CONTEMPORARY EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY, 2010, 1(1), 60-83
Book Review:
Handbook of Research on Educational Communications and
Technology
Rauf Yildiz
Canakkale Onsekiz Mart University, Turkey
Introduction
This third edition of the Handbook of Research on Educational Communications and Technology is
edited by J. Michael Spector (Florida State University), M. David Merrill (Utah State
University), Jeroen J.G. van Merrienboer (Open University of the Netherlands), and Marcy P.
Driscoll (Florida State University). It is published in 2008 by Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
(ISBN-13: 978-0-8058-5849-5). The book is organized in six major parts: (1) Foundations; (2)
Strategies; (3) Technologies; (4) Models; (5) Design and Development; (6) Research Methodologies.
These parts reflect fundamental issues and applications involved in deploying information and
communications technologies for educational purposes. Each part is led by one of the coeditors
with assistance from a second coeditor and several external reviewers.
The Handbook is considered to primarily be useful for doctoral students initiating a research
review for their dissertation studies, for faculty as an additional resource for teaching courses on
related topics, and for researchers seeking a quick review on a specific topic. All chapters have
extensive lists of useful references for researchers who are new to a particular area of
study and for doctoral students conducting their background research. Professional
educators and educational researchers can also benefit particularly from the chapters in
Parts I and VI. These chapters, as well as many others in the Handbook, are likely to be
useful for those responsible for leading graduate seminars in the areas of educational
technology, instructional systems, or learning environment design and development.
Part I, led by Marcy P. Driscoll with assistance from J. Michael Spector, includes historical,
theoretical, and methodological foundations and perspectives. Part II, led by M. David
Merrill, focuses on strategies. Part III, led by J. Michael Spector, focuses on technologies.
Part IV, led by Jeroen van Merrienboer, focuses on models. Part V, led by M. David Merrill,
focuses on design and development. Part VI, led by Jeroen van Merrienboer, focuses on
methodological issues. Let us now examine each part separately in more details.
Part I: Foundations
As indicated earlier, this part of the Handbook is led by Marcy P. Driscoll with assistance from
J. Michael Spector. It focuses on various sets of assumptions that underlie research in
educational communications and technology. Some of these assumptions are based on what
has gone before. Others are based on developments in other disciplines. The goal in this
part is to make these assumptions explicit, summarize key developments, and provide
CONTEMPORARY EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY, 2010, 1(1), 60-83
pointers to exemplary work that has implications for research in educational
communications and technology. This part of the Handbook consists of seven chapters
covering: (1) historical foundations, (2) theoretical foundations, (3) complexity theory, (4)
experiential perspectives, (5) empirical perspectives, (6) contextualistic perspectives, and (7)
philosophical perspectives.
Chapter 1: Historical Foundations
This chapter is written by Michael Molenda of Indiana University, USA. The chapter can be
summarized as follows: Research and practice in educational technology are rooted in a primordial
human drive to find ways of teaching in ways that are more efficient. Every civilization has developed
formal methods of education more efficacious than the trial-and-error of everyday living. In the first
decades of the 20th century, individuals and, later, groups of affiliated professionals made that
quest a central focus, thus establishing educational technology as a field. Their first activities aimed
at enriching the learning experience with visual and later audio-visual resources. As radio
broadcasting grew in the 1930s and then television in the 1950s, these mass media were accepted as
ways to reach even larger audiences, in and out of school, with educative audio-visual programs. In
the 1960s, the wave of interest in teaching machines incorporating programmed instruction based
on behaviorist psychology engulfed the field, engendering a shift in identity. The proper study of
the field expanded from audio-visual technologies to all technologies, including psychological ones.
By the 1980s, the center of gravity had shifted to the design of instructional systems, especially the
adroit application of instructional methods, enlivened by fresh insights from cognitive and
constructivist perspectives. As computers became ubiquitous in the 1990s, they became the
delivery system of choice due to their interactive capabilities. With the rapid global spread of the
World Wide Web after 1995, networked computers took on communication functions as well as
storage and processing functions. The 21st century began with educational technology that
increasingly focused on distance education, the latest paradigmatic framework for its ageless
mission to help more people learn faster, better, and more affordably.
Chapter 2: Theoretical Foundations
This chapter is written by J. Michael Spector of Florida State University, USA. The chapter
addresses the theoretical foundations for research in educational communications and
technology. Four relevant areas are explored: (1) the psychology of learning, (2)
communications theory, (3) human-computer interaction, and (4) instructional design
and development. Past work in these four areas can be viewed as providing a theoretical
foundation for further research and development in educational communications and
technology.
Chapter 3: Complexity Theory
This chapter is written by Xiaopeng Ni and Robert Maribe Branch of University of Georgia, USA.
The chapter can be summarized as follows: Complexity is a common phenomenon existing in
biological organisms, geological formations, and social constructions. Educational researchers
and educational practitioners routinely encounter complex situations as a function of study
and practice. Managing complex situations has become a common necessity for educational
technology researchers to make sense of complicated situations; however, complexity as a
CONTEMPORARY EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY, 2010, 1(1), 60-83
factor in educational technology research tends to be malaligned, oversimplified, or
otherwise insufficiently addressed, thereby rendering the results of many research studies
about educational technology lacking in generalizability. A conceptual, theoretical, and practical understanding of complexity offers a framework for research on educational technology
that addresses the issues associated with nonlinear and complicated relationships.
Complexity theory is predicated on a phenomenon possessing five attributes: (1) it contains
independent complicated entities; (2) multiple entities are contained within; (3) the entities
within the phenomenon perform interrelated functions; (4) the phenomenon seeks a
common goal; and (5) uncertainty is generated because of unpredictable interactions within
itself and between itself and the environment. A summary of the main conceptual,
theoretical, and practical aspects of complexity is presented as it relates to educational
communications and technology.
Chapter 4: Experiential Perspectives
This chapter is written by Konrad Morgan of Northern Alberta Institute of Technology, Canada.
The author claims that a review of modern perspectives on learning would not be complete
without some mention of the increasing awareness that we now have of the importance of
experiential learning and its relationship in developing not only domain skills within the learner
but also an understanding of new applications for such domain skills. The author discusses
experiential learning in a modern perspective and provides the reader with a deeper
understanding of the concepts associated with these ideas and the likely future directions
for applying experiential leaning within the context of technology-enhanced lifetime
Chapter 5: Empirical Perspectives on Memory and Motivation
This chapter is written by Norbert M. Seel of Florida State University, USA. It focuses on
empirical research on memory and motivation within the realm of educational communication
and technology. A variety of research methods and methodologies are described, with
emphasis on the accessibility of theoretical constructs such as memory and motivation and the
validity and reliability of assessments. The abundance of issues surrounding memory and
motivation are discussed within the realm of educational communication and technology.
Several theoretical approaches to the architecture of cognition and models of human
memory are described and discussed with regard to the question of how experiences
with media and human memory interact. Accordingly, cognitive load theory and dualcode processing, as well as the theories of schemata and mental models, are reviewed
critically and evaluated with regard to their advantages and drawbacks for learning with
media. This chapter furthermore introduces relevant motivational research issues
concerning technology-enhanced learning. After a description of several theoretical
approaches concerning relevant motivational factors, the empirical research dealing with the
question of how media and motivation interact are reviewed and evaluated.
Chapter 6: Contextualistic Perspectives
This chapter is written by Eric J. Fox of Western Michigan University, USA. The chapter provides
an overview of Stephen Pepper's philosophical worldviews as a way of clarifying the
CONTEMPORARY EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY, 2010, 1(1), 60-83
philosophical assumptions of different perspectives. A detailed analysis of contextualism is
provided, and the manner in which this worldview relates to both constructivist and behavioral
theories in instructional design is explicated.
Chapter 7: Philosophical Perspectives
This chapter is written by Eric Kathy L. Schuh (University of Iowa), and Sasha A. Barab (Indiana
University), USA. In this chapter, the authors discuss that philosophical perspectives are
worldviews that define the nature of the world, the individual's place in it, and the possible
relationships to that world and its parts. Learning and instructional theories are developed
with respect to a particular set of assumptions regarding what it means to know and learn.
They point out that when situational variables require some decision on the part of the
educator (and they believe this is always the case), an underlying set of assumptions
(whether they be tacit or explicit) will, and should, drive the decision. They provide
overview descriptions of five psychological perspectives, contrasted in terms of epistemology,
ontology, unit of analysis, and whether they suggest dualist relationships. These theories
(behaviorism, cognitivism, cognitive constructivism, sociocultural/historicisim and situativity
theory) provide frameworks for describing learning and designing instruction. The goal of
this chapter is to clarify these distinctions and the underlying assumptions so instructional
designers, classroom teachers, and educational researchers may make pedagogical decisions
more explicitly.
Part II: Foundations
This part of the Handbook, led by David Merril, focuses on strategies. The various
chapters in the strategies part cover both instructional and learning strategies, although
the emphasis is on implications for design and development. This part of the Handbook
consists of seven chapters covering: (8) representation strategies; (9) strategies for
designing embodied curriculum; (10) generative learning: principles and implications for
making meaning; (11) feedback strategies for interactive learning tasks; (12) technologyenhanced support strategies for inquiry learning; (13) a distributed perspective on collaborative
activity; and (14) prescriptive principles for instructional design.
Chapter 8: Representation Strategies
This chapter is written by Linda L. Lohr and James E. Gall of University of Northern Colorado,
USA. The authors point out that throughout the history of education as a social science, empirical
research has been conducted on various representation modes of knowledge and their impact on
learners. Although a number of non-objectivist (based on social phenomenology rather than
physical reality) philosophies have been put forth in education, research in knowledge
representations continues to be dominated by a fundamental paradigm of knowledge
transfer. This chapter uses a three-tier toolbox metaphor for media-based instructional
design. The top tier addresses learning theories, the middle tier addresses multimedia
models, and the bottom tier addresses specific text, visuals, audio, and animation/video
design guidelines.
CONTEMPORARY EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY, 2010, 1(1), 60-83
Chapter 9: Strategies for Designing Embodied Curriculum
This chapter is written by Sasha A. Barab and Tyler Dodge of Indiana University, USA. It provides
a conceptual framework related to designing for situational embodiment; discusses three
types of curricular designs, ranging from designed and emergent simulation models to
participation models; and overviews various strategies for achieving each design, including
examples from the literature. Specifically, the authors discuss designed simulation models
(e.g. anchored instruction, problem-based learning, and cognitive apprenticeship);
emergent simulation models, (e.g. case-based reasoning, project-based learning, and
classroom learning communities); and participation models (e.g., participatory
simulations, academic play spaces, and communities of practice). Looking across the
different examples, they also discern tensions that emerge in working toward curricular
embodiment — namely, tensions concerning the quality of the context (noisy vs. tailored)
and the quality of the formalisms (explicit vs. implicit) guidelines.
Chapter 10: Generative Learning: Principles and Implications for Making Meaning
This chapter is written by Hyeon Woo Lee, Kyu Yon Him, and Barbara L. Grabowski of Pennsylvania
State University, USA. Its primary goal is to reconceptualize the processes for making meaning
by synthesizing theoretical foundations of generative learning and exploring generative learning
effects by different types of learning outcomes. It is claimed that the essence of this model
of generative learning is knowledge generation. Only through learners' generation of
relationships and meaning themselves can knowledge be generated that is sustainable—
this is the essential process of meaning making by the learner. Likewise, only those
activities that involve the actual creation of relationships and meaning are classified as
examples of generative learning strategies. A variety of studies reporting on results of generative strategies are claimed by the authors to have shown that, in most cases, active learner
involvement produced increased gains in recall, comprehension, and higher order thinking or
improvement in self-regulated learning skill. Misconception, providing feedback, and
developmental appropriateness are issues that have emerged as unresolved. As such, there
is much research left to do to establish specific guidelines that help the designer create a
learning environment that stimulates attention and intention, promotes active mental
processing at all stages and levels of learning, and provides the learner with appropriate
help in the generation process guidelines.
Chapter 11: Feedback Strategies for Interactive Learning Tasks
This chapter is written by Susanne Narciss of Technische Universitaet Dresden, Germany. The
purpose of this chapter is to present theoretically and empirically based guidelines for the
design and evaluation of feedback strategies. To this end, the chapter describes an
interactive, two-feedback-loop model that explains core factors and effects of feedback in
interactive instruction . Based on these theoretical considerations, a
multidimensional view of designing and evaluating multiples feedback strategies under
multiple individual and situational conditions is presented. This multidimensional view
integrates recommendations of prior research on elaborated feedback, task analyses, error
analyses and tutoring techniques guidelines.
CONTEMPORARY EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY, 2010, 1(1), 60-83
Chapter 12: Technology-Enhanced Support Strategies for Inquiry Learning
This chapter is written by Yael Kali (Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel) and
Marcia C. Linn (University of California, USA). The purpose of this chapter is to highlight
eight pragmatic design principles from the Design Principles Database that are most likely
to support learning, and to provide evidence that shows how learning is supported by
features in technologies that apply these principles. The authors discuss the advantages
and limitations of design principles to guide a design process and suggest that, for design
principles to be more effective for guiding new innovations, they should be complemented
with a design patterns approach.
Chapter 13: A Distributed Perspective on Collaborative Activity
This chapter is written by Thomas Satwicz (University of Georgia, Athens) and Reed Stevens
(University of Washington Georgia, USA). Its purpose is to take a look at how studies of
collaborative learning have developed over time in relation to a shift away from exclusively
individualistic conceptions of human activity in educational research and design. The authors
use prescriptions for and descriptions of collaborative learning as two general categories for
understanding research and design. By prescriptions, they mean ideas, principles, and
representations of designs for collaboration. By descriptions, they mean empirical accounts of
collaboration. In their view, a broad survey of writing on collaborative activity displays an
imbalance; they are relatively light on descriptions and heavy on prescriptions. Toward
tipping this imbalance back, they argue that a productive perspective for casting descriptions
of collaborative learning is a distributed one. A distributed perspective is one that considers
human activity in relation to both other people and things. They conclude by using the
distributed perspective to challenge researchers to consider technological artifacts as
inherently collaborative and to move their work forward under this assumption.
Chapter 14: Prescriptive Principles for Instructional Design
This chapter is written by Thomas M. David Merrill (Florida State University), Matthew Barclay
(Utah State University), Andrew van Schaak (Vanderbilt University), and Reed Stevens
(University of Washington Georgia, USA). Its purpose is to review some of the prescriptive
principles that, based on research or experience, have been identified for facilitating
effective, efficient, and engaging instruction. For this purpose, instruction is defined as a
deliberate attempt to design a product or environment that facilitates the acquisition of
specified learning goals. This chapter first reviews the first principles of instruction
identified by Merrill . In the second section, recent specifications of instructional
design principles are compared to these first principles. The final section reviews
approaches for designing instruction centered in whole tasks.
Part III: Technologies
This part of the Handbook, led Mike Spector, focuses on technologies. It consists of 17
chapters on both digital and non-electronic technologies, intelligent and non-intelligent
technologies, and planning and evaluation technologies, as well as technologies for
implementation.
CONTEMPORARY EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY, 2010, 1(1), 60-83
Chapter 15: Programmed Technologies
This chapter is written by Barbara B. Lockee, Miriam B. Larson, John K. Burton, and D.
Michael Moore of Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, USA. The purpose of
this chapter is to addresses the historical evolution of programmed technologies, their
underlying psychological principles and characteristics, and the extensive research base that
formed the early foundations of the IDT field. The most prominent models of programmed
technologies are reviewed, including programmed instruction (PI), Personalized System of
Instruction (PSI), and Precision Teaching (PT). Programmed Technologies represent some of
the most empirically investigated forms of instruction, with decades of studies that examined
their effectiveness. The modified application of programmed technologies in current models of
teaching and learning reflects the long-standing impact of these design approaches on
instructional systems development.
Chapter 16: Educational Hypertext
This chapter is written by Barbara Dale S. Niederhauser of Iowa State University, USA. It,
grounded on cognitive flexibility theory and the construction-integration model, focuses
on current empirical research that furthers the authors’ understanding of learning from
hypertext. They point out that clearly, one's goals for reading a given hypertext play an
important role in determining what is learned from it. They believe that the degree to
which these goals are self or externally imposed, the specificity of goals, and the
interactions among goals, system structure, and individual characteristics of learners all
influence what is learned when reading hypertext. Further, strategies readers use to navigate through hypertext content, and the inclusion of navigational scaffolds, also appear
to influence learning. Finally, individual characteristics, such as prior knowledge and
cognitive style, also appear to affect learning from hypertext, while metacognitive aspects
such as active knowledge construction and self-regulated learning, coupled with
coherence-promoting hypertext design elements, hold great promise for future research.
Chapter 17: Computer-Mediated Technologies
This chapter is written by Arthur C. Graesser, Patrick Chipman, and Brandon G. King of
University of Memphis, USA. It reviews research on the application of computer-mediated
technologies to learning. This includes traditional computer-based training, multimedia,
hypertext and hypermedia, interactive simulation, intelligent tutoring systems, inquiry-based
information retrieval animated pedagogical agents, virtual environments with agents, serious
games, and collaborative learning environments. Most of these systems encourage active
learning, knowledge construction, inquiry and exploration on the part of the student, as
opposed to being exposed to information delivery systems. The authors advocate a
research roadmap for the future that systematically investigates a broad landscape of learning technologies (T), pedagogical mechanisms (M), learning goals (G), and learner
characteristics (L). They claim that a well-understood TMGL landscape will provide a principled foundation for assigning the right learning environment to the right learner at the right
time. Since the costs of developing advanced learning environments are often high, they
encourage designers to follow standards for reusing learning objects, lessons, and systems
CONTEMPORARY EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY, 2010, 1(1), 60-83
developed by the research community. They believe that one major technical challenge will
be to develop authoring tools to make it easy for designers, instructors, and students to
develop new content that incorporates these advanced learning technologies.
Chapter 18: Computer-Mediated Communications Technologies
This chapter is written by Jay Pfaffman of University of Tennessee, USA. It reports recent
research on using text-based computer-mediated communication (CMC) in educational
settings. As it is known, CMC takes many forms, and the tools available are many. An outline
of CMC features and their affordances is presented as a means to draw the attention of those
designing, evaluating, or describing communication environments to the features—technical
and social—that are the essence of the activity and away from the particular applications
that provide them. The goals of research using CMC are widely varied. Some research
focuses on how a particular activity is connected to a measure of learning. Other research
focuses on the nature of CMC and how various forms differ from one another. With the tacit
assumptions that people learn from thoughtful evaluation and respond to the ideas of
others, some research looks at ways to increase participation or guide learners to communicate in particular ways. Because CMC is not affected by time or place, it is also
used as a means for teacher training and reduction of the isolation that many educators
Chapter 19: K-12 Library Media Centers
This chapter is written by Delia Neuman of University of Maryland, USA. The author points out
that: Since the early 20th century, public school library media centers in the United States
have housed non-print educational materials. Since the middle of that century, K-12 library
media specialists have designed learning experiences integrating these materials into
classroom practice. For today's library media specialist, technology (both as materials and as
process) is essential. Current American standards highlight instructional leadership,
collaboration with teachers, and technology as the three integrating issues essential to the
library media program . Much early research focused on developing
and explaining the multifaceted role of the library media specialist. Until the 1990s, few
studies looked at the relationship of K-12 library media programs to student learning. Since
then, about two dozens of studies have investigated that link. The political focus of much
of this work is undeniable; concerns about the absence of library media from key national
legislation related to American schooling have led to research designed to establish links
between library media programs and student achievement. Similar pressures in the United
Kingdom and Australia have led to comparable efforts there. Quantitative and qualitative
approaches have been used to (1) demonstrate widespread correlations between highquality library media programs and student learning, and (2) identify specific contributions
of such programs. Various recent initiatives suggest an expansion of K-12 school library
media research and a wider dissemination of its findings.
Chapter 20: Technology-Based Knowledge Systems
This chapter is written by Ian Douglas of Florida State University, USA. The author points out
that: Knowledge is collected and organized into technology-based systems in various ways to
CONTEMPORARY EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY, 2010, 1(1), 60-83
support learning and performance. Four main types of systems are identified under the general
term of knowledge systems: (1) expert or knowledge-based; (2) knowledge management; (3)
knowledge communities; and (4) hybrid systems that combine elements of the other types.
Expert systems are computer programs that use knowledge derived from human experts to
provide guidance to novices. A number of these systems have been adapted to assist in
learning. Expert systems use captured knowledge to help a computer program provide
assistance to a user. In knowledge management systems, the knowledge is captured and
organized for direct access by the user. The third type of system is aimed at facilitating
direct human-to-human communication of knowledge and includes research that comes
under the categories of communities of practice or knowledge communities. This area also
includes informal knowledge sharing networks that emerge through such technologies as
instant messaging. This chapter highlights research issues that cut across the three
approaches, including how knowledge is derived from human sources; how knowledge is
encoded in a machine readable form; how collections of digital knowledge are organized
using taxonomies, metadata, and ontology; and knowledge quality assurance.
Chapter 21: Flexible Learning and the Architecture of Learning Places
This chapter is written by Peter Goodyear of CoCo Research Centre, Australia. The author points
out that as people take more control over their learning activity, there is a multiplication of
the possible influences of time and space on their learning. If learning can take place anywhere,
then we need to know more about the pedagogical affordances of the various wheres in which
it is situated. This becomes a priority for the effective learner—needing to know how to
select and configure appropriate learn-places—as well as for researchers trying to
understand the sometimes subtle connections between place and learning. The chapter offers
a summary description of flexible learning and then moves on to consider the relations
between learning and place. The account is structured, in part, by a distinction between
weaker and stronger interpretations of what is meant by situated learning. The function of
the weaker interpretation is to highlight the importance of the learning context, such that
we can focus on the affordances of the learnplace and consider the ergonomics of supportive learning environments. The stronger interpretation of situated learning causes us to
take seriously the idea that being a learner is first and foremost engagement in a cultural
practice, that people have to learn to engage in such cultural practices, and that place has
a distinctive role in cultural practice. Paradoxically, ideas about flexible learning and
mobile learning help us put learning in its place.
Chapter 22: Enabling Time, Pace, and Place Independence
This chapter is written by Som Naidu of University of Melbourne, Australia. It examines
technologies that enable time and place independence. Its particular focus is on the affor-dances of
these technologies: their ability to support self-paced , 60-83
nologies. Group-based learning asynchronously is a mode of learning that enables
individuals to learn in groups with online technologies but in their own time, at their own
pace, and from their own place. Technologies that support this mode of learning include
online learning management systems, mailing lists, bulletin boards, Web logs, and wikis.
Group-based learning synchronously is a mode of learning that enables individuals to learn in
groups with online technologies at the same time and at the same pace as that of the group,
but from different places. Commonly known technologies that allow this kind of flexibility
are audio and video conferencing, broadcast radio and television, and newer technologies
such as Internet telephony (VoIP), inter-relay chat, and online games and simulations.
Chapter 23: Blended Learning Environments
This chapter is written by Charles R. Graham (Brigham Young University) and Charles Dziuban
(University of Central Florida), USA. The authors point out that: In recent decades, rapid
technological innovation has facilitated a convergence between traditional face-to-face and
distributed (or technology-mediated) learning environments. These blended learning
environments try to take advantage of the strengths of both archetypal learning
environments . The emergence of blended learning is highlighted in higher
education and in industry training literature. The Chronicle of Higher Education reports that
the President of Pennsylvania State University regards the convergence between online and
residential instruction as the "single greatest unrecognized trend in higher education today" . Similarly, the American Society for Training and Development identifies blended
learning as one of the top ten emergent trends in the knowledge delivery industry . Yet,
surprisingly, we understand little about the nature of blended learning systems. This chapter
identifies core issues and research about blended learning using the Sloan Consortium's five pillars
(learning effectiveness, student satisfaction, faculty satisfaction, cost effectiveness, and access) as an
organizing framework . The authors also discuss future directions in
blended learning research.
Chapter 24: Adaptive Technologies
This chapter is written by Valerie J. Shute (Florida State University) and Diego Zapata-Rivera
(Educational Testing Service, Princeton, New Jersey, USA). The chapter describes research
and development efforts related to adaptive technologies, which can be combined with
other technologies and processes to form an adaptive system. The goal of an adaptive system, in the context of this chapter, is to create an instructionally sound and flexible
environment that supports teaming for students with a range of abilities, disabilities,
interests, backgrounds, and other characteristics. After defining key terms and establishing
a rationale for adaptation, the authors present a general framework to organize adaptive
technologies. They then describe experts' thoughts on what to adapt and how to adapt.
The authors conclude with a summary of key challenges and potential futures of adaptive
technologies.
Chapter 25: Generational Differences
This chapter is written by Thomas C. Reeves and Eunjung Oh of University of Georgia, USA.
The authors point out that generational differences are the subject of much popular
CONTEMPORARY EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY, 2010, 1(1), 60-83
speculation but relatively little substantive research. Among the speculations are suggestions
that instructional designers should take generational differences into account when developing
instruction and that games and simulations will be more effective learning environments with
today's younger generation than they have been with earlier ones. This review examines the
evidence in both the research and popular literature that supports (or fails to support) these
speculations. Most of the popular literature on the subject of generational differences appears
to rest on limited data, almost always conducted by survey methods characterized by a lack of
reliability and validity data. The most recent research based on rigorous analysis of previous
psychological studies does yield some evidence of substantive generational differences, especially
between those generations horn before and after 1970. Recommendations for further research
in this area include examining generational differences across the whole spectrum of
socioeconomic status and in international contexts, as well as implementing innovative
design-based research approaches to accommodating generation differences in the process
of instructional design.
Chapter 26: Technologies Linking Learning, Cognition, and Instruction
This chapter is written by Sabine Graf (Vienna University of Technology, Vienna, Austria) and
Eunjung Oh Kinshuk (Athabasca University, Athabasca, Canada). The authors begin with point
that people prefer to learn in many different ways. Furthermore, individuals have different cognitive
abilities that influence the way effective learning takes place. Incorporating individual differences
such as learning styles and cognitive abilities into education makes learning easier and increases the
learner's performance. In contrast, learners whose needs are not supported by the learning
environment experience problems in the learning process. Then they introduce some cognitive
traits that are important for learning and also discuss how to incorporate different abilities in educational systems. In regard to learning styles, some major approaches as well as possible strategies for
involving learning styles in online courses are presented. After that, recent research dealing with
identifying learning styles and cognitive traits based on the behavior of students during a course is
presented. This information is necessary to provide adaptive courses. Finally, the relationship
between cognitive traits and learning styles is discussed. This relationship leads to additional
information and therefore to a more reliable student model.
Chapter 27: Synthetic Learning Environments
This chapter is written by Janis A. Cannon-Bowers and Clint A. Bowers of University of Central
Florida, USA. A variety of technology-based interventions have been proposed to accelerate
learning. Although these technologies have enjoyed some success, we need a better
understanding of the manner in which specific technologies affect the pedagogical factors
associated with enhanced learning. In this chapter, the authors attempt to articulate
a path forward for the development of synthetic learning environments by identifying
variables that are important to their effectiveness. Further, they articulate the conditions
under which such technologies are most likely to be successful.
Chapter 28: Modeling Technologies
This chapter is written by Roy B. Clariana (Pennsylvania State Great Valley, USA) and Johannes
Strobel (Concordia University, Montreal, Canada). The authors start with explaining that
CONTEMPORARY EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY, 2010, 1(1), 60-83
modeling technologies are a powerful tool for affecting learning. Although dynamic
modeling is not an easy task, modeling technologies are maturing. As tools become easier
to use, more people will build models, and this is likely to drive learning theory and
practice in new directions. The chapter centers on one aspect of modeling: dynamic
modeling with technology, where students build dynamic models that "run." This chapter
particularly does not address other forms of modeling technologies such as concept
mapping (as a form of modeling domain knowledge), expert systems (modeling of
problems), and case databases (modeling experiences). The chapter begins with the
conceptual framework for modeling with technology, describes extant dynamic modeling
tools, reviews investigations of the factors associated with modeling technologies in the
classroom, and points to future design and research.
Chapter 29: The Learning Objects Literature
This chapter is written by David A. Wiley of Utah State University, USA. This chapter can be
summarized as follows: The learning objects literature is a collection of journal articles, book
chapters, white papers, and blog entries that as a whole recognize few seminal works, share
few common definitions of terms, and rarely reference or build upon one another. Learning
objects research generally falls into one of two categories. The traditional approach to using
learning objects focuses on enabling the just-in-time automated assembly of carefully
structured learning objects to create personalized educational experiences. The permissive
approach to using learning objects focuses on making the reuse and localization of all
resources, regardless of their structure, as effective and efficient as possible. The field is
subject to a large number of criticisms. Nascent work in open educational resources points
to the likely future of the field.
Chapter 30: Open Source and Open Standards
This chapter is written by Rob Koper of Open University of the Netherlands. The objective of
this chapter is to create an understanding of the importance of open source software and open
standards (OSS/OS) for e-learning research. Open source is a fundamental new way to develop
software, and open standards are needed to make software components work together. It is
argued that OSS and OS can improve the convergence of knowledge in the e-learning field,
improve the general quality and interoperability of e-learning applications, and improve
collaboration between researchers and users. AH of these are beneficial and necessary
requirements for e-learning research. After a general introduction into basic OSS and OS
concepts, the following questions are answered: (1) How does OSS/OS facilitate the
technological activities of the researchers in terms of methodology, collaboration, and
dissemination of results? (2) How does OSS/OS facilitate the development of
technological knowledge in the field? (3) How does OSS/OS facilitate the development of
technological artifacts in the field? The development and use of the open standard IMS
Learning Design (a formal design language for online courses) and the open source
applications that are developed to run and present IMS Learning Design courses are used as
an example to demonstrate the use of OSS/OS in e-learning research. In the concluding
section, the authors provide some practical information for researchers on how to get
involved in OSS and OS and how to use them in e-learning research field.
CONTEMPORARY EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY, 2010, 1(1), 60-83
Part IV: Models
This part of the Handbook is led by Jeroen van Merrienboer and focuses on models. Issues
concerned with various types of and approaches to learning are discussed. These models
clearly inform design and development and can be linked to various instructional
strategies covered in Part II. The Models part includes general models directed toward
learning in schools as well as outside schools and models that focus on learning in specific
domains such as medicine, science, and reading.
Chapter 31: Human Cognitive Architecture
This chapter is written by John Swelter of University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia. This
chapter outlines the evolutionary bases for human cognitive architecture, examines
those aspects of human cognition that are directly relevant to instruction, and discusses the
various instructional principles generated by cognitive load theory with specific reference
to their applicability to instructional technology.
Chapter 32: Outcome-Referenced, Conditions-Based Theories and Models
This chapter is written by Tillman J. Ragan and Patricia L. Smith (University of Oklahoma) and
L. K. Curda (University of West Florida), USA. The underlying discussion of this chapter can be
summarized as follows: One of the most influential and pervasive theories underlying
instructional design proposes that (1) there are identifiably different types of learning
outcomes, and (2) the acquisition of these outcomes requires different internal and external
conditions of learning. These propositions underlie an outcome-referenced, conditions-based
paradigm of instructional design (ID). The outcome-referenced, conditions-based perspective
is commonplace, if not universal, in current instructional psychology and instructional design
thinking, even when the author's orientation and values are not based on the cognitive
science that underlies this perspective. Whether or not individuals formally subscribe lo or
have an interest in these theories and models, it is part of the everyday work of instructional
designers and scholars of instruction and learning environments. This chapter (1) presents
the assumptions of the outcome-referenced, conditions-based perspective, (2) describes
prevalent theories and models within this tradition, and (3) provides future directions for
research and development.
Chapter 33: Cooperation and the Use of Technology
This chapter is written by David W. Johnson and Roger T. Johnson of the University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA. The chapter can be summarized as follows:
Technology may be more productively utilized when it is combined with cooperative
learning. There are four types of cooperative learning: formal cooperative learning, informal
cooperative learning, cooperative base groups, and academic controversy. Cooperative
learning's worldwide use is based on a well-formulated theory (i.e., social interdependence
theory) that has been validated by numerous research studies and operationalized into
practical procedures that can be used at any level of education. Technology-supported
cooperative learning tends to increase achievement (both academic achievement and
learning how to use technology), positive attitudes (toward technology and cooperation),
CONTEMPORARY EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY, 2010, 1(1), 60-83
healthy development (cognitive development, learning control, social competencies),
positive relationships with team members (including social presence), and innovation in
groupware and hardware. Cooperative learning and technology-supported instruction
have complementary strengths. The computer, for example, can control the flow of work,
monitor accuracy, give electronic feedback, and do calculations. Cooperative learning
provides a sense of belonging, the opportunity to explain and summarize what is being
learned, shared mental models, social models, respect and approval for efforts to achieve,
encouragement of divergent thinking, and interpersonal feedback on academic learning
and the use of the technology. The use of cooperative learning with technology-assistedinstruction results in more positive attitudes toward technology (especially by females)
and allows for argumentation (i.e., constructive controversy) to be part of lessons utilizing
technology. Cooperative learning is an important part of enhancing the effectiveness of
interacting around computers and interacting through computers (e.g., local networks, email, videogames and simulations, adventure learning, and interacting with electronic
pedagogical agents).
Chapter 34: The Cognitive Apprenticeship Model in Educational Practice
This chapter is written by Vanessa P. Dennett and Kerry J. Burner of Florida State University,
Tallahassee, Florida, USA. Cognitive apprenticeship is a process by which learners learn from
a more experienced person by way of cognitive and metacognitive skills and processes. This
chapter explores the elements of cognitive apprenticeship, first offering definitions and a
historical context, then moving into a review of research. The research review is organized
with a three-part focus: on studies that investigate a holistic approaches to educational
applications of the process of cognitive apprenticeship; on studies that investigate portions of
the process, such as scaffolding or mentoring; and on studies that investigate cognitive
apprenticeship activities within communities of practice. Discussion about the intersection
of technology and cognitive apprenticeship research is imbedded within each of the three
areas of focus, reflecting the steady increase of systematically designed, computermediated instruction that is based in social learning theories, especially cognitive apprenticeship theories. Empirical studies have confirmed much of what theories have suggested:
(1) that the cognitive apprenticeship model is an accurate description of how learning
occurs, and (2) that the instructional strategies that have been extracted from these
observations of everyday life can be designed into more formal learning contexts with
positive effect. The chapter concludes with a call for more systematic and integrated
program of studies working toward the development of guiding principles to support
instructional design, teaching, and learning based on the cognitive apprenticeship model.
Chapter 35: Whole-Task Models in Education
This chapter is written by Jeroen J. G. van Merrienboer and Liesbeth Kester of Open
University of the Netherlands, Heerlen, the Netherlands. Whole-task models support the
development of educational programs for students who need to learn and transfer professional
competences or complex cognitive skills to an increasingly varied set of real-world contexts and
settings. They are a reaction to traditional atomistic approaches in which complex contents and
tasks are reduced into increasingly simpler elements until reaching a level where the distinct
elements can be transferred to the learners through presentation or practice. These
approaches work well if there are few interactions between the elements, but they do not
CONTEMPORARY EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY, 2010, 1(1), 60-83
work well if the elements are interrelated because the whole is then more than the sum of its
parts. Whole-task models basically try to deal with complexity without losing sight of the
relationships between elements. This chapter briefly discusses the history of whole-task
models. They are rooted in motor learning and sports, andragogy and adult learning, and
Gestalt psychology. The characteristics of whole-task models in the field of educational
communications and technology are also discussed. Elaboration theory, goal-based
scenarios, and four-component instructional design are presented as three representative
examples of whole-task models. The authors present empirical evidence for the
effectiveness of the whole-task approach and the three example models. We conclude with
a summary of findings and directions for future research on whole-task models.
Chapter 36: Model-Facilitated Learning
This chapter is written by Ton de Jong and Wouter R. van Joolingen of University of Twente,
Enschede, the Netherlands. This chapter discusses the possible roles of models in learning,
focusing on computer models (simulations). In learning from models, students' learning processes center around the exploration of a model by changing values of input variables and
observing resulting values of output variables. In this process, they experience rules of the
simulated domain or discover aspects of these rules. Models can also play a role in the
learning process when we ask students to construct models. In learning by modeling, students
are required to construct an external model that can be simulated to reproduce phenomena
observed in a real system. Finally, both ways of using models can be combined in what we
refer to as model-based inquiry learning. Here, students encounter a computer model that
they can explore by changing values of the input variables and by observing values of the
output variables and then they reconstruct the model, including its internal functioning, so
both models will behave similarly.
Chapter 37: Adaptive Instructional Systems
This chapter is written by Jung Lee (The Richard Stockton College of New Jersey, Pomona, New
Jersey) and Ok-Choon Park (Institute of Education Sciences, Washington, D.C.), USA. This
chapter summarizes five approaches to adaptive instruction, which embodies all
instructional forms that accommodate the needs and abilities of different learners: (1)
macro-adaptive instruction; (2) aptitude-treatment interactions (ATI-based); (3) microadaptive instruction, including intelligent tutoring systems (ITSs); (4) the adaptive/adaptable
hyper-media/Web-based system (AHS); and (5) specific pedagogy-centered systems.
These approaches are presented in historical order, beginning with macro-adaptive
systems. For each approach, its characteristics and representative systems are discussed.
Although each has its own distinctive properties, some similarities can be found among the
approaches. Due to the development of information and communication technology (ICT),
the structural functions of recent adaptive systems are significantly more powerful than earlier ones. New Web-based systems have functions that simultaneously provide customized
learning experiences to masses of individual learners. The challenges now facing researchers
and developers are to optimally integrate many different theories, principles, and strategies
of learning and instruction with system functions and to prove empirically the effects and
value of these systems in real-world environments.
CONTEMPORARY EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY, 2010, 1(1), 60-83
Chapter 38: Problem-Based Learning
This chapter is written by Woei Hung (University of Arizona South, Siena Vista, Arizona), David H.
Jonassen (University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri), Rude Liu (Beijing Normal University,
Beijing, China). According to the authors, problem-based learning (PBL) is perhaps the most
innovative instructional method conceived in the history of education. PBL was originally
designed to respond to the criticism that traditional teaching and learning methods fail to
prepare medical students for solving problems in clinical settings. Instead of requiring that
students study content knowledge and then practice context-free problems, PBL embeds
students' learning processes in real-life problems. After its successful implementation in
various fields of medical education, PBL is now being implemented throughout higher
education as well as in K-I2 education. The purpose of this chapter is to inform researchers
and practitioners about research findings and issues in PBL that may be used to inform future
studies. The authors review PBL research from the past 30 years. They first describe the
history of development and implementation of PBL in various educational settings and
define the major characteristics of PBL. They then review the research on PBL. First, they
examine the effectiveness of PBL in terms of student learning outcomes, including basic
domain knowledge acquisition and applications, retention of content and problem-solving
skills, higher order thinking, self-directed ]earning/lifelong learning, and self-perception.
Second, they look at implementation issues, such as tutoring issues, curriculum design
issues, and use of technology. Finally, the authors provide recommendations for future
Chapter 39: Behavioral, Cognitive, and Technological Approaches to Performance
Improvement
This chapter is written by Ruth Colvin Clark (Clark Training and Consulting, Cortez, Colorado)
and Frank Nguyen (San Diego State University, San Diego, California), USA. Often, training fails
to improve organizational outcomes. Increasingly, practitioners are assuming a performance
improvement perspective that takes a holistic and systemic perspective in analyzing causes
of and solutions for gaps in organizational results. The authors review the models and
evidence for three perspectives on performance improvement: behavioral engineering, cognitive-motivational, and technological. The behavioral engineering models prevalent among
U.S. practitioner-oriented professional societies apply a pragmatic systemic approach that
evaluates performance factors at the organizational, process, and individual worker or
team levels. The cognitive-motivational approaches prevalent among industrial and
organizational psychologists include guidelines for goal setting, feedback, and incentives. The
cognitive models are based on empirical evidence and incorporate motivational and cognitive moderators of their interventions. Recent advances in computer technology offer
opportunities to deliver performance support in new ways. In our discussion of
technological approaches, we focus primarily on the evolution of and evidence for electronic
performance support systems (EPSSs) in the workplace.
Chapter 40: Resource-Based Learning
This chapter is written by Michael J. Hannafin and Janette R. Hill of University of Georgia,
Athens, Georgia, USA. The nature of information has changed dramatically during the past 25
years. The digital age has redefined the nature of a resource and dramatically changed how
CONTEMPORARY EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY, 2010, 1(1), 60-83
resources are used to support learning. Media of often unknown origin and quality are now
used across a wide range of learning systems to address diverse epistemological beliefs and
associated learning goals. The number and types of resources have also grown exponentially.
Several factors increase the viability of resources for learning, including access to resources
in contexts not previously available, increased flexibility in their use, and ready availability,
manipulability, and sharability. The purposes of this chapter are to present a brief historical
perspective on resource-based learning; describe components of resource-based
learning; introduce the influence of underlying epistemology, foundations, and
assumptions in grounding resource use; critically analyze related research; and identify
implications for RBL.
Chapter 41: Instructional Models in Domains and Professions
This chapter is written by Henny P. A. Boshuizen (lead author) (Open University of the
Netherlands, Heerlen, the Netherlands), Caroline Phythian-Sence and Richard K. Wagner
(Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida), Koeno Gravemeijer (Utrecht University, Utrecht,
the Netherlands), Geerdina Maria van der Aalsvoort (Leiden University, Leiden, the
Netherlands), Fleurie Nievelstein, Tamara van Gog and Frans J. Prins (Open University of the
Netherlands, Heerlen, the Netherlands), Tim Dornan (University of Manchester, Manchester,
England), Albert Scherpbier (Maastricht University, Maastricht, the Netherlands) and John
Spencer (University of Newcastle, Newcastle, England).
This chapter investigates grounds for the application and adaptation of general instructional
models in specific domains and professions and for the generation of domain-specific
instructional methods using the examples of reading, mathematics, science, law, and medicine.
It does so by first investigating the specific teaching and learning difficulties of those
domains by showing and analyzing domain- and profession-specific solutions to these problems.
The chapter consists of a general analysis of the problems with general instructional design
models that have to be solved before they can be used in specific domains, the requirements
for the use of these models, and the effects of internal and external pressures for change.
Part V: Design and Development
This part of the Handbook, led by M. David Merrill, focuses on design and development. It
discusses research that pertains directly to professional practice. This part of the Handbook
consists of eleven chapters. Readers will find chapters on familiar topics such as
competency development, task analysis, change agency, and performance assessment.
The Design and Development part also covers innovative treatments of design languages,
design and development teams, and user-centered design and development.
Chapter 42: Competencies for the New-Age Instructional Designer
This chapter is written by Roderick C. Sims (Capella University, Woodburn, New South Wales,
Australia) and Tiffany A. Koszalka (Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York). This chapter
provides an analysis of current competencies (i.e., knowledge, skills, and attitudes) that are
necessary to achieve effective instructional design and development outcomes with specific
focus on contemporary technology-mediated educational applications. Referring to current
CONTEMPORARY EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY, 2010, 1(1), 60-83
competency standards and models, such as those devised by ibstpi®, this chapter elaborates
on those competencies essential for supporting the integration of hardware and software
technologies (mobile devices, personal blogs, multiplayer environments) into collaborative
instructional networks. In addition, the analysis identifies recent models of design that
provide a framework for educational professionals to ensure that they have the
knowledge, skills, and attitudes to effectively manage the challenges and utilize the
affordances of educational technology in today's complex social settings. By understanding
these shifts, instructional designers will appreciate the expanding and changing nature of
their role.
Chapter 43: Cognitive Task Analysis
This chapter is written Richard E. Clark (University of Southern California, Los Angeles,
California), David F. Feldon (University of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina), Jeroen J.
G. van Merrienboer (Open University of the Netherlands, Heerten, the Netherlands), Kenneth
A. Yates (University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California) and Sean Early (University
of Southern California, Los Angeles, California). It presents an overview of the current state of
cognitive task analysis (CTA) in research and practice. CTA uses a variety of interview and
observation strategies to capture a description of the explicit and implicit knowledge that
experts use to perform complex tasks. The captured knowledge is most often transferred
to training or the development of expert systems. The first section presents descriptions of
a variety of CTA techniques, their common characteristics, and the typical strategies used to
elicit knowledge from experts and other sources. The second section describes research on
the impact of CTA and synthesizes a number of studies and reviews pertinent to issues
underlying knowledge elicitation. In the third section, we discuss the integration of CTA
with training design. Finally, in the fourth section, the authors present a number of
recommendations for future research and conclude with general comments.
Chapter 44: Design and Validation of Technology-Based Performance Assessments
This chapter is written by Eva L. Baker, Gregory K. W. K. Chung, and Girlie C. Delacruz of
UCLA/CRESST, Los Angeles, California, USA. This chapter describes approaches to the design
and technical verification of assessments of performance. The chapter begins with a brief
definition of performance measurement and describes a set of validity criteria that should
be in place to guide the design of performance assessments that may serve multiple
purposes. Design criteria include descriptions of families of cognitive demands, approaches
to ensure content representation, and templates or objects to promote economic design
and renewal. The authors then illustrate with multiple examples from K-12 education and
from the training community. The context of most of the chapter is the use of technology
tools for design, administration, and automated scoring. This chapter concludes with
future directions in performance measurement and its implications.
Chapter 45: Models and Methods for Evaluation
This chapter is written by Ron Owston of York University, Toronto, Canada. It situates the
evaluation of technology-based programs in the context of the field of general educational
program evaluation. It begins with an overview of the main evaluation approaches devel-
CONTEMPORARY EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY, 2010, 1(1), 60-83
oped for general educational programs, including Tyler's early conception of assessing
attainment of program objectives, decision-making approaches, naturalistic evaluation, and
Kirkpatrick's four levels for evaluating program effectiveness. Following this is an overview of
commonly used technology-specific program evaluation criteria and frameworks.
Strategies distilled from these two fields are then suggested for evaluating technologybased learning programs. These strategies emphasize clarifying the goal or purpose of
the evaluation and determining the information needs of the intended audiences of the
evaluation at the beginning of the project. This, in turn, suggests the most appropriate
evaluation methodology to be used. The chapter concludes with a description of tools that
can be used for analysis of evaluative data, followed by a brief discussion of the
dissemination of evaluation results.
Chapter 46: Change Agentry
This chapter is written by Brian Beabout and Alison A. Carr-Chellman of Pennsylvania State
University, USA. It presents theoretical foundations and empirical findings of the construct
of change agentry in order to aid change agents and scholars in effecting substantive
organizational or educational change. Familiarity with this literature gives credibility to those
of us in the educational communications and technology field seeking to effect significant
change through collaborative efforts. The authors begin by defining change agentry and
focusing on the theoretical foundations of change theories, agency theories, and diffusion
theories. After this consideration of theoretical constructs, they turn to an examination
of the empirical findings in research studies associated with K-12 school contexts,
government organizations, corporations, and the health care industry. Their findings
indicate three core ideas central to change agentry: (1) connecting an organization to its
environment is important; (2) flexibly adaptive change may be a desired goal, and (3) local
leaders as well as external supports are needed to support any successful change effort.
Chapter 47: Design Languages
This chapter is written by Andrew S. Gibbons (Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah), Luca
Botturi (NewMinE Lab, University of Lugano, Lugano, Switzerland), Eddy Boot (TNO Human
Factors, Soesterberg, the Netherlands) and Jon Nelson (Utah State University, Logan, Utah).
The chapter can be summarized as follows: Design languages and notation systems hold
great practical and theoretical significance for instructional design. Instructional designers
use multiple design languages in the creation of designs. Notation systems make design
languages visible and document those solutions. Design languages provide the building
blocks of an evolving design. Design languages are used by individual designers; shared
design languages and notation systems are necessary for multi-participant design teams to
function, even at a basic level. Design languages for instructional design allow us to view
instructional design, instructional theory, and daily practice in a new way that enhances our
understanding of all of them.
Chapter 48: The Social Consequences of Design and Development Teams
This chapter is written by Laura Blasi and Stephen M. Fiore (University of Central Florida,
Orlando, Florida), John Hedberg , 60-83
Australia) and Richard F. Schmid (Concordia University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada). Providing
a brief history of the work of design and development (D&D) teams grounded in the
relevant literature, this chapter offers several prominent examples from the past 65 years.
These examples allow the comparison of the context for design and development focused
on industry, government, and education. The authors highlight models for developing
teams that are especially useful to those who are new to the field. They conclude with
challenges faced by design and development teams specifically in regard to educational
communications and technology. Design and development teams should: (1) organize in
ways informed by the research; (2) access and apply research on teaching and learning; (3)
conduct research for ongoing evaluation of technology in education; and (4) contribute to
the research in the field from their own innovations, mindful of the social consequences of
design and development
Chapter 49: User-Centered Design and Development
This chapter is written by Eun-Ok Baek (California State University, San Bernardino, California),
Kursat Cagiltay (Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey), Elizabeth Baling and Theodore
Frick (Indiana University, Bloominglon, Indiana). The chapter surveys methods, techniques,
practices, and challenging issues in user-centered design and development (UCDD). The
traditional instructional systems design (ISD) approach has been criticized for its
bureaucratic and linear nature and its slow process. Two alternatives to that approach are
discussed here. They are rapid prototyping and participatory design. These have been put
forth as alternative models that address the many limitations of the conventional ISD
Chapter 50: Tools for Design and Development of Online Instruction
This chapter is written by Bryan L. Chapman of Brandon Hall Research/Chapman Alliance,
Sunnyvale, California, USA. The aim of this chapter is to explore the tools that instructional
designers and novice developers use most often to create online learning from both a
design and development perspective, the types of instructional design support that can be
found in different types of development tools, and how these tools may (or may not) impact
the ability to meet instructional needs. A classification system is used to analyze tools as (1)
standard authoring tools, (2) front-end design and automated instructional design (AID) tools, (3)
simulation and gaming tools, or (4) team development or publishing tools such as learning content
management systems (LCMSs) and groupware authoring. Although instructional design guidance, in
some form or another, is now embedded inside several classifications of development tools,
considerable innovation and research are still required to create holistic systems that negate or
minimize the need for instructional design expertise, allowing nontrained designers to create online
learning courseware without assistance.
Chapter 51: Artifacts as Tools in the Design Process
This chapter is written by Elizabeth Boling and Kennon M. Smith of Indiana University,
Bloomington, Indiana, USA. The content of the chapter can be summarized as follows: Both
process and product artifacts are collected and disseminated in many fields of design as a
source of design knowledge in the form of precedent, which includes both the artifacts
CONTEMPORARY EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY, 2010, 1(1), 60-83
themselves and the memories, or schema, retained as a result of interaction with or
examination of the artifacts. The emergence of serious study into the practice of design in our
field will extend beyond the study of process models and may be productively informed by
understanding how artifacts are used as tools by designers.
Chapter 52: Systems Design for Change in Education and Training
This chapter is written by Sunnie Lee Watson and Charles M. Reigeluth (Indiana University,
Bloomington, Indiana) and William R. Watson (Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana), USA.
The purpose of this chapter is to introduce current research and theory on systems design
for change, or systemic change, in the fields of education and training. Systems design is the
process for determining what characteristics a new system should have, resulting in a
model of the new system and a plan for creating it. Systemic change is the process of
changing a system from one paradigm to another by applying systems thinking and systems
theory. Repeated calls for massive reform of current educational and training practices have
consistently been published over the last several decades. This has resulted in an increasing
recognition of the need for systemic change in education as numerous structured, piecemeal
approaches to education reform have been implemented and failed to significantly improve
the state of education. This chapter first presents a description of design theory and systems
theory as the foundations for systems design. Design theory is the concepts and principles
that help to develop strategies and methods for designing. The term system has been
defined in various ways by different researchers, but the core concept is one of relationships
among components comprising the whole.
Part VI: Methodological Issues
This part, led by Jeroen van Merrienboer, follows the empirical cycle through theory
development, experimental design, and data collection and analysis. Design sections
adhere to the main parts of the Handbook and treat, in order, research on strategies,
technologies, models, and design and development. For data collection, special
requirements for (virtual) laboratories are discussed. Analysis methods include the analysis
of learning processes, interactions, and complex performances. The Methodological Issues
part ends with a discussion by the editorial team of a research agenda that should help our
field to build a strong scientific foundation for the future.
Chapter 53: Theory Development
This chapter is written by Jan Elen and Geraldine Clarebout of Katholieke Universiteit Leuven,
Leuveii, Belgium. The field of educational technology is characterized by an abundance of sets
of theoretical statements. These sets can be described from at least four perspectives. A first
perspective pertains to the object or orientation of the (sets of) theoretical statements. Sets
may address educational principles, features of interventions or tools, development
procedures, or the nature of the field itself. The origin (theoretical or practical context) of
these sets of statements is a second perspective from which they can be described.
Theoretical statements can be clearly anchored in specific practical experiences, can be the
result of a deductive effort to apply fundamental theoretical insights or theoretical
perspectives, or can reflect a thoughtful interaction between a practical setting and a
CONTEMPORARY EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY, 2010, 1(1), 60-83
theoretical perspective. A third perspective relates to the level of theoretical sophistication
of these (sets of) statements. Sets of theoretical statements can be collections of isolated
theoretical expressions, descriptive or prescriptive models with respect to educational
technological issues, of integrated, internally coherent sets of theoretical principles. The
degree of justification of these (sets of) statements represents a fourth perspective. Some
statements are purely explorative, whereas for others empirical evidence is readily available.
Taking these differences into account, this chapter aims at discussing theory
development. First, features of descriptive and prescriptive theories are elaborated by
analyzing their commonalities and differences. Second, the development of theories itself is
addressed by focusing on deductive, inductive, and mixed approaches. Third,
theoretical levels of sophistication and justification are dealt with. In all this, the elaboration
of instructional design models is focused upon.
Chapter 54: Research Designs
This chapter is written by Steven M. Ross (lead author of the chapter) (University of Memphis,
Memphis, Tennessee), Gary R, Morrison (Old Dominion University, Norfolk, Virginia), Robert D.
Hannafin and Michael Young (University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut) Jan van den Akker
and Wilmad Kuiper (University of Twente, Enschede, the Netherlands) Rita C. Rickey (Wayne
State University, Detroit, Michigan) and James D. Klein (Arizona State University, Tempe,
Arizona). This chapter examines the types of designs and methodological approaches used by
educational technology and instructional design researchers to investigate: (1) instructional
strategies; (2) educational technologies; (3) instructional design models; and (4) design and
development of instruction. These four approaches correspond to the four main parts of the
Handbook. In the opening section, Ross and Morrison discuss how experimental methods have
been predominantly used in determining the effectiveness of instructional strategies used to
teach specific content, affect the design of a course, or improve message design. In the second
chapter section, Hannafin and Young examine how research on instructional technologies has
been influenced by the manner in which technology has been conceptualized as a treatment
or intervention. When it is regarded as simply a medium for learning (e.g., computer-assisted
instruction), usage of highly controlled experimental designs is most common; when conceived
more broadly as a technology-enhanced learning environment (TELE), use of design-based
research is favored. In the third section, van den Akker and Kuiper examine design and
development research focusing on models for instructional design. Specific attention is
directed to analyzing the trends that are most visible in model development and validation and
exploring how research on models can be redirected to foster blending of theory and practice. In
the final section, Richey and Klein focus on methods and issues related to conducting research
on the design and development of instruction. Studies in this area, although highly diverse,
most frequently rely on qualitative techniques, including case studies, interviews, document
reviews, and observations. Design and development research: Research that seeks to create
knowledge grounded in data systematically derived from practice and based upon a systematic
analysis of specific cases. Experiment: A design that involves the comparison of one treatment to
another, using two or more different groups.
Chapter 55: Data Collection and Analysis
This chapter is written by Tamara van Gog and Fred Paas (lead authors of the chapter)(Open
University of the Netherlands, Heerlen, the Netherlands), Wilhelmina Savenye , 60-83
University-Tempe, Tempe, Arizona), Rhonda Robinson (Northern Illinois University, DeKalb,
Illinois), Mary Niemczyk Arizona State University-Polytechnic, Mesa, Arizona), Robert
Atkinson (Arizona State University-Tempe, Tempe, Arizona), Tristan E. Johnson (Florida State
University, Tallahassee, Florida), Debra L. O'Connor (Intelligent Decision Systems, Inc.,
Williamsburg, Virginia), Rerny M, J. P. Rikers (Erasmus University Rotterdam, Rotterdam, the
Netherlands), Paul Ayres (University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia), Aaron R. Duley
(National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Ames Research Center, Moffett Field,
California), Paul Ward (Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida) and Peter A, Hancock
(University of Central Florida, Orlando, Florida).
The focus of this chapter is on methods of data collection and analysis for the assessment of
learning processes and complex performance, the last part of the empirical cycle after
theory development and experimental design. In the introduction (van Gog and Paas), the
general background and the relation between the chapter sections are briefly described.
The section by Savenye, Robinson, Niemczyk, and Atkinson focuses on methods of data
collection and analysis for assessment of individual learning processes, whereas the section
by Johnson and O'Connor is concerned with methods for assessment of group learning
processes. The chapter section by van Gog, Rikers, and Ayres discusses the assessment of
complex performance, and the final chapter section by Duley, Ward, Szalma, and Hancock is
concerned with setting up laboratories to measure learning and complex performance.
Chapter 55: Foundations for the Future
This chapter is written by ChanMin Kim and JungMi Lee (Florida State University, Tallahassee,
Florida), M. David Merrill (Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida), USA. J. Michael
Spector (Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida) and Jeroen J. G. van Merrienboer
(Open University of the Netherlands, Heerlen, the Netherlands). The authors address five
questions as a way of technology speculating about the future of scientific inquiry
pertaining to educational communications and technology: (1) What have been the
most significant developments in educational communications and in the last five
years? (2) What are likely to be the most significant developments in the next five
years? (3) What significant research findings have occurred in the last five years? (4) What
are likely to be the most significant research issues in the next five years? (5) What are the
most critical foundational aspects and factors for future research and development in
educational communications and technology? In addition to addressing these questions,
we also comment on the proper study of instructional design and how best to prepare
educational technology practitioners and researchers.
Conclusion
As Joost Lowyck indicates in the foreword of the book, the information made available by
acknowledged scholars in the Handbook “depicts many contributions to the foundation, strategies,
technologies, models, design and development, and methodology of educational communications
and technology. One of the expected outcomes of this immense knowledge base is the creation of
a new generation of research and development, in which conceptual alignment, empirical richness,
and synergy are spearheads of educational innovation” (p.xv).
CONTEMPORARY EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY, 2010, 1(1), 60-83
Overall, the Handbook is a cornerstone in the field of educational communications and technology.
Starting with the first edition, it has been a very useful guide particularly for academicians and
doctoral students all around the world. Compared to previous editions, this third edition consists of
contributions from more authors from different countries. This international perspective alone
represents a more comprehensive view of issues and approaches in educational technology.
Considering its distinct nature and unique role, the Handbook of Research on Educational
Communications and Technology should be available in the library of all educational technology and
instructional design professionals.
Correspondence: Rauf Yildiz, Professor, Faculty of Education, Canakkale Onsekiz Mart
University, Anafartalar Campus, Canakkale, Turkey.