UC Berkeley
UC Berkeley Previously Published Works
Major New Microbial Groups Expand Diversity and Alter our Understanding of the Tree of
 
Cell, 172(6)
Castelle, Cindy J
Banfield, Jillian F
Publication Date
2018-03-01
10.1016/j.cell.2018.02.016
Peer reviewed
eScholarship.org
Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California
Major New Microbial Groups Expand Diversity and Alter our
Understanding of the Tree of Life
Cindy J. Castelle1,2,3 and Jillian F. Banfield1,2,3,4,5,6,*
1Department of Earth and Planetary Science, University of California,
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA 2Innovative Genomics Institute, Berkeley, CA,
USA 3Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, CA, USA 4University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia 5Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, USA 6Department of Environmental Science, Policy
and Management, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA
*Correspondence: 
The recent recovery of genomes for organisms from phyla with no isolated
representative (candidate phyla) via cultivation-independent genomics
enabled delineation of major new microbial lineages, namely the bacterial
candidate phyla radiation (CPR), DPANN archaea, and Asgard archaea. CPR
and DPANN organisms are inferred to be mostly symbionts, and some are
episymbionts of other microbial community members. Asgard genomes
encode typically eukaryotic systems, and their inclusion in phylogenetic
analyses results in placement of eukaryotes as a branch within Archaea.
Here, we illustrate how new genomes have changed the structure of the tree
of life and altered our understanding of biology, evolution, and metabolic
roles in biogeochemical processes.
Introduction
The tree of life is arguably the most important organizing principle in biology
and perhaps the most widely understood depiction of the evolutionary
process. It explains to us how we are related to other organisms and where
we may have come from. The tree has undergone some tremendous
revolutions since the first version was sketched by Charles Darwin. A major
innovation was the construction of phylogenetic trees using DNA sequence
information, which opened the way for classification of microbial life. As
implemented by Carl Woese and collaborators, this work enabled the
definition of three domains: Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukaryotes . More recently, the three-domain topology
has been questioned, and eukaryotes—our own branch of life—potentially
relocated into the archael domain .
Beyond this, and as described here, cultivation-independent genomic
methods that access sequences from laboratory-intractable organisms have
added many new lineages to the tree. Their inclusion completely clarifies the
extreme minority of life’s diversity that is represented by macroscopic
organisms and underscores that our place in biology is dwarfed by bacteria
and archaea.
Genome Resolution of Uncultivated Organisms
Cultivation-independent (e.g., 16S rRNA gene-based) survey methods
uncovered evidence for vast microbial diversity that was not represented in
the set of organisms available in pure culture . This motivated the development of new genomic approaches that can
provide comprehensive metabolic insights without the requirement for
laboratory growth. The first of these is referred to as community genomics
or, more commonly, metagenomics. As metagenomics is sometimes
considered to include rRNA gene surveys, we adopt the term “genomeresolved metagenomics” to describe the specific approach that can yield
direct information about metabolic capacity on an organism-by-organism
basis. In genome-resolved metagenomics, DNA is extracted from a whole
community or an enrichment and shotgun sequenced, and the short
sequences are assembled into larger genome fragments that are ultimately
assigned to genome bins . Typically,
metabolic predictions are only undertaken for reasonably high-quality
genomes (>70% complete with low contamination by fragments from other
organisms). In a few cases, further assembly curation has generated
complete (closed) genomes .
Importantly, the approach is not limited to Bacteria and Archaea but can
provide draft genomes for Eukaryotes and partial or complete genomes of
phage, viruses, and plasmids . The
disadvantage of this method is that the sampled cells comprise a natural
population. Thus, the genome is, to differing extents, a composite of
sequence variants distinguished by single-nucleotide polymorphisms and
insertions/deletions. On the other hand, the reads can be mapped back to
the genome sequence to provide a snapshot of the form and extent of
variation within the population .
The second method, single-cell genomics, involves the sequencing of
fragments of DNA amplified from a single cell or collection of cells with
similar rRNA gene sequences . The method has been
especially useful for study of eukaryotic cells . The
advantage of a method in which a single microbial cell is sequenced is that
all reported nucleotides derive from one genome so that linkage patterns
can be established; however, binning may be required to remove
contaminating sequences. A comparative study that targeted both methods
to one microbial community revealed that the single-cell method is of much
lower throughput than genome-resolved metagenomics, and the genomes
are, on average, significantly less complete. However, the sequences from
single-cell genomics and metagenomics analyses generally agree well
 . Single-cell sequencing can be implemented in a
targeted way following screening of rRNA genes . Thus,
the resulting sequences directly augment the collection of genomes for
organisms belonging to lineages that are unsampled or undersampled.
An Updated Topology of the Tree of Life
Hug et al.  presented a new version of the tree of life that captured
information for organisms whose draft genomes had been reconstructed
without prior cultivation. Although the deep branching order is not well
supported, it is possible that the root of the bacterial domain is placed
between well-known bacteria (including the commonly known major
lineages, such as Proteobacteria, Actinobacteria, Firmicutes, and
Cyanobacteria, with well-studied representatives) and the bacteria of a
recently described and seemingly monophyletic group referred to as the
candidate phyla radiation (CPR) . Recent detailed
phylogenetic analyses have considered the placement of the DPANN
(Diapherotrites, Parvarchaeota, Aenigmarchaeota, Nanoarchaeota and
Nanohaloarchaeota), a newly recognized superphylum that is described in
more detail below, within the archaeal domain . To root
the archaeal tree, Williams et al. applied a new approach that is based on
single-gene tree reconciliation with no need for the use of an outgroup. They
proposed that the root of the archaeal domain is placed between the all
other archaea and the DPANN. Their analyses suggest the monophyly of the
DPANN superphylum and the Euryarchaeota phylum. However, due to low
sampling of the DPANN superphylum at the time of their analysis, new
sequences and approaches are needed to further evaluate this conclusion.
Sequencing and bioinformatics methods are evolving rapidly, and new
genomes have recently become available. Figure 1 presents an updated view
of the three-domain tree that includes new sequences from DPANN archaea.
The extent of diversity within the CPR is a topic of current debate. Analyses
based on 16S rRNA or concatenation of ribosomal proteins suggest that the
CPR may be comparable in breadth to all other bacteria .
However, it remains uncertain whether this is due to early divergence or
rapid evolution (or both). Other estimates of the scale of the CPR predict that
they could comprise a maximum of 26% or 25% of bacterial diversity. A reanalysis of this question using the full
set of available genomes, genes universal to both groups, and improved
phylogenetic methods is required.
After the explosive growth in the number of major branches either
discovered or genomically resolved via cultivation-independent methods
between 2012 and 2016, one may wonder if the appearance of new phylumlevel groups will continue indefinitely. An analysis of the rate of discovery of
new groups would suggest that this is not the case. Around 8,000 genomes
were reconstructed de novo by exploiting the public short-read archive
 . The archive includes samples from a huge array of
environment types . The majority of genomes were for
bacteria and archaea from clades already known to exist. A subset was
assigned to 44 putative phyla that were defined by cultivation-independent
genomic methods over the past 5 years. 3 potentially additional archaeal
phyla and 17 possible bacterial phyla were identified (although some of
these may have been independently described in the period between
download of the archive and publication). In fact, 2017 saw reports of the
first genomic sampling of several new groups, many of which are in the
previously undersampled archaeal domain (Table S1). Once found, the major
phylum-level lineages of bacteria and archaea are often identified across
multiple ecosystems (see below). We suspect that the phylum content of the
bacterial and archaeal domains will soon approach saturation, although the
topology of the tree may change as algorithms to analyze it improve. The
scope for discovery of new classes and groups at finer scales of taxonomic
resolution is immense.
If we are approaching full delineation of the major branches of the tree of
life, one may wonder why it took so long and then happened so quickly. It is
our perspective that this is a reflection of relatively little prior focus on
subsurface environments (which constitute a huge part of the biosphere but
are difficult to sample) and challenges associated with the application of
cultivation-independent genomic methods to the most complicated
ecosystems (e.g., soil). Many subsurface environments are anaerobic, and
therefore may be refuges for organisms from lineages that diverged early
from primitive life forms. These environments are also enriched for
organisms not commonly associated with humans, animals, or crops (thus
viewed as lower-priority research targets). Some subsurface environments
are low in nutrients and thus harbor slow-growing organisms with complex
interdependencies that ensure retention of resources within the ecosystem
 . Overall, these more recently studied environments are
enriched in organisms that have been difficult (or impossible) to cultivate, so
their discovery and genomic characterization awaited the development of
community-wide cultivation-independent methods.
New Phyla and Phylum Radiations
16S rRNA gene surveys perfomed by Norman Pace’s group uncovered
sequences from organisms from a “candidate division” (analogous to a
candidate phylum) labeled OP11 that were detected in hot springs of
Yellowstone National Park . As the diversity of
sequences expanded, it was apparent that the OP11 radiation includes
multiple potentially phylum-level groups, including the OD1 superphylum
 now referred to as Parcubacteria and
the OP11 superphylum now referred to as Microgenomates . Metagenomics-derived rRNA and protein sequences grouped these
into the CPR, and many new major lineages were added .
As discussed below, bacteria of the CPR consistently have small genomes
and cell sizes, and most are predicted to have symbiotic lifestyles.
Importantly, some groups within the CPR are not detected in rRNA gene
surveys due to primer mismatch, introns, or both .
Currently, we estimate that 73 CPR groups have been identified
(Figure 1 and Table S1).
Rinke et al.  proposed the term Patescibacteria for a superphylum
comprising Microgenomates (OP11), Parcubacteria (OD1), and Gracilibacteria
(GNO2-BD1-5), but the meaning of the term has become confused and even
misused as synonymous with the CPR . The term CPR is
simply a description of a huge monophyletic radiation of phyla and
superphlya that includes the group that ultimately may be referred to as
Patscibacteria and dozens of additional phyla and superphyla. Communitywide consultation should be undertaken before a formal name for this
radiation is proposed.
It should be noted that a widely accepted definition of what constitutes a
superphylum or even a new phylum is not available. In our experience, new
phylum-level branches are distinct, apparently monophyletic, and have 16S
rRNA genes that share <75%–80% identity with the most closely related
groups. Ultimately, appropriate phylum and superphylum definitions require
strong evidence for deep branch placements, and this is not yet available.
Based on the current summary, 62 non-CPR bacterial phylum-level groups
have representatives that have been genomically described via cultivationindependent methods (Table S1). Given that around 30 traditionally have
been described bacterial phyla (a handful of which were candidate phyla that
now have recently isolated representatives), the scope of the bacterial
domain exclusive of CPR may have approximately tripled. When CPR and
non-CPR groups are taken together, we estimate that cultivationindependent genomic methods have expanded the scale of domain Bacteria
by over five times.
There were early indications for the existence of a group of novel archaea
potentially analogous to the CPR organisms. These include the co-cultivation
of Nanoarchaeum equitans with its host , genomic
description and imaging of what were initially referred to as archaeal
Richmond Mine acidophilic nanoorganisms (ARMAN) archaea , and the genomic characterization of extremely
salt-adapted nanohaloarchaea . Based on a
collection of draft genomes from single cells (or concentrates), a segment of
the archaeal domain referred to as DPANN was proposed .
Since then, new genomes and the definition of at least nine major groups
have greatly expanded the DPANN lineages .
Archaea now include at least three other major supergroups: the
Euryarchaeota, the TACK , and Asgard archaea, all
of which comprise potentially phylum- or superphylum-level clades (see
below; Figure 1). In addition, 6 potential phylum-level groups have been
proposed within the TACK superphylum, and 15 additional groups affiliate
approximately with the Euryarchaeota. Although the phylum-level
delineation of Archaea is especially complicated , it appears that new archaeal candidate phyla (35 groups listed
in Table S1) expand the scope of archaeal diversity by a factor similar to that
noted for bacteria.
New Discoveries Regarding Potential Roles of Non-DPANN Archaea in
Biogeochemical Cycles
Genomic data for uncultivated archaea resulted in key discoveries related to
their roles in the carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur geochemical cycles. Excellent
recent reviews have been published on the phylogeny and ecological roles of
archaea in diverse ecosystems . Thus,
we focus here on a few examples related to ammonia and methane
metabolism to illustrate the overarching principle that genome-resolved
metagenomics can inform our understanding of evolution and
biogeochemistry.
An important early result of metagenomics was the discovery of homologs of
ammonia monooxygenase genes in archaeal genome fragments
reconstructed from a Sargasso Sea metagenome . The
existence of an unknown organism responsible for much of the ammonia
oxidation in the ocean had been suspected based on in situ measurements
that indicated that ammonia oxidation often proceeds at substrate
concentrations significantly below the growth threshold of cultured
ammonia-oxidizing bacteria. Subsequently, autotrophic ammonia-oxidizing
archaea were isolated and their critical role in the global nitrogen cycle
demonstrated . In 2008, they
were proposed as the third archaeal phylum and named Thaumarchaeota
 .
Sibling to Thaumarchaeota and Aigarchaeota are the Bathyarchaeota, which
appear to be key players in the global carbon cycle in terrestrial and marine
anoxic sediments. Some Bathyarchaeota possess the archaeal Wood-
Ljungdahl pathway , suggesting a
capacity for CO2 fixation via acetogenesis, a process thought to be unique
to bacteria . Importantly, some Bathyarchaeota may be
methanogens, given key genes that could produce methane from methanol,
methyl sulfides, and methylated amines .
Verstraetearchaeota (TACK superphylum) are also found in anoxic
environments with high methane fluxes and, like some Bathyarchaeota, are
predicted to conserve energy via methylotrophic methanogenesis
 .
Metagenomics has been critical for the study of methane oxidation.
Anaerobic methane-oxidizing euryarchaea-2d (ANME-2d) are often detected
in the sulfate-methane transition zone in marine sediments and use a
modified and reverse-methanogenesis pathway for growth . Certain ANME-2d from granitic groundwater were incubated with 13Clabeled methane to demonstrate that methane oxidation is linked to
microbial sulfate reduction . Others are predicted to conduct
reverse methanogenesis using nitrate as the terminal electron acceptor, and
this has been experimentally demonstrated using bioreactors and 13C and 15N
labeling . It has also been predicted that some ANME-2d
oxidize methane using manganese or iron as the electron acceptor. The genomes of anaerobic
Methanomassiliicoccales also encode key enzymes involved in methyldependent methanogenesis, unlike other members of Thermoplasmatarelated lineages . WSA2/Arc1, sibling to both the nonmethanogenic Hadesarchaeota and MSBL1 , may be methanogens and were recently named “Candidatus
Methanofastidiosa.” Based on metabolic predictions from genome sequences
from a wastewater treatment bioreactor , they lack
pathways for CO2-reducing and aceticlastic methanogenesis, but they may
be capable of methane formation via methylated thiol reduction with H2.
Overall, recent metagenomic studies have substantially expanded the
diversity of archaea predicted to be involved in methane metabolism. The
inference that Bathyarchaeota and Verstraetearchaeota, members of the
TACK superphylum, are methanogens is important because previously,
methanogenesis was unknown outside of the Euryarchaeota. New groups
such as the Methanomassiliicoccales and Methanofastidiosa also expand the
diversity of Euryarchaeotes predicted to be involved in methanogenesis.
However, it should be noted that the genes for methanogenesis and
methane oxidation via reverse methanogenesis are essentially the same.
This observation underlines the importance of experimental (e.g., bioreactor)
studies to appropriately define metabolism in situ.
Discoveries Regarding DPANN Archaea
Understanding of the diversity, distribution, and metabolisms of nano-sized
archaea that are members of the DPANN superphylum has been
substantially advanced via cultivation-independent genomics studies. DPANN
archaea are found in various extreme (e.g., hot, acidic, hypersaline) and
temperate (e.g., lake and marine sediments) ecosystems, although they
have been relatively rarely detected in soil and the open ocean. The first
ARMAN archaeal groups were discovered in acid mine drainage biofilms via
genomics-based approaches . The
coverage of these groups and the diversity of the environments in which
they occur has expanded , and the phyla have been
renamed as Parvarchaeota and Micrarchaeota . Both lineages are found in association with other
archaea (see below). Single-cell genomics and metagenomics uncovered and
defined additional phylum-level lineages within the DPANN superphylum.
These include Diapherotrites and Aenigmarchaeota ,
Nanoarchaeota , Nanohaloarchaeota ,
Woesearchaeota, and Pacearchaeota . Common
features unifying DPANN archaea are their small genomes, small cell sizes
and limited metabolic repertoires: many lack core biosynthetic pathways for
nucleotides, amino acids, and lipids. Most DPANN archaea depend on other
microbes to meet their biological requirements. However, some appear to
have the genetic potential to be free living with a heterotrophic aerobic and/
or fermentative lifestyle.
A potential phylum-level clade represented by the Altiarchaeales appears to branch deeply within the DPANN
superphylum based on recent studies 
and our analyses (Figure 1). However, this placement requires further
analysis. Altiarchaeales dominate some cold subsurface anaerobic
groundwater habitats . Unlike most archaea, they have
an outer membrane and unique surface-attached grappling hooks known as
hami. They form biofilms and appear to grow autotrophically on carbon
monoxide, acetate, or formate .
Some New Discoveries Regarding Potential Roles of Non-CPR Bacteria in
Biogeochemical Cycles
Many bacterial groups have new genomically described representatives
(Table S1), but it is beyond the scope of this Perspective to provide details
for all of these. Many of the bacterial genomes used to define these putative
candidate phyla were reported by nantharaman et al. .
Gene-by-gene analysis yielded a detailed metabolic prediction for this
organism, an overview of which is presented in Figure 2. Notably, the
genome encodes an extensive repertoire of redox enzymes that likely
indicate roles in iron and arsenic oxidation/reduction, nitrogen compound
transformations, hydrogen metabolism, and fermentation. This mixture of
aerobic and anaerobic pathways likely confers metabolic versatility, enabling
this bacterium to proliferate under changing conditions close to the water
table .
A long-standing mystery is related to the apparent detection
of Cyanobacteria in human fecal samples, suggesting the unexpected
existence of these bacteria in gut microbiomes. Adult fecal samples that
were relatively enriched in these organisms (based on 16S rRNA gene
sequencing) were targeted by genome-resolved metagenomics methods,
and a complete (closed) genome was reconstructed .
The study included an additional genome for a distinct group that was
recovered from an acetate-amended sediment metagenome . Metabolic predictions for these genomes indicated the absence of
photosynthetic machinery, leading to the conclusion that these bacteria have
a fermentation-based metabolism. Based on phylogenetic analyses, the
bacteria were assigned to the candidate phylum Melainabacteria . Genomes from a distinct but related lineage,
Sericytochromatia, were subsequently detected in a coal-bed methane well,
a laboratory bioreactor biofilm, and acetate-amended sediments . Soo et al. propose both Melainabacteria and Sericytochromatia as
classes of Cyanobacteria, a disagreement that reflects the common
challenge of achieving consensus regarding taxonomic designations. Due to
the absence of photosynthetic machinery in lineages sibling to
Cyanobacteria, Soo et al. confirm and extend the earlier conclusion that photosynthesis evolved after the divergence of
Cyanobacteria. Further, their analyses suggest that aerobic respiration arose
after the evolution of photosynthesis.
Another distinct bacterial group is the candidate phylum Rokubacteria , first genomically described via metagenomic analysis of
sediments collected at the same site as Zixibacteria and some
Melainabacteria. These bacteria had been previously detected in soil 16S
rRNA gene surveys. Based on metabolic predictions, it was suggested that
the sediment-associated Rokubacteria are acetoclastic heterotrophs that
likely use beta-oxidation of fatty acids for energy generation and produce
butyrate that would be consumed by other community members. These
Rokubacteria were also predicted to contribute to sulfur cycling (via
oxidation of thiosulfate to sulfide and its reduction to hydrogen sulfide) and
nitrogen cycling (via nitrite oxidation) and can probably oxidize carbon
monoxide. Subsequently, it was proposed that Rokubacteria, which are
relatively abundant in grassland soil, play a key role in carbon turnover via
methanol oxidation . Rokubacteria were recently
described as “genomic giants,” detected in the rhizosphere, volcanic mud, oil
wells, aquifers, and the deep subsurface .
Another important discovery involves bacteria of the candidate phylum
Tectobacteria. The first genomically described members belong to the
candidate genus Entotheonella and were described using metagenomic and
single-cell sequencing methods targeted at microbial communities in the
marine sponge Theonella swinhoei  . Entotheonella are
predicted to produce a huge variety of bioactive compounds that may
mediate ecological interactions. As sponges are well known as rich sources
of diverse natural products, the research likely addressed the question of
which organisms are the source of these compounds. The results of this
study underline the potential of genome-resolved metagenomics targeted to
candidate phyla groups to uncover biosynthetic pathways for a vast treasure
trove of secondary metabolites that could address the pressing need for new
antimicrobial compounds and other pharmaceuticals.
Bacteria of the CPR and Their Similarities to DPANN Archaea
Although the first draft genomes for CPR were first reported only in 2012
 , there are now thousands of sequences on hand.
Based on the first ∼800 genomes, Brown et al.  proposed the
existence of at least 35 candidate phyla within the CPR. Parallel cryogenic
transmission electron microscope images that targeted post-0.2 μm filtrates
collected from the same samples verified small cell volumes for these
bacteria . Interestingly, some candidate phyla
within the radiation (Gracilibacteria, BD1-5 and Absconditabacteria, SR1) use
an alternative genetic code . The repurposing of the UGA stop codon
to code for glycine was confirmed for an enrichment that contained
Gracilibacteria by metaproteomics . Building upon prior
work by Wrighton et al., 2012, Kantor et al., 2013, Brown et al., 2015, Nelson
and Stegen, 2015, and others, nantharaman et al. . Many are predicted to be unable to
produce nucleotides de novo and have minimal amino acid and cofactor
biosynthetic capacity. No CPR genomes analyzed to date contain the
components necessary to synthesize membrane lipids required for the cell
envelope, so further research is needed to determine the nature and sources
of these components. The CPR bacteria have unusual ribosome
compositions, and whole lineages (groups of putative candidate phyla) are
missing what were considered to be universal ribosomal proteins . Parcubacteria have been reported to lack ribosomal small
subunit methyltransferase G and ribosome-silencing factor .
In a new analysis reported here, we used a set of high-quality draft genomes
and some complete genomes to provide a first glance into the metabolic
variation within the CPR and DPANN simultaneously. As is evident from the
descriptions above, limited metabolic capacities are common across both
radiations and gaps in metabolic features are often shared (Figure 3). As
noted previously, typically bacterial genes (e.g., bacterial transcription
factors) occur in some DPANN archaea . The
distribution of isoprenoid-related genes is discussed further below.
Episymbiosis: An Unusual Lifestyle Predicted to Be Common for CPR and
A few CPR and DPANN species are associated with eukaryotic hosts . However, most are likely symbionts of bacteria or archaea,
given their abundance and diversity in samples that have few, if any,
eukaryotes. Based on strong enrichment in post-0.2 μm filtrates, it was
predicted that many may be episymbionts—i.e., symbionts that associate
with the surfaces of host cells rather than being contained within them.
Cryogenic transmission electron microscopy (cryo-TEM) data show pili-like
structures that extend from CPR cell surfaces (Figure 4A) and, in some cases,
contact other microbial cells . These
might provide access to nucleic acids or other metabolites. A few CPR and
DPANN organisms have been directly shown to be episymbionts. For ARMAN
(either Micrarchaetoa or Parvarchaeota), cryoelectron tomographic data
revealed penetration of their cell interiors via cytoplasmic extensions from
larger cells without a cell wall . Based on the overall microbial composition, the larger cells
were identified as Thermoplasmatales archaea. In other cases, cells are
attached via short bridges to Thermoplasmatales cells (Figure 4D)—probably
Gplasma —which were renamed Cuniculiplasma
divulgatum by Golyshina et al., . These points of contact resemble
those associated with N. equitans cells attached to host Ignicoccus
hospitalis archaea in a co-culture of these organisms .
Similarly, a co-culture of a parasitic Saccharibacterium (TM7) and
its Actinomyces odontolyticus (Actinobacteria) host has been obtained from
the human mouth . Transmission electron microscope
images indicate host-episymbiont interaction via a region of cell-cell contact
similar in form to those seen for ARMAN archaea and host
Thermoplasmatales.
Isoprenoid Lipid Biosynthesis Pathways Blur a Historical Distinction of
Archaea and Bacteria
Isoprenoids are metabolites that are essential in all living organisms in the
three domains of life. Isoprenoids have diverse metabolic functions, including
as quinones, chlorophylls, bacteriochlorophylls, rhodopsins, and carotenoids.
Archaeal membranes are composed of isoprenoid-based lipids, the
isopentenyl pyrophosphate and dimethylallyl diphosphate precursors of
which are typically synthesized via the mevalonate (MVA) pathway. Bacteria
use a nonhomologous pathway—the methylerythritol phosphate (MEP)
pathway—to synthesize the precursors. Previously, only few bacteria (mostly
Gram positive) were known to possess the MVA pathway . Interestingly, most of these bacteria predate other bacteria. In new
analyses, we revisited the question of the distribution of the MVA pathway in
bacteria, making use of hundreds of new genomes from the CPR and DPANN
radiation. The results show that some CPR bacteria (mostly Microgenomates
and a few Peregrinibacteria) possess the MVA pathway rather than the
bacterial MEP pathway (Figure 3). Intriguingly, the MVA pathway of the CPR
is of the type found in eukaryotes. The eukaryote MVA pathway includes
three enzymes that do not normally occur in in the archaeal MVA pathway
(phosphomevalonate kinase [PMK], diphosphomevalonate carboxylase
[MDC], and isopentenyl diphosphate isomerase [IDI1]).
As expected for Archaea, the MVA pathway occurs in organisms from several
DPANN phyla, including Diapherotrites, Micrarchaeota, and
Aenigmarchaeota. Similar to the CPR and distinct from other archaea, the
DPANN MVA pathway includes the full set of enzymes found in eukaryotes.
The MVA pathway is rarely found in Woesearchaeota. Instead, they have the
bacterial MEP pathway. This is important because the MEP pathway has not
been reported in archaea.
Previously, the presence of the MVA pathway in a few bacteria was explained
by potential acquisition via horizontal gene transfer from archaeal or
eukaryotic donors . Later,
in-depth phylogenomic analyses indicated that the MVA pathway may have
been ancestral in all three domains of life . We
conducted phylogenetic analyses using two key enzymes (MVA kinase and
PMK) from the MVA pathways to evaluate whether the new CPR and DPANN
sequences throw light on the evolutionary origin of isoprenoid biosynthesis
(Figure 5). The resulting phylogenetic tree resolves a novel intermediate
clade for members of the Microgenomates superphylum that is placed at the
base of both families (Figure 5). Of note, the Microgenomates that harbor the
unusual new form of MVA kinase also possess the regular MVA kinase
(Figure 5). The tree topology rules out recent horizontal gene transfer(s)
from other archaea or eukaryotes as the explanation for the MVA pathway in
CPR bacteria, with a few important exceptions (transfers from DPANN to
Dependentiae [TM6] and from Firmicutes to Woesearchaeota; Figure 5).
The “lipid divide” has been a central feature used to establish the distinction
between bacteria and archaea. The newly reported distribution of the MVA
and the MEP pathways in both domains reopens the question of their
evolutionary origin and alters the prior conclusion that the MEP pathway is
restricted to bacteria.
How the CPR and DPANN May Change Our View of Evolution
As noted above, the availability of genomes for a much more comprehensive
set of organisms revealed major new features of the tree of life (Figure 1).
The question of whether the tree topology involves two major subgroups
within bacteria and archaea—the CPR and DPANN, respectively—is
unresolved. Are the apparent groupings of CPR and DPANN artifacts of rapid
evolution or reflections of early origins and a long history of diversification?
A phenomenon that could drive fast evolution is genome reduction, which is
an obvious consideration for CPR and DPANN, given their small cell and
genome sizes. Largely symbiotic lifestyles are linked to rapid gene loss and
fast accumulation of mutations in well-studied symbioses (e.g., those that
involve partnerships of bacteria and eukaryotic hosts), although these may
not be appropriate models for associations in which the host is bacterial or
archaeal. The early stages of genome reduction in symbionts of eukaryotes
are characterized by proliferation of mobile elements, formation of
pseudogenes, multiple genomic rearrangements, and deletion of
chromosome fragments. To date, such phenomena have not been described
as prominent features of CPR and DPANN genomes . In more anciently evolved symbionts, such as Buchnera aphidicola,
mobile elements and most pseudogenes have been eliminated . Thus, if the CPR and DPANN experienced radiation-wide
genome reduction, it may have occurred long ago.
It is important to note that the small genomes of bacterial symbionts of
insects and those of human-associated pathogens, such as Chlamydia, do
not cluster within the CPR. This suggests that the phylogenetic placement of
the CPR is not an artifact of genome streamlining. That said, metabolisms
predicted for CPR and DPANN vary dramatically, and while some have
sufficient metabolic capacities to suggest that they may be free living, others
lack numerous biosynthetic capacities. Thus, we predict that genome
reduction may be an important phenomenon in some lineages.
The alternative explanation for the existence of CPR and DPANN as distinct
major radiations is that both arose from very early-evolving organisms
(possibly with small genomes), and the long branches of the CPR and DPANN
are due mostly to undersampling (rather than rapid evolution). Although
their apparent deep branching phylogenetic placement remains in question,
other observations make an early origin of both groups from a common
ancestral pool worth considering. Most important, perhaps, is the similarity in
the suite of biosynthetic capacities that both groups possess (extensive
genes of the information system) and in missing pathways (e.g., lack of the
electron transport chain and tricarboxylic acid [TCA] cycles that are widely
distributed in other bacteria and archaea). If, as one might predict, extensive
use of oxygen-based respiration arose relatively late (following the advent of
O2-generating photosynthesis around 2 billion years ago), it would make
sense that groups with ancient metabolic platforms would be anaerobes. The
metabolisms of CPR and DPANN are consistent with such a world, as these
organisms appear to be almost exclusively anaerobes, lacking a full TCA
cycle and electron transport chain required for aerobic growth. Similarly,
almost all are incapable of dissimilatory nitrate reduction, and none are
predicted to have metabolisms based on dissimilatory sulfate reduction. Both
oxidized nitrogen and sulfur-based compounds would have been at low
abundance prior to an oxidized atmosphere. Obviously, it is speculation, but
we imagine that nucleotide and amino acid biosynthesis capacities may have
been present in ancestral populations but lost during genome reduction as
(most) CPR and DPANN adopted lifestyles that depended on organisms with
more recently evolved capacities (e.g., aerobic growth, photosynthesis, and
other forms or chemoautotrophy). The alternative explanation that cannot be
ruled out at this time is that the many similarities in the genomic features of
CPR and DPANN may have arisen by convergent evolution, possibly involving
late radiation-wide adaption to anaerobic habitats.
Although what we see now in CPR and DPANN genomes must be a faint echo
of what once was, the presence of specific genes in widely divergent groups
may hint at features of ancestral organisms that were lost from many
modern groups. Included in this list are capacities such as modified
glycolysis (reliant on pentose phosphate pathway enzymes), hydrogen
metabolism ,
and ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (RuBisCO). In fact,
one of the most striking cases of widely but sparsely distributed enzymes
found in both CPR and DPANN organisms are the form II/III- and III-like
RuBisCOs that apparently function in a nucleotide-based pathway that feeds
into lower glycolysis and fermentation . This enzyme
occurs in some extremely minimal genomes (Dojkabacteria [WS6] and
Pacearchaeota), consistent with its central role in the metabolism of these
organisms. Thus, RuBisCO that functions in nucleotide metabolism and
central carbon metabolism may have been key to the physiology of ancestral
CPR and DPANN. A bacterial or archaeal cell is, on average, 20% RNA, and
RNA is 40% ribose by weight . Therefore, it has been suggested that ribose was likely an abundant
sugar available on early Earth for fermentation. Hence, type III- and II/IIIbased RuBisCO pathway of nucleoside monophosphate conversion to 3phosphoglycerate may be a relic of ancient heterotrophy.
The alternative explanation for the very striking patterns of similarity in the
presence and absence of genes is a combination of gene loss and horizontal
gene transfer. Horizontal gene transfer certainly has shaped the evolution of
CPR and DPANN , but this remains relatively unstudied. So
far, where more complex metabolic capacities occur, they are present
sporadically, and the enzymes are highly divergent relative to all currently
known sequences. Likely, the evolutionary trajectories of CPR and DPANN
have been shaped by combination of gene loss, lateral transfer, and
convergent evolution. The balance in importance of these processes across
the radiations is very much an open question.
Asgard Archaea Reinforce the Idea that Archaea Were Ancestors of
Eukaryotic Cells
The Asgard superphylum, comprising Lokiarchaeota ,
Thorarchaeota , Odinarchaeota (aremba-Niedzwiedzka
et al., 201), and Heimdallarchaeota (aremba-Niedzwiedzka et al., 201)
represents an important recent discovery from metagenomics. Based on
phylogenetic analyses that included sequences from members of the Asgard
superphylum, it was proposed that these archaea share a relatively close
evolutionary relationship with Eukaryotes . There have
been many competing hypotheses regarding the origin of eukaryotic cells,
and the idea that they arose from the fusion of bacterial and archaeal cells
has a long history. Jim Lake and colleagues suggested this in the 1980s . A mixed origin for the eukaryotic cell involving both bacteria and
archaea was supported by the fact that genes for DNA replication,
transcription, and translation systems of eukaryotes resemble archaeal
genes, whereas genes involved in energy and carbon metabolism are similar
to genes of bacteria. Martin and Müller  proposed that Eukaryotes
arose through symbiotic association of an anaerobic, autotrophic, hydrogendependent archaeal host with bacterial symbiont. Others suggested that
they arose via symbiosis between methanogenic archaea and an ancestral
sulfate-reducing myxobacterium . The claim
regarding the phylogenetic placement of Asgard archaea with Eukaryotes
 was an important new twist and considered
controversial by some .
The phylogenetic argument of Spang et al.  is supported by recent and
more comprehensive studies (aremba-Niedzwiedzka et al., 201). Important
discoveries in the original and new studies relate to the presence of
numerous genes and pathways in Asgard archaea that are normally
considered to be eukaryotic signatures (eukaryotic signature proteins, ESPs),
thus mostly absent in other archaea. These include some components
related to membrane remodeling and trafficking, cytoskeletal features,
ubiquitin-modifier systems, tubulins, and vesicle-formation processes in
eukaryotes . Although genes encoding some
of these proteins had been noted previously in archaeal genomes , the presence of multiple components adds significant weight
to claims based on phylogenetic reconstructions. Thus, Asgard archaea likely
provide important clues regarding the nature of the precursors of the first
eukaryotic cells. Although it must be acknowledged that the biochemical
functions of the intriguing eukaryotic features of Asgard archaea remain to
be determined, the presence of such a repertoire may imply that if the
ancestor of eukaryotes was archaeal, the organisms were far more complex
than otherwise predicted.
Metabolic Handoffs, Microbial Communities
A strength of genome-resolved metagenomics methods is that they provide
information about the metabolic potential of coexisting community
members. Thus, in addition to resolving which organism can do what
(Figure 6A), it is possible to examine the distributions of traits over
coexisting organisms within an ecosystem . The Anantharaman
et al. analysis leveraged over 2,500 genomes from a single aquifer
environment (representing around ⅓ of all organisms detected there) and
revealed evidence for extensive interconnection among the metabolisms of
coexisting community members. These connections involve the supply and
consumption of compounds of the nitrogen, sulfur, carbon, hydrogen, and
other biogeochemical cycles. For example, an organism may be able to
conduct only a subset of the redox transformations in a biogeochemical
pathway. Thus, they release a partially oxidized (e.g., thiocyanite that can be
oxidized to sulfite) or partially reduced (e.g., nitrite that can be reduced to
nitrous oxide) intermediate product for use by other organisms. This
ecosystem structure is counter to the expectation that, for example, a single
bacterium is responsible for all steps in nitrate reduction. The phenomenon,
involving cooperative biogeochemical cycling, has been referred to as
“metabolic handoffs” and is
diagrammed in Figure 6B. Through metabolic handoffs, the ecosystem can
adopt a large number of configurations by shifting the mixture of organisms
involved in a process as environmental conditions change. Complex
interdependencies, and especially obligate symbioses, may explain why
some organisms are difficult to grow in pure cultures (as isolates).
Figure 6: Information from genome-resolved analysis of natural microbial communities. (A)
Predicted metabolic features for some newly described bacteria and archaea from a range of different
sites and studies (for references, please see the text). The simplified cell cartoons highlight how
genomics-based analyses of organisms from candidate phyla have revealed their biogeochemically
important roles. Organisms are represented in the context of sediment, an environment that hosts
many newly described bacteria and archaea, but they occur in other environments. Genomes of
bacteriophage (phage), viruses (of archaea), and plasmids can also be reconstructed, enabling direct
analysis of the roles of these entities in augmenting host metabolism and lateral gene transfer. (B)
Diagram illustrating the concept of coexisting microorganisms working together to complete a single
biogeochemical pathway (ammonia, NH3, to N2). This is based on Figure 6 and traits data in
Supplementary Table 9 of nantharaman et al. . The availability of new genomic information
for candidate phyla organisms, arguably the majority of all bacteria and
archaea, has demanded that we rethink concepts related to microbial
community structure and functioning, the nature of symbioses, and the
origins of evolutionary innovations. Huge and fundamental questions remain
regarding early evolution that can only be addressed by better and more
detailed phylogenetic analyses that leverage more comprehensive sets of
The scale of microbial diversity in Domain Eukarya is likely underestimated.
A major advance anticipated in the coming years is the discovery, metabolic
exploration, and analysis of the habitat distribution of microbial eukaryotes.
A few studies have already employed cultivation-independent genomic
methods for de novo reconstruction of genomes of microbial and even
macro-eukaryotes from short read datasets . Although approaches are improving rapidly
 , genome-resolved metagenomics methods have not yet
found broad application for this purpose. The combination of cultivationindependent genomic information with transcriptomic data may resolve how
the metabolism of microbial eukaryotes depends on the types and activities
of associated bacteria and archaea. For example, laboratory studies using a
single genotype of the human pathogen Candida albicans (Eukaryota,
Opisthokonta, Fungi) showed that it underwent a phenotypic switch, with
dramatic alteration of its gene expression patterns, when it was grown in the
presence of different bacterial isolates . Such phenomena
could be directly tested by genomically defining Candida in real human gut
microbial communities via genome-resolved metagenomics and then
evaluating its transcriptome (via metatranscriptomics) as a function of the
flanking microbial community composition.
Medical research has been substantially impacted by the introduction of
cultivation-independent microbiome studies. However, genomically resolved
analyses remain in the minority, partially due to the high costs and slow
speed relative to rRNA sequence-based analyses. We anticipate that this will
change with the advent of new, real-time, and low-cost sequencing
methodologies. Although rRNA gene surveys and existing metagenomic data
suggest that it is unlikely that many major new microbial groups (e.g., phyla)
will be discovered in the human microbiome, new species-, genus- and
higher-taxonomic-level groups certainly will be uncovered. Importantly,
genome sequences for even closely related strains can differ significantly,
and variation may involve genes that contribute to pathogenicity and
antibiotic resistance. Thus, metagenomic methods have the potential to
provide new insights into the medical importance and drug susceptibility of
human-associated microbes and ultimately could guide medical treatments.
An understudied question relates the medical significance of CPR and
DPANN. Overall, they do not appear to be major players in most human
microbiomes. Saccharibacteria (TM7) and Absconditabacteria (SR1) have
been found in the mouth . TM7 have been linked to
periodontal disease, and one subtype is found primarily at diseased sites
 . Members of this phylum are also associated with
dermatitis and cystic fibrosis , and they were detected in
other mucus-rich sites associated with vaginosis and inflammatory bowel
disease . Importantly,
experiments involving co-culture of a TM7 with its host showed that TM7
could modulate the immune response . Intriguingly, bacteria
from these groups, along with a variety of DPANN archaea, are relatively
common in dolphin mouths , suggesting their broader
importance in animal health. Woesearchaeota were recently detected in the
lungs of humans , and cell-free DNA of certain CPR
bacteria was found in the blood of many human subjects . Both CPR and DPANN are abundant in groundwater and thus may be
ingested regularly by humans and animals. It is our view that PCRindependent methods applied to human microbiome samples from diverse
body sites, disease states, and populations could provide new information
relating to the potential medical significance of CPR and DPANN.
Throughout this Perspective, our focus has been on genomics, i.e., what can
be learned from DNA sequence information. Ultimately, however,
experiments are needed to address the biological relevance of the
predictions informed by sequence analysis. The landmark study involving the
TM7 co-culture with its actinobacterial host provides a template for future
work. Metagenomics studies provide information about appropriate
environmental sample sources that could be used to seed enrichments. Coabundance patterns for CPR or DPANN and other bacteria or archaea could
be used to identify possible symbiont-host associations. Based on host gene
content, it should be possible to design enrichment studies to bring other
CPR and DPANN into co-cultures. Going beyond the physiological and
morphological studies that co-cultures enable, specific organisms in
enrichments could be targeted using modern genome-editing methods to
remove or upregulate genes in either the symbiont or host to discover the
mechanisms of their interaction.
With sufficient genomic and linked functional data, it will be possible to really
begin to understand how natural ecosystems function. Comprehensive
“omics” information is already being collected from extensive suites of time
series and spatial samples, as well as from laboratory bioreactors and full
field-scale manipulation experiments. Ultimately, across ecosystem types, it
should be possible to link organisms to processes and to understand the
conditions that cause organisms of interest to proliferate. Thus, genomically
informed ecosystem (including human microbiome) manipulations should
soon come within reach.
Acknowledgments
Support was provided by grants from the Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory’s Genomes-to-Watershed Scientific Focus Area . The U.S.
Department of Energy (DOE), Office of Science, and Office of Biological and
Environmental Research funded the work under contract DE-AC02-
05CH11231 and the DOE carbon cycling program DOE-SC10010566 , the
Innovative Genomics Institute at Berkeley and the Chan Zuckerberg Biohub .
We thank the editor and two anonymous reviewers for excellent input to this
manuscript.