Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pages 3356–3369
November 16 - 20, 2020. c⃝2020 Association for Computational Linguistics
REALTOXICITYPROMPTS:
Evaluating Neural Toxic Degeneration in Language Models
Samuel Gehman⇧
Suchin Gururangan⇧†
Maarten Sap⇧
Yejin Choi⇧†
Noah A. Smith⇧†
⇧Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
†Allen Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Seattle, USA
{sgehman,sg01,msap,yejin,nasmith}@cs.washington.edu
Pretrained neural language models (LMs) are
prone to generating racist, sexist, or otherwise
toxic language which hinders their safe deployment. We investigate the extent to which pretrained LMs can be prompted to generate toxic
language, and the effectiveness of controllable
text generation algorithms at preventing such
toxic degeneration. We create and release RE-
ALTOXICITYPROMPTS, a dataset of 100K naturally occurring, sentence-level prompts derived from a large corpus of English web
text, paired with toxicity scores from a widelyused toxicity classiﬁer. Using REALTOXICI-
TYPROMPTS, we ﬁnd that pretrained LMs can
degenerate into toxic text even from seemingly
innocuous prompts. We empirically assess several controllable generation methods, and ﬁnd
that while data- or compute-intensive methods
(e.g., adaptive pretraining on non-toxic data)
are more effective at steering away from toxicity than simpler solutions (e.g., banning “bad”
words), no current method is failsafe against
neural toxic degeneration. To pinpoint the potential cause of such persistent toxic degeneration, we analyze two web text corpora used to
pretrain several LMs , and ﬁnd a signiﬁcant amount
of offensive, factually unreliable, and otherwise toxic content. Our work provides a test
bed for evaluating toxic generations by LMs
and stresses the need for better data selection
processes for pretraining.
Introduction
Although they are the backbone of many modern
NLP systems , language models (LMs)
pretrained on large web text corpora suffer from
degenerate and biased behavior . As illustrated in Figure 1,
they can easily degenerate into toxicity, even without explicitly toxic prompts, which hinders their
# ( )./
'' ( ̦̦̦
)/.0- $/
..*( *) 
4GCN6QZKEKV[2TQORVU
./IGPGTCVKQPU
*$!4*0"-
/#$)&.# ̲.!0''̦̦̦
Figure 1: Non-toxic
examples from REALTOXICI-
TYPROMPTS, a new testbed for evaluating neural generations and their toxicity. Despite not containing any
toxic language as measured by PERSPECTIVE API,
these prompts cause several pretrained LMs to systematically generate highly toxic text (shown in Table 17
in Appendix §E).
safe deployment .
We ﬁrst introduce a framework to systematically measure the risk of toxic degeneration
by pretrained LMs.
We release REALTOXICI-
TYPROMPTS (§4), a set of 100K naturally occurring prompts (i.e., sentence preﬁxes; Figure
1) extracted from a large corpus of English web
text and paired with toxicity scores from a widely
used and commercially deployed toxicity detector
(PERSPECTIVE API). We show that popular LMs
produce toxic generations when conditioned on our
prompts, even those that are non-toxic (§4.2).
Then, as a possible mitigation strategy, we evaluate controllable generation methods and quantify
their ability to steer away from toxic content using REALTOXICITYPROMPTS (§5). We ﬁnd that
certain controllable methods (e.g., toxicity control
tokens, swearword ﬁlters) are less successful than
more computationally or data-intensive methods
(e.g., ﬁnetuning on non-toxic corpora). However,
we show that even our best steering methods can
still generate highly toxic content.
Finally, to further investigate the potential cause
of these phenomena, we present the ﬁrst largescale analysis of toxicity in GPT-2’s training corpus, OpenAI WebText, , as well as an in-depth analysis of
its open-source replica, OPENWEBTEXT CORPUS
 . We
ﬁnd non-negligible amounts of toxic, harmful, and
abusive text in these corpora, which were used in
pretraining of several language models . We identify additional
issues with the data and its provenance, including
large numbers of news articles shared on banned
Internet communities or from factually unreliable
sources (§6.2).
Our ﬁndings highlight the difﬁculty of avoiding
toxicity in natural language generation (NLG) and
illustrate a need to actively reconsider the content
used in LM pretraining. We release our code and
data for tracking the progress towards combating
the critical issue of neural toxic degeneration.1,2
Operationalizing Toxicity
Characterizing the toxicity of large corpora of naturally occurring or machine generated text is crucial
to understanding toxic degeneration by language
models. Unfortunately, such large scale prevents
human annotations of toxicity (e.g., we score at
least 80 GB of text in §6). Therefore, we rely on
PERSPECTIVE API3, an automated tool for toxic
language and hate speech detection. We acknowledge, however, that such tools are imperfect and
subject to a variety of biases, as discussed in §2.2
PERSPECTIVE API TOXICITY
We use the TOXICITY4 score from PERSPECTIVE
API, a widely used, commercially deployed toxic-
1Due to their prevalence, we focus our study only on neural
language models, and therefore use the term “neural toxic degeneration.” Future work could examine whether non-neural
language models exhibit similar behavior.
2 
3 
perspectiveapi
4PERSPECTIVE API deﬁnes TOXICITY as a “rude, disrespectful, or unreasonable comment; likely to make people
leave a discussion.”
ity detection tool. Accessed through an API, TOX-
ICITY corresponds to the prediction output of a
CNN trained on a proprietary
corpus of comments from Wikipedia , New York
Times, and other news sites with an AUC of 0.97.
Since the model is calibrated using isotonic regression ,5 we can meaningfully interpret the score as a probability of toxicity.
In our analyses, we label a prompt as toxic if it has
TOXICITY ≥0.5, and non-toxic otherwise.6
Biases in Toxic Language Detection
Although widely used, the PERSPECTIVE API and
other hate speech detection systems and corpora
exhibit biases against minorities and suffer from
low agreement in annotations , partially due to annotator identity in-
ﬂuencing their perception of hate speech and differences in annotation task setup . Notably, recent
work has found that systems are overestimating the
prevalence of toxicity in text that contains a minority identity mention or text by
racial minorities . This
is partially due to detectors’ over-reliance on lexical cues of toxicity . We further discuss and examine the effect of these biases
in the Appendix, by assessing that the racial bias
in toxicity is invariant with respect to model choice
(Appendix §C.1) and analyzing the presence of
profanity and swearwords separately from toxicity
(Appendix §C.2).
Out-of-the-Box Generation Toxicity
We focus our investigation of toxic degeneration
in ﬁve popular autoregressive Transformer-based
 language models: GPT-1,
5 
perspectiveapi/blob/master/3-concepts/
score-normalization.md
6To assess PERSPECTIVE API on human-generated
the ﬁrst three authors performed manual judgments of toxicity of a sample of 100 documents from
OWTC, and found an 88% pairwise agreement (Pearson
⇢=0.83) with TOXICITY scores.
To assess the API on
machine-generated text,
among 100 generations from
our judgments had 80% pairwise agreement
and Pearson ⇢=0.65 with TOXICITY.
For further model
information, we refer the reader to the model card for TOX-
 
perspectiveapi/blob/master/2-api/modelcards/English/toxicity.md
GPT-2, GPT-3, CTRL, and CTRL-WIKI. GPT-1
 is a 117M-parameter model
pretrained on a large corpus of English books . GPT-2 , is a similarly sized model
pretrained on OPENAI-WT, which contains 40GB
of English web text and is described in §6.7 GPT-3
 is pretrained on a mix of Common Crawl, an expanded version of OPENAI-WT,
books corpora, and Wikipedia.8 In all experiments,
we use the 175B parameter GPT-3 model, also
known as DA VINCI in the OpenAI API.
CTRL is a 1.63B parameter
model that uses domain-speciﬁc control tokens for
conditional language modelling. We analyze generations in two domains: web text (CTRL, Links
control token), and English Wikipedia (CTRL-
WIKI, Wiki control token).
Generating from Models
Unless otherwise
noted, we use nucleus sampling with p = 0.9 to generate up to 20 tokens
(see Appendix §B.4 for additional details). All experiments are carried out with the Hugging Face
Transformers library .
Unprompted Toxicity in Neural Models
To quantify the risk associated with using pretrained language models for generation, we ﬁrst
measure their propensity to generate toxic output conditioned only on their respective start-ofsentence tokens.9 For each model, we ﬁrst generate
a pool of 10K spans, and then perform bootstrap estimation of the expected maximum toxicity for n 
10K generations, by sampling (with replacement)
n generations from the pool 1K times each.
Our results (Figure 2) show that all ﬁve language
models can degenerate into toxicity of over 0.5
within 100 generations, and most only require 1K
generations to exceed a maximum toxicity of 0.9
(see Table 15 and 16 in Appendix §E for examples). We ﬁnd similar patterns of expected maximum toxicity for GPT-2 and CTRL, which have
signiﬁcantly more overlap in pretraining data than
with GPT-1. Though trained on a much larger
corpus, GPT-3’s unprompted toxicity also mirrors
7We ﬁnd similar toxic behavior in GPT-2-small and GPT-
2-medium, see Appendix §B.7 for details.
8We access the GPT-3 model through OpenAI’s API
( 
9For CTRL and CTRL-WIKI, we use the Links and
Wiki control tokens; for GPT-2 and GPT-3, we use the
<|endoftext|> token; for GPT-1, we use “. ”.
Figure 2: Neural models generate toxicity, even with no
prompting. Here we display bootstrap estimates of the
expected maximum toxicity for N generations, with
variance bounds as shades. For example, we observe
that GPT-2 generates an expected maximum toxicity
of 0.65 with just 100 unprompted generations.
that of GPT-2, which may be due to the fact that
GPT-3’s training data was designed to be similar to GPT-2’s training data .
On the other hand, GPT-1 generates higher levels
of expected toxicity with fewer generations. This
may be explained by the correspondingly high levels of toxicity in GPT-1’s pretraining corpus (see
Appendix §D.3 for details). We also observe that
CTRL-WIKI has a signiﬁcantly lower expected
maximum toxicity than the other models. These
results suggest that models acquire toxicity from
their pretraining data, which we analyze further in
REALTOXICITYPROMPTS
To systematically evaluate and compare the generations from language models, we create REAL-
TOXICITYPROMPTS as a testbed for toxicity in
conditional language generation that mirrors real
world applications . With this dataset,
we quantify the effect of prompt toxicity on the toxicity of generation from our ﬁve language models.
Prompt Creation and Selection
We select our prompts from sentences in the OPEN-
WEBTEXT CORPUS ,
a large corpus of English web text scraped from
REALTOXICITYPROMPTS
Continuations
Avg. Toxicity
Continuations
Table 1: Data statistics of prompts and continuations in
REALTOXICITYPROMPTS.
Exp. Max. Toxicity
Toxicity Prob.
Table 2: Toxicity of generations conditioned on REAL-
TOXICITYPROMPTS. Left: Expected maximum toxicity (with standard deviations as subscripts) over 25
generations. Right: The empirical probability of generating toxic text at least once over 25 generations.
outbound URLs from Reddit, for which we extract TOXICITY scores with PERSPECTIVE API.
To obtain a stratiﬁed range of prompt toxicity,10 we
sample 25K sentences from four equal-width toxicity ranges ([0,.25), ..., [.75,1]), for a total of 100K
sentences. We then split sentences in half, yielding
a prompt and a continuation, both of which we also
score for toxicity. We include further preprocessing
details in Appendix §A.
Our ﬁnal dataset includes 100K naturally occurring prompts, which average 11.7 ± 4.2 tokens in
length (Table 1). REALTOXICITYPROMPTS contains 22K prompts with TOXICITY ≥0.5 (i.e., toxic
prompts). We ﬁnd that prompt and continuation
toxicity are slightly anti-correlated (r = –0.08, p 
0.001), indicating that, in our documents, toxicity
as measured by PERSPECTIVE API is usually con-
ﬁned to one half of the sentence.
Prompted Toxicity in Neural Models
Using REALTOXICITYPROMPTS and the same generation procedures outlined in §3, we measure toxic
degeneration in out-of-the-box neural language
models. We characterize toxicity in prompted generations with two metrics: 1) the expected maxi-
10Oversampling toxicity is necessary since it is a relatively
rare phenomenon online .
mum toxicity over k = 25 generations, which we
estimate with a mean and standard deviation; and
2) the empirical probability of generating a span
with TOXICITY ≥0.5 at least once over k = 25
generations. These metrics characterize toxic generations along two axes: the higher the expected
maximum toxicity, the more toxic we expect the
worst-case generations to be, and the higher the
toxicity probability, the more frequently the model
generates toxicity.
Our results show that while toxic prompts unsurprisingly yield higher toxicity in generations, nontoxic prompts still can still cause toxic generations
at non-trivial rates (Table 2). Speciﬁcally, all ﬁve
models have a toxicity probability near or above
0.5 for non-toxic prompts. This shows that even in
innocuous contexts these models can still generate
toxic content (as illustrated in Table 17 and 18 in
Appendix §E), suggesting the need for models to
“unlearn” toxicity. Surprisingly, even CTRL-WIKI
has similar generation toxicity to other models in
prompted settings, even though it was trained on
just Wikipedia. These results suggest that like the
provenance of pretraining data (§3.1), prompt context can heavily inﬂuence generation toxicity, and
that steering generations after pretraining is crucial
to prevent toxic behavior in language models. In
the following section, we explore the effectiveness
of a variety of such methods to avoid toxicity.
Detoxifying Generations
We investigate the effectiveness of recent controllable generation methods at steering away from toxicity using REALTOXICITYPROMPTS. Speciﬁcally,
we focus on GPT-2 as a base model for two detoxi-
ﬁcation techniques: data-based, where we pretrain
the language model further, and decoding-based
where we only change the generation strategy without changing model parameters.11 As described in
§4.2, we sample 25 generations per prompt for each
model. We describe hyperparameters and training
details for all methods in Appendix §B.
Data-Based Detoxiﬁcation
We consider two types of data-based detoxiﬁcation
in which we continue pretraining on approximately
150K documents from OWTC.12
11We conﬁrm that our detoxiﬁed models are still reasonable
language models in terms of perplexity in Table 10, Appendix
12Described in Appendix §B.3, our training corpora are
fully disjoint from the prompts data.
Exp. Max. Toxicity
Toxicity Prob.
Unprompted
Unprompted
Data-based
DAPT (Non-Toxic)
DAPT (Toxic)
Decoding-based
VOCAB-SHIFT
WORD FILTER
Table 3: Left: Average maximum toxicity (with standard deviations as subscripts) over 25 generations. Right: The
empirical probability of generating toxic text at least once over 25 generations. The best performing detoxiﬁcation
method yielding the lowest toxicity per-category, is bolded. We display DAPT (Toxic) as a reference for the
effectiveness of DAPT as a method of controlling LM behavior. All models are evaluated on a full dataset of 100K
prompts, except PPLM, which is evaluated on a dataset of 10K prompts, due to computational budget.
Domain-Adaptive Pretraining (DAPT)
the framework outlined in Gururangan et al. ,
we perform an additional phase of pretraining on
the non-toxic subset of a balanced corpus with
GPT-2. For comparison, we also perform the experiment using the toxic subset.
Attribute Conditioning (ATCON)
Inspired by
Ficler and Goldberg and Keskar et al.
 , we prepend a corresponding toxicity attribute token (<|toxic|>, <|nontoxic|>) to
a random sample of documents and pretrain the
GPT-2 language model further. In our generation
experiments, we prepend the <|nontoxic|> token to our prompts.
Decoding-Based Detoxiﬁcation
Noting the additional cost of training language
models further, we explore three detoxifying strategies that only rely on altering the decoding algorithm and are therefore more readily usable by
many practitioners.
Vocabulary Shifting (VOCAB-SHIFT)
by Eisenstein et al. and Ghosh et al. ,
we learn a 2-dimensional representation of toxicity
and non-toxicity for every token in GPT-2’s vocabulary, which we then use to boost the likelihood of
non-toxic tokens. Given the language model’s unnormalized probability (logits) over the vocabulary,
we add the term βW · t, where t 2 R2 encodes
(non-)toxicity, and W 2 RV represents the associations between each token and (non-)toxicity, and
β is the boosting strength. We set β = 3 for all
experiments. We learn this representation using the
toxicity labels on the balanced corpus described in
§5.1 (See Appendix §B.3 for more details).
Word Filtering (WORD FILTER)
We also implement a language model blocklist, disallowing a
set of words from being generated by GPT-2. We
set the probability of generating any word from a
list13 of profanity, slurs, and swearwords to zero.
We use the recently released PPLM
 . This decoding method
operates on GPT-2 by altering the past and present
hidden representations to better reﬂect the desired
attributes, using gradients from a discriminator . In our
experiments, we steer generations using the toxicity classiﬁer released by the authors and the Hugging Face implementation. For PPLM, we only
sample 10 generations per prompt, and evaluate
with 10K prompts total, due to this decoding strategy being extremely computationally intensive (14
sec/generation, vs. 0.2 sec for GPT-2).
Effect of Controllable Solutions on
Generation Toxicity
We investigate the effectiveness of our detoxiﬁcation methods under REALTOXICITYPROMPTS, following the same generation procedures and experimental setups outlined in §4. Listed in Table 3, our
results show that steering does not completely solve
neural toxic degeneration, though all proposed techniques do reduce toxic behavior in GPT-2. Of all
methods, DAPT (Non-Toxic), vocabulary shifting,
and PPLM yield the lowest toxicity in generation.
Despite its simplicity, DAPT (Non-Toxic) is one of
the most effective methods for steering away from
13List of Dirty, Naughty, Obscene, and Otherwise Bad
downloaded
 
LDNOOBW/List-of-Dirty-Naughty-Obsceneand-Otherwise-Bad-Words.
toxicity, highlighting the importance of pretraining
data in neural toxic degeneration.
Prompts That Challenge All Models
that certain prompts consistently cause all models
to generate toxicity (e.g., the four prompts in Figure
1). Speciﬁcally, there are 327 prompts that yielded
at least one generation with 0.9 TOXICITY from all
models, and 1,225 prompts when considering only
the out-of-the-box language models (i.e., GPT-1,
GPT-2, GPT-3, CTRL, CTRL-WIKI).14 From
qualitative investigations, these prompts tended to
either be toxic themselves, or if innocuous, they
contain opening quotes or preﬁxes of multiword
expressions such as “full of-” (Figure 1). Additionally, we ﬁnd that at least 10% of those 1.2K come
from factually unreliable news sources or appear in
banned or quarantined subreddits.
Analyzing Toxicity in Web Text
To further investigate the phenomenon of neural
toxic degeneration, and partially motivated by the
surprising effectiveness of domain-adaptive pretraining on non-toxic data, we turn our focus to two
corpora used to pretrain several language models.
Speciﬁcally, we quantify the toxicity in OPENAI-
WT 
and its open-source replica OWTC , inspired by previous work in analyzing social biases in large text corpora . Then, we investigate the provenance of the
data in these corpora, quantifying how many documents come from factually unreliable news sites or
were shared on quarantined or banned subreddits.
is a large corpus of English web text
scraped from outbound URLs in submissions on
Reddit communities (subreddits). In the creation of
OWTC, only links included in posts with a “karma”
(i.e., popularity) score of 3 or more were considered. Following the links, only English documents
longer than 128 tokens are included in this corpus,
amounting to 38 GB of text from about 8M documents. To allow for further analyses, we parse
the URLs given with OWTC documents to extract the domain , which we crossreference with news factuality ratings by Baly et al.
 . We additionally cross-reference publicly
14When releasing REALTOXICITYPROMPTS, we will include a ﬂag for prompts belong to this challenging subset.
Figure 3: TOXICITY scores of documents in OWTC
(top) and OPENAI-WT (bottom). y-axis is in log-scale,
and color gradient follows magnitude in x-axis. We
consider a document toxic if its TOXICITY is ≥0.5.
We additionally display the estimated total % of toxic
documents in each corpus above each subplot.
available Reddit dumps15 to identify which subreddits the URLs were submitted to. We include
further details on OWTC and metadata linking in
Appendix §D.
is the pretraining corpus for GPT-
2 , also containing about 8M
documents. Following OWTC, authors gathered
URLs from Reddit, though from a different (but
overlapping) timespan. Additionally, authors ﬁltered content using a blocklist of sexually-explicit
and otherwise offensive subreddits.16 This corpus
does not come paired with URL metadata.
We ﬁnd about 29% overlap between the
two corpora, using a large-scale similarity search
with locality-sensitive hashing . We ﬁnd
15 
16 
2/blob/master/model_card.md
Figure 4: Top: Factual reliability in news sites that
make up OWTC. Bottom: Unreliable news sources in
OWTC have a much higher proportion of toxic content.
that at least 2.3M documents in OPENAI-WT also
appear in OWTC.
Toxicity in Web Text
Shown in Figure 3, we ﬁnd that both corpora contain non-negligible amounts of toxicity, with 2.1%
of OWTC having TOXICITY ≥0.5, and 4.3% of
OPENAI-WT. These rates are in line with Founta
et al. , who ﬁnd that the prevalence of abusive or toxic content online roughly ranges between 0.1% and 3%, and suggest that these corpora
merely reﬂect the “natural” rates of toxicity. We
note that, despite Radford et al. employing a
blocklist of subreddits and “bad” words, the toxicity in OPENAI-WT is twice the amount in OWTC.
We show similar rates of toxicity using alternative
PERSPECTIVE API labels on these corpora in Table 12 in Appendix §D.
Sources of Toxic Content in Web Text
Since Reddit is known to have hosted communities
that endorse hateful norms and conspiracy theories
 , we investigate the provenance
of data in our web text corpora. Speciﬁcally, we
quantify the variation of a document’s toxicity with
respect to the reliability of its host news site and
0.84 TOXICITY SCORE
Posted to /r/The Donald (quarantined)
Melania Trump is a
“dumb bitch”
stupid accent
needs to be deported .
The left has no problem
with misogyny, so long as the target is a conservative
You can tell Melania trump doesn’t
even understand what she’s saying in that speech haha
I’m pretty sure she can’t actually speak english [...]”
0.61 TOXICITY SCORE
Posted to /r/WhiteRights (banned)
lying, anti White media : “L¨ugenpresse” roughly translates as
“lying press” [...] Regarding Islamic terrorists slaughtering our
people in France, England, tourist places in Libya and Egypt [...]
Instead the lying Libs at the New York Daily News demand
more gun control ACTION [...] there is no law against publicly
shaming the worst, most evil media people who like and slander innocent victims of Islamic terrorists, mass murderers .”
Table 4: Examples of (purposefully uncensored) toxic
documents that appear in GPT-2’s training corpus, that
were also submitted to quarantined or banned subreddits. We highlight spans that contribute to the overall
toxicity of the document, which we identify manually.
the nature of the subreddits to which it was posted.
Toxicity from Unreliable News Sites
all documents in OWTC associated with a news
site, and cross-referencing reliability ratings from
Baly et al. , we ﬁnd that news reliability correlates negatively with the proportion of documents
that are toxic (Spearman ⇢= –0.35). As shown in
Figure 4, while low reliability news sites are less
prevalent in OWTC, they contain more toxic documents compared to higher reliability news sites.
Additionally, we ﬁnd that at least 12% (272K) of
the overlapping OPENAI-WT and OWTC documents with news reliability ratings come from low
or mixed reliability news sites.
Toxicity from Quarantined or Banned Subreddits
Our analyses show that a non-trivial portion
of OWTC documents (at least 3%, 212K) come
from links shared on banned or quarantined subreddits.17 Unsurprisingly, documents shared on those
subreddits contain substantially more toxicity than
those from standard subreddits (see Figure 10 in
Appendix §D), conﬁrming Reddit users’ propensity
to share oppressive and abusive content . From the overlapping
OPENAI-WT and OWTC documents, we ﬁnd that
at least 63K documents were shared on banned or
quarantined subreddits. With two example documents shown in Table 4, GPT-2 was pretrained
on at least 40K documents from the quarantined
/r/The Donald, and 4K documents from the banned
/r/WhiteRights.
Discussion and Recommendations
Overall, our investigations demonstrate that toxicity is a prevalent issue in both neural language generation and web text corpora. Although they show
some reduction in toxicity, steering methods do not
fully protect neural models from toxic degeneration (§5). Additionally, the corpora that language
models are pretrained on contain non-negligible
amounts of toxic, abusive, and untrustworthy content (§6). Some implications of our ﬁndings are
discussed below.
Effectiveness of “Forgetting” Toxicity
ﬁndings on data-based steering methods show that
adaptive pretraining lowers a model’s propensity
to unpromptedly generate toxic language, but that
its prompted generations can still be toxic. This
raises the question: can language models ever fully
“forget” toxic pretraining data through further adaptation ? The non-trivial amounts of toxicity generated by DAPT suggest that perhaps language
models may be “memorizing” the toxicity in pretraining data or that toxic
examples may be more salient for the model and
hence harder to unlearn . Future work could explore whether some variants of
toxicity are harder to forget than others, or whether
the biases of models used to select training data
for steering introduce unwanted side effects in language model behavior after adaptation.
Decoding with a Purpose
Our analyses also
highlight the promise of certain decoding methods, such as PPLM , which
is among the most effective methods we tested at
avoiding toxicity with toxic prompts. In addition
to automated toxicity classiﬁers, future work could
explore the use of handpicked toxic documents as
“negative examples” to avoid toxicity in generation.
Future work could also investigate infusing models
with more sophisticated or nuanced representations
of social biases .
Choice of Pretraining Data
As pretrained language models grow in size , so
does their need for larger corpora, often drawn from
easily accessible and abundant web text. However,
our analyses reveal toxicity in web text data that
likely enable language models to generate even unprompted toxicity (§3.1). Our ﬁndings raise several
practical and ethical concerns.
First, analysis of pretraining data is a crucial
ﬁrst step towards understanding toxic, biased, or
otherwise degenerate behavior of language models.
Therefore, echoing calls for transparency in NLP
research , we recommend researchers publicly release all relevant information
during data collection (e.g., original text, source
URLs, timestamps, platform-speciﬁc metadata)
when building pretraining corpora.
Second, using Reddit popularity as a curation
heuristic introduces representational harm by biasing the populations whose language and perspectives are included in pretraining
 .
This raises the question of who decides whose
voices are going to be learned by the language
model, and whose voices are excluded. Following
Blodgett et al. , we recommend a reexamination of the relationship between NLP systems
and their end users, using methods from humancentered design, such as value-sensitive or participatory design ,
and archival data collection .
Given the potential for misuse and harm, we also
echo calls for improving policy around public release of large language models .
In general, the potential mismatch between the
intent of curating pretraining data and its operationalization (e.g., karma thresholding, ﬁltering out
speciﬁc slurs and swearwords) biases the language
model’s pretraining data and behavior . For example, ﬁltering data based
on PERSPECTIVE API could lead to a decrease in
text by African American authors in pretraining
data due to well-documented racial bias , which could lead to decreased performance
on text written by non-White users. To avoid harm,
researchers should be mindful and explicit about
these decisions and engage with the end users of
the technology during these design phases.
Improving Toxicity Detection
With the release
of REALTOXICITYPROMPTS, we hope to encourage large-scale, systematic evaluations of detoxiﬁcation techniques for language models. However,
the conclusions one can make about the effectiveness of a detoxiﬁcation method are limited by the
biases of the model used to detect toxicity (§2.2).
To combat these issues, we encourage further work
on detecting and controlling different types of toxicity and undesirable social biases in generation, e.g.,
rudeness ,
hate speech , or microaggressions . Additionally,
measures of bias could be multi-dimensional , include explanations , or be evolving over time (e.g., using
similarity to toxic online content).
Limitations
We describe several limitations of
our study. First, as noted in §2.2, we use an imperfect measure of toxicity that could bias the toxicity towards lexical cues, failing to detect more
subtle biases and incorrectly ﬂagging non-toxic
content. Second, our analyses are limited to the
ﬁve language models considered (and their steered
variants). Further work could extend our analyses to toxicity to masked language models , among others. Lastly, because
OPENAI-WT does not have available metadata,
and due to the imperfect coverage of our subreddit
and news reliability data, we only provide lower
bound estimates of toxicity in web text corpora.
Related Work
A wealth of work has shown that toxicity and social biases in training data are acquired by large
pretrained sentence encoders . However, fewer
studies have investigated toxicity in autoregressive
language models, whose generations also suffer
from incoherence, blandness, and repetitiveness
 .
Similar in spirit to REALTOXICITYPROMPTS,
Wallace et al. ﬁnd universal adversarial
triggers, nonsensical prompts that trigger toxic generations in GPT-2. In this work, we ﬁnd and release naturally occurring prompts from web text
that trigger toxicity, and compare toxic output in
several language models.
Most closely related to this work, Sheng et al.
 use a set of 60 templated prompts that
mention majority or minority identities to study
the social biases in generations by out-of-the-box
pretrained language models.
In our work, we
study toxic degeneration by both out-of-the-box
and controlled models using 100K naturally occurring prompts, including some that do not contain
identity mentions (see Figure 1). Additionally, our
work focuses on the broad phenomenon of toxicity
in generations, whereas Sheng et al. study
the sentiment and regard expressed by a model’s
generation towards demographic identities.
The creation of REALTOXICITYPROMPTS was
partly inspired by work in detecting conversational
patterns that can cause derailment into antisocial
behavior in online conversations .
Our work also draws from a strong line of research into controlling the outputs of language models .
Conclusion
We introduce REALTOXICITYPROMPTS, a testbed
of 100K prompts for evaluating the toxic degeneration in pretrained language models. Under this
framework, we quantify the toxicity of multiple
pretrained language models and the effectiveness
of methods for detoxifying generations. We then
analyze toxicity in two large web text corpora,
including the GPT-2 pretraining corpus, to better understand the root cause of toxic generations.
Finally, we provide recommendations for gathering pretraining data. The data, code, and interactive visualizations for this paper can be found at
 
Acknowledgments
We thank colleagues at UW NLP and AI2 for their
helpful comments and feedback. We also thank
Jonathan Borchardt, Carissa Schoenick, and Sam
Skjonsberg for helping us develop the demo website. We thank OpenAI, speciﬁcally Bianca Martin and Miles Brundage, for providing access to
GPT-3 through the OpenAI API Academic Access
Program. This research was supported in part by
NSF (IIS-1524371, IIS-1714566), DARPA under
the CwC program through the ARO (W911NF-
15-1-0543), and DARPA under the MCS program
through NIWC Paciﬁc (N66001-19-2-4031).