Journal of Open, Flexible, and Distance Learning, 16(2)
Book review
Meaningful learning with technology
Pinelopi Zaka
University of Canterbury
Howland, J. L., Jonassen, D., & Marra R. M. . Meaningful learning with technology (4th
ed.). Columbus, OH: Merrill/Prentice-Hall (pp. xv, 292).
Despite the growth of the use of information and communication technologies by
educational providers around the world and the potential of digital technologies to
revolutionise education in the 21st century, ICTs in the classroom are often used as a
way to sustain traditional teaching and learning. With the increased availability of digital
devices, open source and easily accessible online tools, it becomes critical to approach
the use of new technologies in the classroom from a pedagogical, rather than a technical
point of view. In New Zealand in particular, the need for teachers’ professional
development regarding the pedagogically sound use of technologies in the classroom is
even greater with the rollout of Ultra Fast Broadband in schools, which is expected to
further encourage the uptake of technology-enhanced teaching and learning with online
or blended approaches.
Meaningful Learning with Technology has a promising title that directly conveys the
book’s focus on the use of technology in the classroom—not as an end in itself, but as a
way to promote meaningful learning for students—and it builds the reader’s expectations
for a rewarding reading experience. Underpinned by constructivist learning theory, the
book discusses, in 10 coherently written and structured chapters, the role of technology
in fostering meaningful learning through a range of processes.
In the preface, the authors provide a comprehensive background on the book’s
epistemological underpinnings. Meaningful learning is directly linked to knowledge
construction, and the need to challenge traditional ideas about education and schooling is
discussed briefly. The authors indicate that “[u]sing technologies to engage meaningful
learning assumes that our conceptions of education will change, that schools or
classrooms (at least those that use technologies in the way that we describe) will rethink
the educational process” (p.xii). The main purpose of the book, which is communicated
clearly, is to encourage its readers (mainly professionals in school contexts) to change
their traditional ideas of education and to understand how technologies can “catalyze that
change and support it if it comes” (p.xii). The authors explain briefly how traditional
teacher and student roles are challenged, preparing the reader for the conceptual change
the book is aiming for.
Chapter 1 provides a more detailed description of the characteristics of meaningful
learning, including active, constructive, collaborative, authentic, and intentional learning.
These characteristics are used in the following chapters as a basis to assess meaningful
learning through a range of learning processes. The differences between learning from
and learning with technology are emphasised, resolving any misconceptions about the
role of technology, which is often overstated. The authors acknowledge the potential of
ICT to support knowledge construction, access to information, authentic, social, and
reflective learning. They present the International Society for Technology in Education
Book Reviews
(ISTE), National Education Technology Standards (NETS), and the Elements of the 21st
Century Skills Framework, which were developed to help teachers and other educational
stakeholders to enable and assess meaningful learning. In discussing the effectiveness of
another framework to assess teaching and learning with technology (the Technological
Pedagogical Content Knowledge [TPACK] model), the authors argue that teaching with
technology is another pedagogical approach. On that basis, the authors question whether
technological knowledge and pedagogical knowledge should be considered to be two
different dimensions. They introduce the ‘learning knowledge’ dimension, explaining
that knowledge of what and how students should learn is “the most important factor in
deciding what and how you should teach” (p.16). This assumption, which underpins this
book, is identified as one of the major differences between this and other books that
focus on teaching with technology.
Chapters 2 to 10 focus on specific learning processes that can be enhanced by using
technologies to foster meaningful learning. In particular, the authors describe how
technologies can enhance learning through inquiring, experimenting, designing,
communicating, community building and collaborating, writing, modelling, and
visualising, as well as the role of technology in assessing meaningful learning. The skills
that students develop throughout these learning processes with the use of technologies
have a central role in each chapter. A wide range of ICT tools are introduced and
enriched with examples of implementation in primary and secondary classrooms. Where
relevant, the authors refer to implications of the use of several technologies, further
stimulating readers’ reflection on the roles–responsibilities of teachers and students. At
the end of each of these chapters there is a list of specific NET Standards and 21st
century skills that can be engaged by the suggested activities. Each chapter concludes
with a set of questions that enhance the reader’s reflection on the role of the teachers and
the implications and effective implementation of technology to enhance specific
processes related to meaningful learning.
Between Chapters 2 to 10, I found chapters 5 and 6 very useful and timely, as they
explore the social aspects of learning with technology. Teachers’ need for adequate
professional development regarding the meaningful use of technologies to enhance
communication, collaboration, and community building becomes critical at a time when
access to Web 2.0 tools and social software have changed the way people use the
internet, providing increased opportunities for networked learning. In these chapters, the
authors emphasise the reasons why technology-enhanced communication and
collaboration in today’s schools is important, referring to students’ increased access and
engagement with online communication in their everyday lives, and drawing on relevant
research. However, the authors’ argument that “K–12 students are an informationinundated generation and are used to communication that is ubiquitous and
instantaneous” (p. 92) should be taken cautiously depending on the context, given the
differences in students’ access to technology across various countries .
Chapters 5 and 6 both provide examples of a wide range of technologies that can
enhance communication and collaboration, especially Web 2.0 tools (e.g., discussion
boards, instant messaging tools, social presentation tools, podcasts, wikis, social
networking tools, online community websites) that can enhance exchange of ideas,
Journal of Open, Flexible, and Distance Learning, 16(2)
argumentation, community building, and connections beyond the school walls. The
authors share best practices in using some of these tools in ways that enhance meaningful
learning, based on relevant research, and provide examples from educational practice,
with additional links for further reference. They provide a wide range of ideas for
primary and secondary school class projects that use tools such as virtual field trips and
multi-school projects through video conference, and collaborative writing with wikis.
Readers’ reflection on possible implications of online communication and collaboration
is further stimulated through discussions on aspects such as licensing issues with content
sharing, effective moderation of online discussions, online safety, and information
Looking into the future in the concluding chapter, the authors emphasise the purpose of
the book—to provide ways that can engage and support meaningful learning:
We have offered examples of how to use technologies to engage meaningful learning. Our
purpose was not to show you how to use these technologies […]. Our goal is that you
generalize the ideas we present to your teaching and learning situations, rather than replicate
the activity (p. 272).
However, they often provide more detailed technical descriptions of the use of specific
tools, perhaps in an effort to highlight the ease of use of these tools and to increase
teachers’ confidence in using and managing new technologies. I found this at times
unnecessary, since the technical use of ICTs is clearly beyond the scope of the book.
The concluding chapter also prompts discussion on the exciting potential of new
technologies to enhance community building and collaboration, not only among students,
but also among teachers. It provides a list of criteria for meaningful use of technologies,
as well as an appendix that includes rubrics to assess the characteristics of meaningful
learning (active, constructive, intentional, authentic, and cooperative learning), further
stimulating educators’ reflection and providing them with practical tools to plan,
implement, and evaluate teaching practice.
Overall, I found that Meaningful Learning with Technology can increase readers’
understanding of the ways technology can be used to engage and support meaningful
learning. It also stimulates further reflection and discussion on the roles and
responsibilities of teachers and students, as well as on the role of technology in various
learning processes, actively engaging readers in construction of further knowledge
individually or collaboratively. The book would be a valuable resource for in-service and
pre-service teachers in the primary and secondary education sector if used to inform
teachers’ planning, implementation and evaluation of use of technologies in their classes.
Most importantly, it would contribute to teachers’ capacity building regarding the use of
technologies in the classroom, as well as conceptual change towards the role of
education and schooling in the 21st century.