Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 4582–4597
August 1–6, 2021. ©2021 Association for Computational Linguistics
Preﬁx-Tuning: Optimizing Continuous Prompts for Generation
Xiang Lisa Li
Stanford University
 
Percy Liang
Stanford University
 
Fine-tuning is the de facto way of leveraging
large pretrained language models for downstream tasks. However, ﬁne-tuning modiﬁes
all the language model parameters and therefore necessitates storing a full copy for each
task. In this paper, we propose preﬁx-tuning, a
lightweight alternative to ﬁne-tuning for natural language generation tasks, which keeps language model parameters frozen and instead optimizes a sequence of continuous task-speciﬁc
vectors, which we call the preﬁx. Preﬁx-tuning
draws inspiration from prompting for language
models, allowing subsequent tokens to attend
to this preﬁx as if it were “virtual tokens”.
We apply preﬁx-tuning to GPT-2 for table-totext generation and to BART for summarization. We show that by modifying only 0.1% of
the parameters, preﬁx-tuning obtains comparable performance in the full data setting, outperforms ﬁne-tuning in low-data settings, and extrapolates better to examples with topics that
are unseen during training.
Introduction
Fine-tuning is the prevalent paradigm for using
large pretrained language models (LMs) to perform downstream tasks (e.g., summarization), but it requires
updating and storing all the parameters of the LM.
Consequently, to build and deploy NLP systems
that rely on large pretrained LMs, one currently
needs to store a modiﬁed copy of all the LM parameters for each task. This can be prohibitively
expensive given the size of current LMs; for example, GPT-2 has 774M parameters and GPT-3 has 175B parameters .
A natural approach to this problem is lightweight
ﬁne-tuning, which freezes most of the pretrained
parameters and only tunes a smaller set of parameters. For example, adapter-tuning (Rebufﬁet al.,
Fine-tuning (top) updates all LM parameters (the red Transformer box) and requires storing
a full model copy for each task. We propose preﬁxtuning (bottom), which freezes the LM parameters and
only optimizes the preﬁx (the red preﬁx blocks). Consequently, we only need to store the preﬁx for each
task, making preﬁx-tuning modular and space-efﬁcient.
Note that each vertical block denote transformer activations at one time step.
2017; Houlsby et al., 2019) inserts additional taskspeciﬁc layers between the layers of pretrained
language models. Adapter-tuning has promising
performance on natural language understanding
and generation benchmarks, attaining comparable
performance with ﬁne-tuning while adding only
around 2–4% task-speciﬁc parameters .
At the limit, GPT-3 can
be deployed using in-context learning, which is
a form of prompting, without modifying any LM
parameters. In in-context learning, Brown et al.
 prepend a natural language task instruction
(e.g., TL;DR for summarization) and a few examples to the task input, and then generate the task
output from the LM. However, since Transformers
can only condition on a bounded-length context
 , in-context learning
is restricted to very small training sets.
In this paper, we propose preﬁx-tuning, a
lightweight alternative to ﬁne-tuning for natural language generation (NLG) tasks, inspired by prompting. Consider the task of generating a textual description of a data table, as shown in Figure 1,
where the task input is a linearized table (e.g.,
“name: Starbucks | type: coffee shop”) and the output is a textual description (e.g., “Starbucks serves
coffee.”). Preﬁx-tuning prepends a sequence of
continuous task-speciﬁc vectors to the input, which
we call a preﬁx, depicted by red blocks in Figure 1
(bottom). To generate each token, the LM can attend to the preﬁx as if it were a sequence of “virtual
tokens”, but unlike prompting, the preﬁx consists
entirely of free parameters which do not correspond
to real tokens. In contrast to ﬁne-tuning in Figure 1
(top), which updates all LM parameters and thus
requires storing a tuned copy of the model for each
task, preﬁx-tuning only optimizes the preﬁx. Consequently, we only need to store one copy of the
large LM and a learned task-speciﬁc preﬁx, yielding a very small overhead for each additional task
(e.g., 250K parameters for table-to-text).
In contrast to full ﬁne-tuning, preﬁx-tuning is
also modular: we train an upstream preﬁx which
steers an unmodiﬁed LM, and therefore, a single
LM can support many tasks at once. In the context of personalization where the tasks correspond
to users , we would have a separate preﬁx for
each user trained only on that user’s data, thereby
avoiding data cross-contamination. Moreover, the
preﬁx-based architecture enables us to even process examples from multiple users/tasks in a single
batch, something that is not possible with other
lightweight ﬁne-tuning approaches like adaptertuning.
We evaluate preﬁx-tuning on table-to-text generation using GPT-2 and abstractive summarization using BART. In terms of storage, preﬁx-tuning
stores 1000x fewer parameters than full ﬁne-tuning.
In terms of performance when trained on full
datasets, preﬁx-tuning and ﬁne-tuning are comparable for table-to-text (§6.1), while preﬁx-tuning suffers a small degradation for summarization (§6.2).
In low-data settings, preﬁx-tuning outperforms ﬁnetuning on both tasks (§6.3). Preﬁx-tuning also extrapolates better to tables (for table-to-text) and articles (for summarization) with unseen topics (§6.4).
Related Work
Fine-tuning for natural language generation.
Current state-of-the-art systems for natural language generation (NLG) are based on ﬁne-tuning
pretrained LMs. For table-to-text generation, Kale
 ﬁne-tunes a sequence-to-sequence model
 . For extractive and abstractive summarization, researchers ﬁne-tune masked
language models 
and encode-decoder models , respectively . For other
conditional NLG tasks such as machine translation and dialogue generation, ﬁne-tuning is also the
prevalent paradigm . In
this paper, we focus on table-to-text using GPT-2
and summarization using BART, but preﬁx-tuning
in principle can be applied to other generation tasks
and pretrained models, such as masked LMs.
Lightweight
ﬁne-tuning.
Preﬁx-tuning
under the broad class of lightweight ﬁne-tuning
methods, which freeze most of the pretrained
parameters and only tune a smaller set of parameters. The key question is how to augment the LM
architecture and decide which subset of pretrained
parameters to tune. One line of research learns a
task-speciﬁc parameter mask .
Another line
of research inserts new modules with trainable
parameters. For example, Zhang et al. 
trains a “side” network that is fused with the
pretrained model via summation; adapter-tuning
inserts task-speciﬁc layers (adapters) between each
layer of the pretrained LM . Compared to this line of work, which tunes
around 3.6% of the LM parameters, our method
obtains a further 30x reduction in task-speciﬁc
parameters, tuning only 0.1% while maintaining
comparable performance on table-to-text tasks.
Prompting.
Prompting is a way of leveraging a
pretrained LM by prepending instructions and a
few examples to the task input and generating the
task output from the LM. For autoregressive LMs,
the most successful form of prompting is GPT-3’s
in-context learning , which
uses manually designed prompts to adapt its generation for different tasks in few-shot settings. For
masked LMs like BERT and RoBERTa , prompt engineering has been explored for
natural language understanding tasks . For example,
AutoPrompt searches for a sequence of discrete trigger words and concatenates
it with each input to elicit sentiment or factual
knowledge from BERT and RoBERTa. In contrast
with AutoPrompt, our method optimizes continuous preﬁxes, which are more expressive (§7.2);
moreover, we focus on language generation tasks.
Continuous vectors have been used to steer LMs;
for example, Subramani et al. showed that a
pretrained LSTM language model can reconstruct
arbitrary sentences by optimizing a continuous vector for each sentence, making the vector inputspeciﬁc. In contrast, preﬁx-tuning optimizes a taskspeciﬁc preﬁx that applies to all instances of that
task. As a result, unlike the previous work whose
application is limited to sentence reconstruction,
preﬁx-tuning can be applied to NLG tasks.
Controllable generation.
Controllable generation aims to steer a pretrained language model
to match a sentence-level attribute (e.g., positive
sentiment or sports). Such control can happen at
training time: Keskar et al. pretrains the
language model (CTRL) to condition on metadata
such as keywords or URLs. The control can also
happen at decoding time, by weighted decoding
 or iteratively updating the past activations . However, there is no straightforward way
to apply these controllable generation techniques
to enforce ﬁne-grained control over generated contents, as demanded by tasks like table-to-text and
summarization.
P*-tuning.
Preﬁx tuning is an instance of a new
class of methods that has emerged, which we call
p*-tuning (since the other prominent instances, ptuning and prompt-tuning, also start with p), all
based on the idea of optimizing a continuous preﬁx
or prompt. Concurrent with our work, Qin and Eisner learn mixtures of soft ﬁll-in-the-blank
prompts to elicit knowledge from LMs such as
BERT and BART. Hambardzumyan et al. 
learns task-speciﬁc embeddings that adapts BERT
for sentiment classiﬁcation. Both works show that
tuning soft prompts outperforms previous work,
which optimizes over discrete prompts. P-tuning
 shows that jointly updating the
prompt embeddings and LM parameters improves
GPT-2’s performance on natural language understanding tasks, in both few-shot and full data settings. In a followup work, Prompt-tuning simpliﬁes our approach and applies
it to T5 , demonstrating that
the performance gap between ﬁne-tuning and p*tuning vanishes as the model size grows.
Problem Statement
Consider a conditional generation task where the
input x is a context and the output y is a sequence
of tokens. We focus on two tasks, shown in Figure 2 (right): In table-to-text, x corresponds to a linearized data table and y is a textual description; in
summarization, x is an article and y is a summary.
Autoregressive LM
Assume we have an autoregressive neural language
model pφ(y | x) parametrized by φ . As shown in Figure 2 (top),
let z = [x; y] be the concatenation of x and y;
let Xidx denote the sequence of indices that corresponds to x, and Yidx denote the same for y.
The activation vector at time step i is hi ∈Rd,
where hi = [h(1)
i ; · · · ; h(n)
] is a concatenation of
all activation layers at this time step, and h(j)
activation vector of the j-th layer at time step i.1
An autoregressive neural LM computes hi as a
function of zi and the past activations in its left
context, as follows:
hi = LMφ(zi, h<i),
where the last layer of hi is used to compute the
distribution for the next token: pφ(zi+1 | h≤i) =
softmax(Wφ h(n)
) and Wφ is a matrix that maps
to logits over the vocabulary.
Encoder-Decoder Architecture
We can also use an encoder-decoder architecture
 to model pφ(y | x),
where x is encoded by the bidirectional encoder,
and the decoder predicts y autoregressively (conditioned on the encoded x and its left context). We
use the same indexing and activation notation, as
shown in Figure 2 (bottom): each hi for i ∈Xidx
is computed by the a bidirectional encoder; each
hi for i ∈Yidx is computed by an autoregressive
decoder using the same equation (1).
1In GPT-2, h(n)
consists of a key-value pair, and the dimension of each key and value is 1024.
Figure 2: An annotated example of preﬁx-tuning using an autoregressive LM (top) and an encoder-decoder model
(bottom). The preﬁx activations ∀i ∈Pidx, hi are drawn from a trainable matrix Pθ. The remaining activations are
computed by the Transformer.
Fine-tuning
In the full ﬁne-tuning framework, we initialize with
the pretrained parameters φ. Here pφ is a trainable language model distribution and we perform
gradient updates on the following log-likelihood
objective:
log pφ(y | x) = max
log pφ(zi | h<i).
Preﬁx-Tuning
We propose preﬁx-tuning as an alternative to full
ﬁne-tuning for conditional generation tasks. We
ﬁrst provide intuition in §4.1 before deﬁning our
method formally in §4.2.
Prompting has demonstrated that conditioning on a
proper context can steer the LM without changing
its parameters. For example, if we want the LM
to generate a word (e.g., Obama), we can prepend
its common collocations as context (e.g., Barack),
and the LM will assign much higher probability to
the desired word. Extending this intuition beyond
generating a single word or sentence, we want to
ﬁnd a context that steers the LM to solve an NLG
task. Intuitively, the context could inﬂuence the
encoding of the task input x by guiding what to extract from x, and it could inﬂuence the generation
of the task output y by steering the next token distribution. However, it’s non-obvious whether such a
context exists. Using natural language task instructions (e.g., “summarize the following table in one
sentence”) for the context might guide a human to
solve the task, but this fails for moderately-sized
pretrained LMs.2 Optimizing over the discrete instructions might help, but discrete optimization is
computationally challenging.
Instead of optimizing over discrete tokens, we
can optimize the instruction as continuous word embeddings, whose effects will be propagated upward
to all Transformer activation layers and rightward
to subsequent tokens. This is strictly more expressive than a discrete prompt which is constrained to
the embeddings of real words. Preﬁx-tuning goes
one step further in increasing expressivity by optimizing the activations of all the layers, not just
the embedding layer. As another beneﬁt, preﬁxtuning can directly modify representations deeper
in the network, therefore, avoiding long computation paths across the depth of the network.
Preﬁx-tuning prepends a preﬁx for an autoregressive LM to obtain z = [PREFIX; x; y], or prepends
preﬁxes for both encoder and decoder to obtain
z = [PREFIX; x; PREFIX′; y], as shown in Figure 2.
Here, Pidx denotes the sequence of preﬁx indices,
and we use |Pidx| to denote the length of the preﬁx.
We follow the recurrence relation in equation (1), except that the activations of the preﬁx
indices are free parameters, given by a matrix Pθ
(parametrized by θ) of dimension |Pidx| × dim(hi).
if i ∈Pidx,
LMφ(zi, h<i),
otherwise.
2In our preliminary experiments, GPT-2 and BART fail in
this setting; the only exception is GPT-3.
The training objective is the same as equation (2),
but the set of trainable parameters changes: the language model parameters φ are ﬁxed and the preﬁx
parameters θ are the only trainable parameters.
Here, each hi is a function of the trainable Pθ.
When i ∈Pidx, this is clear because hi copies
directly from Pθ. When i ̸∈Pidx, hi still depends
on Pθ, because the preﬁx activations are always
in the left context and will therefore affect any
activations to the right.
Parametrization of Pθ
Empirically, directly updating the Pθ parameters
leads to unstable optimization and a slight drop
in performance.3 So we reparametrize the matrix
Pθ[i, :] = MLPθ(P ′
θ[i, :]) by a smaller matrix (P ′
composed with a large feedforward neural network
(MLPθ). Now, the trainable parameters include P ′
and the parameters of MLPθ. Note that Pθ and
θ has the same number of rows (i.e., the preﬁx
length), but different number of columns.4
Once training is complete, these reparametrization parameters can be dropped, and only the preﬁx
(Pθ) needs to be saved.
Experimental Setup
Datasets and Metrics
We evaluate on three standard neural generation
datasets for the table-to-text task: E2E , WebNLG , and
DART , as shown in Table 1.
The datasets are ordered by increasing complexity
and size. E2E only has 1 domain (i.e. restaurant
reviews); WebNLG has 14 domains, and DART
is open-domain, using open-domain tables from
Wikipedia. For evaluation, we report the metrics
using the ofﬁcial evaluation scripts (see details in
Appendix A.1).
For the summarization task, we use the XSUM
 dataset, which is an abstractive summarization dataset on news articles. We
report ROUGE-1, ROUGE-2 and ROUGE-L.
For table-to-text generation, we compare preﬁxtuning with three other methods: full ﬁne-tuning
3We ﬁnd in preliminary experiments that directly optimizing the preﬁx is very sensitive to initialization.
4Pθ has dimensions |Pidx| × dim(hi) while Pθ has
dimensions |Pidx| × k. We choose k = 512 for table-to-text
and 800 for summarization. MLPθ maps from k to dim(hi).
input length
output length
Datasets statistics.
The input and output
length is the number of BPE tokens per example. For
the three table-to-text datasets, the input length is the
length of linearized tables (details in Appendix A.1).
(FT-FULL), ﬁne-tuning only the top 2 layers (FT-
TOP2), and adapter-tuning (ADAPTER).5 We also
report the current state-of-the-art results on these
datasets: On E2E, Shen et al. uses a pragmatically informed model without pretraining. On
WebNLG, Kale ﬁne-tunes T5-large. On
DART, no ofﬁcial models trained on this dataset
version are released.6 For summarization, we compare against ﬁne-tuning BART .
Architectures and Hyperparameters
For table-to-text, we use GPT-2MEDIUM and GPT-
2LARGE. For summarization, we use BARTLARGE.
Our implementation is based on the Hugging Face
Transformers .
At training time, we use the AdamW optimizer
 and a linear learning rate scheduler, as suggested by the Hugging
Face default setup. The hyperparameters we tune
include the number of epochs, batch size, learning
rate, and preﬁx length. Hyperparameter details are
in the appendix. The default setting is 10 epochs,
batch size 5, learning rate 5·10−5 and preﬁx length
10. The table-to-text models are trained on TITAN
Xp or GeForce GTX TITAN X machines. Preﬁxtuning takes 0.2 hours per epoch to train on 22K
examples, whereas ﬁne-tuning takes around 0.3
hours per epoch. The summarization models are
trained on Tesla V100 machines, taking 1.25 hours
per epoch on the XSUM dataset. For time efﬁciency, preﬁx-tuning is around 30% faster than
ﬁne-tuning. For GPU memory efﬁciency, preﬁxtuning with batchsize 1 takes 18% of the total GPU
memory, whereas ﬁne-tuning takes 50%.
At decoding time, for table-to-text, we use beam
search with beam size 5. For summarization, we
use beam size 6 and length normalization 0.8. Decoding takes 1.2 seconds per sentence .
6The ofﬁcial benchmark model is trained on v.1.0.0 while
the release dataset is v1.1.1.
batching) for table-to-text, and 2.6 seconds per
batch (using a batch size of 10) for summarization.
Main Results
Table-to-text Generation
We ﬁnd that by updating only 0.1% task-speciﬁc parameters,7 preﬁx-tuning is effective in table-to-text
generation, outperforming other lightweight baselines (ADAPTER and FT-TOP2) even by updating
30x fewer parameters and achieving a comparable
performance with (full) ﬁne-tuning. This trend
holds for all datasets: E2E, WebNLG,8 and DART.
If we match the number of parameters for preﬁxtuning and adapter-tuning to be 0.1%, Table 2
shows that preﬁx-tuning is signiﬁcantly better than
ADAPTER (0.1%), attaining 4.1 BLEU improvement per dataset on average. Even when we compare with ﬁne-tuning (100%) and adapter-tuning
(3.0%), which update signiﬁcantly more parameters than preﬁx-tuning, preﬁx-tuning still achieves
results comparable or better than those two systems.
This demonstrates that preﬁx-tuning is more Pareto
efﬁcient than adapter-tuning, signiﬁcantly reducing
parameters while improving generation quality.
Additionally, attaining good performance on
DART suggests that preﬁx-tuning can generalize
to tables with diverse domains and a large number
of relations. We will delve deeper into extrapolation performance (i.e., generalization to unseen
categories or topics) in §6.4.
In summary, preﬁx-tuning is an effective and
space-efﬁcient method to adapt GPT-2 to table-totext generation. It also maintains the performance
gains when scaling up to GPT-2LARGE, suggesting
it has the potential to scale to even larger models
with a similar architecture, like GPT-3.
Summarization
As shown in Table 3, with 2% parameters, preﬁxtuning obtains slightly lower performance than ﬁnetuning (36.05 vs. 37.25 in ROUGE-L). With only
0.1% parameters, preﬁx-tuning underperforms full
ﬁne-tuning (35.05 vs. 37.25). There are several
differences between XSUM and the three table-totext datasets which could account for why preﬁxtuning has comparative advantage in table-to-text:
7250K for E2E, 250K for WebNLG, and 500K for DART
versus 345M GPT-2 parameters.
8The S,U,A columns in WebNLG represents SEEN, UN-
SEEN, and ALL respectively; SEEN categories appear at
training time; UNSEEN categories only appears at test time;
and ALL is the combination of the two.
(1) XSUM contains 4x more examples than the
three table-to-text datasets on average; (2) the input
articles are 17x longer than the linearized table input of table-to-text datasets on average; (3) summarization is more complex than table-to-text because
it requires selecting key contents from an article.
Low-data Setting
Based on the results from table-to-text (§6.1)
and summarization (§6.2), we observe that preﬁxtuning has a comparative advantage when the number of training examples is smaller. To explore
the low-data setting more systematically, we subsample the full dataset (E2E for table-to-text and
XSUM for summarization) to obtain small datasets
of size {50, 100, 200, 500}. For each size, we sample 5 different datasets and average over 2 training
random seeds. Thus, we average over 10 models
for each low-data setting.9
Figure 3 (right) shows that preﬁx-tuning outperforms ﬁne-tuning in low-data regimes by 2.9 BLEU
on average, in addition to requiring much fewer parameters, but the gap narrows as the dataset size
increases.
Qualitatively, Figure 3 (left) shows 8 examples
generated by both preﬁx-tuning and ﬁne-tuning
models trained on different data levels. While both
methods tend to undergenerate (missing table contents) in low data regimes, preﬁx-tuning tends to be
more faithful than ﬁne-tuning. For example, ﬁnetuning (100, 200)10 falsely claims a low customer
rating while the true rating is average, whereas
preﬁx-tuning (100, 200) generates a description
that is faithful to the table.
Extrapolation
We now investigate extrapolation performance to
unseen topics for both table-to-text and summarization. In order to construct an extrapolation setting,
we split the existing datasets so that training and
test cover different topics. For table-to-text, the
WebNLG dataset is labeled with table topics. There
are 9 categories that appear in training and dev, denoted as SEEN and 5 categories that only appear at
test time, denoted as UNSEEN. So we evaluate extrapolation by training on the SEEN categories and
testing on the UNSEEN categories. For summarization, we construct two extrapolation data splits:
9We also sample a dev split (with dev size = 30% × training size) for each training set. We use the dev split to choose
hyperparameters and perform early stopping.
10The number in the parenthesis refers to the training size.
BLEU NIST MET R-L CIDEr
BLEU MET TER ↓Mover BERT BLEURT
GPT-2MEDIUM
64.7 26.7 45.7 0.46 0.30 0.38 0.33 0.78 0.54
53.6 18.9 36.0 0.38 0.23 0.31 0.49 0.99 0.72
ADAPTER(3%)
60.5 47.9 54.8 0.43 0.38 0.41 0.35 0.46 0.39
ADAPTER(0.1%)
54.5 45.1 50.2 0.39 0.36 0.38 0.40 0.46 0.43
PREFIX(0.1%)
62.9 45.3 55.0 0.44 0.37 0.41 0.35 0.51 0.42
GPT-2LARGE
65.3 43.1 55.5 0.46 0.38 0.42 0.33 0.53 0.42
63.4 47.7 56.3 0.45 0.39 0.42 0.34 0.48 0.40
63.9 52.8 57.1 0.46 0.41 0.44
Table 2: Metrics (higher is better, except for TER) for table-to-text generation on E2E (left), WebNLG (middle)
and DART (right). With only 0.1% parameters, Preﬁx-tuning outperforms other lightweight baselines and achieves
a comparable performance with ﬁne-tuning. The best score is boldfaced for both GPT-2MEDIUM and GPT-2LARGE.
name : The Eagle | type : coffee shop | food : Chinese | price : cheap | customer
rating : average | area : riverside | family friendly : no | near : Burger King
Preﬁx (50)
The Eagle is a cheap Chinese coffee shop located near Burger King.
Preﬁx (100)
The Eagle is a cheap coffee shop located in the riverside near Burger King. It
has average customer ratings.
Preﬁx (200)
The Eagle is a cheap Chinese coffee shop located in the riverside area near
Burger King. It has average customer ratings.
Preﬁx (500)
The Eagle is a coffee shop that serves Chinese food. It is located in the riverside
area near Burger King. It has an average customer rating and is not family
The Eagle coffee shop is located in the riverside area near Burger King.
The Eagle is a cheap coffee shop near Burger King in the riverside area. It has
a low customer rating and is not family friendly.
The Eagle is a cheap Chinese coffee shop with a low customer rating. It is
located near Burger King in the riverside area.
The Eagle is a cheap Chinese coffee shop with average customer ratings. It is
located in the riverside area near Burger King.
training data size
training data size
training data size
training data size
Figure 3: (Left) qualitative examples in lowdata settings. (Right) preﬁx-tuning (orange) outperforms ﬁne-tuning
(blue) in low-data regimes in addition to requiring many fewer parameters. The top two plots correspond to summarization, measured by ROUGE-1 and ROUGE-2. The bottom two plots correspond to table-to-text, measured
by BLEU and ROUGE-L. The x-axis is the training size and the y-axis is the evaluation metric (higher is better).
FT-FULL 
PREFIX(2%)
PREFIX(0.1%)
Table 3: Performance of methods on the XSUM summarization dataset.
Preﬁx-tuning slightly underperforms ﬁne-tuning in the full-data regime.
news-to-sports
within-news
Table 4: Extrapolation performance on XSUM. Preﬁxtuning outperforms ﬁne-tuning on both news-to-sports
and within-news splits.
In news-to-sports, we train on news articles
and test on sports articles. In within-news, we
train on {world, UK, business} news and test on
the remaining news categories (e.g., health, tech).
On both table-to-text and summarization, preﬁxtuning extrapolates better than ﬁne-tuning under all
metrics, as shown in Table 4 and the ‘U’ columns
of Table 2 (middle).
We also ﬁnd that adapter-tuning achieves good
extrapolation performance, comparable with preﬁxtuning, as shown in Table 2. This shared trend
suggests that preserving LM parameters indeed has
a positive impact on extrapolation. However, how
preﬁx-tuning improves extrapolation is an open
question and we will discuss this further in §8.
Intrinsic Evaluation
We compare different variants of preﬁx-tuning to
study the impact of various design decisions. §7.1
studies the impact of the preﬁx length. §7.2 studies
tuning only the embedding layer, which is more
akin to tuning a discrete prompt. §7.3 compares
preﬁxing and inﬁxing, which inserts trainable activations between x and y. §7.4 studies the impact of
various preﬁx initialization strategies. §7.5 further
studies the data efﬁciency of preﬁx-tuning.
Preﬁx Length
A longer preﬁx means more trainable parameters,
and therefore more expressive power.11 Figure 4
shows that performance increases as the preﬁx
11Empirically, longer preﬁxes have a negligible impact on
training and inference speed per batch, because attention computation over the entire preﬁx is parallellized on GPUs.
Prefix Length (XSUM)
Prefix Length (DART)
Preﬁx length vs. performance on summerization (left) and table-to-text (right). Performance increases as the preﬁx length increases up to a threshold
(200 for summarization and 10 for table-to-text) and
then a slight performance drop occurs. Each plot reports two metrics (on two vertical axes).
Embedding-only: EMB-{PreﬁxLength}
Inﬁx-tuning: INFIX-{PreﬁxLength}
Table 5: Intrinsic evaluation of Embedding-only (§7.2)
and Inﬁxing (§7.3). Both Embedding-only ablation and
Inﬁx-tuning underperforms full preﬁx-tuning.
length increases up to a threshold (200 for summarization, 10 for table-to-text) and then a slight
performance drop occurs. Preﬁxes longer than the
threshold lead to lower training loss, but slightly
worse test performance, suggesting that they tend
to overﬁt the training data.
Full vs Embedding-only
Recall in §4.1, we discussed optimizing the continuous embeddings of the “virtual tokens.” We instantiate that idea and call it embedding-only. The word
embeddings are free parameters, and the remaining
activation layers are computed by the Transformer.
Table 5 (top) shows that the performance drops
signiﬁcantly, suggesting that tuning only the embedding layer is not sufﬁciently expressive.
Embedding-only upper bounds the performance
of discrete prompt optimization ,
because discrete prompt restricts the embedding
layer to exactly match the embedding of a real word.
Consequently, we have this chain of increasing expressive power: discrete prompting < embeddingonly < preﬁx-tuning.
Preﬁx-tuning vs Inﬁx-tuning
We also investigate how the trainable activations’
position in the sequence affects performance. In
"elephant"
"summarize"
"table-to-text:"
"beautiful"
Figure 5: Initializing the preﬁx with activations of real
words signiﬁcantly outperforms random initialization,
in low-data settings.
preﬁx-tuning, we place them at the beginning
[PREFIX; x; y]. We can also place the trainable
activations between x and y (i.e. [x; INFIX; y]) and
call this inﬁx-tuning. Table 5 (bottom) shows that
inﬁx-tuning slightly underperforms preﬁx-tuning.
We believe this is because preﬁx-tuning can affect
the activations of x and y whereas inﬁx-tuning can
only inﬂuence the activations of y.
Initialization
We ﬁnd that how the preﬁx is initialized has
a large impact in low-data settings.
initialization leads to low performance with high
variance. Initializing the preﬁx with activations of
real words signiﬁcantly improves generation, as
shown in Figure 5. In particular, initializing with
task relevant words such as “summarization” and
“table-to-text” obtains slightly better performance
than task irrelevant words such as “elephant”
and “divide”, but using real words is still better
than random. Moreover, in full data settings, the
initialization trick has no impact, and random
initialization leads to equally good performance.
Since we initialize the preﬁx with activations of
real words computed by the LM, this initialization
strategy is concordant with preﬁx-tuning’s philosophy, which preserves the pretrained LM as much
as possible.
Data Efﬁciency
We also investigate the data efﬁciency of preﬁxtuning (without initialization trick, a.k.a random
initialization) and full ﬁne-tuning by comparing
their performance on 5 different data scales of the
E2E task (10%, 20%, 40%, 60%, and 80%). Figure 6 shows that preﬁx-tuning has better performance than ﬁne-tuning when using more than 20%
of the data. For data scale of 10%, preﬁx-tuning
with random initialization yields comparable or
slightly lower performance than full ﬁne-tuning,
percentage of training data
percentage of training data
Figure 6: Data efﬁciency curves: percentage of training set vs. performance on table-to-text (E2E). Preﬁxtuning (without the initialization trick) is more dataefﬁcient than ﬁne-tuning when using more than 20%
of the data.
necessitating the initialization trick (§6.3) to improve the performance in this low-data regime.
Discussion
We will discuss several favorable properties of
preﬁx-tuning and some open problems.
Personalization.
As we note in §1, preﬁx-tuning
is advantageous when there are a large number
of tasks that needs to be trained independently.
One practical setting is user privacy . In order
to preserve user privacy, each user’s data needs to
be separated and a personalized model needs to be
trained independently for each user. Consequently,
each user can be regarded as an independent task. If
there are millions of users, preﬁx-tuning can scale
to this setting and maintain modularity, enabling
ﬂexible addition or deletion of users by adding or
deleting their preﬁxes without cross-contamination.
Batching across users.
Under the same personalization setting, preﬁx-tuning allows batching different users’ queries even though they are backed
by different preﬁxes. When multiple users query
a cloud GPU device with their inputs, it is computationally efﬁcient to put these users in the same
batch. Preﬁx-tuning keeps the shared LM intact;
consequently, batching requires a simple step of
prepending the personalized preﬁx to user input,
and all the remaining computation is unchanged.
In contrast, we can’t batch across different users
in adapter-tuning, which has personalized adapters
between shared Transformer layers.
This batching beneﬁt could also help create efﬁcient ensembles of multiple preﬁxes trained on the
same task .
Inductive bias of preﬁx-tuning.
Recall that ﬁnetuning updates all pretrained parameters, whereas
preﬁx-tuning and adapter-tuning preserve them.
Since the language models are pretrained on general purpose corpora, preserving the LM parameters might help generalization to domains unseen
during training. In concordance with this intuition,
we observe that both preﬁx-tuning and adaptertuning have signiﬁcant performance gain in extrapolation settings (§6.4); however, how these methods
improve extrapolation is an open question.
While preﬁx-tuning and adapter-tuning both
freeze the pretrained parameters, they tune different
sets of parameters to affect the activation layers of
the Transformer. Recall that preﬁx-tuning keeps the
LM intact and uses the preﬁx and the pretrained attention blocks to affect the subsequent activations;
adapter-tuning inserts trainable modules between
LM layers, which directly add residual vectors to
the activations. Moreover, we observe that preﬁxtuning requires vastly fewer parameters compared
to adapter-tuning while maintaining comparable
performance. We think this gain in parameter efﬁciency is because preﬁx-tuning keeps the pretrained
LM intact as much as possible, and therefore exploits the LM more than adapter-tuning.
Recent work by Aghajanyan et al. uses
intrinsic dimension to show that there exists a lowdimensional reparameterization that is as effective
for ﬁne-tuning as the full parametrization. This
explains why good accuracy on downstream tasks
can be obtained by updating only a small number of parameters. Our work echoes this ﬁnding
by showing that good generation performance can
also be attained by updating a very small preﬁx.
However, preﬁx-tuning is not just about the size of
trainable parameters, but more importantly, which
subset of parameters to modify. Therefore, it would
be interesting future work to explore other lightweight ﬁne-tuning methods that achieve an even
better accuracy-size tradeoff.
Acknowledgments
We thank the members of p-lambda group as well
as anonymous reviewers for valuable feedback. We
gratefully acknowledge the support of a PECASE
award. XLL is supported by a Stanford Graduate
Fellowship.
Reproducibility
Our code is available at 
XiangLi1999/PrefixTuning.
Experiments and data are available at https:
//worksheets.codalab.org/worksheets/
0x16e0c8e7ab1f4b22aaccddc8b586541f.