Perception & Psychophysics
/990. 48 (/). 45-58
Vision outside the focus of attention
JOCHEN BRAUN and DOV SAGI
The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel
We investigated the relationship between focal attention and a feature-gradient detection that
is performed in a parallel manner. We found that a feature gradient can be detected without
measurable impairment of performance even while a concurrent form-recognition task is carried
out, in spite of the fact that the form-recognition task engages focal attention and thus removes
attentive resources from the vicinity ofthe feature gradient. This outcome suggests strongly that
certain perceptions concerning salient boundaries and singularities in a visual scene can be accomplished without the aid of resource-limited processes, such as focal attention, and, by implication, that there may exist two distinct perceptual faculties (one attentive, the other not) that
are able to bring complementary kinds of visual information simultaneously to our awareness.
In certain experimental situations, resources for the
processing of visual information appear to become concentrated in one subregion of the field of view. For example, when a precue reveals where in visual space a test
target is about to appear, visual performance improves
in the cued region well above the performance level elsewhere in the field of view . This apparent local accumulation of processing resources is thought to be
the consequence of a covert repositioning of visual attention , in a process somewhat analogous to overt shifts
of eye position.
Another observation thought to concern visual attention derives from experiments with multipledisplay items.
Two or more concurrent visual tasks that concern several
test targets separated in visual space are almost always
found to interfere with each other , and,
in numerous cases, the visual search for a target requires
more time when more nontarget items are included in the
display . These observations are taken as evidence that visual processing involves, in the situations just described, a limited-capacity
stage that is unable to operate simultaneously on multiple display items.
The regional resource accumulation suggested by cuing experiments and the limited-capacity process impli-
This research was supported by grants from Boehringer Ingelheim
Fonds and Fritz Thyssen Stiftung to J.B. and from Israel Center for
Psychobiology and B. Sheva de Rothschild Foundation to D.S. A brief
account of this work has appeared in abstract form 
and is available as technical report WIS CSS 88-16. Thanks are extended
to Shimon Ullman for helpful comments on an earlier manuscript. Requests for reprints may be sent to Dov Sagi, Department of Applied
Mathematics, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel.
cated by multiple-item experiments are thought to reflect
the operation of the same process, which has been termed
focal attention, spatial attention, or spotlight ofattention
by various authors. The essential operating characteristic of focal attention is thought to be spatial exclusivity
or seriality (i.e., the fact that it cannot operate in more
than one region of visual space at a time). The postulate
of a unitary process that operates in essentially the same
manner in a variety of visual situations has evident heuristic value, although it is, perhaps, not easily justified on
empirical grounds. In fact, whether or not the same explanation accounts for both cuing and multiple-item experiments has been questioned .
The present work concerns the capacity limitation in
visual processing that becomes apparent when multiple
targets are used and when the visualpersistenceof a stimulus pattern is limited by masking , which permits observers to respond selectively to one particular stimulus, in one particular modality, among the many stimuli that confront our various
sensory modalities at all times.
A number of studies have attempted to determine the
hypotheticalgeometrical distribution and manner of movement of focal attention. Several studies agree that the diameter of the region covered by focal attention (i.e., the
half width of the profile of visual enhancement) appears
to scale with eccentricity and to measure approximately
0 of eccentricity . However, there are also reports that this
Copyright 1990 Psychonomic Society, Inc.
BRAUN AND SAGI
diameter may vary in a task-dependent manner in
1989; Podgorny & Shepard, 1983). The time span for
the performance of feature-gradient tasks. In doing so,
which focal attention remains in one place in the field of
we were motivated by two considerations. The existence
view can be as briefas 20 to 100 msec .
suggests that, collectively, these mechanisms might con-
It therefore appears that, during one eye fixation, focal
stitute an independent and distinct perceptual faculty,
attention may be reallocated and rescaled, perhaps several
which might underlie certain specific aspects of visual pertimes, to different parts of the visual scene .
holds, to understand focal attention, it seems important
In contrast to the experimental situations described so
to determine whether this process participates universally
far, there also exist situations where a limited-capacity
in all visual performance or, alternatively, whether it conprocess does not contribute to visual performance, at least
tributes only to some parts of visual function. A general
not in any overt manner. For example, there are many
rationale for postulating the existence of several distinct
instances where visual search experiments suggest that all
visual faculties or modules has been outlined by Ullman
items in a display are processed concurrently . There also appear to
themselves. One is that, during parallel performance,
be visual tasks for which a precue fails to raise perforresources are dispersed evenly over the entire field of view
mance and for which several spatially
 . Accord-
Julesz, 1985a), although these findings remain controvering to this view, processing resources would be distributed
sial . On
limited-capacity process is active can narrow or widen
the basis of this large body of work, it has been proposed
to suit the task at hand, as this view suggests, then serial
that parallel processing occurs when a visual task relies
and parallel visual performance would not mark the two
on simple stimulus features or textons that are registered
sides of a categorical divide, but merely the opposite ends
simultaneously by mechanisms that are scattered across (l. of continuum.
the visual field. The stimulus features in question are
/.fhe second alternative is that the apparatus of the
thought to be lightness, color, local motion, binocular dislimited-capacity process does not contribute to the perparity, aspects of texture, such as local orientation and
formance of feature-gradient tasks; therefore, if the
size (spatial frequency),
and perhaps others . More recently, it has been
constitute distinct perceptual categories and would be pershown that parallel performance depends on local differformed by two independent visual faculties. Since only
ences, or gradients, between the features on either side
one of these would draw on the limited-capacity process,
of a texture boundary, or between a singularity and its
the two faculties might be able to operate concurrently,
surroundings . We will refer to tasks
and perceptions mediated by the two might impinge on
based on local feature differences as feature-gradient
awareness roughly simultaneously.
To decide between these alternatives, we performed
A conceptually different proposal is that parallel
dual-task experiments in which we asked observers to perprocessing (automatic detection) prevails for tasks in
form a feature-gradient task together with a second visual
which targets and nontargets fall into stable and welltask designed to engage the limited-capacity process (i.e.,
learned categories (consistent mapping) (Schneider &
focal attention). We could then study performance of the
Shiffrin, 1977; Shiffrin & Schneider, 1977). This view
feature-gradient task with and without the demand on the
is concerned less with features and other physical aspects
limited-capacity process posed by the second task. If the
of the stimulus than with the plasticity of visual processes
limited-capacity process participates in feature-gradient
in the course of training and with facilitating effects of
tasks, performance should be impaired when the availtask anticipation (set).
ability of resources is reduced. In contrast to this expectation, we found that feature-gradient performance is not
measurably affected by load on the limited-capacity
A number of authors have previously conducted dualtask experiments under conditions of masking but, in contrast to the present study, did not attempt to combine attentive with nonattentive types of visual tasks .
The unavailability of attention (inattention) has been found
to impair severely the commitment to memory of complex shapes . With an intent similar to ours, Hoffman, Nelson, and Houck studied
the role of attentional resources in the detection of automatic targets. These authors chose a digit-among-letters
search task under consistent mapping conditions to
represent automatic detection and a flicker location task
to capture focal attention. They found that the two tasks
interfere and concluded that "attention shifts apparently
play a role in the ability to report target occurrence"
 .
For a feature-gradient task, we chose the detection of
a target element, differing in orientation from neighboring background elements . We took care to create a strong feature
gradient by placing background elements densely and by
choosing large orientation differences . To ensure that feature-gradient detection was sufficiently demanding to require a significant involvement of
a limited-capacity process, if indeed it required any of
it, a carefully constructed masking pattern curtailed visual
persistence. Because of the masking, this task cannot be
described as "easy. " In fact, the duration of stimulus persistence required for this task (its psychometric curve) was
similar to the attentive tasks with which it was to be
To demonstrate that feature-gradient detection was, under our conditions, performed in a parallel manner, we
conducted Experiment I, in which observers attempted
to simultaneously carry out two separate feature-gradient
detection tasks, one in the top and one in the bottom half
of the display. Another purpose of Experiment 1 was to
confirm the practicability of our dual-task procedure (i.e.,
to show that observers are able to generate two yes/no
responses concerning two separate but concurrently
presented targets without impairment of performance).
To engage focal attention, we chose an orientation discrimination task. This choice was motivated by recent
reports that even simple feature discriminations require
access to the limited-capacity stage . To confirm that this task poses a demand for a
limited-capacity process, we conducted Experiment 2, in
which observers attempted to simultaneously accomplish
two orientation discriminations. The outcome suggested
NONATTENTIVE VISION
that our orientation-discrimination task engages the
limited-capacity process for approximately 50 msec.
Next, we addressed the central concern of the present
study: the relationship between the limited-capacity
process and feature-gradient performance. In Experiment 3, observers attempted to combine the two tasks
characterized by the preceding experiments. The results
showed that feature-gradient detection and orientation discrimination can be accomplished simultaneously without
measurable task interference or performance impairment.
The interpretation favored by us for this outcomethat the resources of the limited-capacity process, and,
therefore, of focal attention, do not participate in featuregradient detection-would appear to depend on whether
resources of the limited-capacity process were drawn effectively to the target of the orientation discrimination and
away from those regions of visual space where featuregradient targets appeared. To increase our confidence in
this respect, we conducted Experiment 4, in which the
orientation discrimination was replaced by a handedness
discrimination, which we hoped wouldengage the limitedcapacity process even more firmly. The outcome remained
unchanged.
Seven practiced psychophysical observers participated. Five were
naive as to the purpose of the study.
Stimulus displays were generated by a Sun 2 minicomputer together
with an Imaging Technologies frarnebuffer on a Conrac black-andwhite raster monitor. Thedisplay raster consisted of 256 x 256 pixels
x 8 bits. Display rate was 50 Hz noninterlaced. The timing of displays was synchronized to the video signal by the driver of the
framebuffer device. In this way, defined display timeswere obtained
despite the (non-real-time) operating system of the host computer.
The observers initiated trials by pressing the space bar on a standard
terminal keyboard and responded by typing the digits 0 or I on a
keyboard. An error elicited feedback from the terminal bell.
Stimulus Patterns
Stimulus patterns were formed by arranging discrete elements
in a hexagonal array, resulting in three concentric shells of elements
around a center element (Figures IA-ID). Elements were generated either with continuous luminance distributions in the shape of
Gabor functions (GFs) or, in the stimulus for Experiment 4, as line
figures. We used GFs because their spacing in an array does not
vary with orientation, as it would for line elements, and because
they can be expected to stimulate a more defined population of neural
filters .
At the center of Stimulus Patterns Band C (Figure I), a smaller
GF element (center target) assumed an orientation of 0° or 90°
(horizontal or vertical) with equal probability. At thecenter of Stimulus Pattern D, there appeared a line element (arrow target). In all
stimulus patterns, there sometimes appeared eccentric GF elements
(eccentric targets) of 0° or 90° (horizontal or vertical) orientation.
Either orientation occurred with equal probability. In Stimulus Pattern B, the eccentric targets were always present. Eccentric targets
appeared only in the second shell of array positions (i.e., at approximately 3° of eccentricity). In Stimulus Patterns B, C, and D,
BRAUN AND SAGI
Figure 1. Stimulus patterns, mask elements, and illustration of arrow discrimination task. (A) Stimulus pattern combining two pop-out
detection tasks. Two eccentric targets were independently present or absent in the top and bottom halves of the pattern. (8) Two
orientation-discrimination tasks. A central target and one eccentric target assumed, independently, horizontal or vertical orientation.
(C) Orientation-discrimination task and pop-out detection task. The central target assumed horizontal or vertical orientation and, independently, one eccentric target was present or absent. (D) Arrow discrimination task and pop-out detection task. The central arrow
assumed one of two possible mirror-symmetric forms and, independently, one eccentric target was present or absent. (E-F) Typical mask
elements for Gabor function elements. (G-O D1ustration of arrow task: counterclockwise form of arrow target (G), clockwise form of
arrow target (11), mask pattern for the arrow target (0.
all 12 positions in the second shell of the array were equally likely
to display an eccentric target. In Stimulus Pattern A, eccentric targets were confined to 10 positions in the second shell of the array,
since eccentric targets never occurred on the horizontal midline.
In Stimulus Patterns A, C, and 0, all remaining array positions
were occupied by GF elements (background elements) of uniform
orientation, chosen to be 45° or 135° (diagonal or antidiagonal)
with equal probability.
In Stimulus Pattern B, no background elements were used in order
to exclude the possibility of any contribution from feature-gradient
mechanisms to eccentric-target discrimination.
The handedness target at the center of Stimulus Pattern 0
(Figure 10) was formed by two line elements of slightly different
lengths (0.35° and 0.40°), which were joined at a 60° angle and
which assumed two mirror-symmetric forms, as shown in Figure IG
(counterclockwise target) and Figure IH (clockwise target). Either
form of the arrow target appeared with equal probability at 22.5 0,
67.5°, ... ,337.5° orientation. The handedness target was thus
rotated (almost) arbitrarily in the imageplane before being displayed.
In every trial, elements were displaced from their exact array positions within the confines of a square whose sides measured one
fourth of the nominal element spacing. In addition, element contrast was varied between 80% and 100% of nominal contrast.
However, displacement and contrast were not set for each element
individually. Instead, elements were divided randomly into two
groups for which displacement and contrast were determined
separately. These measures served a double purpose: (I) they created
a large variety of stimulus patterns and prevented the pop-out detection from degenerating into a detection of memorized patterns,
and (2) they increased the effectiveness of the mask by rendering
unpredictable the spatial relationship between stimulus and mask
Display size was 9° x 9°; mean luminance was 65 cd/rrr'; nominal element spacing was 1.2°; spatial periods of GFs were 0.18°
to 0.28° (center) and 0.35° (elsewhere); lie radii ofGFs wereo.or
to 0.11 ° (center) and 0.25° (elsewhere); nominal stimulus contrast
was 25 % to 36%; nominal mask contrast was twice stimulus
Mask Patterns
Mask patterns were varied on every trial and were formed through
one-to-one replacement of stimulus elements by appropriate mask
elements. Mask patterns, in contrast to stimulus patterns, were not
uniform, since background elements were masked by one of two
possible (randomly chosen) mask elements. Mask elements were
constructed in such a way as to ensure that a superposition of stimulus and mask element would render the stimulus elements indiscriminable. Mask elements for GF elements were a superposition of two GFs of different orientation that had been displaced
independently from their nominal position in the manner described
above. GF mask elements were recomputed for every trial. Typical GF mask elements for Experiments I, 3, and 4 (Stimuli A, C,
and D, Figures lA, IC, and ID) are shown in Figure IE; typical
mask elements for Experiment 2 (Stimulus B, Figure IB) are shown
in Figure IF. The line figure (handedness target) used in Experiment 4 (Stimulus D, Figure ID), which could appear in one of two
mirror-symmetric forms (Figures IG and IH), was masked by
another line figure, shown in Figure II.
Feature-gradient detection. The observers indicated the presence
or absence of a GF function element of horizontal or vertical orientation within a dense background of diagonal or antidiagonal
Orientation discrimination. The observers indicated whether a
GF target assumed horizontal or vertical orientation.
Handedness discrimination. The observers indicated whether
a line-figure target assumed clockwise or counterclockwise form.
Each type of stimulus pattern posed two distinct visual tasks for
the observer. Our objective was to determine how well the observer
could carry out both tasks of the pattern simultaneously. Accordingly, we conducted with each pattern type a double-task experiment, in which the observer attempted to accomplish both tasks
concurrently, as well as two single-task experiments, in which the
observer attempted only one of the two tasks. The single-task experiments provided the standard of reference against which doubletask experiments were judged. We wish to emphasize that singletask stimulus patterns contained all targets and target forms, including those irrelevant to the task performed, so that double- and
single-task experiments were conducted on identical stimulus ensembles.
Experiments were conducted in blocks of 50 or 100 trials. The
observers were instructed to fixate a mark at the center of the video
screen before initiating a trial. Fixation was not monitored otherwise. After the observer hadsignaled readiness, the screen displayed
the stimulus pattern (for 20 msec), then mean luminance (for 0 to
160 msec), and finally a mask pattern (for 100 msec). The brevity
of the stimulus interval precluded a second fixation. The interval
between stimulus and mask onset (stimulus onset asynchrony, or
SOA) controlled the visual availability of the stimulus pattern. After trial presentation, the observers responded by typing the digits
o or I on a keyboard. In double-task blocks, the observers gave
two such responses, in the order specified in the text. Error feedback from the terminal bell was given in the same order; a delay
rendered the second bell tone distinct from the first.
The observers were well practiced and had achieved stable performance during thousands of practice trials prior to each experiment. The serial order in which Experiments I, 2, 3, and 4 were
carried out was balanced across observers. The order of the various SOAs for which data was to be collected was chosen unsystematically. Experimental sessions lasted I to 2 h, and were almost
always devoted to one particular SOA. However, sessions always
included blocks of all three instruction types (the double-task and
two single-task instructions), and blocks of the various types were
alternated several times during each session.
NONATIENTIVE VISION
Performance was measured in terms of the percentage of correct
responses, averaged across positive and negative trials, as a function of SOA. The ratio of false positive to false negative responses
was analyzed. Although this ratio revealed some observer bias (typically on the order of 0.5 to 2.0), it did not vary significantly between double- and single-task conditions. It was therefore deemed
unnecessary to report d' measures.
Task Synchrony
Considerable effort went into the design of stimulus-mask combinations that prevented stimulus discrimination (i.e., resulted in
chance performance on all tasks) for SOA values below 40 msec.
All experiments included (without being limited to) SOA values
that were insufficient for the reliable performance of the tasks used
(performance below 80% correct). These measures were intended
to create conditions under which stimulus patterns were available
exactly as long as necessary for the task to be performed, and not
Task performance was limited not by stimulus visibility, but by
backwards masking. Without the mask, single and double tasks were
performed without error. For a task that presents a demand on a
limited-capacity system, masking is expected to favor resourcelimited, rather than data-limited, performance . A second consequence of the use of masking was that, in
the double-task situation, the observers were compelled to attempt
both tasks synchronously.
Task DIfficulty
For every experiment, the two tasks involved were adjusted (typically, by varying mask contrast) so that they required stimulus persistence for approximately equal spans of time. The SOA at which
observers achieved a performance of 75% correct responses
(threshold) was estimated by fitting the psychometric function
pet) = I -
..!... 2 - (liT) l
to each data set. Values for the parameter "( ranged from 2 to 5.
Va1ues for the threshold parameter, T, are listed in Tables I, 2,
3, and 4. The performance values achieved by a given subject in
all blocks of trials at a given SOA were averaged to yield the mean
performance, and its standard error, at the given SOA. A representative standard error for the data set was obtained as the geometric
average of the standard errors at given SOA values. This average
was taken over those SOA values for which mean performance lay
between 60% and 90% correct. A confidence interval for the
parameter T was computed from the representative standard error
and from the slope of the fitted psychometric function.
Experiment 1: Combination of
Two Feature-Gradient Detections
The stimulus pattern for Experiment I contained up to
two eccentric targets that appeared, independently, in one
of the top five and/or in one of the bottom five locations
in the second shell of the stimulus array (Figure IA). All
possible target positions were equally probable. Thus, eccentric targets appeared in the top and/or bottom halves
of the display, never on the horizontal midline, and each
half contained either one target or none with equal probability.
In the double-task situation, the observers were asked
to devote equal effort to the top and bottom halves of the
display and to attempt to detect simultaneously targets in
both halves.
BRAUN AND SAGI
TOP POPOUT DETECTION
BOTTOM POPOUT DETECTION
')00-: ~~ L~
Figure 2. Top and bottom pop-out detection tasks for Observers J.B., D.S.,
M.P., and A.P. This figure, as weD as subsequent ones, represents visual performance (frequency of correct responses) as a function of stimulus availability (stimulus onset asynchrony). Each graph compares performance when the
task was carried out alone (0 = single-task situation) and performance when
the other task of the pair was carried out concurrently (e = double-task situation). At the lower right of each graph are the average standard error, the
number of blocks of trials on which the graph is based, and the number of
trials per block.
The observers reported on the stimulus by means of two
separate present/absent responses-one pertaining to targets in the top half of the display and another pertaining
to targets in the bottom half of the display. In the two
single-task situations, the observers reported whether or
not they had detected a target in one half of the display,
and they disregarded the other half (and any target there).
Four observers participated,
and the outcome is
represented by two graphs per observer-one graph for
feature-gradient detection in the top half of the display
and another for feature-gradient detection in the bottom
half (Figure 2). Graphs are based on 1,550 to 4,050
responses each, as indicated in Figure 2. Each graph contains the task's psychometric curves in both single-task
(open circles) and double-task (filled circles) situations.
The threshold values computed from this data are listed
in Table 1.
The psychometric curves obtained for single- and
double-task situations were practically identical. With the
exception of a small improvement of Observer M.P. 's
performance in the double-task situation, there were no
significant differences in the computed threshold values
between single- and double-task situations (Table 1). This
outcome shows that the two pop-out detections do not
hinder each other (even when carried out together they
retain the levels of performance at which each is carried
out alone) and confirms that our choice for a featuregradient task is performed in a parallel manner. The out-
Mean Stimulus Onset Asynchronies (SOAs) and Standard Errors at the Single-Task
and the Double-Task Thresholds in Experiment 1
Single Task
Double Task
Difference
Difference
Significance
Top Detection Task
Bottom Detection Task
Note-All values for mean SOAs and SEs are given in milliseconds.
NONATTENTIVE VISION
ORIENTATION DISCRIMINATION
ORIENTATION
DISCRIMINATION
SOA lrns l
Figure 3. Central and eccentric orlentation-dlscrlmination tasks for Observers J.B., D.S., N.B., and J.G. 0 = single-task situation.• = double-task situation. The dashed lines are discussed in the text. See Figure 2 caption for other details.
come also confirms that observers are able to perform
reliably in the double-task situation.
Experiment 2: Combination of
Two Orientation Discriminations
The stimulus for Experiment 2 was composed of just
two target elements: one (the center target) appeared at
display center, and another (the eccentric target) appeared
in one of the 12 positions in the second shell of the stimulus array (Figure IB). All possible positions of the eccentric target were equally probable. Both the center and
the eccentric target assumed independently and with equal
probability either a horizontal or a vertical orientation.
Background elements were not used in order to exclude
any contribution of feature-gradient mechanisms to the
discrimination of the eccentric target. 1 The asymmetric
placement of the targets (one central, the other eccentric)
reproduced the target positions in Experiments 3 and 4.
As it turned out, the absence of background elements
resulted in two tasks with almost equal psychometric
curves, thus approximating the symmetric conditions (two
eccentric targets) of Experiment I.
In the double-tasksituation, the observers produced two
vertical/horizontal responses-the first one pertaining to
the center target and the second one pertaining to the eccentric target. To maintain double- and single-task performance on the center target at comparable levels, the
observers were instructed to give priority to the discrimination of the center target in the double-task situation.
Identical instructions were used in Experiments 3 and 4.
The use of a task ranking simplified analysis of the outcome, because it ensured optimal, or almost optimal,
performance on the primary task and therefore limited
our observations to a one-dimensional subset of twodimensional domain that describes the performance
tradeoff between two limited-capacity tasks (Norman &
Mean Stimulus Onset Asynchronies (8OAs) and Standard Errors at the Single-Task
and the Double-Task Thresholds in Experiment 2
Single Task
Double Task
Difference
Difference
Significance
Central Discrimination Task
Eccentric Discrimination Task
Note-All values for mean SOAs and SEs are given in milliseconds.
BRAUN AND SAGI
CENTRAL ORIENTATION DISCRIMINATION
100 -: ~.oo:Z~.:
ECCENTRIC POPOUT DETECTION
SOA lrns l
SOA lrns l
Figure 4. Central orientation-discrimination task and eccentric pop-out detection task for Observers J.B., S.E., D.S., and N.B. 0 = single-task situation.
= double-task situation. See Figure 2 caption for other details.
Bobrow, 1975). However, during practice trials, we established that the basic outcome of the experiment (task
interference) is also obtained if no task ranking is used.
In the single-task situations, the observers produced one
response and disregarded the irrelevant target. In a given
block of trials, the observers knew which half of the array would be relevant and, occasionally, they might have
fixated above or below the display center. A bias large
enough to affect performance is not consistent with the
outcome of Experiment 2.
The psychometric curves obtained from 4 observers are
shown in Figure 3; the threshold values computed from
this data are listed in Table 2. Graphs are based on 2,200
to 11,400 responses each. All observers except J.G. were
able to follow the instructions concerning the priority of
the center target and discriminated the orientation of this
target equally well in the double- and single-task situations (Table 2). However, performance on the eccentric
target in the double-task situation suffered a highly significant reduction for all observers (Table 2). This inability to simultaneously discriminate two separate targets
is what is expected of a task that requires the participation of focal attention.
To quantify the obstacle that the center task appears to
pose for the performance of the eccentric task, we displaced the eccentric single-task psychometric curve along
the SOA axis until its threshold SOA coincided with the
threshold SOA of the double-task curve. This displacement, shown by dashed lines in Figure 3, might be
regarded as an effective delay that is imposed on eccentric performance by the double-task situation. Averaged
over observers, this apparent delay was 52 msec ± 12
(Table 2). We note that, because the observers were able
to carry out the secondary task when the SOA was large
enough, it appears more appropriate to describe the outcome in terms of a performance delay than in terms of
Mean Stimulus Onset Asyncbronies (8OAs) and Standard Errors at the Single-Task
and the Double-Task Thresholds in Experiment 3
Single Task
Double Task
Difference
Difference
Significance
Central Discrimination Task
Eccentric Detection Task
Note-All values for mean SOAs and SEs are given in milliseconds.
NONATTENTIVE VISION
Experiment 4: Combination of Pop-Out
Detection and Arrow Discrimination
Experiment 4 was exactly analogous to Experiment 3,
discrimination
mirrorsymmetric forms of a line-figure target was used instead
of an orientation discrimination at the center of the display (Figure ID). The handedness target assumed clockwise or counterclockwise form with equal probability and,
in addition, was rotated randomly in the image plane (see
Method section). The task, which after some days ofpractice could be performed without much mental effort, consisted in discriminating the clockwise and counterclockwise forms of the target. An experiment combining two
handedness discriminations (on the strength of a reasoning similar to that followed in Experiment 2) suggested
that a central handedness discrimination engages focal attention for approximately 80 msec.
Two observers participated, and the outcome is given
in Figure 5 and in Table 4. Graphs were based on 2,250
to 3,700 responses each. Observer J.B. showed a weakly
significant improvement in his double-task performance
of the discrimination task, whereas Observer D.S. displayed a weakly significant reduction in his performance
of the detection task. No performance reductioncomparable to that of Experiment 2 was observed. As in Experithe center target. In single-task situations, the observers
were asked to disregard the irrelevant target.
The outcome of Experiment 3, in which 4 observers
participated, is shown in Figure 4 and Table 3. Graphs
are based on 2,150 to 10,400 responses each. For all observers, single- and double-task performance curves are
close to identical on both tasks. On the central discrimination task, there was a weakly significant improvement
in the double-task performance of Observer J. B., and a
weakly significant reduction for Observer N.B. On the
eccentric detection task, there was a weakly significant
improvement in the double-task performance of Observer S.E. Accordingly, feature-gradient detection was
not measurably affected by the concurrent orientationdiscrimination task, despite the demanding nature of this
task vis-a-vis a limited-eapacity process. This suggests that
the limited-capacity process is not required for the performance of a feature-gradient detection task.
ECCENTRIC POPOUT DETECTION
a reduction. If the apparent delay of the secondary task
when observers carry out the central discrimination is,
in fact, caused by a temporary unavailability of the
limited-capacity process at eccentric locations, then this
unavailability would seem to persist for approximately
Figure S. Central arrow discrimination task and eccentric popout detection task for Observers J.B. and D.S. 0 = single-task situation. •
= double-task situation. See Figure 2 caption for other
CENTRAL ARROW DISCRIMINATION
Experiment 3: Combination of Pop-Out
Detection and Orientation Discrimination
The stimulus pattern for Experiment 3 contained a central target, which assumed horizontal or vertical orientation with equal probability, and an eccentric target embedded in a background of diagonal or antidiagonal elements
(Figure IC). The eccentric target was present or absent
with equal probability and could appear in anyone of the
12 positions in the second shell ofthe stimulus array. The
orientation of the eccentric target was horizontal or vertical with equal probability.
In the double-task situation, the observers were asked
to attempt to discriminate simultaneously the orientation
of the center target and to detect the presence or absence
of an eccentric target. As in Experiment 2, the observers
were instructed to give priority, and to respond first, to
Mean Stimulus Onset Asynchronies (8OAs) and Standard Errors at the Single-Task
and the Double-Task Thresholds in Experiment 4
Single Task
Double Task
Difference
Difference
Significance
Central Discrimination Task
Eccentric Detection Task
Note-All values for mean SOAs and SEs are given in milliseconds.
BRAUN AND SAGI
ment 3, the pop-out detection task continued to be carried out essentially at single-task performance levels, even
though the limited-capacity process was engaged at fixation by the arrow discrimination.
DISCUSSION
We have investigated the compatibility of visual tasks
that are attempted concurrently. Our procedure included
a mask to limit the temporal availability of the stimulus,
as well as separate reporting for each task. Under such
conditions, the compatibility of two visual tasks that concern targets in separate parts of the field of view is expected to be curtailed by a limited-eapacity stage of visual
processing (which we believe to 'be focal attention).
Although interference between 'tasks has been reported
previously for similar conditions ,
we have observed the full compatibility of certain task
combinations. Our interpretation of this outcome is that
the observed lack of interference is a consequence of our
use of a feature-gradient task (i.e., of a target that is
embedded in a dense and uniform background). This interpretation is consistent with a large body of work on
texture segregation that implicates the existence of nonattentive mechanisms that register local feature differences
in parallel across the field of view .
That our experimental procedure was suited to reveal
interference between two visual tasks was confirmed by
a control experiment (Experiment 2) in which substantial task interference was observed. In fact, the outcome
obtained in Experiment 2 was consistent with complete
interference (i.e.,
with strictly
sequential task performance).
Detection/Localization Task
The feature-gradient task used here involved a dense
array of elements of uniform orientation within which an
individual target element of different orientation was
embedded.? The task consisted of detecting the presence
of such a target in one or two specified regions of the display (the top and bottom halves in Experiment 1, and the
entire display in Experiments
3 and 4). Experiment 1
showed that two such detections can be performed concurrently in two regions of the field of view. The performance observed when the task was carried out concurrently in two regions was comparable to the performance
obtained when a target had to be detected in only one
region of the display.
Studies on texture segregation have given rise to the
notion that feature gradients are registered in parallel
across the field of view .
It has been shown that several feature-gradient targets can
be detected, counted, and localized concurrently . Experiment I confirms these results and
extends them to situations in which observers report the
presence or absence of each target separately.
In addition to confirming the parallelism of featuregradient registration, the outcome of Experiment 1 has
another implication. It shows that, if performance of such
tasks is limited at all by the availability of a limited
resource , then
the allocation of this resource cannot, in this case, be spatially selective. Accordingly, if an attentive process participates in the performance of feature-gradient tasks, it
would have to participate in the form of dispersed, rather
than focal, attention. This argument has been made by
a number of authors who have interpreted parallelism as
evidence for a dispersed form of attention .
It is instructive to compare an experiment reported by
Duncan . In the experiment of Duncan, observers
monitored simultaneously four locations at which line targets appeared in one of two forms (vertical and tilted).
The locations were grouped into pairs, and the more rare
target form (tilted) could occur at not more than one location of each pair. The task was to detect the presence
of tilted targets concurrently at both pairs of locations.
Masking and separate reporting were both used. The outcome was that the detection of a target at one location
pair interfered with detecting targets at the other pair of
locations. Although there are several differences between
this experiment and ours, it is tempting to ascribe the contrasting outcomes to the the fact that the targets of Duncan, although comparable in size to ours, were not embedded in a dense background and were separated from their
(two) nearest neighbors by approximately 2.5
• Thus, it
is possible that spurious gradients generated by nontargets interfered with target detection. Our targets and background elements were separated by 1.2
0 from (six) adjacent background elements, a value that is close to optimal
for the detection of feature gradients . The possibility that stimulus geometry
is the critical difference between the two paradigms is currently under investigation.
Discrimination Tasks
Our other two tasks required the observer to discriminate between two equally probable forms of a target element. One task involved a discrimination between
horizontally and vertically oriented targets; the other involved a discrimination between clockwise and counterclockwise forms of a handed target.
In Experiment 2, two orientation targets were shownone at fixation and another at randomly chosen locations
0 of eccentricity. These target locations were identical to the target locations in Experiments 3 and 4. The
outcome showed that the orientations of the two targets
could not be discriminated concurrently with the same
reliability as each target orientation could bediscriminated
alone. Analogous experiments with handednesstargets and
with combinations of orientation and handedness targets
yielded similar results. 3
This shows that the performance of these tasks involves
a process that is unable to operate on two targets concurrently (i.e., a limited-capacity process). It seems safe to
identify this process, whose participation in a visual task
has been previously reported to result in competition between spatially separated targets , with focal attention, spatial attention, or the spotlight of attention (i.e., with the postulated
unitary process thought to account for serial visual
processing in a number of situations).
In Experiments 2,3, and 4, the discrimination of a target at display center was designated as the primary task
of the observer. It should be stressed that competition between targets does in no way depend on the imposition
of such a task ranking . Due to this instruction, the primary task was performed, in combination with
the secondary one, at, or almost at, the level at which
it was performed as a single task. In other words, we observed not impaired performance for both tasks, but a
secondary-task
performance
substantially
reduced, reflecting the extent to which a limited capacity
necessary for task performance was engaged (monopolized) by the primary task, which was being executed in
a normal manner.
In combination with the primary task, performance of
the secondary task reached a normal level (i.e., the level
at which it was performed alone) only if the stimulus was
permitted to persist for some additional time. It appears
significant that this time (approximately 50
orientation targets and 80 msec for arrow targets) was
comparable in magnitude to the SOA (and therefore,
presumably, the stimulus persistence time) required by
the primary task. The delay observed in the performance
of the secondary task was therefore roughly what would
be expected from a limited-capacity process that engages
the primary target first and the secondary target only
thereafter. Whether or not this interpretation is correct,
it is clear that the execution of our discrimination tasks
poses a large, and possibly exclusive, demand on the
resources of a limited-capacity process (which we identify with focal attention). This implies that the performance of these tasks should interfere with the concurrent
performance of any other visual task that requires the participation of focal attention (or the limited-eapacityprocess
in question) to any significant extent.
Combination of Discrimination and
Detection Tasks
In Experiments 3 and 4, The observers attempted to
combine the discrimination and detection tasks described
above. The primary task was to discriminate the orientation (vertical or horizontal), in Experiment 3, or handedness (clockwise or counterclockwise), in Experiment 4,
NONATTENTIVE VISION
of a target at display center. In both Experiments 3 and
4, the secondary task was to detect the presence of a target of singular orientation within a dense array of uniformly oriented background elements.
The outcome was identical in both experiments: Performance of the secondary task was not affected by the
concurrent execution of the primary task. Our interpretation of this outcome is that the secondary task, a featuregradient task, makes no use of the resources of the limitedcapacity process suspected to be focal attention. Before
this interpretation-which, if correct, would have important
implications
understanding
processing-can be accepted, a number of possible objections must be considered.
Could the outcome reflect difficulties at the
level of response selection?
The first objection is that the interference or noninterference that we observed for various task combinations
may have been a reflection of the compatibility or noncompatibility of processes underlying response generation rather than a reflection of the involvement or noninvolvement of focal attention. Perhaps the generation of
two detection responses (Experiment 1) or of a detection
and a discrimination response (Experiments 3 and 4) poses
fewer difficulties for the observer than does the generation of two discrimination responses (Experiment 2).
However, this appears unlikely. A number of authors have
observed interference with detection responses. Two detections of tilted targets among vertical nontargets (which
were too distant to form a feature gradient) have been
found to interfere . Interference has also
been reported for the discrimination of a cued letter target (T or L) and the simultaneous detection of a T among
several L nontargets . Several instances of interference between a discrimination and a detection task have been noted by Hoffman, Nelson, and
Hough .
Could feature-gradient detection require a small
fraction of the limited capacity?
A second objection can be raised against our contention that, if the limited-capacity process engaged by our
discrimination task would have participated in any way
in our detection task, this would necessarily have revealed
itself through a reduction in the performance of the latter
task. It is certainly possible that our detection task is
resource-limited in the sense of Norman and Bobrow
 , and that even a partial availability of the limitedcapacity process is sufficient for performing this task at
normal levels. In other words, it is possible that a total
removal of the resources of focal attention would have
prevented our detection task from being carried out, but
that what we achieved was only a partial removal, which
did not have this effect.
We attempted to meet this objection through several
aspects of experimental design. Stimulus parameters (contrast, spatial frequency of target and background elements,
BRAUN AND SAGI
element separation) were chosen to optimize the visibility of feature-gradient targets. A glance at Figure 1 will
convince the reader that the pop-out effect obtained is
strong. To counterbalance high stimulus visibility, considerable care was taken to create an effective masking
pattern (mask contrast was twice the stimulus contrast,
the spatial relationship between stimulus elements and
mask elements was not constant, the mask was nonuniform and contained stronger feature gradients than did
the stimulus, and a new mask was generated for every
trial). These measures (i.e., the use of an easily visible
stimulus and the sharp curtailment of stimulus persistence
by effective masking) are expected to favor resourcelimited performance ofa task .
The minimal duration for which the stimulus had to persist for the subjects to reliably perform the detection task
was comparable to, if not higher than, the persistence time
required by our discrimination tasks (Tables 1-4). In other
words, the absolute task difficultieswere comparable. Any
requirement by the detection task for a limited capacity
was therefore likely to persist at least as long as the corresponding requirement of the discrimination tasks. That
our discrimination tasks engaged a limited-capacity
process for a span of time that is comparable to stimulus
persistence was argued above. In addition, the handedness discrimination task used in Experiment 4 would be
expected to pose a particularly severe demand on a limited
resource, such as focal attention. It seems clear, therefore, that the outcome of Experiments 3 and 4 was obtained despite a nonquantifiable, but substantial, reduction, lasting throughout stimulus persistence, in the
availability of the limited capacity engaged by our discrimination tasks. In a subsequent series of experiments
 , we have obtained similar outcomes
despite an increase in the separation between discrimination and detection targets from 3
0 and despite placing the two types of targets in opposite visual hemifields.
Because none of these measures affected featuregradient performance, the most parsimonious explanation
would seem to be that feature-gradient tasks do not involve the limited-capacity process under investigation.
Are Experiments 2 and 3 comparable?
A further objection is that differences between the
stimuli for Experiment 2 and the stimuli for Experiment 3
make it difficult to judge the demand on a limited-capacity
process posed by the discrimination task in these two experiments. The basis for this objection is the absence of
background elements in Experiment 2 and the analogous
experiment with handedness targets (which was not reported in full). As mentioned earlier, the reason for leaving out background elements was to exclude the possibility of a contribution from feature-gradient mechanisms
to the performance of the secondary (eccentric) discrimination task. For the primary (central) discrimination task,
the presence of flanking elements, as in Experiments 3
and 4, is expected to increase, not decrease, the requirements of attention . Additional experiments have confirmed, for both orientation
and handedness discrimination, that the addition of background elements does not affect the demand for a limitedcapacity process posed by these tasks.
Is focal attention the limited-capacity
process under study?
A fourth and final objection to the interpretation of our
results is that the limited-capacity process that we have
studied may not be identical to the postulated process that
other authors have called "focal attention," "spatial attention, " and so forth. In fact, we did not present any
evidence for the fact that we study focal attention beyond
the observation of competition between spatially separate
targets under conditions of masking. We agree that there
remains a need to establish focal attention as a unitary
phenomenon, at least for cuing and masking paradigms,
but note that extant evidence ,
as well as general scientific procedure, would seem to
favor a unitary explanation.
CONCLUSIONS
We have investigated the compatibility of two visual
tasks that were attempted simultaneously: (1) a featuregradient task that exercises the subject's capabilityfor perceiving salient boundaries and singularities in parallel
across the entire visual scene, and (2) a task thought to
engage focal attention. We have shown that such tasks
do not interfere and can be accomplished simultaneously
without adverse effect on either. Thus, the detection of
a feature gradient was not affected by a reduction in the
availability of visual attention.
Our results show that, over a considerable range of
availability of the resources of focal attention, such
resources are not a limitingfactor for feature-gradientperformance. This suggests strongly that focal attention does
not participate in feature-gradient performance and that
feature-gradient tasks can becarried out outside the region
at which focal attention is engaged. Feature-gradient tasks
thus seem to be mediated exclusively by nonattentive
mechanisms.
If one accepts that the detection of feature gradients is
not aided by focal attention, a number of important consequences follow. First, this would imply that the detection of salient boundariesand singularities in a visual scene
constitutes a distinct class of nonattentive perceptions and
would lay to rest the notion that attentive and nonattentive visual performance represent merely the oppositeends
of a continuum that
"no stimulus attribute can be overtly reported unless the
target itself gains access to the limited-capacity system"
and that "it is wrong to conclude that any attribute can
be perceived 'without attention'" .
To the contrary, it would imply that such attributes as the
presence and location of a feature-gradient target are perceived without attention.
Third, acceptance of this interpretation would open the
possibility that information about salient boundaries and
singularities gleaned by nonattentive processes may play
a rather larger role in everyday vision than has been
hitherto imagined. Such information could not only guide,
or help to guide, the shifts of selective attention but,
so we speculate, in a
thoroughly familiar environment, it could prove to be
sufficiently rich to permit visual recognition.
Fourth, if unattentive and attentive visual mechanisms
could function side by side, they should perhaps be
thought of not as successive stages of vision, but rather
as two visual faculties that operate concurrently and that
provide us with complementary forms of access to the
visual world.
If, in fact, we do enjoy vision outside the focus of attention with respect to certain prominent features of a
stimulus, it will not necessarily be the case that all parallel
visual performance is nonattentive. It remains possible that
some visual tasks that are attentive (in the sense that their
performance suffers when visual attention becomes less
available) do not exhibit serial behavior to any marked
degree. In other words, there may well be visual tasks
that involve a dispersed form of attention. It appears that
the consistent-mapping search task investigated by Hoffman, Nelson, and Houck and the detection task
studied by Krose and Julesz may be members of
this category.