New developments in parsing Mizar
Czesław Bylinski1 and Jesse Alama2 ⋆
Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
New University of Lisbon
 
Abstract. The Mizar language aims to capture mathematical vernacular by providing a rich language for mathematics. From the perspective
of a user, the richness of the language is welcome because it makes writing texts more “natural”. But for the developer, the richness leads to
syntactic complexity, such as dealing with overloading.
Recently the Mizar team has been making a fresh approach to the problem of parsing the Mizar language. One aim is to make the language
accessible to users and other developers. In this paper we describe these
new parsing eﬀorts and some applications thereof, such as large-scale text
refactorings, pretty-printing, HTTP parsing services, and normalizations
of Mizar texts.
Introduction
The Mizar system provides a language for declaratively expressing mathematical
content and writing mathematical proofs. One of the principal aims of the Mizar
project is to capture “the mathematical vernacular” by permitting authors to
use linguistic constructions that mimic ordinary informal mathematical writing.
The richness is welcome for authors of Mizar texts. However, a rich, ﬂexible,
expressive language is good for authors can lead to diﬃculties for developers and
enthusiasts. Certain experiments with the Mizar language and its vast library of
formalized mathematical knowledge (the Mizar Mathematical Library, or MML),
naturally lead to rewriting Mizar texts in various ways. For some purposes one
can work entirely on the semantic level of Mizar texts; one may not need to know
precisely what the source text is, but only its semantic form. For such purposes,
an XML presentation of Mizar texts has long been available . However, for
some tasks the purely semantic form of a Mizar text is not what is wanted. Until
⋆Supported by the ESF research project Dialogical Foundations of Semantics within
the ESF Eurocores program LogICCC . Research for this paper was partially done while
a visiting fellow at the Isaac Newton Institute for the Mathematical Sciences in the
program ‘Semantics & Syntax’. Karol Pąk deserves thanks for his patient assistance
in developing customized Mizar text rewriting tools.
recently there has been no standalone tool, distributed with Mizar, that would
simply parse Mizar texts and present the parse trees in a workable form.1
Parsing texts for many proof assistants is often facilitated through the environment in which these proof assistants are executed. Thus, texts written for
those systems working on top of a Lisp, such as IMPS, PVS, and ACL2, already
come parsed, so one has more or less immediate access to the desired parse trees
for terms, formulas, proofs, etc. Other systems, such as Coq and HOL light, use
syntax extensions (e.g., Camlp4 for Objective Caml) to “raise” the ambient programming language to the desired level of proof texts. For Mizar, there is no such
ambient environment or read-eval-print loop; working with Mizar is more akin
to writing a C program or LATEX document, submitting it to gcc or pdﬂatex,
and inspecting the results.
This paper describes new eﬀorts by the Mizar team to make their language
more workable and illustrates some of the fruits these eﬀorts have already borne.
This paper does not explain how to parse arbitrary Mizar texts. And for lack of
space we cannot go into the detail about the Mizar system; see .
In Section 2, we discuss diﬀerent views of Mizar texts that are now available.
Section 3 describes some current applications made possible by opening up Mizar
texts, and describes some HTTP-based services for those who wish to connect
their own tools to Mizar services. Section 4 concludes by sketching further work
and potential applications.
Layers of a Mizar text
It is common in parsing theory to distinguish various analyses or layers of a text,
considered in the ﬁrst place as a sequence of bytes or characters . Traditionally
the ﬁrst task in parsing is lexical analysis or scanning: to compute, from a
stream of characters, a stream of tokens, i.e., terminals of a production grammar
G. From a stream of tokens one then carries out a syntactic analysis, which
is the synthesis of tokens into groups that match the production rules of G.
One cannot, in general, lexically analyze Mizar texts without access to the
MML. Overloading (using the same symbol for multiple, possibly unrelated
meanings) already implies that parsing will be non-trivial, and overloading is
used extensively in the Mizar library. Even with a lexical analysis of a Mizar
text, how should it be understood syntactically? Through Mizar’s support for
dependent types, the overloading problem is further complicated. Consider,
for example, the Mizar fragment
let X be set ,
1 One parser tool, lisppars, is distributed with Mizar. lisppars is mainly used to facilitate authoring Mizar texts with Emacs ; it carries out fast lexical analysis only
and does not output parse trees.
The notion of a (binary) relation is indicated by the non-dependent (zeroargument) type Relation. There is also the binary notion relation whose domain is a subset of X and whose range is a subset of Y , which is expressed
as Relation of X,Y. Finally, we have the one-argument notion relation whose
domain is a subset of X and whose range is a subset of X which is written
Relation of X. In the text fragment above, we have to determine which possibility is correct, but this information would not contained in a token stream (is
Y the second argument of an instance of the binary Relation type, or is it the
third variable introduced by the let?).
Normalizations of Mizar texts
One goal of opening up the Mizar parser is to help those interested in working
with Mizar texts to not have to rely on the Mizar codebase to do their own experiments with Mizar texts. We now describe two normalizations of (arbitrary)
Mizar texts, which we call weakly strict and more strict. The results of these two
normalizations on a Mizar text can be easily parsed by a standard LR parser,
such as those generated by the standard tool bison2 and have further desirable syntactic and semantic properties. Other normalizations beyond these two
are certainly possible. For example, whitespace, labels for deﬁnitions, theorems,
lemmas, etc., are rewritten by the normalizations we discuss; one can imagine
applications where such information ought not be tampered with.
Weakly strict Mizar
The aim of the weakly strict Mizar (WSM) transformation is to deﬁne a class of
Mizar texts for which one could easily write an standard, standalone parser that
does not require any further use of the Mizar tools. In a weakly strict Mizar text
all notations are disambiguated and fully parenthesized, and all statements take
up exactly one line. (This is a diﬀerent transformation than single-line variant
AUT-SL of the Automath system .) Consider:
reserve P,R for
This Mizar fragment is ambiguous: it is possible that the variable Y is a third
reserved variable (after the variables P and R), and it is possible that Y is an argument of the dependent type Relation of X,Y. The text becomes disambiguated
by the weakly strict Mizar normalization to
reserve P , R for ( Relation
of X , Y ) ;
and now the intended reading is syntactically evident, thanks to explicit bracketing and whitespace. (Any information that is implicitly contained by whitespace
structure in the original text is destroyed.)
The result of the one-line approach of the weakly strict Mizar normalization
is, in many cases, excessive parenthesization, unnecessary whitespace, and rather
2 
long lines.3 The point of the weakly strict Mizar normalization is not to produce
attractive human-readable texts. Instead, the aim is to transform Mizar texts so
that they have a simpler grammatical structure.
More Strict Mizar
A second normalization that we have implemented is called, for lack of a better
term, more strict Mizar (MSM). The aim of the MSM normalization is to to
deﬁne a class of Mizar texts that are canonicalized in the following ways:
– From the name alone of an occurrence of a variable one can determine the
category (reserved variable, free variable, bound variable, etc.) to which the
occurrence belongs. (Such inferences are of course not valid for arbitrary
Mizar texts.)
– All formulas are labeled, even those that were unlabeled in the original text.
– Some “syntactic sugar” is expanded.
– Toplevel logical linking is replaced by explicit reference. Thus,
φ; then ψ;
using the keyword then includes the previous statement (φ) as the justiﬁcation of ψ. Under the MSM transformation, such logical relationships are
rewritten as
Label1: φ;
Label2: ψ by
Now both formulas have new labels Label1 and Label2. The logical link
between φ and ψ, previously indicated by the keyword then, is replaced by
an explicit reference to the new label (Label1) for φ.
– All labels of formulas and names of variables in a Mizar are serially ordered.
MSM Mizar texts are useful because they permit certain “semantic” inferences
to be made simply by looking at the syntax. For example, since all formulas are
labeled and any use of a formula must be done through its label, one can infer
simply by looking at labels of formulas in a text whether a formula is used.
By looking only at the name of a variable, one can determine whether it was
introduced inside the current proof or was deﬁned earlier.
Applications
Opening up the Mizar parser by providing new tools that produce parse trees
naturally suggests further useful text transformations, such as pretty printing.
An HTTP parsing service for these new developments is available for public
3 The longest line in the “WSM-iﬁed” library has length 6042. About 60% (to be
precise, 694) of the articles in the WSM form of the current version of the Mizar
Mathematical Library (4.181.1147) have lines of length at least 500 characters. The
average line length across the whole “WSM-iﬁed” library is 54.7.
consumption. Four services are available. Submitting a suitable GET request to
the service and supplying a Mizar text in the message body, one can obtain as
a response the XML parse tree for the text, a pretty-printed form of it, or the
WSM or MSM form of a text (either as plain text or as XML). The HTTP
services permit users to parse Mizar texts without having access to the MML, or
even the Mizar tools. See
 
to learn more about the parsing service, how to prepare suitable HTTP parsing
requests, and how to interpret the results.
Conclusion and Future Work
Parsing is an essential task for any proof assistant. In the case of Mizar, parsing
is a thorny issue because of the richness of its language and its accompanying
library. New tools for parsing Mizar, with an eye toward those who wish to
design their own Mizar applications without (entirely) relying on the Mizar tools,
are now available. Various normalizations for Mizar texts have been deﬁned.
Further useful normalizations are possible. At present we are experimenting with
a so-called “without reservations” Mizar (WRM), in which there are no so-called
reserved variables; in WRM texts the semantics of any formula is completely
determined by the block in which it appears, which should make processing of
Mizar texts even more eﬃcient.