A Comprehensive Survey of
Data Mining-based Fraud Detection Research
This survey paper categorises, compares, and summarises from
almost all published technical and review articles in automated
fraud detection within the last 10 years. It defines the professional
fraudster, formalises the main types and subtypes of known fraud,
and presents the nature of data evidence collected within affected
industries. Within the business context of mining the data to
achieve higher cost savings, this research presents methods and
techniques together with their problems. Compared to all related
reviews on fraud detection, this survey covers much more
technical articles and is the only one, to the best of our
knowledge, which proposes alternative data and solutions from
related domains.
Data mining applications, automated fraud detection, adversarial
1. INTRODUCTION & MOTIVATION
Data mining is about finding insights which are statistically
reliable, unknown previously, and actionable from data . This data must be available, relevant, adequate, and clean.
Also, the data mining problem must be well-defined, cannot be
solved by query and reporting tools, and guided by a data mining
process model .
The term fraud here refers to the abuse of a profit organisation’s
system without necessarily leading to direct legal consequences.
In a competitive environment, fraud can become a business
critical problem if it is very prevalent and if the prevention
procedures are not fail-safe. Fraud detection, being part of the
overall fraud control, automates and helps reduce the manual parts
of a screening/checking process. This area has become one of the
most established industry/government data mining applications.
It is impossible to be absolutely certain about the legitimacy of
and intention behind an application or transaction. Given the
reality, the best cost effective option is to tease out possible
evidences of fraud from the available data using mathematical
algorithms.
Evolved from numerous research communities, especially those
from developed countries, the analytical engine within these
solutions and software are driven by artificial immune systems,
artificial intelligence, auditing, database, distributed and parallel
computing, econometrics, expert systems, fuzzy logic, genetic
algorithms,
recognition, statistics, visualisation and others. There are plenty of
specialised fraud detection solutions and software1 which protect
businesses such as credit card, e-commerce, insurance, retail,
telecommunications industries.
There are often two main criticisms of data mining-based fraud
detection research: the dearth of publicly available real data to
perform experiments on; and the lack of published wellresearched methods and techniques. To counter both of them, this
paper garners all related literature for categorisation and
comparison, selects some innovative methods and techniques for
discussion; and points toward other data sources as possible
alternatives.
The primary objective of this paper is to define existing
challenges in this domain for the different types of large data
sets and streams. It categorises, compares, and summarises
relevant data mining-based fraud detection methods and
techniques in published academic and industrial research.
The second objective is to highlight promising new directions
from related adversarial data mining fields/applications such
as epidemic/outbreak detection, insider trading, intrusion
detection, money laundering, spam detection, and terrorist
detection. Knowledge and experience from these adversarial
domains can be interchangeable and will help prevent
repetitions of common mistakes and “reinventions of the
Section 2 – Who are the white collar criminals which a fraud
detection system should be designed to discover? Where can one
apply data mining techniques to commercial fraud? Section 3 –
What data is available for fraud detection? Which performance
measurements are appropriate for analysis? Section 4 – Which
techniques often used for automated fraud detection? What
combinations of techniques have been recommended? What are
their weaknesses? Sections 5 – What analytical methods and
techniques from other adversarial domains can one apply in fraud
detection? Section 6 – How is this fraud detection survey different
from others? Section 7 concludes with a brief summary.
1School of Business Systems, Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Clayton campus,
Wellington Road, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia (*author for correspondence, tel.: +61-3-99052065)
{e-mail: clifton.phua, vincent.lee, };
2Baycorp Advantage, Level 12, 628 Bourke Street, Melbourne, VIC 3000, Australia
{e-mail: }
CLIFTON PHUA1*, VINCENT LEE1, KATE SMITH1 & ROSS GAYLER2
2. BACKGROUND
This section highlights the types of fraudsters and affected
industries.
Fraudsters
Figure 2.1: Hierarchy chart of white-collar crime perpetrators from both
firm-level and community-level perspectives.
With reference to figure 2.1, the profit-motivated fraudster has
interactions with the affected business. Traditionally, each
business is always susceptible to internal fraud or corruption from
its management (high-level) and non-management employees
(low-level). In addition to internal and external audits for fraud
control, data mining can also be utilised as an analytical tool.
From figure 1, the fraudster can be an external party, or parties.
Also, the fraudster can either commit fraud in the form of a
prospective/existing
(consumer)
prospective/existing supplier (provider). The external fraudster
has three basic profiles: the average offender, criminal offender,
and organised crime offender. Average offenders display random
and/or occasional dishonest behaviour when there is opportunity,
sudden temptation, or when suffering from financial hardship.
In contrast, the more risky external fraudsters are individual
organised/group
(professional/career fraudsters) because they repeatedly disguise
their true identities and/or evolve their modus operandi over time
to approximate legal forms and to counter detection systems.
Therefore, it is important to account for the strategic interaction,
or moves and countermoves, between a fraud detection system’s
algorithms and the professional fraudsters’ modus operandi. It is
probable that internal and insurance fraud is more likely to be
committed by average offenders; credit and telecommunications
fraud is more vulnerable to professional fraudsters.
For many companies where they have interactions with up to
millions of external parties, it is cost-prohibitive to manually
check the majority of the external parties’ identities and activities.
So the riskiest ones determined through data mining output such
as suspicion scores, rules, and visual anomalies will be
investigated.
Affected Commercial Industries
Figure 2.2: Bar chart of fraud types from 51 unique and published fraud
detection papers. The most recent publication is used to represent previous
similar publications by the same author(s).
Figure 2.2 details the subgroups of internal, insurance, credit card,
and telecommunications fraud detection. Internal fraud detection
is concerned with determining fraudulent financial reporting by
management , and abnormal retail transactions by
employees . There are four subgroups of
insurance fraud detection: home insurance , crop insurance , automobile
insurance , and medical insurance .
Credit fraud detection refers to screening credit applications
 ,
and/or logged credit card
transactions . Similar to credit fraud detection, telecommunications
subscription data , and/or wire-line and
wire-less phone calls are monitored.
Credit transactional fraud detection has received the most
attention from researchers although it has been loosely used here
to include bankruptcy prediction and bad
debts prediction . Employee/retail , national crop insurance , and credit
application each has only one
academic publication.
The main purpose of these detection systems is to identify general
trends of suspicious/fraudulent applications and transactions. In
the case of application fraud, these fraudsters apply for insurance
entitlements using falsified information, and apply for credit and
telecommunications products/services using non-existent identity
information or someone else’s identity information. In the case of
transactional fraud, these fraudsters take over or add to the usage
of an existing legitimate credit or telecommunications account.
There are other fraud detection domains. E-businesses and ecommerce on the Internet present a challenging data mining task
because it blurs the boundaries between fraud detection systems
and network intrusion detection systems. Related literature focus
on video-on-demand websites and IP-based
telecommunication services .
Online sellers and online buyers can be monitored by automated systems. Fraud detection in
government organisations such as tax and
customs has also been reported.
3. DATA AND MEASUREMENTS
This section discusses the types of available data and previously
used performance measures.
Structured data
This subsection aims to define the attributes and examples which
have been used for previous fraud detection experimental studies
and actual systems. By doing so, future studies on fraud detection
will find this useful to either validate their real data or create
synthetic data.
Figure 3.1: Scatter plot of the data size from 40 unique and published
fraud detection papers within common fraud types.
Figure 3.1 shows the number of original attributes (vertical axis)
and pre-sampled examples
(horizontal axis) from internal,
insurance, credit card, and telecommunications fraud detection
literature.
Generally, attributes can be binary, numerical (interval or ratio
scales), categorical (nominal or ordinal scales), or a mixture of the
three. 16 data sets have less than 10 attributes, 18 data sets have
between 10 to 49 attributes, 5 data sets have between 50 to 99
attributes, and only 1 data set used more than 100 attributes
 .
Management data sets are the smallest (all have less than 500
examples), except for employee/retail data with more than 5
million transactions . Insurance data sets consist
of hundreds of examples and the largest contain 40000 examples
 . Most credit transactional data have more than 1
million transactions and the largest contain more than 12 million
transactions
 .
Figure 3.2: Scatter plot of the percentage of fraud and percentage of test
of entire data set. 19 unique and published fraud detection papers within
common fraud types were used.
Figure 3.2 shows the percentage of fraud (vertical axis) and
percentage of test examples (horizontal axis) of the entire data set
described in each study.
Six studies using credit transactional and insurance data have less
than 10 percent fraud. In particular, Foster and Stine and
Bentley have as low as 0.1 percent fraud in credit
transactional data and 0.5 percent fraud in home insurance data
respectively. More than 80 percent (16 papers) of the 19 papers
has skewed data with less than 30% fraud. The average of the
proportion of test examples to total examples of the 19 papers is
around 50%.
The specific attributes used for detecting each fraud type are
generally the same. Management data are typically financial ratios
using accounts receivable, allowance of doubtful debts, and net
sales figures. Crop insurance data consist of ratios using amount
of compensation, premium, and liability figures . Home insurance data is made up of customer behaviour
(current claim amount, time as customer, past claims) and
financial status (annual income, average bank balance, number of
overdrafts) . Automobile insurance data are
usually binary indicators grouped into accident, claimant, driver,
injury, treatment, lost wages, vehicle, and other categories.
Medical insurance data can comprise of patient demographics
(age and gender), treatment details (services), and policy and
claim details (benefits and amount) .
Specific attributes in credit transaction data are often not revealed
but they should comprise of date/time stamps, current transaction
(amount, geographical location, merchant industry code and
validity code), transactional history, payment history, and other
account information (age of account) .
Telecommunications data can comprise of individual call
information (date/time stamps, source number, destination
number, call duration, type of call, geographical origin,
geographical destination) and account summary information (likely payment
methods, average monthly bill, average time between calls, daily
and weekly summaries of individual calls) .
Apart from date/time attributes in Kim et al
employee/retail fraud and day/week/month/year attributes in Phua
et al on automobile insurance fraud, the data collected to
detect internal and insurance fraud are static and do not provide
any temporal information. Not only does insurance (pathology
provider) data described in Yamanishi et al lack temporal
information, the other attributes such as proportion of tests
performed are not effective for fraud detection.
Almost all the data has been de-identified, apart from Wheeler and
Aitken which describes the use of identity information
such as names and addresses from credit applications. While most
telecommunication account data are behavioural, Rosset et al
 includes de-identified demographic data such as age and
ethnicity for the telecommunications customer.
There are no publicly available data sets for studying fraud
detection, except for a relatively small automobile insurance data
set used in Phua et al . And obtaining real data from
companies for research purposes is extremely hard due to legal
and competitive reasons. To circumvent these data availability
problems and work on a particular fraud type, one alternative is to
create synthetic data which matches closely to actual data. Barse
et al justifies that synthetic data can train and adapt a
system without any data on known frauds, variations of known
fraud and new frauds can be artificially created, and to benchmark
different systems. In addition, they summarised important
qualities which should be in simulated data and proposed a fivestep synthetic data generation methodology.
Barse et al reported that use of simulated data had mixed
results when applied to real data. Three out of the 51 papers
presented in Figure 2.2 used simulated data but the credit
transaction data was either not realistic or the insurance data and results were not
explained .
The next alternative, according to Fawcett , is to mine
email data for spam because researchers can study many of the
same data issues as fraud detection and the spam data is available
publicly in large quantities. In contrast to the structured data
collected for fraud detection, unstructured email data will require
effective feature selection or text processing operations.
Performance Measures
Most fraud departments place monetary value on predictions to
maximise cost savings/profit and according to their policies. They
can either define explicit cost or benefit models .
Cahill et al suggests giving a score for an instance (phone
call) by determining the similarity of it to known fraud examples
(fraud styles) divided by the dissimilarity of it to known legal
examples (legitimate telecommunications account).
Most of the fraud detection studies using supervised algorithms
since 2001 have abandoned measurements such as true positive
rate (correctly detected fraud divided by actual fraud) and
accuracy at a chosen threshold (number of instances predicted
correctly, divided by the total number of instances). In fraud
detection, misclassification costs (false positive and false negative
error costs) are unequal, uncertain, can differ from example to
example, and can change over time. In fraud detection, a false
negative error is usually more costly than a false positive error.
Regrettably, some recent studies on credit card transactional fraud
 and telecommunications superimposed fraud
 still aim to only maximise accuracy. Some use
Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) analysis (true positive
rate versus false positive rate).
Apart from Viaene et al , no other fraud detection study on
supervised algorithms has sought to maximise Area under the
Receiver Operating Curve (AUC) and minimise cross entropy
(CXE). AUC measures how many times the instances have to be
swapped with their neighbours when sorting data by predicted
scores; and CXE measures how close predicted scores are to
target scores. In addition, Viaene et al and Foster and
Stine seek to minimise Brier score (mean squared error of
predictions). Caruana and Niculescu-Mizil argues that the
most effective way to assess supervised algorithms is to use one
metric from threshold, ordering, and probability metrics; and they
justify using the average of mean squared error, accuracy, and
AUC. Fawcett and Provost recommend Activity
Monitoring Operating Characteristic (AMOC) (average score
versus false alarm rate) suited for timely credit transactional and
telecommunications superimposition fraud detection.
For semi-supervised approaches such as anomaly detection, Lee
and Xiang propose entropy, conditional entropy, relative
conditional entropy, information gain, and information cost. For
unsupervised algorithms, Yamanishi et al used the
Hellinger and logarithmic scores to find statistical outliers for
insurance; Burge and Shawe-Taylor employed Hellinger
score to determine the difference between short-term and longterm profiles for the telecommunications account. Bolton and
Hand recommends the t-statistic as a score to compute the
standardised distance of the target account with centroid of the
peer group; and also to detect large spending changes within
Other important considerations include how fast the frauds can be
detected (detection time/time to alarm), how many styles/types of
fraud detected, whether the detection was done in online/real time
(event-driven) or batch mode (time-driven) claimed that their algorithm performed
marginally better than the experienced auditors. Brockett et al
 and Stefano and Gisella summed up their
performance as being consistent with the human experts and their
regression scores. Belhadji et al stated that both automated
and manual methods are complementary. Williams 
supports the role of the fraud specialist to explore and evolve
rules. NetMap reports visual analysis of insurance claims
by the user helped discover the fraudster.
4. METHODS AND TECHNIQUES
This section examines four major methods commonly used, and
their corresponding techniques and algorithms.
Figure 4.1: Structured diagram of the possible data for analysis. Data
mining approaches can utilise training/testing data with labels, only legal
examples, and no labels to predict/describe the evaluation data.
Figure 4.1 shows that many existing fraud detection systems
typically operate by adding fraudulent claims/applications/
transactions/accounts/sequences (A) to “black lists” to match for
likely frauds in the new instances (E). Some use hard-coded rules
which each transaction should meet such as matching addresses
and phone numbers, and price and amount limits is to understand the temporal nature of fraud in the
“black lists” by tracking the frequency of terms and category of
terms (style or strategy of fraudster) found in the attributes of
fraudulent examples over time. Below outlines the complex nature
of data used for fraud detection in general :
Volume of both fraud and legal classes will fluctuate
independently of each other; therefore class distributions
(proportion of illegitimate examples to legitimate examples)
will change over time.
Multiple styles of fraud can happen at around the same time.
Each style can have a regular, occasional, seasonal, or onceoff temporal characteristic.
Legal characteristics/behaviour can change over time.
Within the near future after uncovering the current modus
operandi of professional fraudsters, these same fraudsters will
continually supply new or modified styles of fraud until the
detection systems start generating false negatives again.
With reference to Figure 4.1, the common data mining approaches
to determine the most suspicious examples from the incoming
data stream (evaluation data) are:
1) Labelled training data (A + B + C + D) can be processed by
single supervised algorithms (Section 4.2). A better suggestion is
to employ hybrids such as multiple supervised algorithms (Section
4.3.1), or both supervised and unsupervised algorithms (Section
4.3.2) to output suspicion scores, rules and/or visual anomalies on
evaluation data.
2) All known legal claims/applications/transactions/accounts/
sequences (C) should be used processed by semi-supervised
algorithms to detect significant anomalies from consistent normal
behaviour (Section 4.4).
However, there are many criticisms with using labelled data to
detect fraud:
In an operational event-driven environment, the efficiency of
processing is critical.
The length of time needed to flag examples as fraudulent will
be the same amount of time the new fraud types will go
unnoticed.
The class labels of the training data can be incorrect and
subject to sample selectivity bias .
They can be quite expensive and difficult to obtain recommend the use of unlabelled data
because the fraudster will try to make fraud and legal classes
hard to distinguish.
Therefore it is necessary to:
3) Combine training data (the class labels are not required here)
with evaluation data (A + C + E + F). These should be processed
by single or multiple unsupervised algorithms to output suspicion
scores, rules and/or visual anomalies on evaluation data (Section
Supervised Approaches on Labelled
Data (A + B + C + D)
Predictive supervised algorithms examine all previous labelled
transactions to mathematically determine how a standard
fraudulent transaction looks like by assigning a risk score
 . Neural networks are popular and support vector
machines (SVMs) have been applied. Ghosh and Reilly 
used a three-layer, feed-forward Radial Basis Function (RBF)
neural network with only two training passes needed to produce a
fraud score in every two hours for new credit card transactions.
Barse et al used a multi-layer neural network with
exponential trace memory to handle temporal dependencies in
synthetic Video-on-Demand log data. Syeda et al propose
fuzzy neural networks on parallel machines to speed up rule
production for customer-specific credit card fraud detection. Kim
et al proposes SVM ensembles with either bagging and
boosting with aggregation methods for telecommunications
subscription fraud.
The neural network and Bayesian network comparison study
 uses the STAGE algorithm for Bayesian
networks and backpropagation algorithm for neural networks in
credit transactional fraud detection. Comparative results show that
Bayesian networks were more accurate and much faster to train,
but Bayesian networks are slower when applied to new instances.
Ezawa and Norton developed Bayesian network models in
four stages with two parameters. They argue that regression,
nearest-neighbour, and neural networks are too slow and decision
Attributes
Evaluation
trees have difficulties with certain discrete variables. The model
with most variables and with some dependencies performed best
for their telecommunications uncollectible debt data.
Viaene et al applies the weight of evidence formulation of
AdaBoosted naive Bayes (boosted fully independent Bayesian
network) scoring. This allows the computing of the relative
importance (weight) for individual components of suspicion and
displaying the aggregation of evidence pro and contra fraud as a
balance of evidence which is governed by a simple additivity
principle. Compared to unboosted and boosted naive Bayes, the
framework showed slightly better accuracy and AUC but clearly
improved on the cross entropy and Brier scores. It is also readily
accessible and naturally interpretable decision support and allows
for flexible human expert interaction and tuning on an automobile
insurance dataset.
Decision trees, rule induction, and case-based reasoning have also
been used. Fan introduced systematic data selection to
mine concept-drifting, possibly insufficient, data streams. The
paper proposed a framework to select the optimal model from four
different models (based on old data chunk only, new data chunk
only, new data chunk with selected old data, and old and new data
chunks). The selected old data is the examples which both optimal
models at the consecutive time steps predict correctly. The crossvalidated decision tree ensemble is consistently better than all
other decision tree classifiers and weighted averaging ensembles
under all concept-drifting data chunk sizes, especially when the
new data chunk size of the credit card transactions are small. With
the same credit card data as Fan , Wang et al 
demonstrates a pruned classifier C4.5 ensemble which is derived
by weighting each base classifier according to its expected
benefits and then averaging their outputs. The authors show that
the ensemble will most likely perform better than a single
classifier which uses exponential weighted average to emphasise
more influence on recent data.
Rosset et al presents a two-stage rules-based fraud
detection system which first involves generating rules using a
modified C4.5 algorithm. Next, it involves sorting rules based on
accuracy of customer level rules, and selecting rules based on
coverage of fraud of customer rules and difference between
behavioural level rules. It was applied to a telecommunications
subscription fraud. Bonchi et al used boosted C5.0
algorithm on tax declarations of companies. Shao et al 
applied a variant of C4.5 for customs fraud detection.
Case-based reasoning (CBR) was used by Wheeler and Aitken
 to analyse the hardest cases which have been misclassified
by existing methods and techniques. Retrieval was performed by
thresholded nearest neighbour matching. Diagnosis utilised
multiple selection criteria (probabilistic curve, best match,
negative selection, density selection, and default) and resolution
strategies (sequential resolution-default, best guess, and combined
confidence) which analysed the retrieved cases. The authors
claimed that CBR had 20% higher true positive and true negative
rates than common algorithms on credit applications.
Statistical modelling such as regression has been extensively
utilised. Foster and Stine use least squares regression and
stepwise selection of predictors to show that standard statistical
methods are competitive. Their version of fully automatic
stepwise regression has three useful modifications: firstly,
organises calculations to accommodate interactions; secondly,
exploits modern decision-theoretic criteria to choose predictors;
thirdly, conservatively estimate p-values to handle sparse data and
a binary response before calibrating regression predictions. If cost
of false negative is much higher than a false positive, their
regression model obtained significantly lesser misclassification
costs than C4.5 for telecommunications bankruptcy prediction.
Belhadji et al chooses the best indicators (attributes) of
fraud by first querying domain experts, second calculating
conditional probabilities of fraud for each indicator and third
Probit regressions to determine most significant indicators. The
authors also use Prohit regressions to predict fraud and adjusts the
threshold to suit company fraud policy on automobile property
damages. Artis et al compares a multinomial logit model
(MNL) and nested multinomial logit model (NMNL) on a
multiclass classification problem. Both models provide estimated
conditional probabilities for the three classes but NMNL uses the
two step estimation for its nested choice decision tree. It was
applied to automobile insurance data. Mercer described
least-squares stepwise regression analysis for anomaly detection
on aggregated employee’s applications data.
Other techniques include expert systems, association rules, and
genetic programming. Expert systems have been applied to
insurance fraud. Major and Riedinger have implemented
an actual five-layer expert system in which expert knowledge is
integrated with statistical information assessment to identify
medical insurance fraud. Pathak et al , Stefano and Gisella
 and Von Altrock have experimented on fuzzy
expert systems. Deshmukh and Talluru applied an expert
system to management fraud. Chiu and Tsai introduce a
Fraud Patterns Mining (FPM) algorithm, modified from Apriori,
to mine a common format for fraud-only credit card data. Bentley
 uses genetic programming with fuzzy logic to create rules
for classifying data. This system was tested on real home
insurance claims and credit card transaction data
 . None of these papers on expert systems,
association rules, and genetic programming provide any direct
comparisons with the many other available methods and
techniques.
The above supervised algorithms are conventional learning
techniques which can only process structured data from single 1to-1 data tables. Further research using labelled data in fraud
detection can benefit from applying relational learning approaches
such as Inductive Logic Programming (ILP) and simple homophily-based classifiers on relational databases. Perlich and Provost 
also present novel target-dependent aggregation methods for
converting the relational learning problem into a conventional
Hybrid Approaches with Labelled Data
Supervised Hybrids (A + B + C + D)
Popular supervised algorithms such as neural networks, Bayesian
networks, and decision trees have been combined or applied in a
sequential fashion to improve results. Chan et al utilises
naive Bayes, C4.5, CART, and RIPPER as base classifiers and
stacking to combine them. They also examine bridging
incompatible data sets from different companies and the pruning
of base classifiers. The results indicate high cost savings and
better efficiency on credit card transactions. Phua et al 
proposes backpropagation neural networks, naive Bayes, and C4.5
as base classifiers on data partitions derived from minority
oversampling with replacement. Its originality lies in the use of a
single meta-classifier (stacking) to choose the best base classifiers,
and then combine these base classifiers’ predictions (bagging) to
produce the best cost savings on automobile insurance claims.
Ormerod et al recommends a rule generator to refine the
weights of the Bayesian network. Kim and Kim propose a
decision tree to partition the input space, tanh as a weighting
function to generate fraud density, and subsequently a
backpropagation neural network to generate a weighted suspicion
score on credit card transactions.
Also, He et al propose genetic algorithms to determine
optimal weights of the attributes, followed by k-nearest neighbour
algorithm to classify the general practitioner data. They claim
significantly better results than without feature weights and when
compared to CBR.
Supervised/Unsupervised Hybrids propose the use of
signatures (telecommunication account summaries) which are
updated daily (time-driven). Fraudulent signatures are added to
the training set and processed by supervised algorithms such as
atree, slipper, and model-averaged regression. The authors remark
that fraudulent toll-free numbers tend to have extensive late night
activity and long call durations. Cortes and Pregibon use
signatures assumed to be legitimate to detect significant changes
in calling behaviour. Association rules is used to discover
interesting country combinations and temporal information from
the previous month. A graph-theoretic method 
is used to visually detect communities of interest of fraudulent
international call accounts (see Section 4.5). Cahill et al 
assign an averaged suspicion score to each call (event-driven)
based on its similarity to fraudulent signatures and dissimilarity to
its account’s normal signature. Calls with low scores are used
to update the signature and recent calls are weighted more heavily
than earlier ones in the signature.
Fawcett and Provost present fraud rule generation from
each cloned phone account’s labelled data and rule selection to
cover most accounts. Each selected fraud rule is applied in the
form of monitors (number and duration of calls) to the daily
legitimate usage of each account to find anomalies. The selected
monitors’ output and labels on an account’s previous daily
behaviour are used as training data for a simple Linear Threshold
Unit. An alarm will be raised on that account if the suspicion
score on the next evaluation day exceeds its threshold. In terms of
cost savings and accuracy, this method performed better than
other methods such as expert systems, classifiers trained without
account context, high usage, collision detection, velocity
telecommunications superimposed fraud.
Two studies on telecommunications data show that supervised
approaches achieve better results than unsupervised ones. With
AUC as the performance measure, Moreau et al show that
supervised neural network
and rule induction algorithms
outperform two forms of unsupervised neural networks which
identify differences between short-term and long-term statistical
account behaviour profiles. The best results are from a hybrid
model which combines these four techniques using logistic
regression. Using true positive rate with no false positives as the
performance measure, Taniguchi et al
 claim that
supervised neural networks and Bayesian networks on labelled
data achieve significantly better outcomes than unsupervised
techniques such as Gaussian mixture models on each non-fraud
user to detect anomalous phone calls.
Unsupervised approaches have been used to segment the
insurance data into clusters for supervised approaches. Williams
and Huang applies a three step process: k-means for cluster
detection, C4.5 for decision tree rule induction, and domain
knowledge, statistical summaries and visualisation tools for rule
evaluation. Williams use a genetic algorithm, instead of
C4.5, to generate rules and to allow the domain user, such as a
fraud specialist, to explore the rules and to allow them to evolve
accordingly on medical insurance claims. Brockett et al 
present a similar methodology utilising the Self Organising Maps
(SOM) for cluster detection before backpropagation neural
networks in automobile injury claims. Cox uses an
unsupervised neural network followed by a neuro-fuzzy
classification system to monitor medical providers’ claims.
Unconventional hybrids include the use of backpropagation
neural networks, followed by SOMs to analyse the classification
results on medical providers’ claims and RBF
neural networks to check the results of association rules for credit
card transactions .
Semi-supervised Approaches with Only
Legal (Non-fraud) Data (C)
Kim et al implements a novel fraud detection method in
five steps: First, generate rules randomly using association rules
algorithm Apriori and increase diversity by a calender schema;
second, apply rules on known legitimate transaction database,
discard any rule which matches this data; third, use remaining
rules to monitor actual system, discard any rule which detects no
anomalies; fourth, replicate any rule which detects anomalies by
adding tiny random mutations; and fifth, retain the successful
rules. This system has been and currently being tested for internal
fraud by employees within the retail transaction processing
Murad and Pinkas use profiling at call, daily, and overall
levels of normal behaviour from each telecommunications
The common daily profiles are extracted using a
clustering algorithm with cumulative distribution distance
function. An alert is raised if the daily profile’s call duration,
destination, and quantity exceed the threshold and standard
deviation of the overall profile. Aleskerov et al experiment
with auto-associative neural networks (one hidden layer and the
same number of input and output neurons) on each credit card
account’s legal transactions. Kokkinaki proposes similarity
trees (decision trees with Boolean logic functions) to profile each
legitimate customer’s behaviour to detect deviations from the
norm and cluster analysis to segregate each legitimate customer’s
credit card transactions.
Unsupervised Approaches with
Unlabelled Data (A + C + E + F)
Link analysis and graph mining are hot research topics in antiterrorism, law enforcement, and other security areas, but these
techniques seem to be relatively under-rated in fraud detection
research. A white paper describes how the
emergent group algorithm is used to form groups of tightly
connected data and how it led to the capture of an actual elusive
fraudster by visually analysing twelve months worth of insurance
claims. There is a brief application description of a visual
telecommunications fraud detection system which
flexibly encodes data using colour, position, size and other visual
characteristics with multiple different views and levels. The
intuition is to combine human detection with machine
computation.
Cortes et al examines temporal evolution of large dynamic
graphs’ for telecommunications fraud detection. Each graph is
made up of subgraphs called Communities Of Interest (COI). To
overcome instability of using just the current graph, and storage
and weightage problems of using all graphs at all time steps; the
authors used the exponential weighted average approach to update
subgraphs daily. By linking mobile phone accounts using call
quantity and durations to form COIs, the authors confirm two
distinctive characteristics of fraudsters. First, fraudulent phone
accounts are linked - fraudsters call each other or the same phone
numbers. Second, fraudulent call behaviour from flagged frauds
are reflected in some new phone accounts - fraudsters retaliate
with application fraud/identity crime after being detected. Cortes
et al states their contribution to dynamic graph research in
the areas of scale, speed, dynamic updating, condensed
representation of the graph, and measure direct interaction
between nodes.
Some forms of unsupervised neural networks have been applied.
Dorronsoro et al creates a non-linear discriminant analysis
algorithm which do not need labels. It minimises the ratio of the
determinants of the within and between class variances of weight
projections. There is no history on each credit card account’s past
transactions, so all transactions have to be segregated into
different geographical locations. The authors explained that the
installed detection system has low false positive rates, high cost
savings, and high computational efficiency. Burge and Shawe-
Taylor use a recurrent neural network to form short-term
and long-term statistical account behaviour profiles. Hellinger
distance is used to compare the two probability distributions and
give a suspicion score on telecommunications toll tickets.
In addition to cluster analysis (Section 4.3.2), unsupervised
approaches such as outlier detection, spike detection, and other
forms of scoring have been applied. Yamanishi et al 
demonstrated the unsupervised SmartSifter algorithm which can
handle both categorical and continuous variables, and detect
statistical outliers using Hellinger distance, on medical insurance
Bolton and Hand recommend Peer Group Analysis to
monitor inter-account behaviour over time. It compares the
cumulative mean weekly amount between a target account and
other similar accounts (peer group) at subsequent time points. The
distance metric/suspicion score is a t-statistic which determines
the standardised distance from the centroid of the peer group. The
time window to calculate peer group is thirteen weeks and future
time window is four weeks on credit card accounts. Bolton and
Hand also suggest Break Point Analysis to monitor intraaccount behaviour over time. It detects rapid spending or sharp
increases in weekly spending within a single account. Accounts
are ranked by the t-test. The fixed-length moving transaction
window contains twenty-four transactions: first twenty for training
and next four for evaluation on credit card accounts.
Brockett et al recommends Principal Component Analysis
of RIDIT scores for rank-ordered categorical attributes on
automobile insurance data.
Hollmen and Tresp present an experimental real-time fraud
detection system based on a Hidden Markov Model (HMM).
Critique of Methods and Techniques
In most scenarios of real-world fraud detection, the choice of
data mining techniques is more dependent on the practical
issues of operational requirements, resource constraints, and
management commitment towards reduction of fraud than the
technical issues poised by the data.
Other novel commercial fraud detection techniques include
graph-theoretic anomaly detection2 and Inductive Logic
Programming3. There has not been any empirical evaluation of
commercial data mining tools for fraud detection since Abbott
et al .
Only seven studies claim to be implemented (or had been) as
actual fraud detection systems: in insurance , in credit card , and in telecommunications
 . Few fraud
detection studies which explicitly utilise temporal information
and virtually none use spatial information.
There is too much emphasis by research on complex, nonlinear supervised algorithms such as neural networks and
support vector machines. In the long term, less complex and
faster algorithms such as naive Bayes and
logistic regression will produce equal, if not
better results (see Section 3.2), on population-drifting,
concept-drifting, adversarial-ridden data. If the incoming data
stream has to be processed immediately in an event-driven
system or labels are not readily available, then semisupervised and unsupervised approaches are the only data
mining options.
Other related data mining techniques covered by survey
papers and bibliographies include outlier detection , skewed/imbalanced/rare classes4 , sampling , cost sensitive
learning5, stream mining6, graph mining , and scalability .
5. OTHER ADVERSARIAL DOMAINS
This section explains the relationship between fraud detection
three other similar domains.
Terrorist Detection
There had been simplistic technical critiques of data mining for
terrorist detection such as low accuracy (unacceptably high false
positive rates in skewed data) and serious privacy violations
(massive information requirements). To counter them, Jensen et al
 recommend fixed-size clustering to generate true class
labels and the linked structure of data. Scores are randomly drawn
from either the negative or positive entities’ normal distributions.
The second-round classifier averages an entity’s first-round score
and scores of all its neighbours. To reduce false positives, results
show that second-round classifier reduces false positive rates
while maintaining true positive rates of first-round classifier. To
reduce information requirements, results show moderately high
accuracy through the use of only twenty percent of the data.
Surveillance systems for terrorist, bio-terrorist, and chemoterrorist detection often depend on spatial and spatio-temporal
data. These are unsupervised techniques highly applicable to fraud
detection. Neill and Moore employ Kulldorff’s spatial scan
statistic and the overlap-kd tree data structure. It efficiently finds
the most significant densities from latitude and longitude of
patient’s home in real emergency department, and zip codes in
retail cough and cold medication sales data. Das et al 
utilise Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP)
with Kulldorff’s spatial scan statistic on to detect artificial attacks
from real emergency department’s spatio-temporal data.
Bio-terrorism detection aims to detect irregularities in temporal
data. Similar to fraud detection, data has to be partially simulated
by injecting epidemics, and performance is evaluated with
detection time and number of false positives. Wong et al 
apply Bayesian networks to uncover simulated anthrax attacks
from real emergency department data. Hutwagner et al 
describe the use of cumulative sum of deviations in the Early
Aberration Reporting System (EARS). Goldenberg et al 
use time series analysis to track early symptoms of synthetic
anthrax outbreaks from daily sales of retail medication (throat,
cough, and nasal) and some grocery items (facial tissues, orange
juice, and soup). Other epidemic detection papers include
application of sliding linear regression to usage logs of doctors’
reference database and HMMs to
influenza time series .
Financial Crime Detection
Financial crime here refers to money laundering, violative trading,
and insider trading and the following are brief application
descriptions which correspond to each type of monitoring system
for the United States government. The Financial Crimes
Enforcement Network AI System (FAIS) 
operates with an expert system with Bayesian inference engine to
output suspicion scores and with link analysis to visually examine
selected subjects or accounts. Supervised techniques such as casebased reasoning, nearest neighbour retrieval, and decision trees
were seldom used due to propositional approaches, lack of clearly
labelled positive examples, and scalability issues. Unsupervised
techniques were avoided due to difficulties in deriving appropriate
attributes. It has enabled effectiveness in manual investigations
and gained insights in policy decisions for money laundering.
The National Association of Securities Dealers’ (NASD)
Regulation Advanced Detection System (ADS) uses a rule pattern matcher and a sequence matcher cast in
two- and three- dimensional visualisations to generate breaks or
leads. The rule pattern matcher detects predefined suspicious
behaviours; whilst the sequence matcher finds temporal
relationships between events from market data which exists in a
potential violation pattern. Association rules and decision trees
are used to discover new patterns or refined rules which reflect
behavioural changes in the marketplace. It has been successfully
used to identify and correct potential violative trading on the
NASDAQ National Market. Senator argues that
propositional data mining approaches are not useful for the ADS.
The Securities Observation, News Analysis, and Regulation
(SONAR) uses text mining, statistical
regression, rule-based inference, uncertainty, and fuzzy matching.
It mines for explicit and implicit relationships among the entities
and events, all of which form episodes or scenarios with specific
identifiers. It has been reported to be successful in generating
breaks the main stock markets for insider trading (trading upon
inside information of a material nature) and misrepresentation
fraud (falsified news).
Use of large amounts of unstructured text and web data such as
free-text documents, web pages, emails, and SMS messages, is
common in adversarial domains but still unexplored in fraud
detection literature. Zhang et al presents Link Discovery
on Correlation Analysis (LDCA) which uses a correlation measure
with fuzzy logic to determine similarity of patterns between
thousands of paired textual items which have no explicit links. It
comprises of link hypothesis, link generation, and link
identification based on financial transaction timeline analysis to
generate community models for the prosecution of money
laundering criminals.
Use of new relevant sources of data which can decrease detection
time is another trend in adversarial domains which is lacking in
fraud detection research. Donoho explores the use of C4.5
decision tree, backwards stepwise logistic regression, neural
networks (all learning algorithms with default parameters), expert
systems, and k-means clustering (only on positive instances). It is
for finding early symptoms of insider trading in option markets
before any news release.
Intrusion and Spam Detection
There are multiple data sources for intrusion detection and the
common ones are at host level, network level, and user level. Otey
et al advocates intrusion detection at the secure Network
Interface Cards (NIC) level. Leckie and Yasinsac argue
that in an encrypted environment, intrusion detection can utilise
metadata at the user level. Julisch and Dacier mine
historical alarms to reduce false positives. Shavlik and Shavlik
 monitor Windows® operating systems. Compared to fraud
detection where many studies use real proprietary data, the
benchmark KDD cup 1999 network intrusion detection data is
often used. In addition, semi-real user level data are common, the
“intrusions” are usually simulated using another user data and
“real” part refers to normal computer usage data for each
legitimate user.
In intrusion detection terms, misuse detection is for matching
known attacks (using A of Figure 4.1); and anomaly detection is
for discovering unknown attacks (using C of Figure 4.1 and see
Section 4.4). The current research in both intrusion detection and
spam detection are on anomaly detection (semi-supervised) and
unsupervised approaches. In intrusion detection research, the use
of clustering to reduce data and HMMs for anomaly detection had
been popular. Lane and Brodley detail that k-means to
compress data and report that HMMs performed slightly better
than instance-based learning (IBL) for semi-real user level data.
Similarly, Cho use SOM to decrease data for HMM
modelling. The author show that multiple HMM models with
fuzzy logic can be used to reduce false positive rates. Also, Stolfo
et al advocate Sparse Markov Transducers. However,
Yeung and Ding conclude that simple static approaches,
such as occurrence frequency distributions and cross entropy
between distributions, outperform HMMs.
Other anomaly detection studies trialled with Winnow , RIPPER , Apriori , frequent episodes , attribute-oriented induction ,
and k-means . Most studies conclude
that anomaly detection does not perform as well as misuse
detection. Unsupervised approaches include Hawkins et al 
and Williams et al which advocate replicator neural
networks to detect outliers. To detect spam from the email server,
Yoshida et al encodes email as hash-based text, and avoids
labels through the use of document space density to find large
volumes of similar emails. On a small sample of labelled emails,
the authors comment that SVM is the best supervised algorithm
but the detection time is too long for an event-driven system.
The use of game theory to model the strategic interaction between
the system and adversary has been recently introduced into
intrusion and spam detection research. Patcha and Park 
apply theoretical game theory to account for the interaction
between one attacker and one node to detect intrusions from
mobile ad hoc networks. In spam detection, Dalvi et al 
adapt game theory to automatically re-learn a cost-sensitive
supervised algorithm given the cost-sensitive adversary’s optimal
strategy. It defines the adversary and classifier optimal strategy by
making some valid assumptions. Tested under different false
positives costs, the game-theoretic naive Bayes classifier
outperforms the conventional classifier by efficiently predicting
no false positives with relatively low false negatives.
6. RELATED WORK
Bolton and Hand discuss techniques used in several
subgroups within fraud detection such as credit card and
telecommunications, and related domains such as money
laundering and intrusion detection. Kou et al outline
techniques from credit card, telecommunications, and intrusion
detection. Weatherford recommends backpropagation
neural networks, recurrent neural networks and artificial immune
systems for fraud detection.
This paper examines fraud detection from a practical dataoriented, performance-driven perspective rather than the typical
application-oriented or technique-oriented view of the three other
recent survey papers.
In addition, this survey clearly defines the underlying technical
problems and covers more relevant fraud types, methods, and
techniques than any of the other survey papers. For example,
internal fraud and the various hybrid approaches are presented
here. Also, some criticisms of the current fraud detection field are
given and possible future contributions to data mining-based fraud
detection from related domains are highlighted.
7. CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORK
This survey has explored almost all published fraud detection
studies. It defines the adversary, the types and subtypes of fraud,
the technical nature of data, performance metrics, and the methods
and techniques. After identifying the limitations in methods and
techniques of fraud detection, this paper shows that this field can
benefit from other related fields. Specifically, unsupervised
approaches from counterterrorism work, actual monitoring
systems and text mining from law enforcement, and semisupervised and game-theoretic approaches from intrusion and
spam detection communities can contribute to future fraud
detection research. However, Fawcett and Provost show
that there are no guarantees when they successfully applied their
news story monitoring but
unsuccessfully to intrusion detection. Future work will be in the
form of credit application fraud detection.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research is financially supported by the Australian Research
Council, Baycorp Advantage, and Monash University under
Linkage Grant Number LP0454077. The authors gratefully
acknowledge the detailed comments from Dr. Wong Weng-Keen
and insights provided by Prof. John Galloway.
1 
2 
3 
 
 
6 
7 
REFERENCES7
Matkovsky,
An Evaluation of High-End Data Mining Tools for Fraud
Detection. Proc. of IEEE SMC98.
Aleskerov, E., Freisleben, B. & Rao, B. . CARDWATCH:
A Neural Network-Based Database Mining System for Credit
Card Fraud Detection. Proc. of the IEEE/IAFE on Computational
Intelligence for Financial Engineering, 220-226.
Artis, M., Ayuso M. & Guillen M. . Modelling Different
Types of Automobile Insurance Fraud Behaviour in the Spanish
Market. Insurance Mathematics and Economics 24: 67-81.
Barse, E., Kvarnstrom, H. & Jonsson, E. . Synthesizing
Test Data for Fraud Detection Systems. Proc. of the 19th Annual
Computer Security Applications Conference, 384-395.
Belhadji, E., Dionne, G. & Tarkhani, F. . A Model for the
Detection of Insurance Fraud. The Geneva Papers on Risk and
Insurance 25(4): 517-538.
Bell, T. & Carcello, J. . A Decision Aid for Assessing the
Likelihood of Fraudulent Financial Reporting. Auditing: A
Journal of Practice and Theory 10(1): 271-309.
Beneish, M. . Detecting GAAP Violation: Implications for
Assessing Earnings Management Among Firms with Extreme
Financial Performance. Journal of Accounting and Public Policy
16: 271-309.
Bentley, P. . Evolutionary, my dear Watson: Investigating
Committee-based Evolution of Fuzzy Rules for the Detection of
Suspicious Insurance Claims. Proc. of GECCO2000.
Bentley, P., Kim, J., Jung., G. & Choi, J. . Fuzzy Darwinian
Detection of Credit Card Fraud. Proc. of 14th Annual Fall
Symposium of the Korean Information Processing Society.
Bhargava, B., Zhong, Y., & Lu, Y. . Fraud Formalisation
and Detection. Proc. of DaWaK2003, 330-339.
Bolton, R. & Hand, D. . Statistical Fraud Detection: A
Review (With Discussion). Statistical Science 17(3): 235-255.
Bolton, R. & Hand, D. . Unsupervised Profiling Methods
for Fraud Detection. Credit Scoring and Credit Control VII.
Bonchi, F., Giannotti, F., Mainetto, G., Pedreschi, D. . A
Classification-based
Methodology
Strategies in Fraud Detection. Proc. of SIGKDD99, 175-184.
Brause, R., Langsdorf, T. & Hepp, M. . Neural Data
Mining for Credit Card Fraud Detection. Proc. of 11th IEEE
International Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence.
Brockett, P., Derrig, R., Golden, L., Levine, A. & Alpert, M.
 . Fraud Classification using Principal Component Analysis
of RIDITs. Journal of Risk and Insurance 69(3): 341-371.
Brockett, P., Xia, X. & Derrig, R. . Using Kohonen's Self
Organising Feature Map to Uncover Automobile Bodily Injury
Claims Fraud. Journal of Risk and Insurance 65(2): 245-274.
Burge, P. & Shawe-Taylor, J. . An Unsupervised Neural
Network Approach to Profiling the Behaviour of Mobile Phone
Users for Use in Fraud Detection. Journal of Parallel and
Distributed Computing 61: 915-925.
Cahill, M., Chen, F., Lambert, D., Pinheiro, J. & Sun, D. .
Detecting Fraud in the Real World. Handbook of Massive
Datasets 911-930.
Caruana, R. & Niculescu-Mizil, A. . Data Mining in Metric
Supervised
Performance Criteria. Proc. of SIGKDD04, 69-78.
Chan, P., Fan, W., Prodromidis, A. & Stolfo, S. .
Distributed Data Mining in Credit Card Fraud Detection. IEEE
Intelligent Systems 14: 67-74.
Chen, R., Chiu, M., Huang, Y. & Chen, L. . Detecting
Credit Card Fraud by Using Questionaire-Responded Transaction
Model Based on Support Vector Machines. Proc. of IDEAL2004,
Chiu, C. & Tsai, C. . A Web Services-Based Collaborative
Scheme for Credit Card Fraud Detection. Proc. of 2004 IEEE
International Conference on e-Technology, e-Commerce and e-
Cho, S. . Incorporating Soft Computing Techniques Into a
Probabilitistic Intrusion Detection System. IEEE Transactions on
Systems, Man and Cybernetics 32(2): 154-160.
Cortes, C., Pregibon, D. & Volinsky, C. . Computational
Methods for Dynamic Graphs. Journal of Computational and
Graphical Statistics 12: 950-970.
Cortes, C. & Pregibon, D. . Signature-Based Methods for
Data Streams. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 5: 167-
Cortes, C., Pregibon, D. & Volinsky, C. . Communities of
Interest. Proc. of IDA2001, 105-114.
Cox, K., Eick, S. & Wills, G. . Visual Data Mining:
Recognising Telephone Calling Fraud. Data Mining and
Knowledge Discovery 1: 225-231.
Cox, E. . A Fuzzy System for Detecting Anomalous
Behaviors in Healthcare Provider Claims. In Goonatilake, S. &
Treleaven, P. (eds.) Intelligent Systems for Finance and Business,
111-134. John Wiley and Sons Ltd.
Dalvi, N., Domingos, P., Mausam, Sanghai, P. & Verma, D.
 . Adversarial Classification. Proc.of SIGKDD04, 99-108.
Das, K., Moore, A. & Schneider, J. . Belief State
Approaches to Signaling Alarms in Surveillance Systems. Proc. of
SIGKDD04, 539-544.
Deshmukh, A. & Talluru, T. . A Rule Based Fuzzy
Reasoning System for Assessing the Risk of Management Fraud.
Journal of Intelligent Systems in Accounting, Finance &
Management 7(4): 669-673.
Domingos, C., Gavalda, R. & Watanabe, O. . Adaptive
Sampling Methods for Scaling Up Knowledge Discovery
Algorithms. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 6: 131-152.
Donoho, S. . Early Detection of Insider Trading in Option
Markets. Proc. of SIGKDD04, 420-429.
Dorronsoro, J., Ginel, F., Sanchez, C. & Cruz, C. . Neural
Fraud Detection in Credit Card Operations. IEEE Transactions on
Neural Networks 8(4): 827-834.
Elkan, C. . Magical Thinking in Data Mining: Lessons
from CoIL Challenge 2000. Proc. of SIGKDD01, 426-431.
Ezawa, K. & Norton, S. . Constructing Bayesian Networks
to Predict Uncollectible Telecommunications Accounts. IEEE
Expert October: 45-51.
Fan, W. . Systematic Data Selection to Mine Concept-
Drifting Data Streams. Proc. of SIGKDD04, 128-137.
Fan, W., Miller, M., Stolfo, S., Lee, W. & Chan, P. . Using
Artificial Anomalies to Detect Unknown and Known Network
Intrusions. Proc. of ICDM01, 123-248.
Fanning, K., Cogger, K. & Srivastava, R. . Detection of
Management Fraud: A Neural Network Approach. Journal of
Intelligent Systems in Accounting, Finance and Management 4:
Fawcett, T. . "In Vivo" Spam Filtering: A Challenge
Problem for KDD. SIGKDD Explorations 5(2): 140-148.
Fawcett, T. . AI Approaches to Fraud Detection and Risk
Management: Papers from the 1997 AAAI Workshop. Technical
Report WS-97-07. AAAI Press.
Fawcett, T. & Provost, F. . Activity monitoring: Noticing
Interesting Changes in Behavior. Proc. of SIGKDD99, 53-62.
Fawcett, T. & Provost, F. . Adaptive Fraud Detection.
Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 1(3): 291-316.
Foster, D. & Stine, R. . Variable Selection in Data Mining:
Building a Predictive Model for Bankruptcy. Journal of American
Statistical Association 99: 303-313.
Ghosh, S. & Reilly, D. . Credit Card Fraud Detection with
a Neural Network. Proc. of 27th Hawaii International Conference
on Systems Science 3: 621-630.
Goldberg, H., Kirkland, J., Lee, D., Shyr, P. & Thakker, D.
 . The NASD Securities Observation, News Analysis \&
Regulation System (SONAR). Proc. of IAAI03.
Goldenberg, A., Shmueli, G., Caruana, R. & Fienberg, S. .
Early Statistical Detection of Anthrax Outbreaks by Tracking
Over-the-Counter Medication Sales. Proc. of the National
Academy of Sciences, 5237-5249.
Green, B. & Choi, J. . Assessing the Risk of Management
Fraud through Neural Network Technology. Auditing 16(1): 14-
Hawkins, S., He, H., Williams, G. & Baxter, R. . Outlier
Replicator
DaWaK2002, 170-180.
He, H., Graco, W. & Yao, X. . Application of Genetic
Algorithms and k-Nearest Neighbour Method in Medical Fraud
Detection. Proc. of SEAL1998, 74-81.
He, H., Wang, J., Graco, W. & Hawkins, S. . Application
of Neural Networks to Detection of Medical Fraud. Expert
Systems with Applications 13: 329-336.
Heino, J. & Toivonen, H. . Automated Detection of
Epidemics from Usage Logs of a Physicians' Reference Database.
Proc. of PKDD2003, 180-191.
Hodge, V. & Austin, J. . A Survey of Outlier Detection
Methodologies. Artificial Intelligence Review 22: 85-126.
Hollmen, J. & Tresp, V. . Call-based Fraud detection in
Mobile Communication Networks using a Hierarchical Regime-
Switching Model. Proc. of Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems.
Hutwagner, L., Thompson, W. & Seeman, M. . The
Bioterrorism Preparedness and Response Early Abberation
Reporting System (EARS). Journal of Urban Health: Bulletin of
the New York Academy of Medicine 80(2): 89-96.
Jensen, D., Rattigan, M. & Blau, H. . Information
Awareness: A Prospective Technical Assessment. Proc. of
SIGKDD03, 378-387.
Julisch, K. & Dacier, M. . Mining Intrusion Detection
Alarms for Actionable Knowledge. Proc. of SIGKDD02, 366-375.
Kim, H., Pang, S., Je, H., Kim, D. & Bang, S. .
Constructing Support Vector Machine Ensemble. Pattern
Recognition 36: 2757-2767.
Kim, J., Ong, A. & Overill, R. . Design of an Artificial
Immune System as a Novel Anomaly Detector for Combating
Financial Fraud in Retail Sector. Congress on Evolutionary
Computation.
Kim, M. & Kim, T. . A Neural Classifier with Fraud
Density Map for Effective Credit Card Fraud Detection. Proc. of
IDEAL2002, 378-383.
Kirkland, D., Senator, T., Hayden, J., Dybala, T., Goldberg, H. &
Shyr, P. . The NASD Regulation Advanced Detection
System. AAAI 20(1): Spring, 55-67.
Kokkinaki, A. . On Atypical Database Transactions:
Identification of Probable Frauds using Machine Learning for
User Profiling. Proc. of IEEE Knowledge and Data Engineering
Exchange Workshop, 107-113.
Kou, Y., Lu, C., Sirwongwattana, S., & Huang, Y. . Survey
of Fraud Detection Techniques. Proc. of the 2004 International
Conference on Networking, Sensing, and Control, 749-754.
Lane, T. & Brodley, C. . An Empirical Study of Two
Approaches to Sequence Learning for Anomaly Detection.
Machine Learning 51:73-107.
Lavrac, N., Motoda, H., Fawcett, T., Holte, R., Langley, P. &
Adriaans, P. . Introduction: Lessons Learned from Data
Mining Applications and Collaborative Problem Solving.
Machine Learning 57(1-2): 13-34.
Leckie, T. & Yasinsac, A. . Metadata for Anomaly-Based
Security Protocol Attack Deduction. IEEE Transactions on
Knowledge and Data Engineering 16(9): 1157-1168.
Lee, W. & Xiang, D. . Information-theoretic Measures for
Anomaly Detection. Proc. of 2001 IEEE Symposium on Security
and Privacy.
Lim, T., Loh, W. & Shih, Y. . A Comparison of Prediction
Accuracy, Complexity, and Training Time for Thirty-Three Old
and New Classification Algorithms. Machine Learning 40: 203-
Lin, J., Hwang, M. & Becker, J. . A Fuzzy Neural Network
for Assessing the Risk of Fraudulent Financial Reporting.
Managerial Auditing Journal 18(8): 657-665.
Little, B., Johnston, W., Lovell, A., Rejesus, R. & Steed, S.
 . Collusion in the US Crop Insurance Program: Applied
Data Mining. Proc. of SIGKDD02, 594-598.
Maes, S., Tuyls, K., Vanschoenwinkel, B. & Manderick, B.
 . Credit Card Fraud Detection using Bayesian and Neural
Networks. Proc. of the 1st International NAISO Congress on
Neuro Fuzzy Technologies.
Riedinger,
Knowledge/Statistical-based system for the Detection of Fraud.
Journal of Risk and Insurance 69(3): 309-324.
McGibney, J. & Hearne, S. . An Approach to Rules-based
Fraud Management in Emerging Converged Networks. Proc. of
IEI/IEEE ITSRS 2003.
Mercer, L. . Fraud Detection via Regression Analysis.
Computers and Security 9: 331-338.
Moreau, Y., Lerouge, E., Verrelst, H., Vandewalle, J., Stormann,
C. & Burge, P. . BRUTUS: A Hybrid System for Fraud
Detection in Mobile Communications. Proc. of European
Symposium on Artificial Neural Networks, 447-454.
Moreau, Y. & Vandewalle, J. . Detection of Mobile Phone
Fraud Using Supervised Neural Networks: A First Prototype.
Proc. of 1997 International Conference on Artificial Neural
Networks, 1065-1070.
Muggleton, S.
& DeRaedt L. . Inductive Logic
Programming:
Programming 19/20: 629-680.
Murad, U. & Pinkas, G. . Unsupervised Profiling for
Identifying Superimposed Fraud. Proc. of PKDD99.
Neill, D. & Moore, A. . Rapid Detection of Significant
Spatial Clusters. Proc. of SIGKDD04, 256-265.
Netmap. . Fraud and Crime Example Brochure.
Nigrini, M. . Fraud Detection: I Have Got Your Number.
Journal of Accountancy 187: 79-83.
Ormerod, T., Morley, N., Ball, L., Langley, C. & Spenser, C.
 . Using Ethnography to Design a Mass Detection Tool
(MDT) for the Early Discovery of Insurance Fraud. Proc. of ACM
CHI Conference.
Otey, M., Parthasarathy, S., Ghoting, A., Li, G., Narravula, S. &
Panda, D. . Towards NIC-based Intrusion Detection. Proc.
of SIGKDD03, 723-728.
Patcha, A. & Park, J. . A Game Theoretic Approach to
Modeling Intrusion Detection in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks. Proc.
of 2004 IEEE Workshop on Information Assurance and Security,
Pathak, J., Vidyarthi, N. & Summers, S. . A Fuzzy-based
Algorithm for Auditors to Detect Element of Fraud in Settled
Insurance Claims, Odette School of Business Administration.
Perlich, C. & Provost F. . Aggregation-based Feature
Invention and Relational Concept Classes. Proc. of SIGKDD03,
Phua, C., Alahakoon, D. & Lee, V. . Minority Report in
Fraud Detection: Classification of Skewed Data, SIGKDD
Explorations 6(1): 50-59.
Provost, F., Perlich, C. & Macskassy, S. . Relational
Learning Problems and Simple Models. Proc. of the IJCAI2003
Workshop on Learning Statistical Models from Relational Data.
Provost, F. & Kolluri, V. . A Survey of Methods for
Scaling Up Inductive Algorithms. Data Mining and Knowledge
Discovery 3(2): 131-169.
Rath, T., Carreras, M. & Sebastiani, P. . Automated
Detection of Influenza Epidemics with Hidden Markov Models.
Proc. of IDA2003, 521-532.
Rosset, S., Murad, U., Neumann, E., Idan, Y. & Pinkas, G.
 . Discovery of Fraud Rules for Telecommunications -
Challenges and Solutions. Proc. of SIGKDD99, 409-413.
Senator, T. . Ongoing Management and Application of
Discovered Knowledge in a Large Regulatory Organization: A
Case Study of the Use and Impact of NASD Regulation's
Advanced Detection System (ADS). Proc. of SIGKDD00, 44-53.
Senator, T., Goldberg, H., Wooton, J., Cottini, M., Khan, U.,
Klinger, C., Llamas, W., Marrone, M. & Wong, R. . The
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network AI System (FAIS). AAAI
16(4): Winter, 21-39.
Sequeira, K. & Zaki, M. . ADMIT: Anomaly-based Data
Mining for Intrusions. Proc. of SIGKDD02, 386-395.
Shao, H., Zhao, H. & Chang, G. . Applying Data Mining to
Detect Fraud Behaviour in Customs Declaration. Proc. of 1st
International Conference on Machine Learning and Cybernetics,
1241-1244.
Shavlik, J. & Shavlik, M. . Selection, Combination, and
Evaluation of Effective Software Sensors for Detecting Abnormal
Computer Usage. Proc. of SIGKDD04, 276-285.
Sherman, E. . Fighting Web Fraud. Newsweek June 10.
Stefano, B. & Gisella, F. . Insurance Fraud Evaluation: A
Fuzzy Expert System. Proc. of IEEE International Fuzzy Systems
Conference, 1491-1494.
Stolfo, S., Lee, W., Chan, P., Fan, W. & Eskin, E. . Data
Mining-Based Intrusion Detectors: An Overview of the Columbia
IDS Project. SIGMOD Record 30(4): 5-14.
Summers, S. & Sweeney, J. . Fraudulently Misstated
Financial Statements and Insider Trading: An Empirical Analysis.
The Accounting Review January: 131-146.
Syeda, M., Zhang, Y. & Pan, Y. . Parallel Granular Neural
Networks for Fast Credit Card Fraud Detection. Proc. of the 2002
IEEE International Conference on Fuzzy Systems.
Taniguchi, M., Haft, M., Hollmen, J. & Tresp, V. . Fraud
Detection in Communication Networks using Neural and
Probabilistic Methods. Proc. of 1998 IEEE International
Conference in Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, 1241-
Viaene, S., Derrig, R., Baesens, B. & Dedene, G. . A
Comparison of State-of-the-Art Classification Techniques for
Expert Automobile Insurance Claim Fraud Detection. Journal of
Risk and Insurance 69(3): 373-421.
Viaene, S., Derrig, R. & Dedene, G. . A Case Study of
Applying Boosting Naive Bayes to Claim Fraud Diagnosis. IEEE
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 16(5): 612-
Von Altrock, C. . Fuzzy Logic and Neurofuzzy
Applications in Business and Finance. 286-294. Prentice Hall.
Wang, H., Fan, W., Yu, P. & Han, J . Mining Concept-
Drifting Data Streams Using Ensemble Classifiers. Proc. of
SIGKDD03, 226-235.
Washio, T. & Motoda, H. . State of the Art of Graph-based
Data Mining. SIGKDD Explorations 5(1): 61-70.
Weatherford, M. . Mining for Fraud. IEEE Intelligent
Systems July/August: 4-6.
Weiss, G. . Mining with Rarity: A Unifying Framework.
SIGKDD Explorations 6(1): 7-19.
Wheeler, R. & Aitken, S. . Multiple Algorithms for Fraud
Detection. Knowledge-Based Systems 13(3): 93-99.
Williams, G., Baxter, R., He, H. & Hawkins, S. . A
Comparative Study of RNN for Outlier Detection in Data Mining.
Proc. of ICDM02, 709-712.
Williams, G. . Evolutionary Hot Spots Data Mining: An
Architecture for Exploring for Interesting Discoveries. Proc. of
Williams, G. & Huang, Z. . Mining the Knowledge Mine:
The Hot Spots Methodology for Mining Large Real World
Databases. Proc. of the 10th Australian Joint Conference on
Artificial Intelligence.
Wong, W., Moore, A., Cooper, G. & Wagner, M. .
Bayesian Network Anomaly Pattern Detection for Detecting
Disease Outbreaks. Proc. of ICML03, 217-223.
Yamanishi, K., Takeuchi, J., Williams, G. & Milne, P. .
On-Line Unsupervised Outlier Detection Using Finite Mixtures
with Discounting Learning Algorithms. Data Mining and
Knowledge Discovery 8: 275-300.
Yeung, D. & Ding, Y. . User Profiling for Intrusion
Detection Using Dynamic and Static Behavioural Models. Proc.
of PAKDD2002, 494-505.
Yoshida, K., Adachi, F., Washio, T., Motoda, H., Homma, T.,
Nakashima, A., Fujikawa, H. & Yamazaki, K. . Density-
Based Spam Detector. Proc. of SIGKDD04, 486-493.
Zhang, M., Salerno, J. & Yu, P. . Applying Data Mining in
Investigating Money Laundering Crimes. Proc. of SIGKDD03,