American Journal of Epidemiology
ª The Author 2009. Published by the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health.
All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: .
Vol. 169, No. 9
DOI: 10.1093/aje/kwp015
Advance Access publication March 6, 2009
Practice of Epidemiology
Estimating the Effects of Potential Public Health Interventions on Population
Disease Burden: A Step-by-Step Illustration of Causal Inference Methods
Jennifer Ahern, Alan Hubbard, and Sandro Galea
Initially submitted March 26, 2008; accepted for publication January 13, 2009.
Causal inference methods allow estimation of the effects of potential public health interventions on the population burden of disease. Motivated by calls for epidemiologic research to be presented in ways that are more
informative for intervention, the authors present a didactic discussion of the steps required to estimate the population effect of a potential intervention using an imputation-based causal inference method and discuss the
assumptions of and limitations to its use. An analysis of neighborhood smoking norms and individual smoking
behavior is used as an illustration. The implementation steps include the following: 1) modeling the adjusted
exposure and outcome association, 2) imputing the outcome probability for each individual while manipulating
the exposure by ‘‘setting’’ it to different values, 3) averaging these probabilities across the population, and
4) bootstrapping conﬁdence intervals. Imputed probabilities represent counterfactual estimates of the population
smoking prevalence if neighborhood smoking norms could be manipulated through intervention. The degree to
which temporal ordering, randomization, stability, and experimental treatment assignment assumptions are met in
the illustrative example is discussed, along with ways that future studies could be designed to better meet the
assumptions. With this approach, the potential effects of an intervention targeting neighborhoods, individuals, or
other units can be estimated.
causality; intervention studies; methods; population; residence characteristics; smoking; social environment
Abbreviations: GEE, generalized estimating equation; OR, odds ratio.
Most analyses of epidemiologic data apply a regression
model such as linear or logistic regression. These models
have in common that they estimate differences (relative or
absolute) between outcomes (in terms of rates, risks, odds,
or prevalences) associated with variations in exposure, while
holding constant a set of covariates (1–3). These models
estimate differences in outcomes that are stratum speciﬁc,
because they are estimated within strata of the covariates
speciﬁed in the model. Although such ﬁndings constitute
the backbone of modern epidemiologic research (3), they
represent only 1 approach to capturing the association between an exposure and an outcome. This approach tells us
little about population disease burden or about how the disease burden might change if the exposure were modiﬁed.
One alternate approach, which could be more informative, would assess how a particular potential intervention on
the exposure being studied might reduce disease burden
across the population (2, 4). Several methods can estimate
population parameters under hypothetical interventions. In
simple situations, standardization can estimate a populationlevel causal effect (5, 6). Certain causal inference methods
generalize standardization to situations with covariates that
are continuous as well as categorical, covariates that are
time dependent, models that include multiplicative interactions, and nonlinear model forms (5–10). Although many
causal inference methods were developed to control timedependent confounding, the machinery allows the estimation
of population parameters under hypothetical interventions
for cross-sectional studies. Causal inference analyses of
epidemiologic data start with the speciﬁcation of a causal
effect that is of interest. The population average causal effect is speciﬁed as the difference in the outcome (e.g., the
Correspondence to Dr. Jennifer Ahern, School of Public Health, University of California, Berkeley, 101 Haviland Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720-7358
(e-mail: ).
Am J Epidemiol 2009;169:1140–1147
proportion of the population with a health outcome) that
would have been observed in the population if there had
been 1 intervention implemented as opposed to another
(or to no intervention), with all else being equal. This is
done by estimating different counterfactual distributions of
exposures and outcomes (7, 11, 12).
There have been recent calls for epidemiologic research to
be conducted or presented in ways that are more informative
for those considering intervention (4, 13–18). Although
some recent publications have clearly described aspects of
using causal inference methods for estimating intervention
effects (6, 7, 19–23), we are not aware of any publication
that combines discussion of the theoretical utility of these
methods, the details of steps required for implementation,
and consideration of the assumptions and limitations underlying these methods that is accessible to a broad readership.
In this didactic piece, we use an imputation-based causal
inference method. Although imputation has long been used
to ﬁll in missing data on observed subjects (24), in this
setting imputation is used to ﬁll in missing counterfactual
observations of subjects observed in only 1 exposure state.
This general technique has been called the ‘‘g-computation
algorithm’’ in the longitudinal setting and has been discussed in statistical detail elsewhere (8, 25). It is our goal
in this paper to present an intuitive and practical discussion
of this approach that illuminates the utility of this method for
estimating changes in the distribution outcomes that might
be of interest when considering speciﬁc potential interventions, the steps required for implementation, and some of the
assumptions of and limitations to its use.
We use an analysis of neighborhood smoking norms and
individual smoking behavior to illustrate the application of
these methods. The estimation methods applied here allow
us to examine how the distribution of smoking would be
different in the population if we were able to change neighborhood smoking norms.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Data source
We illustrate the application of these methods using data
from the New York Social Environment Study, a multilevel
study designed to examine neighborhood-level exposures
that include economic, social, and structural characteristics
and substance use in New York, New York (referred to hereafter as ‘‘New York City’’). The New York Social Environment Study was conducted between June and December
2005. Random digit dialing methods were used to contact
and interview 4,000 New York City residents. One randomly
selected adult 18 years or older was interviewed by telephone in each household.
Smoking behavior was assessed from each respondent by
using the tobacco module in the World Mental Health Comprehensive International Diagnostic Interview (26, 27).
Neighborhood smoking norms were measured with a question modiﬁed from the National Survey on Drug Use and
Health (28). The neighborhood measure is the proportion of
residents who believe it is ‘‘unacceptable’’ for adults to
smoke cigarettes regularly in each neighborhood.
Respondents provided their residential address or nearest
cross-streets so that their locations could be geocoded and
linked to their neighborhoods of residence. The neighborhood units for this analysis were the 59 community districts
in New York City. Further details about the New York Social
Environment Study are available elsewhere (29, 30).
Analysis step 1
The ﬁrst step in this analysis was to estimate the association between the exposure, neighborhood smoking norms,
and the outcome, current smoking. A full elaboration of this
and other related analyses is the subject of another paper
(30). For illustrative purposes here, the details of 1 model
are presented in Table 1. Brieﬂy, a generalized estimating
equation (GEE) logistic regression model with an exchangeable working correlation was used to account for potential
clustering by neighborhood and to estimate the association
between neighborhood smoking norms and individual
smoking (31–33). (If the model is linear, GEE, random effects, or simple linear regression models could all be used to
estimate the association of interest in step 1. If the model is
logistic, GEE or simple logistic models can be used in
a straightforward way because they both produce marginal
estimates. With a random effects logistic model, the predicted values produced in step 2 need to incorporate the predicted value of the random effect for each neighborhood,
because random effects models produce neighborhoodspeciﬁc estimates). In this model, we adjusted for confounders
and included interaction terms based on an hypothesis posed
in the original analysis that the effects of neighborhood
smoking norms on smoking would vary depending on individuals’ smoking history (30). We found an inverse association between more prohibitive neighborhood smoking
norms and current smoking, and there was an interaction
between smoking norms and history of smoking. For those
with no history of smoking before living in their current
neighborhood, the reference group in this model, there was
the strongest protective effect of antismoking norms on
smoking (odds ratio (OR) ¼ e(norms beta3(standard deviation32)) ¼
e(0.6883 (0.09632)) ¼ 0.27 for a 2-standard deviation increase
in the strength of antismoking norms). However, among those
who tried smoking before living in the current neighborhood
but never smoked regularly, there was almost no association
(OR ¼ e(norms beta3(standard deviation32) þ tried smoking3norms
interaction beta3(standard deviation32)) ¼ e(0.6883(0.09632) þ 6.483
(0.09632)) ¼ 0.93). Similarly, there was essentially no association with neighborhood smoking norms among those who
smoked weekly (OR ¼ 1.14) or daily (OR ¼ 0.90) before
living in the current neighborhood. As with any multivariable
logistic model, this model presents the separate contributions
of each covariate to the odds of smoking; for example, men
had 2.09 times the odds of smoking compared with women,
and those with less than a high school education had 2.70
times the odds of smoking compared with those who had
done graduate work.
These results highlight the 2 central reasons why this
type of analysis falls short when the interest is in the effect
of a speciﬁc potential intervention on the population levels
of the outcome. First, neighborhood smoking norms are
Estimating Intervention Effects on Disease Burden
Am J Epidemiol 2009;169:1140–1147
associated with individual smoking behavior only among
those with no history of smoking; we cannot tell what
effect changing norms would have on the whole population
because only some persons in the population would be
affected. This analysis does not incorporate both the differences in impacts of the exposure on subgroups and how
common the subgroups are in the population. Second, each
covariate in the multivariable model makes its contribution to the odds of smoking by an individual. However,
each covariate’s separate contribution gives the reader no
sense of how these ‘‘bits’’ of risk accumulate for any given
individual in predicting his/her overall probability of
being a smoker or for the population overall in predicting
smoking levels.
Analysis step 2
Moving beyond ‘‘bits’’ of risk, the second step was to use
the model from step 1 to impute the probabilities of smoking
for each individual in the data set incorporating all of the
individual’s particular characteristics. These probabilities
were estimated while ‘‘setting’’ or ﬁxing the neighborhood
Generalized Estimating Equation Logistic Regression
Model of the Association Between Neighborhood Smoking
Norms and Individual Current Smoking, New York, New York,
Neighborhood smoking norms
Smoking before moved to
neighborhood
Never smoked
Ever smoked/tried smoking
Weekly smoker
Daily smoker
Age, years
African American
Marital status
Never married
Table continues
Birthplace
New York, New York
Other US location
Different country
Survey language
Years lived in neighborhood
$40,001–$80,000
Graduate work
College graduate
Some college
High school/GED
Less than high school
Unemployed
Smoking history 3 smoking norms
Never smoked 3 smoking norm
Tried smoking 3 smoking norm
Weekly smoker 3 smoking norm
Daily smoker 3 smoking norm
Abbreviations: GED, general equivalency diploma; N/A, not applicable.
* P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001.
a Although parameter values are rounded in this table and in the
equations in the text, unrounded values should be used in any analysis.
Ahern et al.
Am J Epidemiol 2009;169:1140–1147
norms to different levels that correspond to the range of the
observed data (34). In this analysis, we set the norm values
across the range from 40% to 75% in 5% intervals (percent
who believe it is unacceptable for adults to smoke cigarettes), covering the range observed in the data. Each individual’s probability was
based on his/her
individual
covariates and the risks that they contribute, as well as on
the risk from the ‘‘set’’ norm value in the neighborhood. We
can think about the unobserved counterfactual probability of
smoking given a neighborhood norm level that a particular
individual did not experience as missing data. With this
method, we are imputing each individual’s probability of
smoking if he/she had experienced a norm value that he/
she did not experience to estimate the missing counterfactuals. As an example, the calculations for when 70% of
persons in each neighborhood believe it is unacceptable to
smoke are presented below for someone with no history of
smoking and for someone who smokes daily to illustrate
how the interaction combines with the ‘‘set’’ norm value.
The predicted log odds of smoking for each individual (i)
when 70% believe it is unacceptable to smoke (plo70) (the
smoking norm variable in the model) (Table 1) are centered
around the mean of 58%, so that, for 70% unacceptable, the
variable is ‘‘set’’ to the value of 0.12 or 12%:
plo70i; no history of smoking ¼ intercept beta
0:12 3 neighborhood smoking norms betaÞ
þ other covariate betas ¼ 4:00 þ ð0:12 3 6:88Þ þ. . .
plo70i; daily smoker ¼ intercept beta
þ ð0:12 3 neighborhood smoking norms betaÞ
þ daily smoker beta þ ð0:12
3 daily smoker smoking norm interaction betaÞ
þ other covariate betas ¼ 4:00 þ ð0:12 3 6:88Þ
þ 2:86 þ ð0:12 3 6:35Þ þ . . . :
The predicted probability of smoking for each individual (i)
when 70% believe it is unacceptable to smoke (Pprob70) is
shown as follows:
Pprob70i ¼ 1=ð1 þ expð1 3 plo70iÞÞ:
In the original analysis (Table 1), the effects of norms on
smoking were presented for different subgroups of the population (because of the interaction between smoking history and
norms), and the contributing effects of the individual covariates
were presented separately. In contrast, we have now considered
together the attributes that shaped each individual’s overall
probability of smoking. Moreover, we have estimated the counterfactual probabilities of smoking for each individual if the
norms in his/her neighborhood had taken different values.
Analysis step 3
The third step involved a simple averaging of the imputed probabilities of smoking for each individual across
the whole population, for each ‘‘set’’ level of smoking
norms. These averages of the individual probabilities estimated the prevalence of smoking for each level of neighborhood smoking norms if, contrary to fact, that ‘‘set’’
level of norms had been present in the whole population.
These predicted probabilities are presented in Figure 1. If
norms were at their most permissive level (across the range
observed) in all neighborhoods, the imputed prevalence of
smoking in the whole population would be 29%. If norms
were at their most prohibitive level in all neighborhoods,
the imputed prevalence of smoking in the whole population
would be 17%.
We now have a population-wide predicted effect of
changing norm levels on the prevalence of smoking in the
whole population. Underlying this population-wide prediction are all of the individual contributions to risk, including
the stronger effects of norms on some individuals (those
with no prior history of smoking) than on others. We have
estimated the predicted population-wide net effect of changing norms, while allowing any heterogeneity in associations
due to the interaction to exist at the individual level.
Analysis step 4
The fourth step was the calculation of conﬁdence intervals around the estimate of the population-level effect.
There is typically no straightforward analytical estimate of
the standard error available for this population-level effect.
However, the standard error can be estimated with a bootstrapping technique (35). The technique is based on resampling from the study population with replacement (following
the original sampling design), estimation of the imputed
population probabilities of smoking for each ‘‘set’’ level
of norms in the new sample, and then repetition of this
process 1,000 times, so that the imputed probabilities across
all of the repeated samples capture the sampling distribution
from which we can calculate a standard error. The bootstrapped 95% conﬁdence interval for the predicted prevalence of smoking in this example is presented in Figure 1.
Proportion of Residents Who Believe It Is Unacceptable
to Smoke Cigarettes
Predicted Proportion of Current Smokers
Predicted Proportion
95% Confidence Interval
Predicted smoking prevalence corresponding to counterfactually ‘‘set’’ levels of neighborhood smoking norms, New York,
New York, 2005.
Estimating Intervention Effects on Disease Burden
Am J Epidemiol 2009;169:1140–1147
The Appendix provides further details on the principles and
mechanics of bootstrapping.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In this analysis, we presented 1 approach to estimate the
effects of a speciﬁc potential intervention with neighborhood smoking norms on the burden of smoking in the whole
population. We examined what smoking levels would be if
we could manipulate smoking norms in neighborhoods and
set them across a range of values. This is in contrast to the
effect we were able to estimate with a traditional regression
analysis, which produced stratum-speciﬁc odds ratios that
varied by subgroups depending on smoking history.
In the illustrative example, we found that, if smoking
norms were changed to the most permissive level in all
neighborhoods, the prevalence of smoking in the whole
population would be about 29%. In contrast, if neighborhood smoking norms could be changed to their most prohibitive level in all neighborhoods, the prevalence of
smoking would be about 17%. With the tools in hand for
conducting the analysis presented here, the potential effects
of any speciﬁc intervention on neighborhoods, individuals,
or other units of interest can be estimated. Considering this
illustrative example, another interesting analysis could have
estimated the change in smoking prevalence if we had reduced the exposure to a certain level among neighborhoods
with particularly permissive smoking norms. More generally, this approach can estimate what would happen to the
outcome if researchers were able to change the exposure for
any subgroups of interest.
There are several assumptions that need to be met to
allow us to interpret the predicted values causally (8). First,
we assume that the confounders came before the exposure
and that the exposure came before the outcome. This is
known as the ‘‘temporal ordering assumption’’; temporality
is a commonly cited requirement for causality. Second, we
assume that there are no unmeasured confounders for the
exposure–outcome relation being studied. This is known as
the ‘‘randomization assumption’’ because, if all confounders have been measured, within strata of the confounders the
exposure is effectively randomized. Third, we assume that
the outcome of any individual is independent of the exposures and outcomes (or counterfactuals) of other individuals, an assumption known as the ‘‘stability assumption’’ (or
‘‘stable unit treatment value assumption’’) (36, 37). This
means that any individual conceptually has a set of counterfactual exposure–outcome combinations that could have
been observed which are not affected by the exposures
and outcomes of others. Finally, we assume that all exposures are possible for all members of the study population,
an assumption known as the ‘‘experimental treatment assignment assumption.’’ Practically, this means that, within
the subgroups deﬁned by combinations of covariates, some
individuals have to be observed as exposed and others as
unexposed to meet the experimental treatment assignment
assumption. If one is comfortable making parametric model
assumptions (i.e., extrapolating beyond the data), this assumption is not required when using this analysis method;
however, caution is advisable when interpreting results beyond the range of the observed data. Whether and to what
degree these assumptions are met for any analysis should
inform the strength with which the ﬁndings are interpreted.
It is clear that the data used in the illustrative example
here do not meet all of the above assumptions. However,
considering the assumptions explicitly helps to clarify how
future studies could be designed to strengthen the possibility
of estimating a causal effect. Many neighborhood studies,
including the one presented here, have a cross-sectional design (38, 39). The temporal ordering assumption required
for a causal interpretation of the results is not met by the
structure of the data, so the likely temporal ordering of the
variables should be considered in assessing this assumption.
Most covariates in this analysis are ﬁxed or tend to be static
over long time periods (e.g., age, race, sex, marital status,
education), and it is reasonable to assume that they came
before the exposure. If this assumption were untrue, the
estimated parameter could differ from the true causal parameter in either direction. For the exposure of smoking
norms and the outcome of smoking, we must assume that
it is norms that change in advance of smoking behavior to
have appropriate temporal ordering; this is a reasonable assumption, but the reverse may also be true to some extent.
Were this assumption untrue, we would infer the wrong
causal direction for the parameter estimated. Longitudinal
studies, including time-varying individual- and group-level
data, will be an important future step in neighborhood analyses to establish temporality.
Unmeasured confounders are always a concern in epidemiology, and several authors have raised particular concern
about this issue for social exposures, such as the neighborhood
smoking norms of interest in this analysis (40, 41). Although
we measured all the confounders we identiﬁed based on our
knowledge of the literature, there still may be unmeasured and
mismeasured confounders. In addition, structural relations
among variables (measured and unmeasured) that are not accounted for in the analysis can render the effects of the exposure on the outcome unidentiﬁable or biased in unpredictable
directions (41). For example, in this analysis, we treated all of
our covariates as confounders but, if any are on the causal
pathway between neighborhood smoking norms and smoking,
this creates a different causal structure where a different analysis approach would be appropriate. Although this does not
seem a likely problem for the exposure and outcome examined here, it might be more of a problem for other exposures.
Sensitivity analyses considering different structural relations
and unmeasured variables may be important tools for quantifying these uncertainties (7, 41, 42).
In the context of the stability assumption, this model and
the other models used in epidemiology assume that the outcome of any individual is independent of the exposures and
outcomes of other individuals. However, this assumption of
independence is not met when such phenomena as contagion and positive or negative feedback are at play (43).
These issues have been dealt with in infectious disease epidemiology by necessity for a long time; any analysis that
ignores the contagion of infectious diseases is clearly likely
to be misleading (44, 45). Notably, recent discussions have
begun to consider how contagion and feedback may play
Ahern et al.
Am J Epidemiol 2009;169:1140–1147
important roles in the context of chronic disease and health
behaviors (46–48). Smoking is a behavior that likely has an
element of contagion because of the social nature of the
behavior; the smoking of any individual likely affects the
smoking behaviors of others. Recently, it has been suggested that, for neighborhood-level exposures, the stability
assumption applies to the neighborhood units rather than to
the individuals within the neighborhoods (19). The estimates presented in this paper are based on the prevalences
of smoking observed in neighborhoods that currently have
norm levels across the range presented in Figure 1. Thus,
these estimates assume that the neighborhoods were at equilibrium when they were observed, whatever dynamic processes take place at the individual or neighborhood level as
norms and smoking prevalence change. This assumption
may or may not be reasonable. Applications of models that
explicitly model these dynamic processes may be an interesting complementary approach to consider for anticipating
the effects of interventions.
To consider the distribution of exposure across covariate
subgroups (assessing the experimental treatment assignment
assumption), we examined the distribution of participants
between prohibitive and permissive smoking norm neighborhoods using propensities based on their individual covariates, and minimal social stratiﬁcation was observed.
People of all ‘‘types’’ based on their individual characteristics lived in both prohibitive and permissive norm neighborhoods. Thus, there were no extrapolations made in
estimating the associations between neighborhood smoking
norms and smoking in step 1. Moreover, in this analysis, we
limited our consideration of counterfactual levels of neighborhood smoking norms to those actually observed among
the neighborhoods in our study (range, 40%–75%). This
analysis approach allows extrapolation beyond the observed
values; for example, we could impute the counterfactual
prevalence of smoking if 90% of the population believed
it was unacceptable to smoke. However, it is our opinion,
consistent with the work of others in the area (49), that
caution should be exercised when considering making such
extrapolations.
Naturally, the concept of neighborhood-level smoking
norms is functionally and conceptually the aggregate of
the norms of neighborhood residents. Two issues about an
aggregate exposure merit discussion. First, deﬁning an exposure by a proportion of the population raises a question
about how the counterfactual is deﬁned. Typically, counterfactuals are unique (e.g., an individual is either exposed or
unexposed); however, if 40% believe it is unacceptable to
smoke, it could be any 40% of the overall population. The
method that we used, where we apply imputation at the
individual level, assumes that the causal effect of the neighborhood exposure is the same no matter which 40% believe
smoking is unacceptable; effectively, we assume that the
different possible 40%s are exchangeable. Second, the aggregate nature of the exposure means that, when neighborhood smoking norms change, by deﬁnition the norms of
individuals change. For that reason, we did not adjust the
underlying model (step 1) (Table 1) for individual smoking
norms. If the underlying individual model had been adjusted
for individual smoking norms, the counterfactual question
would have been quite different; it would have been a question about a change in the norms of the neighborhood
around the individuals in the study, but with the requirement
that their individual norms remained the same. This is an
interesting question (and is the subject of another analysis
(30)). It is not, however, a question that makes much sense
from the perspective of intervention, because one would
likely not intend to modify social norms while leaving the
norms of a subgroup unchanged. In contrast, by leaving individual norms out of the model, we ask a question about
a change in the norms of the neighborhood, allowing the
corresponding individual norms to change as they would by
deﬁnition when neighborhood norms change. We do assume
that it is neighborhood norms that inﬂuence individual
norms; teasing apart the causal relation between individual
and neighborhood norms would require detailed timedependent data.
In this analysis, we have taken a model that was built to
test a speciﬁc hypothesis and started from this basis to estimate the population-wide effect of changing neighborhood
smoking norms. However, research on the optimal approach
to selecting the model that provides the basis for the
population-wide effect is in its infancy. We could create
a model at the individual level that simply provides the best
ﬁt to the data regardless of whether it makes any sense from
the perspective of the subject matter, or in relation to any
hypotheses of interest. One strength of this approach is that
it allows any underlying individual-level model that will
best control for confounding to be applied, no matter how
complicated that model may be (e.g., including interactions
and nonlinear terms), and all of that complexity in confounding is summarized in a nuisance parameter. So-called
‘‘black-box’’ model selection techniques are being explored
for this purpose, and these techniques provide estimates that
are somewhat robust to model misspeciﬁcation (50).
Ultimately, complex analytical approaches do not get
around fundamental issues of good study design and conduct,
careful measurement, and consideration of the required assumptions (40). However, the analytical approaches that are
traditionally used in any discipline tend to shape and constrain the types of questions that are asked in a ﬁeld (43). This
analytical approach expands the range of questions that we
might ask to include more that may be directly pertinent to
the effects of interventions on a population, and it presents an
interesting complement to the traditional estimates from regression models. Certainly this approach should be applied to
high-quality studies with data that meet the assumptions to
the greatest extent possible if a causal interpretation of the
effect is of interest. Whether such estimates can be informative about the potential results of intervention remains to be
determined and perhaps can be assessed with comparison to
actual interventions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Author afﬁliations: Division of Epidemiology, School of
Public Health, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley,
California (Jennifer Ahern); Division of Biostatistics,
Estimating Intervention Effects on Disease Burden
Am J Epidemiol 2009;169:1140–1147
School of Public Health, University of California, Berkeley,
Berkeley, California (Alan Hubbard); Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, Michigan (Sandro Galea); Survey Research
Center, Institute for Social Research, Ann Arbor, Michigan
(Sandro Galea); and Department of Epidemiology, Mailman
School of Public Health, Columbia University, New York,
New York (Sandro Galea).
Funding for this work was provided in part by the National Institute on Drug Abuse (DA 017642, DA 022720).
Conﬂict of interest: none declared.