User Model User-Adap Inter 18:455–496
DOI 10.1007/s11257-008-9051-3
ORIGINAL PAPER
The effects of transparency on trust in and acceptance
of a content-based art recommender
Henriette Cramer · Vanessa Evers ·
Satyan Ramlal · Maarten van Someren ·
Lloyd Rutledge · Natalia Stash · Lora Aroyo ·
Bob Wielinga
Received: 10 May 2007 / Accepted in revised form: 26 June 2008 / Published online: 20 August 2008
© The Author(s) 2008
The increasing availability of (digital) cultural heritage artefacts offers
great potential for increased access to art content, but also necessitates tools to help
users deal with such abundance of information. User-adaptive art recommender
H. Cramer (B) · V. Evers · S. Ramlal · M. van Someren
Human Computer Studies Lab, University of Amsterdam, Kruislaan 419,
1098 VA, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
e-mail: 
e-mail: 
e-mail: 
M. van Someren
e-mail: 
L. Rutledge
Telematica Institute, P.O. Box 589, 7500 AN, Enschede, The Netherlands
e-mail: 
L. Rutledge
CWI, Kruislaan 413, 1098 SJ, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
N. Stash · L. Aroyo
Eindhoven University of Technology, P.O. Box 513, 5600 MD, Eindhoven, The Netherlands
e-mail: 
e-mail: 
N. Stash · L. Aroyo
VU University Amsterdam, De Boelelaan 1081, 1081 HV, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
B. Wielinga
Human Computer Studies Lab, University of Amsterdam, Kruislaan 419, 1089 VA, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands
e-mail: 
H. Cramer etal.
systems aim to present their users with art content tailored to their interests. These
systems try to adapt to the user based on feedback from the user on which artworks
he or she ﬁnds interesting. Users need to be able to depend on the system to competently adapt to their feedback and ﬁnd the artworks that are most interesting to them.
This paper investigates the inﬂuence of transparency on user trust in and acceptance
of content-based recommender systems. A between-subject experiment (N = 60)
evaluated interaction with three versions of a content-based art recommender in the
cultural heritage domain. This recommender system provides users with artworks that
are of interest to them, based on their ratings of other artworks. Version 1 was not
transparent, version 2 explained to the user why a recommendation had been made
and version 3 showed a rating of how certain the system was that a recommendation
would be of interest to the user. Results show that explaining to the user why a recommendation was made increased acceptance of the recommendations. Trust in the
system itself was not improved by transparency. Showing how certain the system was
of a recommendation did not inﬂuence trust and acceptance. A number of guidelines
for design of recommender systems in the cultural heritage domain have been derived
from the study’s results.
User-adaptivity · Human-computer interaction · Recommender systems ·
Transparency · Trust · Acceptance · Cultural heritage
1 Introduction
Museums and archives are digitising their material to both preserve and extend user
access to cultural heritage content. Combining digitised collections with mobile technology and other innovations offer great potential for improving museum visits and the
exploration of cultural heritage in general. This can result in the creation of (virtual)
exhibitions where physically dispersed objects are virtually co-located and interconnected. However, such abundance of information can cause users to have difﬁculty
ﬁnding relevant and interesting content. A greater variety of users also means that exhibitions might not appeal to all of them. Tailoring content to users offers the prospective
of a more interesting and satisfying experience when interacting with cultural heritage
content . User-adaptive recommender systems are
one way of offering such personalisation. Recommender systems can help users cope
with an abundance of information items by offering those items the user is likely to
ﬁnd interesting . Recommender systems learn about the user’s preferences and build a user proﬁle for each user. These proﬁles can be based on either
similarities between users (collaborative- or social-based ﬁltering), content features
of recommended items (content-based), or a hybrid of these approaches .
Based on the user’s proﬁle, the system then presents the user with information items
that are likely to be of interest. Such recommender systems are rapidly becoming a
mainstream feature, offered in a variety of domains. Examples include Amazon.com’s
book recommender and Pandora.com’s personalised radio stations.
The extent to which the user is satisﬁed with a user-adaptive recommender depends
on quality of its recommendations, but also greatly depends on user-system interaction.
The effects of transparency on trust in and acceptance of a content
Designing the interaction between a user and a recommender system is challenging.
A recommender system has to successfully learn from the user, adapt the user’s proﬁle
and present him or her with interesting items. The user proﬁle has to be adequate and
the system’s criteria for recommendations have to match the criteria that are relevant
to the user and the speciﬁc task he or she is trying to accomplish. When developing
a recommender system in a cultural heritage context that recommends artworks of
interest to the user, the artist might be relevant to one user, while the artwork’s theme
is not; and vice versa for another user. Especially in the cultural heritage domain it
is difﬁcult to offer recommendations as the user may select objects of interest on
emotional and aesthetic grounds while systems more easily use descriptive characteristics given by art experts related to for example artists, style, techniques, repositories,
dimensions, themes, depicted events and to some extent content and aesthetic features
such as colour and shapes. Additionally, criteria are application dependent. Recommending artworks for an entertaining, personalised tour in a museum would require
other criteria than providing artworks for learning about art in an educational setting
(even though these applications need not be mutually exclusive). As recommenders
learn from interaction with the user, they will only achieve optimal performance over
time. Therefore, the dialogue between recommender and user needs to build a trust
relationship, where the user feels he or she can depend on the system. This is particularly challenging, as recommender systems cannot always be 100% accurate in
predicting the user’s preferences. It is imperative that the user provides feedback to
facilitate the system’s learning process and improve recommendations. When explicit
feedback is used (such as explicit ratings of items as interesting or uninteresting) the
user needs to be persuaded to provide the system with enough explicit feedback to
improve the user proﬁle and allow the system to reach a high level of performance.
Users’ understanding of a system might play a key role in this interaction.
It might be difﬁcult for users to assess whether a system’s goals and reasoning
processes are in line with their own interests and reasoning about e.g. art objects.
A transparent system instead allows the user to understand the way it works and
explains system choices and behaviour. Understanding a personalisation system might
additionally improve interaction .
When a user has an inaccurate mental model of how the recommender works, he or she
may provide inappropriate feedback to the system . Better understanding of a system can help users decide whether they can trust a system and can inﬂuence user attitudes towards a system . Increasing transparency of user-adaptive systems could thus increase trust and acceptance of
such systems .
The study presented in this paper further investigates whether transparency
increases users’ trust and acceptance of recommender systems. The structure of this
paper is as follows: Section 2 reviews related literature on interaction with user-adaptive systems, trust, acceptance and the importance of transparency and outlines the
hypotheses of the study. Section 3 describes the methodology of the reported study.
This section also describes the CHIP cultural heritage recommender system used in
this study. Section 4 reports the study’s quantitative results and its qualitative observations. Section 5 further discusses these results and provides an overview of lessons
H. Cramer etal.
learned about users’ interaction with art recommenders. This section also discusses
the limitations of this study. Section 6 ends this paper with the study’s conclusions.
2 Related literature and hypotheses
2.1 Personalisation in the cultural heritage domain
The advancement of information and communication technologies plays a significant role in exploring new ways of interaction between museum collections and
their (online) visitors. Specifically the evolution of the Web as a major communication medium offers increased access to large and dispersed sets of artworks. This
increased access to cultural information also means that cultural heritage visitors might
need help to deal with information overload. Additionally, such wider access to information about artworks opens the possibility for a larger and more varied audience
to access cultural heritage information. This audience will likely consist of multiple
types of users, who do not all have the same needs . This
presents the challenging task of ﬁnding out what the goals, desires and preferences of
such users are, and how to adapt correspondingly and present personalised museum
collections to visitors and (online) users.
Digitised collections offer the possibility to adapt to the individual user. A decade
ago, Picard identiﬁed the need for such personalisation of online museum
collections. User-adaptivity and personalisation can help present the individual user
with information tailored to his or her speciﬁc needs. Personalisation can help overcome problems of information overload when the size of a collection is overwhelming
to the visitor. It can also help cater for a more diverse public when one exhibition would
not sufﬁce for different types of users. Personalisation additionally has the potential
to improve user interaction with digitised collections by supporting user navigation
and providing assistance in ﬁnding appropriate and interesting information. It can also
serve educational goals when information about personal characteristics, such as age,
education and familiarity with a collection, are used to support better comprehension
of a collection. Bowen and Filippini-Fantoni also argue for a more personalised experience. They claim personalisation enables change in the museum’s mass
communication monologue paradigm and turn it into an interactive dialogue in which
information is exchanged. Personalisation thus could help both learn from and adapt
to online and physical visitors.
Various studies have explored the possibilities of both increasing access to cultural
heritage content and personalising content to individual users. Such endeavours can
for instance take advantage of the domain’s extensive availability of descriptions of
characteristics of cultural items and other metadata. Experts at cultural heritage institutions often provide extensive data on the artworks they manage. This enables the use
of content-based techniques for personalisation and for presenting new strategies to
search and navigate collections. Various information retrieval and search techniques
can support access to cultural heritage content. Semantic Web techniques have been
used in multiple projects. The MuseumFinland Project is an
example of using Semantic Web technologies to provide multi-dimensional access to
The effects of transparency on trust in and acceptance of a content
cultural heritage collections in Finland. The main goal of the project is to provide a
globalviewtodistributedcollectionsasone‘seamless’national(virtual)collection,the
“Museum of Finland”. It offers intelligent services to users for searching and browsing
the collections, as well as easy content publication for museums. It also offers possibilities for personalised access to the collections. Other authors who describe usage
of Semantic Web technologies for adapted presentation of cultural heritage content
include Schreiber et al. and Sinclair et al. . These authors focus on
information retrieval and taking advantage of the knowledge-richness of the cultural
domain. They use common ontologies to allow easier access to diverse collections and
for preservation of the relationships between information items. Another example of
a project using Semantic Web techniques is the CHIP project . The
CHIP recommender system is used in this study.
The new diversity of museum audiences means that not only experts’ concerns have
to be reﬂected. The annotations and other content information about artworks used
to personalise access to cultural heritage do not necessarily have to be supplied by
museums and art experts alone. Trant for example describes how users can
tag items and provide their own descriptions and keywords. These tags can be used
to understand patterns in museum visitors and to explore how expert and non-professional vocabularies differ. Carmagnola et al. describe how these tags can also
be exploited to improve recommender systems. To provide a personalised experience,
it is crucial to elicit accurate user characteristics and align them with the terminology
and structures the domain experts in museums use to describe their collections. When
such concerns are met, personalisation can offer many new opportunities in presenting
cultural heritage information.
Adaptive techniques have been used to generate personalised presentations about
artists and art collections. Personalised presentations combine information items and
artworks to provide a narrative that is tailored to the individual user. The ArtEquAKT
project is a project that focuses on using natural language technologies to automatically extract relevant information about the life and work of artists
from online documents. This information is then presented to the user in personalised artist descriptions in the form of biographical narratives. These are adapted to
the user’s knowledge level. This project illustrates that it is possible to generate useradapted narratives by extracting and structuring information from knowledge bases
using ontologies designed for this domain. The Multimedia Casus project 
is another example of tailor-made presentation generation and using concept structures
for navigating art collections. The project presents a collection of artworks of a performance artist together with artwork-related information used for preservation and
re-installations. The Multimedia Casus project proposes an infrastructure for personalised presentations and personalised guided tours for media-rich collections of culture
heritage items. These projects show that ways to generate personalised narratives are
feasible and available.
Various studies have explored the application of personalisation techniques in
supporting physical visits to museums. Proctor and Tellis concluded from
a 2002 trial with a handheld tour in London’s Tate Modern that visitors enjoyed tours
more when they were adapted to their interests and abilities. Another example of a
mobile guide system is provided by Oppermann and Specht . They also found
H. Cramer etal.
encouraging results on the usefulness of such a personalised guide, be it through expert
evaluation and commentary. The PEACH project supplies users with personalised presentations of cultural
content on mobile devices in museums. It offers animated agents that help motivate
visitors and focus their attention and post-visit summaries that reﬂect individual user
interests. An evaluation with 110 museum visitors offered encouraging results, concluding that major components of their personalisation technology were suitable for
use by the general museum public . Another promising evaluation
of a virtual character guiding exhibition visitors is reported by Damiano et al. .
Beyond guiding the user through an exhibition, adaptation and context-awareness can
also be applied for changing the user’s exhibition environment itself. The LISTEN
project for example generates immersive augmented audio presentations tailored to
the user’s context . These projects show the potential
of personalisation techniques in real applications in cultural heritage settings.
The need for user-adaptivity and encouraging results from earlier projects show
that personalisation and user-adaptive applications are relevant in a cultural heritage
context. Personalisation offers opportunities in overcoming information overload, in
generating personalised presentations and adapting to the needs of the speciﬁc visitor. However, personalisation also brings challenges for interaction, which have to be
addressed. Such issues are discussed in the next section.
2.2 Interaction with user-adaptive systems
User-adaptive systems have been suggested as a way to improve human-computer
interaction in situations where different users might have different goals, needs and
knowledge. User-adaptive systems can adapt to the speciﬁc user’s needs and change
with changing user interests . However, apart from
the advantages such adaptivity might bring, user-adaptivity also provides new challenges for interaction design. Jameson provides an overview of issues related
to user-adaptivity, such as controllability, privacy, obtrusiveness, breadth of the user’s
experience, predictability and transparency. User-adaptive systems take decisions on
behalf of the user; this inﬂuences controllability of a system and might conﬂict with
the user’s need to control a system’s actions directly. User-adaptive systems use data
about the user. A concern might be that this information is used in undesirable ways,
affecting the user’s privacy. Obtrusiveness might be an issue when the adaptive system
itself requires attention from the user, taking away attention from the user’s primary
task. User-adaptive systems that take over tasks from the user can also affect the
breadth of the user’s experience. For example, a user might not learn as much about a
domain when information is ﬁltered for him or her and the user may inappropriately
rely on the information provided by the system alone. Höök also notes that
user-adaptivity might conﬂict with usability principles such as making a system transparent, understandable and predictable. Adaptive systems might change and adapt in
unpredictable ways without the user being able to understand why the system behaves
in a certain way. User understanding of the system can affect both the user’s attitude
towards the system and the user’s feedback. When the system behaves in ways the
The effects of transparency on trust in and acceptance of a content
user does not expect (e.g., recommending something he or she does not like or need),
the user may ﬁnd the system unpredictable and unreliable . If the user has
an inaccurate mental model of the way the system learns, he or she might also change
his or her feedback towards the system in such a way that performance decreases
 . All issues above have to be addressed in designing users’ interaction with a user-adaptive system.
Different contexts and types of users might ask for different types of adaptivity and
user control. Alpert et al. note that a personalisation technique that might be
considered desirable by users in one context might not be met with the same enthusiasm in other contexts. Alpert and colleagues studied user interaction with a user
adaptive e-commerce web site for computer equipment sales and support. In Alpert’s
study participants had mixed reactions to the collaborative ﬁltering feature. Users
felt positive about the system that presented new products and services related to the
users’ current search activities and their recent past activity on the website. However,
“some participants were sceptical of systems that try to predict a user’s current goals
or needs and adapt content accordingly based on implicit information from some disjoint time in the past”. Alpert and colleagues found that participants reacted positively
to the theoretical possibility of such a feature, but that they did not expect such features to actually do well in practice. They noted that in other e-commerce settings
such as movie or book recommendations, users appear to have no objections towards
collaborative techniques. Not only the application context, but also characteristics of
users themselves might inﬂuence acceptance of adaptive systems. Specifically in the
domain of user interaction with personalised museum guides, Goren-Bar et al. 
found that personality traits relating to the notion of control have a selective effect
on the acceptance of the adaptivity dimensions. One of their ﬁndings was that users
who feel less in control of their own beliefs and actions prefer to maintain control
over a system and prefer non-adaptivity. Jameson and Schwarzkopf investigated the level of controllability of a user-adaptive system, and performed a study
in which users got to determine the nature and timing of adaptations. Jameson and
Schwarzkopf concluded that the preferable form of control and automation for a task
depend on factors ranging from individual differences and system properties that are
relatively stable to unpredictable situational characteristics; there is no one level that
ﬁts all situations. Zimmermann and Lorenz for example claim that focusing
on control over an adaptive art-related system might be contradictory to building a
relationship with the presented art.
Which adaptations and level of control are suitable have to be determined for a
particular context, application and the speciﬁc user. This needs to be reﬂected in
the user-system dialogue. This dialogue between the user-adaptive system and user
appears crucial in achieving both excellent performance and user satisfaction. In the
context of user-adaptive recommender systems, this dialogue should provide the user
with high-quality recommendations and information. At the same time, the dialogue
needs to provide the system with information to improve its recommendations. The
user should be persuaded to invest time and effort to provide the system with enough
useful training data to improve its recommendations. As Benyon points out,
user preferences for information items can change over time. This means that a user’s
proﬁle that might have been suitable at one time, might not always be suitable at other
H. Cramer etal.
occasions. This might necessitate continuous adaptation to the user’s feedback, while
taking into account the issues described above, such as controllability, obtrusiveness
and user understanding. User-adaptive systems raise the expectation to ‘know what
the user wants’ and to make (semi)-autonomous decisions on what is relevant to the
user. The system’s user proﬁling has to be adequate to process the user’s feedback and
the criteria used for recommending have to be suitable for the user’s task. The user
on the other hand has to be willing to release control, accept the system and delegate
tasks. In the cultural heritage domain, users have to feel conﬁdent they can let a system
for example adapt a museum tour for them, or search out those artworks that would
be interesting to them. The dialogue between system and user should overcome challenges inherent to user-adaptivity and instil trust in the user that they can indeed let a
system make decisions for them in their speciﬁc situation.
2.3 Trust in user-adaptive systems
Reeves and Nass have shown that people tend to interact with computer systems as if they were social actors. Users’ affective and social reactions to automated
tools affect acceptance of and interaction with such systems. A possible implication
is that social rules and principles of human-to-human interaction can also be applied
to human-computer interaction. This includes the concept of trust. Trust is thought
to be one of the important affective elements that play a role in human interaction
with technology . Making a system reliable
is not enough to achieve appropriate delegation to that system . Trust also depends on the interaction with the user.
Users need to adapt their levels of trust in order to optimise human-machine performance and beneﬁt fully from the cooperation . Users
may have a level of trust in a device, but also have a level of trust in the success of
cooperation with the device . Even if an
appropriate level of automation can be determined, there is no guarantee that users will
trust a system to an appropriate degree and will actually decide to use it. In the context
of adaptive cruise control assisting drivers, Rajaonah and colleagues found that trust
in the cooperation with a device determines the quality of interaction between the
user and system, as well as appropriate use. In an experiment using a ﬂight simulator and an engine monitoring system that provided advice on engine fault diagnosis,
Parasuraman and Miller found that user performance and trust were lowered
by poor automation etiquette, regardless of reliability. In their study a non-interruptive
and patient communication style, instead of using interruptive and impatient worded
system messages, increased trust and performance. Even though a high-reliability,
good etiquette system version yielded the best user performance and the highest trust;
they found that good automation etiquette can compensate to a certain extent for low
automation reliability. Performance alone does thus not completely determine whether
users take full advantage of potential system beneﬁts.
Lee and See describe how trust guides reliance on automation, even while it
does not completely determine it. They provide a comprehensive review of trust from
various perspectives, including organisational, sociological and interpersonal standpoints. According to Lee and See, trust affects reliance as an attitude rather than as a
The effects of transparency on trust in and acceptance of a content
belief, intention, or behaviour. Certain beliefs, for example about the system, determine trust and trust in turn might result in certain intentions and behaviours. Lee and
See state that trust especially guides reliance when a complete understanding of a
system is impractical. They do however note that reliance on automation is also determined by the operating context and goes beyond trust alone. Dzindolet et al. 
note that users do compare their own abilities with those of a system. On the basis
of the outcome of this comparison, users decide whether or not to rely on a system.
Authors such as Castelfranchi and Falcone and Jøsang and Lo Presti 
also note that even though a user might trust a system, he or she might not choose to
rely on it when the user perceives the risks as too great.
In this study we apply the definition of trust by Jøsang and Lo Presti : “the
extent to which one party is willing to depend on somebody or something, in a given
situation with a feeling of relative security, even though negative consequences are
possible”. A similar definition is offered by Lee and See , who deﬁne trust as
“the attitude that an agent will help achieve an individual’s goals in a situation characterized by uncertainty and vulnerability”. Parasuraman and Miller state that
trust is users’ willingness to believe information from a system or make use of its
capabilities. This definition is related to an alternative concept proposed by Fogg and
Tseng , who introduce the concept of credibility. Credibility (synonymous to
believability) is proposed to consist of trustworthiness (the perception that the source
has good intentions) and expertise (or competence) of a system. In this paper, the
concept of trust consists of trust in the intentions of a system (goal alignment) and
trust in the competence of the system. Competence is seen as the perceived skill of
the system: the extent to which it is able to offer the right recommendations. The
perception of the alignment of goals of the system and the user’s goals, coupled with
a belief that a system will perform its task competently, form the basis of trust. In the
context of this paper, trust refers to the user’s willingness to depend on a system and
its recommendations in the speciﬁc context of the user and his or her task(s), even
though the system might make mistakes.
Trust is of speciﬁc interest in interaction with user-adaptive systems. A number
of factors might play a role in the perceptions users have of the goals of the system
and the intentions of its developers and other users. Briggs et al. note that
personalisation itself plays a role in trust formation. In the context of e-commerce
websites, in an experiment using a (mock) website offering travel insurance, Briggs
found that participants felt more positive about the site when it offered a personalised quote based on participants’ circumstances. They felt, for example, that they had
been offered more choice, that the site was more predictable and that it was easier
to use. Such perceived beneﬁts of personalisation might however be dependent on
whether the intentions and capabilities of a personalisation system instil trust in the
user. In some situations, trust may be a prerequisite to get the personal information
needed to personalise a system, invoking privacy concerns . In
recommender systems, trust in the information sources a system uses to generate its
recommendations can also play a role in whether a user trusts the system. Authors
such as Wang and Benbasat and Xiao and Benbasat studied trust in
online e-commerce recommender settings. In such settings trust in the online vendor’s
goals in providing recommendations might also play a role. In collaborative-based
H. Cramer etal.
recommenders, users need to assess whether they trust the intentions and actions of
other users . In addition, in contexts where a system might provide
information about a recommended item not immediately veriﬁable by users, trust in
the correctness and credibility of the information might play a role as well . For example, when a recommender system provides recommendations
based on how comfortable a certain product will feel, users cannot know whether this
is correct before they actually buy and feel the product.
Perceptions of competence of a personalised system can be inﬂuenced by issues
inherent to adaptivity. User-adaptive systems might not offer a high level of performance from the start. If performance is low in the beginning, users’ trust levels should
start out low as well, and gradually increase as training progresses and performance
increases. However, trust rapidly decreases when users notice errors and only slowly
increases as a system performs without errors . This makes achieving trust difﬁcult in adaptive systems
that have not been pre-trained. Lee and See use the terms calibration, resolution and
speciﬁcity of trust to describe such (mis)matches between trust and the capabilities
of automation. Calibration refers to the correspondence between a person’s trust in
a system and the system’s capabilities .
Resolution of trust refers to what extent such changes in system capability affect trust.
Trust also has speciﬁcity; trust can be more or less speciﬁc to part of a system or
to changes in a system’s capability. Getting these aspects of trust right is especially
challenging in a personalised system, as the nature of these systems implies that due
to adaptation to e.g. user feedback the system’s capabilities change; the speciﬁcity and
resolution of trust in the user might not match these changes.
In the context of a recommender in the cultural-heritage domain, users need to be
sure that the purpose of the system matches their own and that the system competently
recommends artworks that are of interest to them. Furthermore, when they are not
familiar with the sources that provide the information, they might need to trust that the
information provided about the artworks is trustworthy. Moreover, if multiple sources
are combined to generate integrated personalised content for a user , it might be even more difﬁcult for the user to trust the information and the
system. However, it has to be taken into account that trust toward recommenders in a
cultural heritage context is different than trust in for example an e-commerce context.
In most e-culture contexts, inaccurate recommendations do not pose a great risk to the
user. When users trust a system to generate a personalised tour from recommended
artworks and it turns out the recommended tour was not suited to their needs, they only
risk a less entertaining or less educational visit. They are not likely to suffer serious
consequences, whereas in commercial settings an inaccurate recommendation may
result in ﬁnancial loss. However, acceptance of the system is still likely to be guided
by user trust and perceptions of the goals and competence of the system.
2.4 Combining trust in and acceptance of user-adaptive systems
The section above describes how trust guides reliance or dependence on a system.
Reliance is related to acceptance and use of a system. The Technology Acceptance
The effects of transparency on trust in and acceptance of a content
Model describes a number of concepts that inﬂuence acceptance of a system. According to the model , performance expectancy, effort expectancy (how much effort it will take to
learn and use a system), social inﬂuence and facilitating conditions (whether the user
has enough time and resources to use the technology) are expected to inﬂuence intent to
use a system and actual usage behaviour. Several authors have studied possible extensions to the Technology Acceptance Model . van der Heijden ,
for example, showed that the purpose of a system plays an important role in determining the predictive importance of respective elements of the technology acceptance
model. Perceived usefulness is important in achieving user acceptance when interacting with work- and task-oriented systems. If users interact with ‘hedonic’ systems
that are aimed at fun and entertaining the user instead, perceived enjoyment and perceived ease of use are more important than perceived usefulness. Van der Heijden
suggests that focusing on the type of system could increase understanding of technology acceptance, in addition to extending acceptance models with more factors that
inﬂuence system acceptance.
Trust has been shown to affect system acceptance and has been combined with the
technology acceptance model, by such authors as Wu and Chen ; Wang and
Benbasat ; Pavlou and Gefen et al. . These authors did so mostly
in the context of e-commerce and on trust in services. They primarily focus on trust in
online transactions and the relationship between a buyer and an online vendor. Integration of acceptance models with other trust-related aspects, such as trust in a system
itself, in other contexts is still scarce. In a non-commercial e-culture context, such
a consumer-buyer relationship is arguably absent. The trust building process might
therefore be more focused on whether the system goals match the users’ goals and
whether it would be competent in giving recommendations. Trust in the intentions
of the recommender might have less of an inﬂuence. This study thus focuses on the
trust a user has in the system itself and the delegation of tasks to that system. System
and recommendation acceptance in this study refers to whether the system and its
recommendations actually would be used.
2.5 Transparency of user-adaptive systems and study hypotheses
Maes ) states that one of the
great interaction design challenges is how to achieve understanding and control in
user-agent interaction. If the user understands how a system works and can predict
system actions and outcomes, the user can focus on his or her task instead of trying
to ﬁgure out the system. In the case of user-adaptive recommender systems, it may be
even more imperative for the users to understand how the system decides on a recommendation. In order for the system to reach an optimal level of performance, it needs
to learn from the users’ implicit or explicit input, for example by analysing user’s
search behaviour or by receiving explicit feedback on recommendations. When a user
is not aware of or does not have an accurate understanding of how the system makes
decisions, the user will not ‘train’ the system properly and it may not be possible
H. Cramer etal.
for the system to improve. Better understanding of the system could help improve
such aspects of interaction. Transparency aims to increase understanding and entails
offering the user insight in how a system works, for example by offering explanations
for system behaviour. This study investigates the effects of transparency on trust and
acceptance; its hypotheses based on prior research into transparency are listed in this
System transparency may not always improve user interaction. It is not always possible for the user to construct an accurate mental model in a reasonable timeframe.
Fogg notes that in the context of credibility, the impact of any interface element
on users’ attitudes depends on to what extent it is noticed (prominence) and what value
users assign to the element (interpretation). Parasuraman and Miller notes that
as automation gets more complex, users will be less wiling and able to learn about
the mechanisms that produce the automation’s behaviours. Höök notes that
it is not necessarily desirable to have a system explain how it works in full detail
because the full details might be alienating to a layman user. It might not be necessary
to explain all details to achieve adequate understanding of the system’s adaptivity.
Waern shows that users cannot always recognise good quality user proﬁles and
cannot always improve them when given the opportunity. Besides the effort needed
from the user to process transparency information, other adverse effects have to be
considered as well. Herlocker et al. found that poorly designed explanations
can actually hinder the acceptance of individual recommendations. Dzindolet et al.
 found that explaining why errors might occur increased trust in automated
tools, even when this was not appropriate. Therefore, transparency and task performance can inﬂuence each other negatively . Bilgic and
Mooney note that explanations should not aim just to promote (‘sell’) a system’s recommendations, but that explanations should enable the user to accurately
assess recommendation quality. Appropriate implementations of transparency need to
overcome these challenges.
In spite of these potential problems, previous authors have emphasised the importance of transparency . Sinha and Swearingen 
for instance, evaluated transparency and recommendations for ﬁve music recommender systems. Mean liking and conﬁdence were rated higher for recommendations
that were more understandable to participants. Other prior studies also suggest that
making adaptive systems more transparent to the user could lead to a more positive user
attitude towards using a system and increases in system performance .
We expect that transparency will have a positive effect on acceptance of user-adaptive
recommender systems.
H1: Users are more likely to accept a user-adaptive recommender system with
a more transparent decision making process.
Lee and See state that appropriate trust and reliance depend on how well the
capabilities of a system are conveyed to the user. McAllister , quoting Simmel
 , notes that “the amount of knowledge necessary for trust is somewhere between
total knowledge and total ignorance. Given total knowledge, there is no need to trust,
and given total ignorance, there is no basis upon which to rationally trust”. Lee and See
The effects of transparency on trust in and acceptance of a content
argue that promoting appropriate trust may depend on presenting information about a
system in a manner compatible with analytic, analogical, and affective processes that
inﬂuence trust. They identify three types of goal-oriented information that appear to
contribute to the development of trust: information on current and past performance
(system expertise), information on the system’s process (to assess appropriateness of
the automation’s algorithms for the user’s situation and goals) and purpose (to match
the designer’s intent for the system to the user’s goals). Increasing transparency of a
system can help users decide whether they can trust the system.
H2: Users will have more trust in a system with a more transparent decision
making process.
A number of authors describe systems with various features that aim to support trust
and acceptance by making a system’s reasoning process understandable and providing insight in system competence. In the context of the Semantic Web, McGuinness
and Pinheiro da Silva , describe an explanation system that explains answers
from Semantic Web agents that use multiple sources to devise an answer to user questions. Their explanations include information on the origin of answers or how they
were derived. Other examples of transparency features can be found in the context
of e-commerce product recommendations. McSherry discusses an approach
to ﬁnding a ﬁtting product recommendation by guiding the user through the features
of the available products, which can for example help understanding the trade-offs
and interdependencies between product features. Shimazu discusses a system
mimicking the interaction between a customer and a store clerk to come to a ﬁnal
understandable product recommendation. Pu and Chen have focused on trust
in the recommender based on the user’s perception of its competence, and its ability to
explain the recommended results. Their organisation interface, which organised recommender results by trade-off properties, was perceived as more capable and efﬁcient
in assisting user decisions. Cortellessa et al. also evaluated the importance of
explanations in interactive problem solving systems and found that explanations are
needed more when the system’s problem solving fails.
In an e-culture context especially, recommendations can be based on a lot of different attributes of artworks (e.g. aesthetics, history, themes, materials, popularity, other
people’s taste) and could serve a variety of goals (e.g. ﬁnding one artwork the user
would ﬁnd aesthetically pleasing, building a tour through a museum, suggesting new
artworks the user could learn about). Perception of the recommender’s competence
is an issue. When the user cannot assess for what goal a system has been built and
whether the properties used by the system match his or her criteria, the interaction will
not likely be satisfactory. The study described in this paper stems from the premise
that transparency of a user-adaptive system that performs well will increase the users’
perception of system competence.
H3: Users will perceive a user-adaptive recommender system with a more transparent decision making process as more competent.
Various studies have investigated the effects of different types of transparency features.
McNee et al. found that adding a conﬁdence metric to a movie recommender,
indicating which recommendations were ‘more risky’, increased user satisfaction and
H. Cramer etal.
inﬂuenced user behaviour. However, they also found that more experienced users of
the movie recommender were less satisﬁed with the system after being instructed
about the conﬁdence rating. Wang and Benbasat compared the effects of three
types of explanations on user trust in an e-commerce recommender. The recommender
system used in their study advised users what digital camera to buy based on their
answers to questions about their product needs (not on the basis of the user’s ratings
of other products). Wang and Benbasat compared the effects of, in their terminology,
‘why’, ‘how’ and ‘trade-off’ explanations. ‘Why’ explanations were designed to demonstrate the recommended is designed to fulﬁl the user’s needs and interests. These
‘why’ explanations justiﬁed the importance and purpose of questions posed by the
recommender and justiﬁed ﬁnal recommendations. ‘How’ explanations revealed the
line of reasoning used based on consumer needs and product attributes preferences
in reaching recommendations. ‘Trade-off’ explanations offered decisional guidance,
helping users to make proper trade-offs among product features and costs of these
features (e.g. a digital camera offering more zoom capabilities will also cost more).
Wang and Benbasat found that ‘why’ explanations increased benevolence beliefs;
the perception that a recommender acts in the consumer’s interests. They found that
‘how’ explanations increased participants’ belief in competence and benevolence of
the recommender. ‘Trade-off’ explanations increased integrity beliefs. Herlocker et al.
 compared the effects of 21 different explanations for a movie recommendation
on participants’ acceptance of the recommendation. The participants had to indicate
how likely it was that they would go and see the movie that was recommended by
the system. Participants reported that the explanations were important. Histograms of
other users’ ratings of an item were found to be the most convincing way to explain
why a recommendation had been made. Indications of a system’s past performance,
likeness to similar previously rated items, and domain-speciﬁc content features (such
as favourite actress) were most compelling in justifying a recommendation. Some
other types of explanations, such as correlations between information items, were dif-
ﬁcult to understand and actually decreased acceptance of recommendations. Tintarev
and Masthoff provide a number of guidelines for recommender system explanations. They, for example, advise that explanations needs to be tailored to the user
and context, as different users might ﬁnd other criteria important in selecting recommendations.
H4: Understandable explanations of the reasons for a particular recommendation will increase acceptance and trust more than other types of transparency
The studies evaluated in this section studied different types of transparency and showed
different effects of transparency on user understanding and satisfaction. There is no
conclusive evidence that a transparent system is always trusted more and it is yet
unclear how different types of transparency can lead to increased trust and acceptance
of user-adaptive systems. To take research into transparency and trust in recommender
systems further it appears that empirical evidence is needed on the effects of different
transparency features on actual user attitudes and behaviour. The study described in
this paper explores whether offering transparency of a recommender system’s decision making process allows users to understand why certain recommendations are
The effects of transparency on trust in and acceptance of a content
made and increases their acceptance of a system in an e-culture context. An experimental set-up is used to study the effects of system transparency on user trust in and
acceptance of content-based recommender systems that rely on explicit user ratings
of art objects. Making the content-based criteria for a recommendation transparent is
expected to increase understanding of the system. If users think the criteria the system
uses to select recommendations are suitable, users’ perceptions of competence, trust
and acceptance should also increase.
As outlined above, this study aims to further investigate, both quantitatively and qualitatively, the effects of transparency on trust and acceptance of user-adaptive systems.
The experiment discussed in this paper had a between-subject design. Its independent variable was transparency (with a transparent condition, a non-transparent condition and a condition that showed information on how certain the system was of its
recommendation, but did not offer more transparency of reasons behind recommendations). Dependent variables included perceived competence, understanding, trust
in, and acceptance of the content-based recommender system. A user-adaptive, content-based art recommender, the CHIP system was used for the experiment. An additional goal of the study was to identify
possible usability issues of this system. Participants interacted with the system, were
observed, interviewed and ﬁlled out a questionnaire. In this section the CHIP system
will be introduced ﬁrst, after which the three experimental conditions, measures and
procedures used in the study are discussed in detail.
3.1 CHIP system
The CHIP (Cultural Heritage Information Personalisation) system recommends artworks from the collection of the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam, the Netherlands, based
on the individual user’s ratings of artworks. The CHIP system uses the semantic annotations of artworks to improve recommendation-based access to these objects. The
artworks have been annotated by the Rijkmuseum’s staff of experts. These properties
include artist (such as Rembrandt), place and time (such as Amsterdam, 1700–1750),
themes (such as animals, trompe l’oeil, or musical instruments), genre, materials,
techniques, and a number of other content features. The CHIP system offers users the
possibility to view and rate Rijksmuseum artworks, such as paintings and sculptures.
On the basis of users’ ratings of these artworks the CHIP system builds individual
user proﬁles. The CHIP system calculates a prediction of interest for other artworks
based on user preference patterns in properties of the artworks that were rated. The
recommendation processing is content-based, using positive ratings of artworks and
properties to ﬁnd similar artworks to recommend.
The overall goal of the CHIP system is to personalise access to digitised cultural
heritage, in close collaboration with museums. Another goal is to engage and educate
the user by offering personalisation. The target audience of the current CHIP projects
is anyone who would come to the Rijksmuseum’s website or the museum itself—a
H. Cramer etal.
broad cross-section of people, but all sharing an interest in art. The CHIP project
involves three main applications at this time: the artwork recommender used in this
study, a ‘Tour Wizard’ to generate navigational routes through the digital Rijksmuseum collection, and a ‘Mobile Tour’ on a PDA that uses Tour Wizard results to generate
personalised tours in the physical Rijksmuseum. Previous research, such as Wubs and
Huysmans’s studies into user goals, interests and navigation patterns of users
of cultural heritage collections, as well as van Setten’s approach for supporting
people in ﬁnding information, based on hybrid recommender systems and goal-based
structuring of information, inspired development of the CHIP system.
3.2 Experimental conditions
The study stems from the premise that system transparency inﬂuences understanding, trust and acceptance. From the literature review in paragraph 2.5 it was apparent
that different types of transparency are thought to inﬂuence understanding, trust and
acceptance in different ways . In particular, offering an
explanation of why recommendations are made is deemed to inﬂuence user interaction with adaptive systems . In this study, we will therefore investigate the effects of transparency by offering
the users insight in the reasons why a particular recommendation has been made. To
compare differences in effects between offering different types of information about
a system, we will also investigate the effects of offering the users insight in how sure
the system is of a particular recommendation.
This leads to three between-subject conditions to manipulate transparency:
– A non-transparent condition (‘non’): no transparency feature was offered (Fig.1).
– A transparent (‘why’) condition: below each thumbnail of a recommended artwork
a ‘why?’ link was shown (Fig.2). This link opened a pop-up window listing those
properties the recommended artwork had in common with artworks the user had
previously rated positively (Fig.3).
– Conﬁdence rating (‘sure’) condition: below each recommended artwork, a percentage was shown which indicated the conﬁdence the system had that the recommendation was interesting to the user (Fig.4).
The non-transparent condition still showed pictures of the artworks the user had ‘liked’
and ‘disliked’. This communicated to the user that the system remembered the user’s
preferences and did indeed tailor itself to the user. It did not show the reasons why
recommendations were made.
The transparent (‘why’) condition was designed to make the criteria the system
uses to recommend artworks more transparent to participants. It did so by showing
the criteria on which the system had based its recommendation. Note that this is different from Wang and Benbasat’s ‘why’ condition which intended to show the
recommender’s goodwill to the user’s interests.
The ‘sure’ condition’s conﬁdence rating provided participants with information on
the system’s predicted correctness of the recommendation; the system’s conﬁdence
that the user will be interested in the artwork. The sure condition was designed to
The effects of transparency on trust in and acceptance of a content
Fig. 1 Non-transparent condition version of the CHIP system
Fig. 2 Detail of the transparent (‘why’) version of the CHIP system, with ‘why’ link (replicated for printing
provide some information on system functioning, but to not provide any extra information on how the recommendations were made. The conﬁdence ratings were intended
to communicate that a level of uncertainty is involved in generating recommendations.
Because participants could compare the conﬁdence rating to their actual interest in the
recommendation, this version provided users with information on recommendation
competence, rather than explanation of the system’s decision making.
Only the transparency features differed between versions, all other parts of the
interface were the same in all of the conditions. In the top left corner, the same set
of artworks was presented to the participant in the same order. These artworks could
be rated by the user. The ratings were used to build the user proﬁle. All artworks
could be rated by clicking one of the three stars below the artwork. One star rating
indicated little user interest; a three star rating indicated high interest. By clicking
the ‘next artefact’ button a new artwork was shown to the user. After several ratings,
recommended artworks appeared at the bottom area of the screen. The ﬁrst ﬁve were
shown directly; the full set of recommended artworks could be viewed by clicking
H. Cramer etal.
Fig. 3 The ‘why’ feature, pop-up window that is shown when ‘why’ link is clicked by the user (replicated
for printing purposes)
Fig. 4 Detail of the conﬁdence rating (‘sure’) version of the CHIP system (replicated for printing purposes)
the “see all recommended artworks” button. In the transparent (‘why’) condition the
“why” link was shown below each recommendation. In the conﬁdence rating (‘sure’)
condition the conﬁdence rating was shown in the same place. In the non-transparent
condition, nothing was shown below the recommendations apart from rating stars. In
all conditions, the recommended artworks could be rated as well.
Users could get more information about an artwork by clicking its picture. A pop-up
window was then opened showing the artwork’s title and a description. The artworks
the user rated as interesting or not interesting were displayed in two sections in the
upper right part of the screen. The “Like Art Works” section displayed the artworks
the users rated most positive. The “Dislike Art Works” section displayed the artworks
the user rated as uninteresting.
3.3 Measures
In this section, we start with an overview of the measures of the experiment. The next
section will describe the procedures used in the study. Table 1 summarises the measures used in this study and provides example questions. Table 3 shows the ﬁnal scales
used in quantitative analysis. Questionnaire items were all seven-point Likert-type
scale questions.
The effects of transparency on trust in and acceptance of a content
Table 1 Measures used in the study and example questions
Measured in:
Perceived transparency of the system
Questionnaire, e.g. “I understand what the
system bases its recommendations on.”
Actual understanding of the system
Interview, e.g. “Could you please tell me
how the system works? It is ﬁne if your
explanation turns out not to be accurate.
This question is not to test you.”
Perceived competence
Questionnaire, e.g. “I think that the artworks
that the system recommends correspond to
my art interests.”
Interview, e.g. “Did the recommendations
match your interest? In what aspects?”
Intent to use the system
Questionnaire, e.g. “The next time I am
looking for a recommendation for an
artwork I would like to use this system.”
Interview, e.g. “Would you use the system
again for the same type of task (ﬁnding
artworks for a talk)? Why?”
Acceptance of system
Interview, acceptance scenario
Acceptance of recommendations
Number of recommendations chosen
Questionnaire, e.g. “I trust the system.”, “I
can depend on the system.”
Interview, e.g. “To what extent do you trust
the system? Why?”
Perceived usefulness and ease of use ‘Sure’/
‘Why’ feature (‘Sure’/‘Why’ conditions only)
Questionnaire, e.g. “I found the ‘why’
explanations for recommendations useful.”
Interview, e.g. “How useful do you think [the
‘why’ feature] was?”
Perceived need for explanations
Questionnaire, e.g.“I think that the system
should give an explanation why it
recommended an art work to me.”
Interview, e.g. “Did you want the system to
explain more about how it recommends art
works? If so, what would you like to
3.3.1 Manipulation checks
In order to check whether the transparency manipulation was successful, three sevenpoint Likert-type scale questions were included to measure the perceived transparency
of the system in each condition with questions such as “I understand why the system
recommended the artworks it did”. Actual understanding was measured by asking
participants how they thought the system worked and on what criteria it based its
recommendations in the interview. Open questions included: “Could you please tell
me your thoughts about how the system works?” and “On what criteria do you think
the system bases its recommendations?” Participants’ responses were compared to the
way the system actually worked and scored accordingly (see the results section for a
description of this comparison).
H. Cramer etal.
3.3.2 Dependent variables
Acceptance: Acceptance was measured twofold: acceptance of the system and acceptance of the recommendations. In the experiment, participants were asked to select
six artworks they found interesting. Acceptance of the system was measured right
after the participant had ﬁnished selecting the six artworks of interest with a scenario
question: “The artworks in the current system are only 700 of a collection of 1400
pieces. Suppose you would have a chance to get a limited edition print of one of the
artworks of the other half of the collection for free. You do not know what artworks
are in this collection. You can choose only one. You are given two options: You would
either be able to choose one artwork by going through a catalogue manually, with one
artwork per page, and you only have 2minutes to do so. The other option is that the
system will take what it has learned from you in this session and will recommend three
artworks from the other half of the collection. You would then be able to choose your
limited edition print from these three artworks. Would you rather use the system and
let it recommend you three artworks, or would you try to select one manually from a
catalogue? Why?” A time limit was given for the ﬁrst option, whereas a limit to the
amount of paintings shown was given for the second option. This was done to ensure
that participants would not think it was possible to take home a catalogue and browse
it at leisure. The aim of this scenario was to create a situation of information overload, where recommenders might be a helpful alternative in order to discover whether
participants intended to use the system again.
Acceptance of the recommendations was measured by the number of recommended
artworks in the participant’s ﬁnal selection of six artworks. For instance, a participant
who had selected six artworks from the recommendations rather than from the rated
artworks was thought to have a high level of acceptance of the recommendations. In
addition, the level of interest in the artworks that were recommended was used as
a measure of acceptance of the recommendations. A participant who scored the recommended artworks as more interesting than other artworks in the selection of six
artworks was seen to accept the recommendations more.
Acceptance was further explored by open interview questions such as “Did you
think the system was good at giving recommendations? Why?”, “Did the recommendations match your interest? In what aspects?” and “Would you use the system again
for the same type of task (ﬁnding artworks for a talk)? Why?” Further questionnaire
items that measured concepts related to acceptance were derived from items from the
technology acceptance model. Participants’ attitudes towards the system were measured by questions adapted from Venkatesh et al.’s UTAUT questionnaire for
technology acceptance. Three questions were included to measure intent to use the
system; also adapted from Venkatesh et al. Acceptance was further explored by open
interview questions such as “Would you use the system again for the same type of task
(ﬁnding artworks for a talk)? Why?”.
Perceived competence of the system: Items to measure perceived usefulness and
competence of the system were also adapted from Venkatesh et al. ; eight items
were included in analysis. Perceived competence of the system and its recommendations were additionally addressed with open interview questions such as “Did you think
The effects of transparency on trust in and acceptance of a content
the system was good at giving recommendations? Why?”, “Did the recommendations
match your interest? In what aspects?”.
Trust: Jian’s et al. note that while a lot of authors have described the concept
of trust, practical methods to measure trust appear scarce . Jiang
and colleagues describe how comparing results of existing scales was not feasible
because of differences in the scope of the scales. Jiang etal. additionally note that
these scales were predominantly based on theory and not on experimental validation.
Jian’s et al. have subsequently developed an empirically validated trust scale.
This questionnaire scale is general in nature and needed to be adapted to the context of
the system used. For instance, Jian’s et al. developed a speciﬁc scale to measure
trust in hybrid inspection systems for detecting faults in product manufacturing, using
Jian’s scale to validate their questionnaire. Jian’s et al. original questionnaire
was adapted and used in this study.
Twelve questionnaire Likert-type scale items were posed on trust in the system. Six
out of the twelve questions used to measure trust were adapted from Jian et al. .
The other questions were designed by the ﬁrst author and focused on measuring to
what extent the participant trusted the system to be competent. Ten questions were
used in analysis.
An open interview question further explored participants’ trust toward the system:
“To what extent do you trust the system? Why?” and “For what type of activities do
you think you would trust the system?”.
Attitudes towards the ‘why’ and ‘sure’ features: Participants’ attitudes toward the
‘why’ and ‘sure’ features were explored in both the questionnaire and interview items.
Participants were also asked whether they thought the system should explain more
about the way it worked with the scaled questionnaire item “I think that the system
should give an explanation why it recommended an art work to me.” An open interview question explored this further: “Did you want the system to explain more about
how it recommends art works? If so, what would you like to know?”
Two to six additional scaled questions were offered in each condition, which
addressed usefulness, ease of use and understandability of the speciﬁc transparency
feature offered. In the non-transparent condition two additional questions were asked
on the need for transparency information, e.g. “An explanation on why an artwork has
been recommended would be useful”. In the ‘sure’ and ‘why’ conditions six questionnaire scale items such as “I found the ‘% sure’ percentages for recommendations useful” and “I thought the ‘why’ explanations were clear and understandable,” were asked.
Interview questions, both open and closed, further investigated participants’ opinions of how useful an offered transparency option (if applicable) was and whether they
thought the system should explain recommendations. Nine interview questions were
included specifically to evaluate the speciﬁc transparency feature offered in the ‘sure’
and ‘why’ conditions, with questions such as: “Did you notice the [‘sure’ / ‘why’]
feature in the system” and “Did they inﬂuence how you felt about the system? In what
Demographics: Participants’ demographics and other background variables that
could inﬂuence acceptance of the system were measured, including age, gender, computer experience, experience with recommender systems, level of education, interest
in art and knowledge of art.
H. Cramer etal.
Long-term interests and attitudes: Long-term perceived competence of the system
(for example “I like the artworks the system recommended to me’), trust in the system
(for example ‘I am conﬁdent in the system”) and intent to use the system again (for
example “The next time I am looking for a recommendation for an artwork I would
like to use this system again”) were measured in a follow-up experiment session.
3.4 Procedure
Each participant participated in one of the three conditions and took part in individual, task-oriented sessions that lasted 45min to three hours. Each individual session
with a participant consisted of three parts: (1) observation of the participant carrying
out a task using the CHIP system (described in more detail below) (2) a questionnaire evaluating participants’ acceptance and trust in the system and (3) a structured
interview to further explore participants’ attitudes towards the system. The study was
conducted by two researchers; each observed 50% of the participants for each of the
three conditions. Eight weeks after their session, participants were sent a follow-up
questionnaire to evaluate participants’ longer-term attitudes towards the system. Each
of these parts of the study is explained below.
3.4.1 Task observation
At the beginning of each session, the experimenter introduced the study and the CHIP
system. Brieﬂy explaining the purpose of the CHIP system, the researcher explained
how to rate artworks (by clicking one of the three stars), where recommendations
would appear (in the lower section of the screen), how to see the full list of recommendations (by clicking the ‘see all artworks’ link). The researcher also explained that the
system would show their liked and disliked artworks, showed how to get more information about an artwork (by clicking its picture) and explained the ‘why’ or ‘sure’
features if applicable.
Participants were given the task to use the CHIP system to select six art works to
develop a short presentation about their personal art interests. During this task, participants were observed by the researcher and were asked to think aloud. The sessions
were audio recorded and participant behaviour was collected by screen capture software and log ﬁles. The researchers took notes paying attention to comments about
the system and reactions to its recommendations, the ‘why’ and ‘sure’ features and to
usability difﬁculties the participants encountered.
When participants ﬁnished after selecting six artworks, they were asked to paste
their selection in a word document and indicate for each artwork how interesting they
found the artwork on a seven-point Likert-type scale “I think this artwork is really
interesting.”, ranging from “very strongly disagree” to “very strongly agree”. Observation sessions lasted from 45minutes to 3hours.
3.4.2 Questionnaire
After completing the task, participants were asked to ﬁll out a questionnaire. The posttask questionnaire included questions addressing participant’s demographics, and 41
The effects of transparency on trust in and acceptance of a content
seven-point Likert-type scale questions addressing perceived usefulness and competence of the system, attitude towards the system, intent to use the system, trust in the
system, and two (non-transparent condition) to six (‘why’ and ‘sure’ conditions) items
measuring attitudes towards transparency information.
3.4.3 Interview
An interview concluded the session. Participants were ﬁrst asked to explain for each
of the six selected artworks why this artwork was interesting to them. Then the acceptance scenario was presented to the participants. The interview’s ﬁfteen questions then
addressed participants’ perception of competence of the system, participants’ trust in
the system, understanding of the system and their reasoning while rating artworks and
attitudes towards transparency.
3.4.4 Follow-up questionnaire
After eight weeks, participants were sent an email with a link to an online questionnaire. The questionnaire ﬁrst tested participants’ satisfaction with their previous
selection of six artworks. As a reminder, a picture of each of the artworks they had
selected was included, and participants were asked to indicate again for each artwork how interesting they thought the artwork was on a seven-point Likert-type scale.
The questionnaire then showed participants the ﬁrst ﬁve recommended artworks they
had received during their ﬁrst session. Thirteen questions then addressed long-term
perceived competence, trust and intent to use the system again.
3.5 Participants
During a period of three weeks, 82 participants were involved in the study. Twenty-two
participants were excluded from analysis. Sixty participants were included in quantitative analysis: twenty-two participants were included in the non-transparent condition,
nineteen participants were included in the transparent condition and another nineteen
were included in the ‘sure’ condition. Participants were excluded from quantitative
analysis when the system had not provided them with any recommendations during
their session (this could happen when they rated a large number of artworks, but only
rated a very limited number of artworks as interesting), if they had not noticed the
recommendations in the lower section of the screen, had not used the ‘why’ feature
in the transparent condition or if technical problems were encountered (e.g. time-outs
of the application). The data from excluded participants were included in qualitative
analysis to gain information on possible usability issues and issues with the system’s
recommendation strategies in order to develop guidelines for recommenders in the art
Participants were volunteers drawn from the researchers’ professional and personal
networks. These participants suggested others who may also be interested in participating in the study. Because this might have lead to an overrepresentation of people
H. Cramer etal.
Table 2 Participant
characteristics
Mean = 34.4years (SD = 13.63,
range 18–68)
Male N = 31, Female N = 29
Maximum level of completed education
1.67% (N = 1) primary education
13.3% (N = 8) secondary education
21.7% (N = 13) receiving/completed
professional tertiary education
63.4% (N = 38) receiving/completed
academic tertiary education
Previous experience with
recommender systems
31.7% (N = 19) previous experience
Computer experience
Mean = 5.43, SD = 1.23, on a 1–7
Knowledge of art
Mean = 3.55, SD = 1.67, on a 1–7
scale, 13.3% high level
Interest in art
Art in general: mean = 5.10,
SD = 1.57, on a 1–7 scale
Art in Rijksmuseum: mean = 4.45,
SD = 1.44, on a 1–7 scale
who are interested in technology or art, computer science and art background was measured in the experiment. Participants were relatively well educated and experienced
in using computers. None were experts on recommender systems. Both art experts
and non-experts were involved in the study. Table 2 offers an overview of participant
characteristics.
The demographics age, gender, computer experience and interest in art were not
found to have a significant inﬂuence on the results of this study. However, female
participants reported significantly less experience in using computers than male participants (Mann–Whitney U = 270.500, p = .006, Nm = 31, N f = 29). Computer
experience however was not found to be correlated with other variables.
This results section is structured as follows: ﬁrst the effects of transparency on perceived understanding, perceived competence, acceptance and trust are discussed. The
effects of offering conﬁdence percentages as in the conﬁdence rating (‘sure’) condition
are discussed afterwards. Possible changes in long-term attitudes towards the system
are addressed as well. The main correlations between the variables are discussed in
the last subsection. Possible explanations and implications of the results described
in this section are discussed in the subsequent discussion (Sect.5). Table 3 shows
the ﬁnal scales used for analysis, reliability of the scales and means scores of our
main variables of interest. Cronbach’s Alpha was used to determine scale reliability.
Questions that decreased scale reliability were excluded. To test our hypotheses, we
conducted Mann–Whitney analyses as an alternative to t-tests as the data did not meet
parametric assumptions.
The effects of transparency on trust in and acceptance of a content
Table 3 Final scales and variables included in overall analysis, including Cronbach’s alpha for the ﬁnal
scale. Questionnaire items were seven-point Likert-type scale questions, with scale ranging from 1 (‘very
strongly disagree’) to 7 (‘very strongly agree)
Perceived transparency of the system
Cronbach’s Alpha=.7433
Mean=4.52, SD=1.19, range: 2.0–6.5
I understand why the system recommended the artworks it did.
I understand what the system bases its recommendations on
Perceived competence
Cronbach’s Alpha=.914
Mean=4.0687, SD=1.14920, range: 1.63–6.50
I think that the system’s criteria in choosing recommendations for me are similar to my own
I like the artworks the system recommended to me.
I think the system should use other criteria for recommending artworks to me than it uses
now. (inverted for analysis)
The artworks that the system recommended really interest me.
I think that the artworks that the system recommends correspond to my art interests.
I think the system does not understand why I like certain artworks I rated as interesting.
(inverted for analysis)
I think the system does a good job adapting to what I tell it to be interesting artworks.
The system correctly adapts its recommendations on the basis of my ratings.
Intent to use the system
Cronbach’s Alpha=.914
Mean=4.3833, SD=1.35828, range: 1–6.67
I would rather choose the 6 artworks by hand from the collection of artworks than use the
system if I would have to perform this task again. (inverted for analysis)
I would like to use the system again for similar tasks.
The next time I am looking for a recommendation for an artwork I would like to use this
Acceptance of Recommendations
Mean=2.04, SD=1.86, range: 0–6
Number of recommendations that the participant included in their ﬁnal selection of 6 artworks.
Acceptance of the System
Participants choosing system selection=32, Participants choosing manual selection=28,
Total N =60
Scenario measuring participant’s willingness to delegate task to system.
Cronbach’s Alpha=.901
Mean=4.2, SD=1.06, range: 1.8–6.2
I am conﬁdent in the system
I trust the system not to recommend artworks that are not interesting to me.
The system is deceptive. (inverted for analysis)
I trust the system to recommend me all artworks that are of interest to me.
The system is reliable.
Using this system for these tasks is risky. (inverted for analysis)
I trust the system.
Using this system is risky. (inverted for analysis)
I can depend on the system.
I trust the recommendations of the system to match my own selection.
H. Cramer etal.
4.1 Effects of transparency on perceived and actual understanding
As expected, participants did ﬁnd the transparent (‘why’) condition more transparent
than the non-transparent condition (Mann–Whitney U = 136.500, p(1 −tailed) =
.025, N‘non’ = 22, N‘why’ = 19, Mean‘non’ = 4.4, SD‘non’ = 1.1, Mdn‘non’ =
5.0, Mean‘why’ = 4.9, SD‘why’ = 1.4, Mdn‘why’ = 5.0). Participants in the con-
ﬁdence rating (‘sure’) condition did not think they understood the system better than
thoseinthenon-transparentcondition(Mann–WhitneyU = 195.500, p(2 −tailed) =
.720, N‘sure’ = 19, Mean‘sure’ = 4.3, SD‘sure’ = 1.1, Mdn‘sure’ = 4.0). This ﬁnding shows that offering explanations for the systems recommendations indeed causes
participants to feel they understand the system better, while offering a conﬁdence percentage does not. However, these results relate to participants’ self-reported, perceived
understanding.
Whether offering explanations also increased actual understanding of the system
was investigated by content analysis of participants’ answers to the interview questions about understanding. Because of resource constraints and its time-consuming
nature, this qualitative analysis was limited to the participants of one of the researchers. Only answers of participants who participated in the non-transparent or ‘why’
condition (N = 21) were analysed. Comments made by these participants concerning composition of the user proﬁle, the rating process and recommendation process
were individually rated by three researchers for accuracy. Participants’ answers to
these questions were divided in atomic statements; duplicate statements in a single
participant’s answers were removed. A participant’s ‘understanding score’ was then
calculated by dividing the total number of accurate comments by the total of correct
and incorrect comments. Three coders coded statements to verify the coding scheme’s
reliability. Inter-coder reliability was analysed by computation of the Intraclass Correlation Coefﬁcient. The ICC can range between 0 (indicating no interrater agreement)
and 1 (indicating total interrater agreement). In this study, the intraclass correlation
coefﬁcient produced a value of 0.808, which can be considered to be very goodNückles
et al. . Having obtained an acceptable interrater reliability, subsequent analysis
was carried out on the data of the main coder only. A similar procedure is followed in
Kurasaki .
Interesting is that for the participants whose understanding was analysed, there was
no significant correlation between how well participants thought they understood the
system and their actual understanding (Spearman’s rho=.005, p(1 −tailed) = .491,
N = 21). This illustrates the necessity of measuring participants’ actual understanding
as well as participants’ perceived understanding; not all participants appear capable
of assessing their own level of understanding of a system.
A significant difference was found between actual understanding of subjects in the
non-transparent condition (Mdn = 7.14) and actual understanding of subjects in the
transparent (‘why’) condition (Mdn=9.50) on how the system works, Mann–Whitney
U = 20.000, p(1 −tailed) = .0065. Participants in the transparent ‘why’ condition
were found to have a better understanding of how the system came to its recommendations; this conﬁrms our manipulation of transparency in the ‘why’ condition was
successful.
The effects of transparency on trust in and acceptance of a content
4.2 Effects of transparency on perceived competence
The data did not support our hypothesis that a system with a more transparent decisionmaking process will be perceived as more competent. Scores on perceived competence
of the systems were compared using the Mann–Whitney test between the non-transparent condition and the transparent (‘why’) condition. No significant difference was
found between the conditions (Mann–Whitney U = 190.000, p(1 −tailed) = .310,
N‘non’ = 22, N‘why’ = 19, Mdn‘non’ = 4.0, Mdn‘why’ = 4.5). It appears that
transparency does not necessarily involve an increase in the perceived competence of
4.3 Effects of transparency on acceptance
To test our hypothesis that transparency would increase system acceptance, both acceptance of the system and acceptance of the system’s recommendations were compared for the non-transparent and transparent (‘why’) condition. The ﬁnal selection
of artworks for participants in the transparent (‘why’) condition contained significantly more recommendations than in the non-transparent condition (Mann–Whitney
U = 125.500, p(1 −tailed) = .013, N‘non’ = 22, N‘why’ = 19, Mdn‘non’ = 1.0,
Mdn‘why’ = 2.0). Acceptance of the recommendations was indeed higher in the
transparent condition.
However, when investigating acceptance of the system using the scenario question
that measured participants’ willingness to delegate a task to system, no significant
difference was found. Participants in the transparent condition were not more willing
to delegate the task of selecting artworks to the recommender than the participants
in the non-transparent condition. In the non-transparent version 11 of 22 participants
chose the system, while in the ‘why’ condition 10 of the 19 participants chose the system; not a significant difference. Participants’ intent to use the system were compared
using the Mann–Whitney test (Mann–Whitney U = 194.500, p(1 −tailed) = .352,
N‘non’ = 22, N‘why’ = 19, Mdn‘non’ = 4.5, Mdn‘why’ = 5.0). No significant
difference was found.
Our hypothesis that a more transparent decision making process would increase
participants’ acceptance of the system can only be partially accepted. The data suggests that it is important to differentiate between acceptance of recommendations and
acceptance of the recommender system. The data of this study indicate that transparency does indeed inﬂuence acceptance of the system’s recommendations, but that the
transparency feature offered here does not inﬂuence acceptance or adoption of the
system itself.
4.4 Effects of transparency on trust in the recommender system
Contrary to our hypothesis, participants in the transparent condition did not trust the
system more. Scores on trust between participants in the non-transparent condition
and the transparent (‘why’) condition were compared using the Mann-Whitney test
(Mann–Whitney U = 180.000, p(1 −tailed) = .224, N‘non’ = 22, N‘why’ = 19,
H. Cramer etal.
Mdn‘non’=4.2, Mdn‘why’=4.7). No significant difference was found on the scores
on trust in the system between the conditions.
4.5 Effects of certainty ratings: the ‘sure’ condition
Offering different types of information about a system was expected to have different
effects on attitudes towards a system. The ‘sure’ condition provided certainty ratings
in a numerical format. It did not provide insight in the system’s reasoning process and
the reasons behind the recommendations. Participants in the conﬁdence rating (‘sure’)
condition did not perceive the system to be more transparent. This was expected, as
the ‘sure’ feature did not offer participants insight in the criteria the system uses to
choose recommendations. It was not expected to significantly increase understanding
of the system’s reasoning process. Scores on perceived competence of the systems
were also compared between the non-transparent condition and the ‘sure’ condition
(Mann–Whitney U = 170.000, p(2 −tailed) = .307, N‘non’ = 22, N‘sure’ = 19,
Mdn‘non’ = 4.0, Mdn‘sure’ = 3.9) as were scores on intent to use (Mann–Whitney,
U = 165.000, p(2 −tailed) = .247, N‘non’ = 22, N‘sure’ = 19, Mdn‘non’ = 4.5,
Mdn‘sure’=4.0). No significant differences were found.
No significant differences were found either on acceptance of the system and its
recommendations between the non-transparent and ‘sure’ condition. The ﬁnal selection of artworks for participants in the ‘sure’ condition did not contain more recommendations than in the non-transparent condition (Mann–Whitney U = 168.000,
p(2 −tailed)=.271, N‘non’=22, N‘sure’=19, Mdn‘non’=1.0, Mdn‘sure’=2.0).
In the acceptance scenario, participants in the ‘sure’ condition were not more willing
to delegate the task of selecting artworks to the recommender than the participants in
the non-transparent condition. Participants also did not trust it more than those in the
non-transparent condition did (Mann–Whitney U = 187.500, p(2 −tailed) = .573,
N‘non’=22, N‘sure’=19, Mdn‘non’=4.2, Mdn‘sure’=3.8).
It appears that not all information that can be offered to the user about system decisions leads to improved transparency, acceptance and trust. Participants additionally
reported to ﬁnd the certainty percentage slightly not useful on a 1–7 Likert-type scale
question (Mean = 3.70, N = 19, SD = 1.45), making positive effects on trust and
acceptance of the feature less likely.
4.6 Long-term attitudes towards the system and its recommendations
Fifty-three of the 60 participants responded to the follow-up email sent eight weeks
after their ﬁrst session and ﬁlled out an online follow-up questionnaire. The questionnaire addressed long-term perceived competence, trust and intent to use the system
again. Participants were presented with the artworks they had chosen as their favourites and the ﬁrst ﬁve of the system’s recommendations. Participants rated the artworks
they had chosen as their favourites in the ﬁrst sessions as interesting in the follow-up
questionnaire as well; their art preferences and attitudes towards the system were more
or less constant. Results on perceived competence, trust and intent were the same in
the ﬁrst session and the follow-up questions. Kruskal–Wallis tests were used to test for
The effects of transparency on trust in and acceptance of a content
differences between the conditions on these scores and whether scores had increased or
decreased more in either of the conditions. No significant differences were found. The
constructs as measured in the ﬁrst session can be taken as representative of longer-term
opinions of the participants. A possible implication might be that user preferences in
the e-culture domain might be relatively stable and proﬁles might be valid during a
longer period after ﬁrst training a system.
4.7 Correlations for perceived understanding
Based on our hypotheses we expected perceived understanding to correlate with perceived competence, trust and acceptance. Spearman’s rho was used to calculate correlations between perceived understanding and the main variables (Fig.5). Perceived
understanding did correlate with trust and system acceptance. Perceived understanding
of the system (Spearman’s rho = .517, p(2 −tailed) = .000, N = 60), and perceived
competence of the system (rho = .663, p(2 −tailed) = .000, N = 60) also were correlated to participants’ reported intent to use the system. These ﬁndings conﬁrm the
expected relationships between variables; they suggest that perceived understanding
relates to system acceptance, which is the user’s choice to delegate a task to the system. Unexpectedly however, perceived understanding did not directly correlate with
acceptance of the recommendations, nor did acceptance of recommendations correlate with acceptance of the system. This last ﬁnding illustrates the need to distinguish
between acceptance of a user-adaptive system as a whole and its recommendations,
suggestions or decisions.
Trust is correlated with intent to use (rho = .805, p(1 −tailed) = .000, N = 60),
the decision whether to use the system or catalogue (rho=.453, p(1 −tailed)=000,
N = 60) and to the acceptance of recommendations (rho = .363, p(1 −tailed) =
.002, N = 60). We conclude that trust is related to the decision whether to use the
understanding
competence
Acceptance
recommendations
Acceptance
Fig. 5 Main significant correlations, Spearman’s rho, p(1 −tailed) < .05
H. Cramer etal.
5 Discussion
This section offers a discussion of the results described in the section above. We indicate a number of limitations to the study and features of the conditions that might have
inﬂuenced results. Participants’ responses and observations from the participant sessions are discussed to explore further our quantitative results. Implications of this study
and guidelines for user-adaptive systems in a cultural heritage context are discussed
5.1 The effects of transparency on understanding
The manipulation of transparency was effective in our study. The results of this study
show that the transparent version of the recommender system was indeed better understood. Participants in the transparent condition reported higher perceived understanding and were also found to have more actual understanding of the recommendation
criteria. When asked about their understanding of the system in the interview, participants with the lowest degrees of understanding offered incorrect views about how
the system worked. For example, one participant in the non-transparent condition
reported that the artworks were divided into categories, which is incorrect since there
are multiple features or properties associated with artworks. Another participant in the
non-transparent condition could not comment anything about how the system works.
Finally, another participant in the non-transparent condition thought that the system
used collaborative ﬁltering techniques to provide recommendations, when in fact the
system relies on content-based techniques. Such misunderstandings can be countered
by offering users explanations on how a system selects the recommended items. Participants with the highest degrees of understanding gave more detailed descriptions of artwork features or properties attached to artworks, and reported that the system provides
recommendations based on similarities between artworks based on their properties.
Understanding of the system led to some emergent behaviour for some of our participants. Subjects in the transparent ‘why’ condition also reported ‘ﬁltering behaviour’
in their interaction with the system; these subjects indicated that they were actively
adapting their rating behaviour to make the system provide different and better recommendations. For example, some participants noted that when they rated Asian art as
interesting, the system would provide related themes in explanations. They would however not only want Asian art recommendations and therefore would rate some Asian
art as less interesting than they would have otherwise. This illustrates how transparency and understanding can inﬂuence user feedback to a system. It is important to
make a system more understandable to increase acceptance of its recommendations,
but also to ensure that user feedback increases perceived and actual performance of
the system. Making a system more transparent without offering users a direct way to
correct a system’s mistakes will be frustrating and is likely to affect attitudes towards
the system negatively.
Which aspects of a system’s decision making process are better understood when
users interact with a more transparent system is likely to be dependent on the speciﬁc
type of transparency offered. In all of the conditions, including the non-transparent
The effects of transparency on trust in and acceptance of a content
condition, the systems showed pictures of the artworks that the user had rated positively and negatively. One could argue that this communicated to the user that the
system ‘knew’ of the user’s likes and dislikes, and thus provided information on how
the recommendations were made. As such, all conditions gave some information concerning the fact that the system used positive and negative user ratings. The transparent
condition however was still better understood and led to higher acceptance of the recommendations. This suggests that transparency can indeed improve user interaction
with user-adaptive systems.
5.2 The effects of transparency on perceived competence
We expected that a system with a more transparent decision making process would
be perceived as more competent, but this was not the case in our study. A number of
reasons can be offered for this ﬁnding. Participants in the transparent condition did
not always agree with the criteria included in the explanation why an artwork had
been recommended. One participant for example, who was an art expert, disagreed
with some of the labelling of artworks. He thought the criteria and explanations were
too simplistic. This is in line with previous literature where users who are familiar
with the content are expected to be more critical of the system and perceive it as less
dependable . It could be that the transparent condition made
discrepancies between the user’s decision-making process and that of the system more
obvious. Even when a participant liked a recommendation, the criteria on the basis
of which the system recommended the artwork and the reasons why the participant
had chosen the artwork could still be different. However, scores on perceived competence were not different in the transparent condition, indicating that this was not a
deciding issue in this study. Explanations could also help convince users of a system’s
competence, if an explanation itself is acceptable to them. An extensive discussion of
the perceived competence of the recommender, its relation to actual competence and
effects of transparency on this relation can be found in Cramer et al. .
5.3 The effects of transparency on acceptance
A more transparent decision making process was expected to increase users’ acceptance of the system. This could only be partially conﬁrmed in our study; only recommendations were accepted more. Why are users more accepting of a system’s
recommendations if they are more transparent, but is a more transparent system not
necessarily adopted more? Explaining why a particular recommendation had been
made, might have helped acceptance of that recommendation. It might have helped
participants accept individual artworks or increased their liking for artworks they
found interesting, but did not convince them to adopt the system more. In response to
the interviews’ acceptance scenario, participants expressed a preference for selecting
artworks by hand. The decision to use or not use the system appeared to depend more
on whether an acceptable artwork could be found by browsing the catalogue within
the time available or that an efﬁcient recommender tool would be needed. If there
is no perceived information overload, a recommender system appears unnecessary.
H. Cramer etal.
System competence and transparency appeared to be secondary to these considerations in overall system acceptance. There is a possibility that explanations make it
easier to critique a system and could in some cases have negatively inﬂuenced trust
and acceptance. However, this appears not to be the main cause of the absence of the
expected positive effect of transparency in this study; no significant differences were
found between conditions in perceived competence of the system.
It is possible that in other situations, transparency of recommendation can help
acceptance of a system as well, but whether the system will actually be used depends
on a large number of other factors, such as perceived competence of the system and
whether the user actually feels the need to use a system. Indeed, perceived understanding of the system and perceived competence of the system were correlated to
participants’ reported intent to use the system. This is consistent with existing technology acceptance models .
5.4 The effects of transparency on user trust
Trust was positively correlated with perceived understanding of the recommender
system. Transparency aimed at increasing understanding of a system can thus play a
role in building trust. However, the hypothesis that a system with a more transparent
decision-making process will be trusted more could not be conﬁrmed in this study.
The transparent version of the system used in this study was not trusted more. Some
of the possible reasons behind the absence of effects of transparency on acceptance
of the system (in contrast to acceptance of recommendations, where a positive effect
was found), might also play a role in this absence of effects on trust.
A number of issues speciﬁc to the cultural heritage domain of the application could
play a role in these results. Trust in the system appears to be mainly based on the
perceived competence of the system. It is possible that users could more easily identify limitations of the system in the transparent condition. This could be related to the
relatively low scores on perceived competence of the system, (mean=4.07 on a 1–7
scale, SD = 1.15, range: 1.63–6.50, only slightly above neutral). Participants noted
that the system could currently not address all of their art interests. Only concepts
deﬁned by experts could be used for the content-based recommendations. Many of
the aesthetic and affective interests that play a role in the likes or dislikes of participants in art (e.g. their personal interests, or emotional reactions) did not appear to be
addressed. Participants were able to identify unsuitable criteria used for recommendations in the transparent version. Possibly, the perceived limitations of the system
might have cancelled out any positive effects of transparency on trust.
Another issue speciﬁc to the context of cultural heritage and art is that recommendations involved static visual artworks, such as paintings, or photographs of historical
objects and visual objects such as statues. Due to the nature of these recommendations,
it was possible to evaluate quality of the recommendations instantly. Participants could
immediately see the pictures of the recommended artworks and decide whether they
liked them or not. This is in contrast with, for example, movie recommenders, where
users ﬁrst need to watch a recommended movie before they know whether the system’s
recommendations are any good. The risk to the user in following up on a recommen-
The effects of transparency on trust in and acceptance of a content
dation is low as the recommendation itself and the content of the recommended item
were largely the same. Additionally, risks of receiving less interesting recommendations are relatively low in an e-culture context. Consequences of seeing less interesting
artworks instead of the ones you would really be interested in, are not very serious.
Perhaps the concept of trust plays less of a role in interaction with user-adaptive
recommenders, especially in cases where direct evaluation of the correctness of recommendations is possible and risks associated with system mistakes are small. It
can also be argued that when the intentions of a system are clear and match the users’
goal, the concept of trust is only partially applicable as rather only competence-related
aspects of trust are of interest. In the cultural heritage domain, trust might for example
be more relevant in contexts where the correctness of information provided about the
artworks might be unclear. Trust in perceived competence appeared to be of main
importance in this study.
Self-reporting of trust appeared somewhat problematic in this study’s interviews.
Interesting is that participants did report trusting the system, but that this was not
actually translated into willingness to let the system choose artworks for them. They
still would rather choose themselves. It could be argued that focus should be on the
willingness to delegate to a system, instead of trying to measure trust in such situations.
While trust appears to be a popular research concept in human-computer interaction,
currently available methods to measure trust appear to lack standardisation. Widely
accepted, standard scales that are applicable to interaction with user-adaptive systems
are not available (yet). While the scale we used can for example be adapted and re-used
in other studies, further research is necessary addressing this issue.
5.5 Effects of certainty ratings on interaction
The study ﬁndings show that offering explanations had a significant effect on user
understanding and acceptance of the recommendations. The transparency feature that
showed certainty ratings however, did not have such an effect. The interviews offered
some insight into why the conﬁdence rating (‘sure’) condition did not impact trust and
acceptance. Seven participants commented on the discrepancy of their interest in artworks and the percentages given by the system. One participant reported liking an artwork labelled as 8% sure, while disliking one the system was 27% sure about. Another
said he understood why a particular artwork had been labelled as 82% sure and that the
percentage ﬁt the ratings he had given, but that he did not really like the artwork itself.
Generally, percentages were under 50% during most of the participants’ session as
the system was building training data to become ‘more sure’ of its recommendations.
One participant remarked that this made it appear as if the system was not sure at all of
what the participant liked. On the other hand, another participant appreciated knowing that the system was not sure of its recommendations and that recommendations
were not “pushed” by the system. The knowledge that the system was unsure about
its recommendations made some participants less inclined to trust the system.
The certainty ratings were not always understood. Typically, in rule-based systems,
each argument contributing to a conclusion is given a certainty factor. Together these
factors build up to the overall certainty of a conclusion. One single certainty percentage, without really understanding in what way the system calculates the rating may
H. Cramer etal.
leave the user to wonder what the rating really represents. Percentages appear difﬁcult
to interpret; any indicators of system performance or (un)certainty should be provided
in a form that is meaningful (e.g. very sure, or unsure, instead of 70% or 10%). More
general and widely adopted retrieval systems such as Google also sort results using
numeric relevance measures, without showing the numbers themselves. Lee and See
 also note that abstract data, such as content-free percentages, lead to different
risk assessments than when speciﬁc instances and salient images are used. More concrete data might be just as, or more, powerful in risk assessment and their effect on
trust. McNee et al. have shown that simple certainty ratings can indeed invoke
more appropriate usage decisions.
Unforeseen effects of certainty ratings on feedback behaviour have to be considered as well. Four participants explicitly reported that the percentages inﬂuenced their
behaviour. They said that the percentages invited them to rate more artworks or change
ratings to make the system surer about recommendations they liked. One decided to
always rate all the recommendations he disliked so that the system would be more
than 50% sure, perceiving 50% as a cut-off rate for interest. Another aimed to get
the certainty percentages for liked artworks higher. One other participant stated that
the sure percentages sometimes decreased after giving more ratings. The participant
found that this reduced motivation for training the system further.
These ﬁndings indicate that there is not a one-size-ﬁts-all solution in making useradaptive systems more transparent. Future research is needed to fully understand
what combination of transparency features will optimise interaction with user-adaptive
5.6 Implications for designing user-adaptive systems in the cultural heritage domain
During observation of the 82 participants while they interacted with the art recommender, interesting observations were made that can inform the development of other
user-adaptive systems that try to personalise cultural heritage explorations.
5.6.1 System criteria need to match user and contextual criteria
During the interview, participants were asked the reasons why they liked the six artworks they had chosen as their favourites. Often, participants would not mention
artists, themes or other content-related features the system used to recommend artworks. Instead, they would refer to more personal or emotional criteria for liking an
artwork. They would quote the depiction of dynamic movement in a picture or its
colours as reasons for liking it. Participants mentioned personal experiences as well,
providing for example information about family history or family anecdotes that were
related to a particular artwork. One of our participants explained she did not particularly like a speciﬁc artwork, but did ﬁnd it very interesting. Another commented she
did not ﬁnd an artwork interesting at ﬁrst, but that reading its description had sparked
her interest. This illustrates the complexity of user feedback indicating which artworks
are interesting to them. The features that are important in the cultural heritage domain,
specifically in the context of art, can be difﬁcult for adaptive technology to deduce.
The effects of transparency on trust in and acceptance of a content
Generating a personalised tour in a museum might require different information than
generating an educational presentation, as might ﬁnding a single artwork the user
would like. It could be useful to include user deﬁned themes (e.g. tags) and collaborative-based recommendation to address shared interests or criteria not described
by expert annotators to include e.g. more personal or emotional criteria for liking an
5.6.2 Offering recommendations at the right time during the interaction process
In this study, a number of participants had to be excluded from quantitative analysis
because the system did not provide them with any recommendations. In a few cases,
this was not because they did not like any of the art in the system’s collection, but
because the system did not accommodate the users’ rating style. These participants
could be classiﬁed as ‘tough critics’; they generally rated artworks with a neutral
rating and did not rate many artworks positively. Consequently, the system did not
have enough properties to offer recommendations. In this study, some of these participants expressed offence at more or less ‘being told’ by the system that they had no
interest in art at all. This illustrates the need to carefully consider when to introduce
recommendations in the interaction process.
5.6.3 Adapt gradually, clearly and offer restore options
In this study, a negative rating sometimes caused the system to immediately eliminate
all artworks from its recommendations that had been annotated with the same themes.
Some participants were frustrated by these changes in the set of recommended artworks and became weary of correcting the system, fearing that they would eliminate
interesting artworks as well without having a way to retrieve them again. Gradual
adaptation and ways to restore eliminated options are necessary.
5.6.4 Consider interface effects on users’ mental model of the system
Some participants in this study suspected more adaptation than was actually implemented. The system used in this study did not adjust the ‘training set’ of the artworks
the user could rate (seen in the upper left corner of the screen, Fig.1). However, some
participants commented on how well the system adjusted the training set to their
preferences, even though the order of artworks was ﬁxed for all participants. Some
of these participants did not even notice the systems’ actual recommendations. This
observation suggests that the promise of adaptation can easily lead to an incorrect mental model of the system; interface design needs to take this into account and clearly
identify the adaptive elements of the interface.
5.6.5 Understandable and meaningful explanations
As Herlocker et al. found, explanations that are too complex might actually
negatively affect acceptance of a system. In this study some participants were confused by themes in explanations they could not relate to the recommended artwork.
H. Cramer etal.
For example, some participants encountered the theme ‘militia paintings’. Not all
participants understood what a ‘militia painting’ was and why it would be interesting
to them. Such expert annotations of cultural heritage information are often difﬁcult
to understand for the laymen users. One of the expert users however, found the same
term too simplistic. These anecdotes argue for not only proﬁling users to offer recommendations but also to offer user-adapted explanations that are meaningful to the
speciﬁc user. Explanations have to be tailored to the goal of a system as well. When
generating a personalised tour, they may for example need to focus on relationships
between artworks instead of the properties of a single artwork. Additionally, explanations might be used to seize the opportunity to educate the user about the styles and
techniques he or she appears to ﬁnd interesting.
5.6.6 Consider potential misconceptions
Transparency features such as explanations cannot be developed in a vacuum from the
rest of an interface. In the ‘why’ condition users’ mental models of the recommendation process were not only inﬂuenced by the explanations. The system used in this
experiment provided both an explanation and a regular description of the artwork. A
limited number of participants thought the system used the descriptions available for
each artwork to recommend artworks. Explanations thus might need to counter misconceptions users have formed while interacting with the rest of the system’s interface.
Unexpected effects of the explanation itself need to be considered as well. For example
in our study, a limited number of participants in the ‘why’ condition indicated when
seeing an explanation for the ﬁrst time, that the system based its recommendations
on too few criteria. It appeared that when they saw that an explanation for recommendation only listed one or two properties it “had in common with other artworks
they liked”, they thought the artwork itself had only been annotated with one or two
properties in total, while in reality the artworks had been annotated with many more
5.6.7 User freedom and control
As Jameson points out, users have a need for control that is in conﬂict with
automatic user-adaptivity. If a system’s criteria are transparent, ways should be provided to correct them if they appear unsuitable to the user. Knowing that a system’s
criteria are wrong, but not having any way to correct them could frustrate users and
negatively affect potential positive effects of transparency of system acceptance and
trust. More control over the system’s proﬁle might also be useful to accommodate
users that already have some idea of the type of recommendations they are looking
for. While users in the cultural heritage domain might be interested in learning about
new artworks, our participants appeared to have an idea of the art they ﬁnd interesting
if they are looking for an entertaining personalised experience. These users should
not only be provided with a training set, but also be provided with (understandable)
options of explicitly including or excluding categories of art in the system’s collection. Issues such as posed by Waern who discusses how users cannot always
improve on their own user proﬁle, should be taken into account.
The effects of transparency on trust in and acceptance of a content
5.7 Limitations of this study
There are a number of limitations to the results of this study regarding the effects
of transparency on trust and acceptance. First of all, only two features that provided
participants with some insight in how the system worked have been implemented and
evaluated in this study. Although careful deliberation preceded the choice for these
speciﬁc features, the implementations did not turn out to be optimal. The study discovered several issues surrounding the implementations and the features’ design were
encountered during participants’ interaction with them. Sections 5.5 and 5.6 discuss
such limitations and give a number of examples. Using other types of implementations
of transparency features, with more direct control to correct system mistakes could
have yielded different results.
In addition, there are limitations to generalisation of this study’s ﬁndings to other
domains. The visual nature of the recommendations facilitated direct evaluation of
the recommendation results. This is not the case for every domain, e.g. in case of
movie recommendations, direct evaluation of the movie is not possible; you have to
see the movie ﬁrst. Participants additionally did not have to deal with real, high-impact
consequences when the system would have made a mistake. Such risks are relatively
low in the art domain. In more risky situations where recommendations of ﬁltering
results cannot be immediately evaluated, trust and transparency might play a greater
role. Additionally, during this experiment, participants interacted with the system in
one session. The effect of transparency might be different when a system is used
repeatedly during a longer period of time. Users might for example be more interested
in transparency features during their ﬁrst encounters with a system and later only
be interested in explanations when a system presents them with unexpected results.
Follow-up research is needed to see whether this is the case.
6 Conclusion
This study contributes to the knowledge on interaction with user-adaptive systems,
and establishes the importance of transparency in interaction with user-adaptive systems. In our experiment, transparency increased the acceptance of recommendations.
Even though in the current study users’ acceptance of and trust in a content-based
recommender system as a whole were not impacted by transparency, transparency can
be considered an important aspect of interaction with user-adaptive systems. Findings
show that the transparent version was perceived as more understandable and perceived
understanding correlated with perceived competence, trust and acceptance of the system. Future research is necessary to evaluate the effects of transparency on trust in and
acceptance of user-adaptive systems. A distinction has to be made in future research
between acceptance of the system in users’ context and acceptance of its results.
It is important that this work is replicated with different types of transparency and in
various domains in order to come to a full understanding of the effects of transparency
on user interaction and system acceptance. There is also a need to replicate the work
in this paper in high-risk contexts in which the need for trust in a user-adaptive system may be more imperative. Trust in user-adaptive systems with (semi-) autonomous
H. Cramer etal.
functionality is scarcely evaluated. Even while for example an existing trust scale was
adapted for use in this study, further research is needed in order to increase knowledge
about trust and to develop reliable measurements that build on existing scales of trust.
Despite the limitations as identiﬁed in the discussion section above, the study has
shown that transparency impacts acceptance of system results and that transparency
features impact user behaviour in both expected and unexpected ways. This experiment
provided empirical evidence on the inﬂuence of system transparency on acceptance
of recommendations in a cultural heritage context. Our manipulation was successful and transparency increased user understanding and acceptance of the system’s
recommendations. The ﬁndings of this study argue for careful consideration of transparency features and explanations in user-adaptive systems. Beyond the positive effect
of transparency on user interaction, this study offers evidence that different transparency features have different effects on user experience that need to be considered in the
design of transparency features. Speciﬁc guidelines have been offered in this study for
developing user-adaptive systems for cultural heritage contexts where speciﬁc application goals might require speciﬁc designs of personalisation strategies and explanations. Through this work, we also aimed to highlight some of the methodological
challenges inherent in evaluating complex dimensions such as trust and contribute to
the development of reliable scales for measuring acceptance of user-adaptive systems.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank all participants in this study and colleagues and anonymous
reviewers for their helpful comments. This research is funded by the Interactive Collaborative Information
Systems (ICIS) project nr: BSIK03024, by the Dutch Ministry of Economical Affairs under contract to
the Human-Computer Studies Laboratory of the University of Amsterdam. The CHIP system is developed
by the CHIP (Cultural Heritage Information Personalization—www.chip-project.org) project, part of the
CATCH (Continuous Access To Cultural Heritage) program funded by the NWO (Netherlands Organisation
for Scientiﬁc Research). The Rijksmuseum Amsterdam gave permission for use of its artwork images.
Open Access
This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
provided the original author(s) and source are credited.