This is a repository copy of The Effect of Data Augmentation on Classification of Atrial
Fibrillation in Short Single-Lead ECG Signals Using Deep Neural Networks.
White Rose Research Online URL for this paper:
 
Version: Accepted Version
Proceedings Paper:
Hatamian, FN, Ravikumar, N, Vesal, S et al. (3 more authors) The Effect of Data
Augmentation on Classification of Atrial Fibrillation in Short Single-Lead ECG Signals
Using Deep Neural Networks. In: ICASSP 2020 - 2020 IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). ICASSP 2020 - 2020 IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 04-08
May 2020, Barcelona, Spain. IEEE , pp. 1264-1268. ISBN 978-1-5090-6632-2
 
© 2020 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be
obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing
this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for
resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this
work in other works.
 
 
Items deposited in White Rose Research Online are protected by copyright, with all rights reserved unless
indicated otherwise. They may be downloaded and/or printed for private study, or other acts as permitted by
national copyright laws. The publisher or other rights holders may allow further reproduction and re-use of
the full text version. This is indicated by the licence information on the White Rose Research Online record
for the item.
If you consider content in White Rose Research Online to be in breach of UK law, please notify us by
emailing including the URL of the record and the reason for the withdrawal request.
 
Accepted and scheduled to be presented in the 45th International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing .
The Effect of Data Augmentation on Classiﬁcation of Atrial Fibrillation in Short Single-Lead
ECG Signals Using Deep Neural Networks
Faezeh Nejati Hatamian∗, Nishant Ravikumar‡, Sulaiman Vesal†, Felix P. Kemeth∗, Matthias Struck∗and Andreas Maier†
∗Department of Image Processing and Medical Technology, Fraunhofer Institute for Integrated Circuits IIS, Erlangen, Germany
† Pattern Recognition Lab, Department of Computer Science, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nrnberg, Erlangen, Germany
‡ Centre for Computational Imaging and Simulation Technologies in Biomedicine (CISTIB), School of Computing,
LICAMM Leeds Institute of Cardiovascular and Metabolic Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Leeds, United Kingdom
Email: 
Abstract—Cardiovascular diseases are the most common cause
of mortality worldwide. Detection of atrial ﬁbrillation (AF) in the
asymptomatic stage can help prevent strokes. It also improves clinical
decision making through the delivery of suitable treatment such as,
anticoagulant therapy, in a timely manner. The clinical signiﬁcance
of such early detection of AF in electrocardiogram (ECG) signals
has inspired numerous studies in recent years, of which many aim
to solve this task by leveraging machine learning algorithms. ECG
datasets containing AF samples, however, usually suffer from severe
class imbalance, which if unaccounted for, affects the performance
of classiﬁcation algorithms. Data augmentation is a popular solution
to tackle this problem.
In this study, we investigate the impact of various data augmentation algorithms, e.g., oversampling, Gaussian Mixture Models
(GMMs) and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), on solving
the class imbalance problem. These algorithms are quantitatively and
qualitatively evaluated, compared and discussed in detail. The results
show that deep learning-based AF signal classiﬁcation methods
beneﬁt more from data augmentation using GANs and GMMs, than
oversampling. Furthermore, the GAN results in circa 3% better AF
classiﬁcation accuracy in average while performing comparably to
the GMM in terms of f1-score.
Keywords-atrial ﬁbrillation, data augmentation, GMM, DCGAN
I. INTRODUCTION
Based on a report released by the World Health Organization
(WHO), ischemic heart disease, also known as coronary artery
disease, were globally acknowledged as one of the most common
causes of death in 2016 . Previous studies have shown that AF
increases the risk of embolic stroke by ﬁve times . Moreover,
detection of atrial ﬁbrillation (AF) in the asymptomatic stage can
help prevent strokes and aid in the timely identiﬁcation of patients that are likely to beneﬁt from anticoagulant therapy .
In a healthy heart, the sinoatrial (SA) node, which works as the
natural pacemaker, generates electric signals in a periodic pattern.
These signals result in the periodic contraction of the heart’s atria
and ventricles. These consecutive contractions translate into the
PQRST peaks in an electrocardiogram (ECG) signal. Malfunction in the SA node may cause the atria to quiver instead of
performing a complete contraction. This can potentially result in
blood remaining in the atrial chamber, followed by the formation
of clots, and ultimately leading to ischemia and strokes , .
AF is reﬂected in the missing of the P-peak and its substitution
with an inconsistent and chaotic ﬁbrillatory wave (f-wave) and an
irregular R-peak to R-peak (R-R) interval in an ECG signal .
The existence of a distinct pattern in ECG signals with AF
disorder makes machine learning an appropriate tool for the
task of distinguishing the normal vs. AF signals. The possibility
of automatically detecting AF in ECG signals along with the
potential clinical impact of doing so, have led to the PhysioNet/CinC challenge organized in 2017, which focused on the
classiﬁcation of ECG signals with AF anomaly . Numerous
studies have adopted the traditional machine learning pipeline
using handcrafted features and reported models with accurate
results. In these approaches, expert knowledge of cardiologists
was taken into account to calculate representative and distinctive
features. These works either focus on detecting the presence of
the f-wave instead of the P-peak or are based on anomaly
detection in the R-R intervals in ECG signals .
Hand crafting descriptors and engineering features, however,
are very expensive, time-consuming and tedious. Moreover, they
demand the availability of expert knowledge. Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) provide the means to automate this
feature extraction process without the need for expert domain
knowledge. Moreover, the hierarchical data processing nature
of CNNs produces highly descriptive and informative features.
Deep CNNs have shown competitive performance in different
computer vision and medical applications and in some cases
matched or even surpassed the human accuracy .
Deep CNNs have also been adopted for ECG signal classiﬁcation. Rajpurkar et al. proposed a 34-layer CNN for
classifying 12 cardiac disorders by mapping the ECG signals
to their corresponding rhythmic disorder classes. Andreotti et
al. used ResNets for AF detection in ECG signals. The
residual connections in such networks help tackle the issue of
vanishing gradients, enabling deeper networks to be trained. An
alternative to the use of CNNs for supervised feature learning,
and the use of hand-crafted features, was proposed in . In
the representation block, they feed the raw ECG signals to a
stacked denoising autoencoder and train it in an unsupervised
manner. The result is then fed into a softmax regression layer.
Authors in use the famous AlexNet for feature extraction.
They fed AlexNet with R-T segments, which are extracted from
the ECG signals, and direct the result into a 2-layer feed-forward
neural network for detecting normal beats, paced beats and Rbbb
(Right Bundle Branch Blocks) beats. The work of Ziehlmann et
al. achieved one of the best classiﬁcation performances in
the PhysioNet 2017 challenge . Their best model is a 24-layer
CNN followed by an LSTM. The input to the network is the
logarithmic spectrogram of the ECG signals. In a similar work,
Chauhan et al. proposed to stack multiple LSTM layers for
the task of cardiovascular anomaly detection from ECG signals.
Previous studies on ECG signal classiﬁcation using deep
learning focus on proposing new and powerful architectures
that can better handle the aforementioned task. However, to
our knowledge, there is neither a universal agreement nor a
comprehensive and thorough study on the most effective data
augmentation algorithm to be employed to address the issue of
the class imbalance. In this work, we aim to close this gap.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In section II we
go over our classiﬁcation pipeline, discuss our contribution and
review the theoretical background of the algorithms we employ.
Section III is dedicated to describing the experimental setup and
summarizing the results. Finally, section IV concludes the paper.
II. PROCESSING FRAMEWORK AND THEORETICAL
BACKGROUND
A. Classiﬁcation Pipeline
The majority of previous studies employing deep learning for
ECG signal classiﬁcation, follow a common pipeline :
First the 1-D signals are pre-processed. The ECG signals can be
segmented into equal-size segments. Moreover, it is common to
transform the 1-D signals to 2-D logarithmic spectrograms. In
the next step, various data augmentation schemes are typically
employed to reduce class imbalance. It is worth noting that not
all studies employ data augmentation. Finally, the pre-processed
and augmented data is fed into the deep network architecture.
In this work, we focus on the data augmentation block and
evaluate various data augmentation schemes, in order to identify
the most suitable ones to enhance classiﬁcation performance. In
the literature and within this community, oversampling is the
most common data augmentation algorithm. In this paper, we
introduce and study the effectiveness of two more augmentation
algorithms, namely Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs).
B. Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM)
1) Gaussian Probability Distribution Function: Many random
events in nature follow Gaussian probability distribution functions (pdf). A Gaussian pdf is parameterized by two parameters,
i.e., the mean and the variance. For one dimensional data X, the
Gaussian pdf is represented by N(µ, σ) as in Eqn. 1.
N(X|µ, σ) =
However, for d-dimensional data X = [X1, ..., Xd], the
mean is a vector µ and the variance becomes a covariance matrix
Σ. The multivariate Gaussian pdf in this case is mathematically
expressed as in Eqn. 2.
N(X|µ, Σ) =
2(X−µ)T Σ−1(X−µ)
where |Σ| represents the determinant of the covariance matrix.
Thus, for this pdf to be well deﬁned, the covariance matrix Σ
needs to be positive-deﬁnite.
2) GMM: Despite the diversity of the Gaussian pdf, not all
the processes follow the Gaussian distribution. Such arbitrary
data distributions can, however, be approximated using a GMM,
i.e., by the weighted sum of more than one Gaussian component,
as in Eqn. 3:
p(X|µi, Σi, wi) =
wiN(X|µi, Σi) ,
where µi, Σi and wi represent the mean, covariance and mixture
weight of the i-th component. Furthermore, mixture weights wi
need to sum up to one. Given the data X, the parameters of
a GMM are usually estimated via the expectation maximization
(EM) algorithm in an iterative manner.
C. Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) are composed
of two sub-networks, i.e., a generator and a discriminator. The
generator takes a random noise vector z initially as input, which
represents the latent space to be learned, and learns the mapping
Figure 1: High level GAN architecture.
between this latent vector z and the data distribution. The
discriminator plays the role of an investigator, who determines
the legitimacy of the data generated by the generator from the
learned latent representation. The main objective of the generator
is to fool the discriminator. These two networks are trained
alternatively, which makes them grow together and therefore,
compete. The high level GAN architecture is depicted in Fig. 1.
GAN’s training, however, strongly depends on the two competing networks, i.e., the generator and the discriminator, and can
be highly unstable. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
shown great performance in supervised learning . Radford
et al. proposed to combine CNNs and GANs and called
the ﬁnal framework Deep Convolutional GAN (DCGAN). In
particular, they eliminated all the fully connected layers and
substituted them by convolutional layers in the discriminator and
transposed convolutional layer in the generator. Moreover, maxpooling and upsampling are replaced by strided convolution and
strided transposed convolution, respectively. In addition, in the
discriminator all the activation functions are LeakyReLU. In the
generator, all the activation functions are ReLU except for the
last layer which uses tanh as the activation function. Finally, for
further stabilizing the training, Batch Normalization (BN) is used
after all layers except the output of the generator and the input
of the discriminator.
III. EVALUATION
A. Dataset
1) Data Statistics: The data used in this study is publicly
available from the PhysioNet/CinC challenge 2017 . It
comprises 8528 single-lead ECG signals in four classes, namely
5154 Normal (N), 771 atrial ﬁbrillation (AF), 2557 Noisy and
46 Other rhythm signals. Following the main objective in this
work, we kept the Normal and AF classes and discarded the
Noisy and Other rhythm ones. The ECG signals’ recording times
vary between 9 and 61 seconds, which are sampled at the rate
of 300 Hz. The majority of the signals in the provided dataset
is 30s long, while a smaller subset is 60s long.
2) Data Segmentation: As different ECG signals in the dataset
have different length and the majority of deep classiﬁers require
the samples to have equal size, it is common to segment the
signals into smaller segments with equal sizes . In order
to do so, a segment length (SL) is chosen. In particular, ECG
signals longer than the chosen SL are cropped, whereas signals
shorter than the SL are discarded. In this work, we follow 
and use SL=1500 being equivalent to 5 seconds.
3) Class Imbalance and Data Augmentation: Using SL=1500,
AF class has 4674 signals and Normal class has 31939 signals
that is seven times the AF class, which indicates the presence
of signiﬁcant class imbalance. This is undesirable in supervised
learning as it would push the classiﬁer towards being biased
on the larger class. In order to tackle this problem, we use
data augmentation on the AF class. The data augmentation
algorithms that we use in this paper are oversampling, GMM
and DCGAN and we compare them with no data augmentation,
referred to as None. When using GMM and DCGAN for data
augmentation, we follow Davari et al. . That means, we train
these generative models using only the AF class samples, draw
virtual samples from the trained models and combine them with
the original samples so that the number of AF class samples
equals the Normal class samples.
For training the DCGAN and GMM, we tried both the 1-
D and 2-D (logarithmic spectrogram) variants of the ECG
signals. DCGAN performed better when trained using the 2-D
spectrograms, while GMM performed better when trained on the
1-D signals. The GANs have been shown to have high capacity in
producing high quality images . However, GMMs are unable
to accurately capture spatial correlations in 2-D images and are
used to generate 1-D signals .
4) Division of Data into Train, Validation and Test Subsets:
In order to divide our data into training set, validation set and
the test set, we opt for the following policy: We take 20% of
whole dataset as the test set. Then we divide the remaining 80%
into 90% training and 10% validation. We want to preserve the
original data statistics and keep the imbalanced class ratio during
the division. Therefore, in order to take x% from the data, we
take x% from the AF class and x% from the Normal class and
then concatenate them.
5) 2-D Data Representation: In order to convert our 1-D
signals to 2-D using logarithmic spectrogram, we use the signal.Spectrogram module from the Scipy toolbox in python.
As for the spectrogram’s hyper-parameters, we follow Zihlmann
et al. , i.e., Tukey window of length 64 and hop length of
32 (i.e., 50% window overlap), and shape parameter of 0.25.
B. Deep Learning Architectures
1) Classiﬁcation Architectures: For the evaluation purposes
in this paper, we use one of the leading deep learning-based
works in the PhysioNet challenge 2017, by Zihlmann et al. .
They proposed two different architectures, which are all adapted
towards the usage of 2-D spectrogram representation of the ECG
signals. SOA CNN, which is depicted in Fig. 2a, comprises six
convolutional blocks. Each block consists of four sub-blocks
with a convolutional layer with 5 × 5 kernel size, then a batch
normalization followed by ReLU activations and a dropout layer.
The last sub-block contains a max-pooling layer. The ﬁrst three
convolutional layers have 64 ﬁlters while, the last convolutional
layer starts with 64 ﬁlters in the ﬁrst block, with the ﬁlter number
being increased by 32 for each subsequent block. The output of
the convolutional blocks is then averaged on the temporal axis,
ﬂattened and fed into a sigmoid classiﬁer.
Their next proposed architecture, SOA CRNN, is very similar
to SOA CNN. Their differences boil down to the usage of 4
convolutional blocks instead of 6, and the substitution of the
temporal averaging layer by an LSTM layer with 200 neurons.
This network is illustrated in Fig. 2b. They trained SOA CRNN
in three phases. In the ﬁrst phase, they replaced the LSTM layer
by temporal averaging, and trained the resulting network. Then,
they substituted the temporal averaging with an LSTM layer and
trained this layer while keeping the rest of the network frozen.
At this point, the convolutional blocks and the LSTM layer
are trained independently. In the ﬁnal training phase, the whole
network is trained. This training policy effectively initializes
parts of the network far better than random weight initialization.
2) DCGAN Architecture: We investigated different architectures for the generator and discriminator in the DCGAN. The
best performing combination is depicted in Fig. 3. In our imple-
(a) SOA CNN
(b) SOA CRNN
Figure 2: Zihlmann et al. architectures: (a) SOA CNN, (b)
(a) Generator
(b) Discriminator
Figure 3: The proposed DCGAN generator and discriminator
architectures.
mentation of the DCGAN architecture, we follow the general tips
and tricks that are suggested in and explained in Sec. II-C.
3) Hyper-parameters: As preprocessing, we apply mean-std
normalization on the data. That means, we subtract the mean of
the training data from all data subsets, i.e., training, validation
and test subsets. Then we divide the result by the standard
deviation (std) of the training data. The mean of the resulting data
is zero and standard deviation is one. For training the deep neural
networks, we use the ADAM optimizer with learning rate equal
to 10−3 and decay rate of 10−5, and run them for 150 epochs.
However, while training the generator and the discriminator of
the DCGAN, we use a learning rate equal to 2 × 10−4, as
suggested in . We use binary cross entropy (BCE) loss
function for training all networks. As for the weight initialization
in the network, we use Xavier uniform initialization technique,
also known as Glorot uniform.
We implemented all the neural network architectures using
Table I: Quantitative results associated with AF class augmentation using different data augmentation algorithms. F1 stands for
f1-score, AF stands for AF class accuracy and N represents the Normal class accuracy.
oversampling
F1[%] AF[%] N[%] F1[%] AF[%] N[%] F1[%] AF[%] N[%] F1[%] AF[%] N[%]
84.47 75.61 99.50
85.91 79.25 99.23
87.16 85.67 98.40
86.77 86.31 98.15
SOA CRNN 86.02 81.60 98.81
85.81 80.86 98.89
87.79 82.67 99.17
86.90 88.34 97.81
Figure 4: Sample DCGAN-generated AF ECG spectrograms.
The DCGAN is trained on spectrograms of 5 seconds long
signals. Thus, it is expected to see 4-7 peaks.
Figure 5: Original AF signals from the training set (ﬁrst row)
and their corresponding logarithmic spectrogram (second row).
the Keras toolbox with Tensorﬂow backend in Python.
Apart from the previously explained hyper-parameters, we used
the default hyper-parameters of Keras. We refer the reader
to the Keras documentation for detail set of parameter
values for reproduction. Furthermore, in the network architecture visualizations in this work, we use the Keras syntax. For
example for a 2-D convolution, we may write Conv2D(a,(b,c)),
which a represents the number of convolutional ﬁlters and (b, c)
represents the convolutional kernel size.
C. Experimental Results
Table I presents the classiﬁcation results that are computed
using different data augmentation algorithms, namely oversampling, GMM and DCGAN. For the sake of comparison, we
report the results without augmentation (None) as well. It can
be observed that using data augmentation always outperforms
no augmentation with respect to f1-score. Another interesting
observation is that in the majority of the cases, applying augmentation on the AF class results in an improvement in both
the AF accuracy and the total f1-score. However, in some cases
the Normal class accuracy slightly deteriorates (≈1%). Among
the augmentation algorithms investigated in this study, the lowest
improvement in performance is achieved by oversampling, while
GMM and DCGAN enhance the performance the most. Although
GMM marginally outperforms DCGAN in terms of the overall
f1-score, it turns out that DCGAN results in better AF accuracy
while producing comparable Normal class accuracy to GMM.
Figure 4 depicts some spectrograms that are generated by the
DCGAN’s generator. For the sake of visual comparison, Fig. 5
illustrates three real AF ECG signals and their corresponding
logarithmic spectrograms.
Figure 6: Sample GMM-generated AF ECG spectrograms.
Figure 6 illustrates the logarithmic spectrogram of two samples
that are generated by a GMM, which is trained on the AF class.
As it can be observed, these samples hardly resemble an ECG
signal visually. However, as GMM resulted in high classiﬁcation
performance improvement, it certainly should have learned the
underlying distribution of the AF class distinctive characteristic.
IV. CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
Data augmentation is a popular technique to solve the data
imbalance problem in supervised learning. In this work, we have
investigated the impact of various data augmentation algorithms,
i.e., oversampling, GMM and DCGAN, on the short singlelead ECG signal classiﬁcation into AF and Normal classes. The
results show that in all cases, data augmentation comes with
performance improvement. Oversampling performs comparable
to, if not better than, using no augmentation. We should state
that we did not expect oversampling to signiﬁcantly increase
the performance because it does not add extra information to
the dataset as it simply is a duplication of data. However, it
still balances the classes and prevents the classiﬁer to be biased
towards the bigger class. On the other hand, the deep learningbased methods seem to really beneﬁt from the DCGAN and
GMM. Further, GAN results in better AF accuracy while GMM
results in better f1-scores using both classiﬁcation networks
investigated. Both GMM and DCGAN augmentation schemes
perform comparably in terms of the Normal class accuracy.
In some cases, using GAN and GMM to augment the AF class
causes slight deterioration of the Normal class accuracy. It would
be interesting to tackle this problem by applying the learningbased augmentation algorithms, e.g., GMM or GAN, on the
Normal class as well. In this manner, the underlying distribution
of the Normal class can be learned and this information can be
included in the data and exploited by the classiﬁer. Furthermore,
other more recent variants of GAN, e.g., improved Wasserstein
GAN, outperform DCGAN. In our future work, we intend to
conduct a thorough study on the effect of different GAN variants
on this application.