High-density mapping
of single-molecule
trajectories with
photoactivated
localization microscopy
Suliana Manley1, Jennifer M Gillette1,
George H Patterson1, Hari Shroff2, Harald F Hess2,
Eric Betzig2 & Jennifer Lippincott-Schwartz1
We combined photoactivated localization microscopy (PALM)
with live-cell single-particle tracking to create a new method
termed sptPALM. We created spatially resolved maps of
single-molecule motions by imaging the membrane proteins
Gag and VSVG, and obtained several orders of magnitude more
trajectories per cell than traditional single-particle tracking
enables. By probing distinct subsets of molecules, sptPALM
can provide insight into the origins of spatial and temporal
heterogeneities in membranes.
Cell membranes are characteristically heterogeneous both structurally and dynamically. By performing single-particle tracking in live
cells, one can access information on the heterogeneities in the
motions of individual proteins to provide insights into many
cellular events1–3. For single-molecule detection, proteins of interest are conjugated to probes such as gold beads4 or ﬂuorescentprotein chimeras3. However, the number and density of single
molecules that can be tracked in an individual cell is limited in
traditional single-particle tracking studies because only a single
localization requires that molecular separations be greater than their
diffraction-limited size. Thus, single-particle tracking has been
unable to probe cell membranes in the spatially and temporally
resolved fashion required to determine structural signatures of
dynamic heterogeneities.
Super-resolution techniques such as PALM5 enable the imaging
of ﬂuorescent-protein chimeras to reveal the organization of
genetically expressed proteins on the nanoscale with a density of
molecules high enough to provide structural context. Recently, the
use of photoactivatable markers for subdiffraction localization has
been applied to imaging in living cells, but the dynamics of
individual molecules were not resolved6. Here we combined the
techniques of PALM and single-particle tracking to resolve the
dynamics of individual molecules by tracking them in live cells; a
method we call sptPALM. We obtained information on the positions of single molecules by activating, localizing and bleaching
many subsets of photoactivatable ﬂuorescent-protein chimeras
(Supplementary Video 1 online). To enable sptPALM on live
cells, we optimized the data acquisition rate and cell viability by
exciting the molecules at high intensities, choosing a robust cell line
(COS7), operating in a total internal reﬂection geometry and using
a high numerical aperture objective (Olympus APO100XO-HR-SP;
1.65 NA). In addition, we used proteins tagged with EosFP7, a
photoconvertible protein with a high photon count and a high
contrast ratio between converted and unconverted forms. Using
these parameters, we imaged membrane proteins at a rate of 20
frames per second without inducing detrimental effects to living
cells (Supplementary Fig. 1 and Supplementary Video 2 online).
This permitted the construction of maps of single molecule diffusion
membrane, providing a means of obtaining spatially resolved
information on cellular dynamics and local environments on the
molecular scale.
We transfected COS-7 cells with either of two membrane
proteins known to have distinctly different spatial distributions
and mobilities: the tsO45 vesicular stomatitis virus G protein
(VSVG) and the human immunodeﬁciency virus type 1 (HIV-1)
structural protein Gag. VSVG is distributed relatively homogeneously across the plasma membrane, where a large fraction freely
diffuses8; in contrast, Gag multimerizes into immobile virus-like
particles (VLPs) that can bud from the plasma membrane9. Timeintegrated PALM images (Fig. 1a) reﬂect the distribution of all
molecular peaks localized to o25 nm. As expected, Gag tagged
with tandem dimer EosFP (Gag-Eos) formed bright puncta of
100–200 nm size (Fig. 1b), consistent with electron microscopy
data of VLPs. In addition, several larger bright regions (possibly
corresponding to clusters of VLPs) and areas of lower than average
density (voids) were visible5. Unlike Gag-Eos, VSVG tagged with
dimeric EosFP (VSVG-Eos) displayed gradual variations in
molecular density instead of bright puncta or large heavily enriched
domains (Fig. 1b).
In addition to examining the spatial distribution of proteins, use
of sptPALM provided dynamic information on individual molecules. As in traditional single-particle tracking, we created trajectories by linking molecular peaks in consecutive frames according
to their proximity (Supplementary Methods, Supplementary
Figs. 2 and 3 online). We observed mobile and immobile molecules
for both Gag-Eos and VSVG-Eos (see example trajectories in
Fig. 1c). Unlike traditional single-particle tracking in which a
single ensemble of molecules is imaged and tracked until they are
RECEIVED 25 OCTOBER 2007; ACCEPTED 19 DECEMBER 2007; PUBLISHED ONLINE 13 JANUARY 2008; DOI:10.1038/NMETH.1176
1National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. 2Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Janelia
Farm Research Campus, Ashburn, Virginia 20147, USA. Correspondence should be addressed to J.L.-S. ( ).
NATURE METHODS | ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION | 1
BRIEF COMMUNICATIONS
bleached3, photoactivatable ﬂuorophores enabled multiple ensembles of molecules to be activated, imaged and bleached. This
allowed us to obtain high-density single-molecule trajectories, up
to B50 per mm2 (Fig. 1d). Gag-Eos trajectories varied from
apparently immobile populations to mobile populations with
pathlengths up to B1 mm. In contrast, VSVG-Eos appeared highly
mobile, exploring large regions of the plasma membrane. The use
of sptPALM allowed localization and tracking of many overlapping
trajectories because the distance between ﬂuorescent molecules at
any time was greater than several times the width of their point
spread function.
A notable improvement afforded by sptPALM is the ability
to probe the dynamics of many molecules in a single cell. By
comparison, 10–100 cells are typically used to obtain statistically
signiﬁcant single-particle tracking information on individual
proteins tagged with conventional labels because each cell yields
less than 10 tracks on average10–12. We achieved similar statistics
with sptPALM on a single cell (Fig. 2a); moreover, the large
number of molecular trajectories we obtained allowed us to
deﬁne molecular environments within individual cells. We
calculated the mean-squared displacement (MSD) as a function
of time lag, Dt, for trajectories longer than 15 frames (B3%
of all molecules). For diffusive behavior, we expected the MSD to
increase linearly with Dt for both VSVG and Gag (Fig. 2b).
To determine the short-time diffusion coefﬁcients, D, for these
longer-lived molecules, we used the relationship MSD ¼ C + 4DDt,
where C is a constant offset. A substantial fraction of the
trajectories resulted in MSDs that increase in a sublinear
fashion (Fig. 2c). This behavior is known as anomalous diffusion:
it has been demonstrated for several membrane proteins and
lipids13, and is hypothesized to be a result of local barriers
to diffusion.
Figure 1 | sptPALM imaging of Gag and VSVG expressed in live COS7 cells.
(a) PALM images of Gag-Eos and VSVG-Eos, integrated over 500 s (10,000
images). Molecules are rendered as Gaussian normalized peaks, with a width
corresponding to the uncertainty in their position. Arrows indicate large
Gag-enriched regions. Scale bars, 2 mm. (b) Magniﬁed regions, corresponding
to boxed regions in a. Arrowheads indicate enriched puncta. Scale bars,
200 nm. (c) Two representative magniﬁed Gag and VSVG single molecule
trajectories from the cells shown in a. The tracks represent diffusive (black)
and conﬁned (red) movement. Scale bar, 100 nm. (d) Complete sptPALM
trajectories of localized Gag and VSVG molecules that are longer than
15 frames (750 ms). Each color indicates a different track. Scale bar, 2 mm.
Number of tracks
Duration (frames)
VSVG fixed
Fraction of tracks
0.3 0.4 0.5
VSVG mobile
Gag mobile
VSVG immobile
Gag immobile
VSVG Brownian
Gag Brownian
VSVG anomalous
Gag anomalous
Figure 2 | Analysis of single molecule trajectories in live COS7 cells. (a) Distribution of trajectory durations of Gag-Eos
and VSVG-Eos single molecules from the images in Figure 1. The histogram represents all the trajectories detected in a
17  17 mm ﬁeld of the cell membrane with 10,000 images and 50-ms exposures. (b) Calculated MSD for the two
Gag and VSVG trajectories shown in Figure 1c. The tracks represent trajectories with diffusive and conﬁned movement.
(c) Calculated MSD for Gag and VSVG trajectories that display Brownian diffusion and anomalous diffusion. Short lines are
drawn to guide the eye, with slopes 1 (black) and 0.6 (green). (d) Diffusion maps of the Gag- and VSVG-expressing cells
illustrated in Figure 1. Each point represents the starting position of one trajectory with a minimum length of 15 frames
(750 ms). Molecules with D o 0.01 mm2/s are plotted as dark blue points, while the most mobile molecules are plotted
as red points. Representative errors for diffusion coefﬁcients are indicated left of the color bar for the shortest (maximum
error) and longest (minimum error) tracks. Scale bars, 2 mm. (e) Histogram of the distribution of diffusion coefﬁcients of
single Gag and VSVG molecules with a minimum track length of 15 frames (750 ms). For ﬁxed VSVG (4% paraformaldehyde), the distribution of diffusion
coefﬁcients was obtained from two cells. For live Gag and VSVG, the distribution of diffusion coefﬁcients was obtained from three cells each.
2 | ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION | NATURE METHODS
BRIEF COMMUNICATIONS
The high density of dynamic information available from
sptPALM allowed us to create a spatially resolved map of single
molecule diffusion coefﬁcients (Fig. 2d) beyond the error owing
to ﬁnite run length (Supplementary Methods). This map emphasized the large clusters of immobile Gag-Eos molecules, which
may correspond to regions where VLPs were concentrated. Notably, although VSVG-Eos is characterized as a highly mobile
molecule, we detected less mobile regions that may represent
ﬁlipodial structures where molecular mobility was slowed by
folds in the membrane.
These diffusion maps of VSVG-Eos and Gag-Eos reﬂect the
dynamics of molecules in single cells. By combining data from
three cells, we constructed a histogram of diffusion coefﬁcients
(Fig. 2e), which conﬁrmed that a larger fraction of VSVG-Eos
molecules were mobile than of Gag-Eos. A control experiment on
ﬁxed cells transfected with VSVG-Eos revealed greater than 95% of
these molecules had D o 2.5  10–2 mm2/s (Supplementary Fig. 4
online). The average diffusion coefﬁcient measured for the mobile
fraction in live cells for Gag-Eos was 0.11 ± 0.08 mm2/s, and for
VSVG-Eos it was 0.14 ± 0.11 mm2/s, in agreement with ﬂuorescence
recovery after photobleaching (FRAP)8 measurements. Diffusion
maps such as these reveal dynamic heterogeneities in cell membranes unlike diffusion measurements obtained by traditional
single-particle tracking or ensemble measurements such as FRAP.
The heterogeneities, in turn, can be characterized further by their
size, morphology and number of molecules.
The immobile fraction of Gag may represent molecules trapped
in VLPs, which are known to cluster in plasma membrane domains
enriched in tetraspanins14. These domains appeared as large bright
spots when imaged with diffraction-limited ﬂuorescence microscopy (Fig. 3a). We used sptPALM to identify and map the
immobile fraction of Gag-Eos (Fig. 3b), revealing structures at
scales larger than the dimensions of individual VLPs. To further
characterize these structures, we performed a clustering analysis
by identifying molecules with neighbors within a 300-nm radius,
then grouped molecules with shared neighbors into the same
cluster. We displayed all clusters containing a minimum of
5 molecules, which demonstrated that diffraction-limited
regions of similar size and intensity may contain dramatically
different numbers of molecules (Fig. 3c). Cluster analysis from
sptPALM revealed these differences and provided quantitative
information inaccessible by total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence
microscopy. We found that in this cell, 1,074 molecules, representing 67% of all trajectories shown in the diffusion maps,
belong to 54 clusters. Although this information by itself
does not allow us to distinguish between different scenarios
for cluster formation, a future study of the characteristics of
Gag-Eos dynamics in clustered regions could provide insight by
revealing whether molecules exhibit reduced mobility or directed motion as a result of interactions with cellular factors that
aid VLP budding.
The analyses applied here are only the beginning for this new
method; data can be further mined to explore different subsets of
molecules based on their spatial organization or dynamics.
Although development of probes and instrumentation will certainly lead to improvements in these techniques, presently available
reagents and imaging tools are capable of providing new information, as demonstrated in this work. sptPALM can be used to reveal
spatially resolved information about membrane protein dynamics.
This provides a local context for individual molecules, an important clue for understanding the mechanisms that drive behaviors
including clustering and anomalous diffusion, both phenomena
ubiquitous to membrane proteins.
Note: Supplementary information is available on the Nature Methods website.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This project was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the US National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health,
and performed while S.M. held a National Research Council Research Associateship
Award at the National Institutes of Health. We thank D. Blair and A.D. Douglass
for providing MATLAB code and helpful discussions.
Published online at 
Reprints and permissions information is available online at
 
Teramura, Y. et al. EMBO J. 25, 4215–4222 .
Yildiz, A. et al. Science 300, 2061–2065 .
Douglass, A.D. & Vale, R.D. Cell 121, 937–950 .
Kusumi, A., Sako, Y. & Yamamoto, M. Biophys. J. 65, 2021–2040 .
Betzig, E. et al. Science 313, 1642–1645 .
Hess, S.T. et al. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 104, 17370–17375 .
Wiedenmann, J. et al. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101, 15905–15910 .
Kenworthy, A.K. et al. J. Cell Biol. 165, 735–746 .
Jouvenet, N. et al. PLoS Biol. 4, 2296–2310 .
10. Wieser, S., Moertelmaier, M., Fuertbauer, E., Stockinger, H. & Schutz, G.J. Biophys.
J. 92, 3719–3728 .
11. Vrljic, M., Nishimura, S.Y., Brasselet, S., Moerner, W.E. & McConnell, H.M. Biophys.
J. 83, 2681–2692 .
12. Ewers, H. et al. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102, 15110–15115 .
13. Feder, T.J., Brust-Mascher, I., Slattery, J.P., Baird, B. & Webb, W.W. Biophys. J. 70,
2767–2773 .
14. Nydegger, S., Khurana, S., Krementsov, D.N., Foti, M. & Thali, M. J. Cell Biol. 173,
795–807 .
Figure 3 | Cluster analysis on the immobile fraction of Gag. (a) Total internal
reﬂection ﬂuorescence microscopy image of the unconverted Gag-Eos taken
under 488 nm excitation before photoconversion and data collection for
sptPALM. Circles indicate corresponding regions in each image. (b) A map of
the positions of molecules with D o 0.05. Each point represents the starting
position of one trajectory with a minimum length of 15 frames (750 ms).
(c) Immobile Gag molecules within a 300 nm radius were grouped as
clusters. Each color indicates a separate cluster of at least ﬁve molecules.
Scale bar, 2 mm.
NATURE METHODS | ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION | 3
BRIEF COMMUNICATIONS