Proceedings of the Tenth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 392–395,
Lisboa, Portugal, 17-18 September 2015. c⃝2015 Association for Computational Linguistics.
CHRF: character n-gram F-score for automatic MT evaluation
Maja Popovi´c
Humboldt University of Berlin
 
We propose the use of character n-gram
F-score for automatic evaluation of machine translation output.
Character ngrams have already been used as a part of
more complex metrics, but their individual
potential has not been investigated yet. We
report system-level correlations with human rankings for 6-gram F1-score (CHRF)
on the WMT12, WMT13 and WMT14 data
as well as segment-level correlation for 6gram F1 (CHRF) and F3-scores (CHRF3)
on WMT14 data for all available target languages. The results are very promising,
especially for the CHRF3 score – for translation from English, this variant showed
the highest segment-level correlations outperforming even the best metrics on the
WMT14 shared evaluation task.
Introduction
Recent investigations have shown that character
level n-grams play an important role for automatic evaluation as a part of more complex metrics such as MTERATER and
BEER .
However, they have not
been investigated as an individual metric so far.
On the other hand, the n-gram based F-scores,
especially the linguistically motivated ones based
on Part-of-Speech tags and morphemes , are shown to correlate very well with human judgments clearly outperforming the widely
used metrics such as BLEU and TER.
In this work, we propose the use of the Fscore based on character n-grams, i.e. the CHRF
We believe that this score has a potential as a stand-alone metric because it is shown to
be an important part of the previously mentioned
complex measures, and because, similarly to the
morpheme-based F-score, it takes into account
some morpho-syntactic phenomena. Apart from
that, in contrast to the related metrics, it is simple, it does not require any additional tools and/or
knowledge sources, it is absolutely language independent and also tokenisation independent.
calculated
translation
 and WMT14 shared tasks, and then compared with
human rankings. System-level correlation coef-
ﬁcients are calculated for all data, segment-level
correlations only for WMT14 data.
The scores
were calculated for all available target languages,
namely English, Spanish, French, German, Czech,
Russian and Hindi.
CHRF score
The general formula for the CHRF score is:
CHRFβ = (1 + β2)
CHRP · CHRR
β2 · CHRP + CHRR
where CHRP and CHRR stand for character ngram precision and recall arithmetically averaged
over all n-grams:
percentage of n-grams in the hypothesis
which have a counterpart in the reference;
percentage of character n-grams in the reference which are also present in the hypothesis.
and β is a parameter which assigns β times more
importance to recall than to precision – if β = 1,
they have the same importance.
Experiments on WMT12, WMT13 and
WMT14 test data
Experiments
As a ﬁrst step, we carried out several experiments
regarding n-gram length.
Since the optimal n
for word-based measures is shown to be n = 4,
MTERATER used up to 10-gram and BEER up to
6-gram, we investigated those three variants. In
addition, we investigated a dynamic n calculated
for each sentence as the average word length. The
best correlations are obtained for 6-gram, therefore we carried out further experiments only on
Apart from the n-gram length, we investigated
the inﬂuence of the space treating it as an additional character. However, taking space into account did not yield any improvement regarding the
correlations and therefore has been abandoned.
This is an example.
characters
T h i s i s a n e x a m p l e .
e x a m p l e .
Table 1: Example of an English sentence with
its corresponding character sequences without and
with taking the space into account.
In the last stage of our current experiments, we
have compared two β values on the WMT14 data:
the standard CHRF with β = 1 i.e. the harmonic
mean of precision and recall, as well as CHRF3
where β = 3, i.e. the recall has three times more
weight. The number 3 has been taken arbitraly as
a preliminary value, and the CHRF3 is tested only
on WMT14 data – more systematic experiments in
this direction should be carried out in the future
Correlations with human rankings
System-level correlations
The evaluation metrics were compared with human rankings on the system-level by means
of Spearman’s correlation coefﬁcients ρ for the
WMT12 and WMT13 data and Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcients r for the WMT14 data.
Spearman’s rank correlation coefﬁcient is equivalent to
Pearson correlation on ranks, and it makes fewer
assumptions about the data.
Average system-level correlations for CHRF
score(s) together with the word n-gram F-score
WORDF and the three mostly used metrics BLEU
 , TER 
and METEOR are
shown in Table 2. It can be seen that the CHRF
score is comparable or better than the other metrics, especially the CHRF3 score.
Table 3 presents the percentage of translation outputs where the particular F-score metric
(WORDF, CHRF and CHRF3) has higher correlation (no ties) than the particular standard metric
(BLEU, TER and METEOR). It can be seen that
the WORDF score outperforms BLEU and TER for
about 60% of documents, however METEOR only
in less than 40%. Standard CHRF is better than
METEOR for half of the documents, and better than
BLEU and TER for 68% of the documents thus
being deﬁnitely more promising than the wordbased metrics. Finally, CHRF3 score outperforms
all standard metric for about 70-80% of texts, thus
being the most promising variant.
Segment-level correlations
The segment-level quality of metrics is measured
using Kendall’s τ rank correlation coefﬁcient. It
measures the metric’s ability to predict the results
of the manual pairwise comparison of two systems. The τ coefﬁcients were calulated only on
the WMT14 data using the ofﬁcial WMT14 script,
and the obtained WMT14 variant is reported for
the WORDF score, both CHRF scores, as well as
for the best ranked metrics in the shared evaluation task.
Table 4 shows the τ coefﬁcients for translation into English (above) and for translation
from English (below).
For translation into English, it can be seen that the CHRF3 score is
again the most promising F-score. Furthermore,
it can be seen that the correlations for both CHRF
scores are close to the two best ranked metrics
(DISCOTKPARTY and BEER) and the METEOR
metrics, which is very well ranked too. For translation from English, the CHRF3 score yields the
highest average correlation, and the CHRF score is
comparable with the best ranked BEER metric.
Conclusions
The results presented in this paper show that
the character n-gram F-score CHRF represents
a promising metric for automatic evaluation
of machine translation output for several reasons:
it is language-independent, tokenisationindependent and it shows good correlations with
human judgments both on the system- as well as
Table 2: Average system-level correlations on WMT14 (Pearson’s r), WMT13 and WMT12 data (Spearman’s ρ) for word 4-gram F1 score, character 6-gram F1 score and character 6-gram F3 score together
with the three mostly used metrics BLEU, TER and METEOR.
Table 3: rank> for three F-scores (WORDF, CHRF and CHRF3) in comparison with three standard metrics
(BLEU, TER and METEOR) – percentage of translation outputs where the given F-score metrics has higher
correlation than the given standard metric.
Kendall’s τ
DISCOTKPARTY
Kendall’s τ
Table 4: Segment-level Kendall’s τ correlations on WMT 14 data for WORDF, CHRF and CHRF3 score
together with the best performing metrics on the shared evaluation task.
on the segment-level, especially the CHRF3 variant. Therefore both of the CHRF scores were submitted to the WMT15 shared metrics task. In future work, different β values should be investigated, as well as different weights for particular
n-grams. Apart from this, CHRF is so far tested on
only one non-European language (Hindi) – application on more languages using different writing
systems such as Arabic, Chinese, etc. has to be
explored systematically.
Acknowledgments
This publication has emanated from research
supported by QTLEAP project (Quality Translation by Deep Language Engineering Approach)
– ECs FP7 under grant agreement number 610516, QT21 project funded by
the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research
and innovation programme under grant number
645452, and TRAMOOC project (Translation for
Massive Open Online Courses) partially funded
by the European Commission under H2020-ICT-
2014/H2020-ICT-2014-1 under grant agreement
number 644333. Special thanks to Miloˇs Stanojevi´c for suggesting experiments with the β parameter.