IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
80 million tiny images: a large dataset for
non-parametric object and scene recognition
Antonio Torralba, Rob Fergus and William T. Freeman
Abstract— With the advent of the Internet, billions of images
are now freely available online and constitute a dense sampling
of the visual world. Using a variety of non-parametric methods,
we explore this world with the aid of a large dataset of 79,302,017
images collected from the Web. Motivated by psychophysical
results showing the remarkable tolerance of the human visual
system to degradations in image resolution, the images in the
dataset are stored as 32 × 32 color images. Each image is
loosely labeled with one of the 75,062 non-abstract nouns in
English, as listed in the Wordnet lexical database. Hence the
image database gives a comprehensive coverage of all object
categories and scenes. The semantic information from Wordnet
can be used in conjunction with nearest-neighbor methods to
perform object classiﬁcation over a range of semantic levels
minimizing the effects of labeling noise. For certain classes that
are particularly prevalent in the dataset, such as people, we are
able to demonstrate a recognition performance comparable to
class-speciﬁc Viola-Jones style detectors.
Index Terms— Object recognition, tiny images, large datasets,
Internet images, nearest-neighbor methods.
I. INTRODUCTION
With overwhelming amounts of data, many problems can be
solved without the need for sophisticated algorithms. One example in the textual domain is Google’s “Did you mean?” tool which
corrects errors in search queries, not through a complex parsing
of the query but by memorizing billions of query-answer pairs
and suggesting the one closest to the users query. In this paper,
we explore a visual analog to this tool by using a large dataset
of 79 million images and nearest-neighbor matching schemes.
When very many images are available, simple image indexing
techniques can be used to retrieve images with similar object
arrangements to the query image. If we have a big enough
database then we can ﬁnd, with high probability, images visually
close to a query image, containing similar scenes with similar
objects arranged in similar spatial conﬁgurations. If the images
in the retrieval set are partially labeled, then we can propagate
the labels to the query image, so performing classiﬁcation.
Nearest-neighbor methods have been used in a variety of computer vision problems, primarily for interest point matching ,
 , . They have also been used for global image matching
(e.g. estimation of human pose ), character recognition ,
and object recognition , . A number of recent papers have
used large datasets of images in conjunction with purely nonparametric methods for computer vision and graphics applications
 , .
Finding images within large collections is the focus of the
content based image retrieval (CBIR) community. Their emphasis
The authors are with the Computer Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Lab
(CSAIL) at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Email: {torralba,fergus,billf}@csail.mit.edu
on really large datasets means that the chosen image representation is often relatively simple, e.g. color , wavelets 
or crude segmentations . This enables very fast retrieval of
images similar to the query, for example the Cortina system
 demonstrates real-time retrieval from a 10 million image
collection, using a combination of texture and edge histogram
features. See Datta et al. for a survey of such methods .
The key question that we address in this paper is: How big
does the image dataset need to be to robustly perform recognition
using simple nearest-neighbor schemes? In fact, it is unclear that
the size of the dataset required is at all practical since there are an
effectively inﬁnite number of possible images the visual system
can be confronted with. What gives us hope is that the visual
world is very regular in that real world pictures occupy only a
relatively small portion of the space of possible images.
Studying the space occupied by natural images is hard due to
the high dimensionality of the images. One way of simplifying
this task is by lowering the resolution of the images. When we
look at the images in Fig. 6, we can recognize the scene and its
constituent objects. Interestingly though, these pictures have only
32 × 32 color pixels (the entire image is just a vector of 3072
dimensions with 8 bits per dimension), yet at this resolution, the
images already seem to contain most of the relevant information
needed to support reliable recognition.
An important beneﬁt of working with tiny images is that it
becomes practical to store and manipulate datasets orders of
magnitude bigger than those typically used in computer vision.
Correspondingly, we introduce, and make available to researchers,
a dataset of 79 million unique 32 × 32 color images gathered
from the Internet. Each image is loosely labeled with one of
75,062 English nouns, so the dataset covers a very large number of
visual object classes. This is in contrast to existing datasets which
provide a sparse selection of object classes. In this paper we will
study the impact on having very large datasets in combination
with simple techniques for recognizing several common object
and scene classes at different levels of categorization.
The paper is divided in three parts. In Section 2 we establish
the minimal resolution required for scene and object recognition.
In Sections 3 and 4 we introduce our dataset of 79 million images
and explore some of its properties. In Section 5 we attempt
scene and object recognition using a variety of nearest-neighbor
methods. We measure performance at a number of semantic
levels, obtaining impressive results for certain object classes.
II. LOW DIMENSIONAL IMAGE REPRESENTATIONS
A number of approaches exist for computing the gist of a
image, a global low-dimensional representation that captures the
scene and its constituent objects , , . We show that
very low-resolution 32×32 color images can be used in this
role, containing enough information for scene recognition, object
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
Image resolution
Correct recognition rate
Color image
False positive rate
True positive rate
wall-space
waiting area
reception desk
dining room
dining room
lightdoorspi
chair chair
center piece
shoes painting
monitor center piece
c) Segmentation of 32x32 images
d) Cropped objects
b) Car detection
a) Scene recognition
a) Human performance on scene recognition as a function of resolution. The green and black curves show the performance on color and gray-scale
images respectively. For color 32 × 32 images the performance only drops by 7% relative to full resolution, despite having 1/64th of the pixels. b) Car
detection task on the PASCAL 2006 test dataset. The colored dots show the performance of four human subjects classifying tiny versions of the test data.
The ROC curves of the best vision algorithms (running on full resolution images) are shown for comparison. All lie below the performance of humans on
the tiny images, which rely on none of the high-resolution cues exploited by the computer vision algorithms. c) Humans can correctly recognize and segment
objects at very low resolutions, even when the objects in isolation can not be recognized (d).
detection and segmentation (even when the objects occupy just a
few pixels in the image).
A. Scene recognition
Studies on face perception , have shown that only 16×
16 pixels are needed for robust face recognition. This remarkable
performance is also found in a scene recognition task .
We evaluate the scene recognition performance of humans as
the image resolution is decreased. We used a dataset of 15 scenes
that was taken from , , . Each image was shown at
one of 5 possible resolutions (82, 162, 322, 642 and 2562 pixels)
and the participant task was to assign the low-resolution picture
to one of the 15 different scene categories (bedroom, suburban,
industrial, kitchen, living room, coast, forest, highway, inside
city, mountain, open country, street, tall buildings, ofﬁce, and
store)1. Fig. 1(a) shows human performance on this task when
presented with grayscale and color images2 of varying resolution.
For grayscale images, humans need around 64 × 64 pixels. When
the images are in color, humans need only 32 × 32 pixels to
achieve more than 80% recognition rate. Below this resolution the
performance rapidly decreases. Therefore, humans need around
3000 dimensions of either color or grayscale data to perform
this task. In the next section we show that 32 × 32 color images
also preserve a great amount of local information and that many
objects can still be recognized even when they occupy just a few
1Experimental details: 6 participants classiﬁed 585 color images as belonging to one of the 15 scene categories from , , . Images
were presented at 5 possible resolutions (82, 162, 322, 642 and 2562). Each
image was shown at 5 possible sizes using bicubic interpolation to reduce
pixelation effects which impair recognition. Interpolation was applied to the
low-resolution image with 8 bits per pixel and color channel. Images were
not repeated across conditions. 6 additional participants performed the same
experiment but with gray scale images.
2100% recognition rate can not be achieved in this dataset as there is no
perfect separation between the 15 categories.
B. Object recognition
Recently, the PASCAL object recognition challenge evaluated
a large number of algorithms in a detection task for several object
categories . Fig. 1(b) shows the performances (ROC curves) of
the best performing algorithms in the car classiﬁcation task (i.e.
is there a car present in the image?). These algorithms require
access to relatively high resolution images. We studied the ability
of human participants to perform the same detection task but using
very low-resolution images. Human participants were shown
color images from the test set scaled to have 32 pixels on the
smallest axis, preserving their aspect ratio. Fig. 1(b) shows some
examples of tiny PASCAL images. Each participant classiﬁed
between 200 and 400 images selected randomly. Fig. 1(b) shows
the performances of four human observers that participated in
the experiment. Although around 10% of cars are missed, the
performance is still very good, signiﬁcantly outperforming the
computer vision algorithms using full resolution images. This
shows that even though the images are very small, they contain
sufﬁcient information for accurate recognition.
Fig. 1(c) shows some representative 322 images segmented by
human subjects. Despite the low resolution, sufﬁcient information remains for reliable segmentation (more than 80% of the
segmented objects are correctly recognized), although any further
decrease in resolution dramatically affects segmentation performance. Fig. 1(d) shows crops of some of the smallest objects
correctly recognized when shown within the scene. Note that in
isolation, the objects cannot be identiﬁed since the resolution is
so low, hence the recognition of these objects within the scene is
almost entirely based on context.
Clearly, not all visual tasks can be solved using such low
resolution images. But the experiments in this section suggest that
32×32 color images are the minimum viable size for recognition
tasks – the focus of the paper.
III. A LARGE DATASET OF 32 × 32 IMAGES
As discussed in the previous sections, 32×32 color images contain the information needed to perform a number of challenging
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
Images per keyword
Number of keywords
Recall (image rank)
Total, unique,
non-uniform images:
79,302,017
Total number of words:
Mean # images per word:
10 12 14 16 18
Wordnet level
instrumentality 53
geographical
municipality
vertebrate
administrative
instrument
inhabitant
communicator
geological
angiosperm
invertebrate
entertainer
conveyance
capitalist
spermatophyte
Statistics of our database of tiny images. a) A histogram of images per keyword collected. Around 10% of keywords have very few images. b)
Performance of the search various engines (evaluated on hand-labeled ground truth). c) Accuracy of the labels attached at each image as a function of the
depth in the Wordnet tree (deeper corresponds to more speciﬁc words). d) Accuracy of labeling for different nodes of a portion of the Wordnet tree.
recognition tasks. One important advantage of very low resolution
images is that it becomes practical to work with millions of
images. In this section we will describe a dataset of 108 tiny
Current experiments in object recognition typically use 102-104
images spread over a few different classes; the largest available
dataset being one with 256 classes . Other ﬁelds, such as
speech, routinely use 106 data points for training, since they have
found that large training sets are vital for achieving low errors
rates in testing . As the visual world is far more complex than
the aural one, it would seem natural to use very large set of
training images. Motivated by this, and the ability of humans to
recognize objects and scenes in 32×32 images, we have collected
a database of nearly 108 such images.
A. Collection procedure
We use Wordnet likely to have any kind of visual consistency. We do this by extracting all non-abstract nouns from the
database, 75,062 of them in total. In contrast to existing object
recognition datasets which use a sparse selection of classes, by
collecting images for all nouns, we have a dense coverage of all
visual forms.
We selected 7 independent image search engines: Altavista,
Ask, Flickr, Cydral, Google, Picsearch and Webshots (others have
outputs correlated with these). We automatically download all
the images provided by each engine for all 75,846 non-abstract
nouns. Running over 8 months, this method gathered 97,245,098
images in total. Once intra-word duplicates and uniform images
(images with zero variance) are removed, this number is reduced
to 79,302,017 images from 75,062 words (around 1% of the
keywords had no images). Storing this number of images at full
resolution is impractical on the standard hardware used in our
experiments so we down-sampled the images to 32 × 32 as they
were gathered3. The dataset ﬁts onto a single hard disk, occupying
760Gb in total. The dataset may be downloaded from http:
\\people.csail.mit.edu\torralba\tinyimages.
Fig. 2(a) shows a histogram of the number of images per class.
Around 10% of the query words are obscure so no images can be
found on the Internet, but for the majority of words a reasonable
number of images are found. We place an upper limit of 3000
images/word to keep the total collection time to a reasonable level.
Although the gathered dataset is very large, it is not necessarily
representative of all natural images. Images on the Internet have
their own biases (e.g. objects tend to be centered and fairly large
in the image). However, web images deﬁne an interesting visual
world for developing computer vision applications , .
B. Characterization of labeling noise
Despite a number of recent efforts for image annotation ,
 , collecting images from the web provides a powerful mechanism to build large image databases orders of magnitude larger
than is possible with manual methods. However, the images
gathered by the engines are loosely labeled in that the visual
content is often unrelated to the query word (for example, see
Fig. 10). In this section we characterize the noise present in the
labels. Among other factors, the accuracy of the labels depend on
the engine used, and the speciﬁcity of the term used for querying.
In Fig. 2(b) we quantify the labeling noise using 3526 handlabeled images selected by randomly sampling images out of the
ﬁrst 250 images returned by each online search engine for each
word. A recall-precision curve is plotted for each search engine in
which the horizontal axis represents the rank in which the image
was returned and the vertical axis is the percentage of images that
corresponded to the query. Accuracy drops after the 100th image
and then stabilizes at around 44% correct on average.
3Further comments: (i) Wordnet is a lexical dictionary, meaning that it gives
the semantic relations between words in addition to the information usually
given in a dictionary.; (ii) The tiny database is not just about objects. It is
about everything that can be indexed with Wordnet and this includes scenelevel classes such as streets, beaches, mountains, as well as category-level
classes and more speciﬁc objects such as US Presidents, astronomical objects
and Abyssinian cats.; (iii) At present we do not remove inter-word duplicates
since identifying them in our dataset is non-trivial.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
The accuracy of online searchers also varies depending on
which terms were used for the query. Fig. 2(c) shows that the
noise varies for different levels of the Wordnet tree, being more
accurate when getting close to the leaves of the tree. Fig. 2(d)
shows a subset of the Wordnet tree used to build our dataset (the
full tree contains >40,000 leaves). The number and color at each
node corresponds to the percentage of images correctly assigned
to the leaves of each node. The more speciﬁc are the terms, the
more likely are the images to correspond to the query.
Various methods exist for cleaning up the data by removing
images visually unrelated to the query word. Berg and Forsyth
 have shown a variety of effective methods for doing this with
images of animals gathered from the web. Berg et al. showed
how text and visual cues could be used to cluster faces of people
from cluttered news feeds. Fergus et al. have shown the use
of a variety of approaches for improving Internet image search
engines. Li et al. show further approaches to decreasing label
noise. However, due to the extreme size of our dataset, it is not
practical to employ these methods. In Section 5, we show that
reasonable recognition performances can be achieved despite the
high labeling noise.
IV. STATISTICS OF VERY LOW RESOLUTION IMAGES
Despite 32 × 32 being very low resolution, each image lives in
a space of 3072 dimensions. This is a very large space — if each
dimension has 8 bits, there are a total of 107400 possible images.
This is a huge number, especially if we consider that a human in
a 100 years only gets to see 1011 frames (at 30 frames/second).
However, natural images only correspond to a tiny fraction of this
space (most of the images correspond to white noise), and it is
natural to investigate the size of that fraction. A number of studies
 , have been devoted to characterize the space of natural
images by studying the statistics of small image patches. However,
low-resolution scenes are quite different to patches extracted by
randomly cropping small patches from images.
Given a similarity measure, the question that we want to answer
is: how many images are needed so that, for any given query
image, we can always ﬁnd a neighbor with the same class label?
Note that we are concerned solely with recognition performance,
not with issues of intrinsic dimensionality or the like as explored
in other studies of large collection of image patches , .
In this section, we explore how the probability of ﬁnding images
with a similar label nearby increases with the size of the dataset.
In turn, this tells us how big the dataset needs to be to give a
robust recognition performance.
A. Distribution of neighbors as a function of dataset size
As a ﬁrst step, we use the sum of squared differences (SSD)
to compare two images. We will deﬁne later other similarity
measures that incorporate invariances to translations and scaling.
The SSD between two images I1 and I2 (normalized to have zero
mean and unit norm)4 is:
(I1(x, y, c) −I2(x, y, c))2
Computing similarities among 7.9 × 107 images is computationally expensive. To improve speed, we index the images using
4Normalization of each image is performed by transforming the image into
a vector concatenating the three color channels. The normalization does not
change image color, only the overall luminance.
the ﬁrst 19 principal components of the 7.9 × 107 images (19
is the maximum number of components per image such that the
entire index structure can be held in memory). The 1/f2 property
of the power spectrum of natural images means that the distance
between two images can be approximated using few principal
components (alternative representations using wavelets could
also be used in place of the PCA representation). We compute
the approximate distance ˆD2
ssd = 2 −2
n=1 v1(n)v2(n), where
vi(n) is the nth principal component coefﬁcient for the ith image
(normalized so that
n vi(n)2 = 1), and C is the number of
components used to approximate the distance. We deﬁne SN as
the set of N exact nearest neighbors and ˆSM as the set of M
approximate nearest neighbors.
Fig. 3(a) shows the probability that an image, of index i, from
the set SN is also inside ˆSM: P(i ∈ˆSM|i ∈SN). The plot
corresponds to N = 50. For the experiments in this section, we
used 200 images randomly sampled from the datasets and for
which we computed the exact distances to all the 7.9×107 images.
Many images on the web appear multiple times. For the plots in
these ﬁgures, we have removed manually all the image pairs that
were duplicates.
Fig. 3(b) shows the number of approximate neighbors (M) that
need to be considered as a function of the desired number of exact
neighbors (N) in order to have a probability of 0.8 of ﬁnding
N exact neighbors. As the dataset becomes larger, we need to
collect more approximate nearest neighbors in order to have the
same probability of including the ﬁrst N exact neighbors.
For the experiments in this paper, we use the following procedure. First, we ﬁnd the closest 16,000 images per image. From
Fig. 3(a) we know that more than 80% of the exact neighbors
will be part of this approximate neighbor set. Then, within the
set of 16,000 images, we compute the exact distances to provide
the ﬁnal rankings of neighbors. Exhaustive search, used in all
our experiments, takes 30 seconds per image using the principle
components method. This can be dramatically improved through
the use of a kd-tree to 0.3 seconds per query, if fast retrieval
performance is needed. The memory overhead of the kd-tree
means that only 17 of the 19 PCA components can be used.
Devising efﬁcient indexing methods for large image databases
 , , is a very important topic of active research but it
is not the focus of this paper.
Fig. 4 shows several plots measuring various properties as the
size of the dataset is increased. The plots use the normalized
correlation ρ between images (note that D2
ssd = 2(1 −ρ)). In
Fig. 4(a), we show the probability that the nearest neighbor has
a normalized correlation exceeding a certain value. Each curve
corresponds to a different dataset size. Fig. 4(b) shows a vertical
section through Fig. 4(a) at the correlations 0.8 and 0.9, plotting
the probability of ﬁnding a neighbor as the number of images in
the dataset grows. From Fig. 4(b) we see that a third of the images
in the dataset are expected to have a neighbor with correlation
In Fig. 4(c) we explore how the plots shown in Fig. 4(a) & (b)
relate to recognition performance. Three human subjects labeled
pairs of images as belonging to the same visual class or not
(pairs of images that correspond to duplicate images are removed).
The plot shows the probability that two images are labeled as
belonging to the same class as a function of image similarity.
As the normalized correlation exceeds 0.8, the probability of
belonging to the same class grows rapidly. Hence a simple K-
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
Overlap between S(50) and S(M)
79,000,000
Evaluation of the method for computing approximate nearest neighbors. These curves correspond to the similarity measure Dssd. (a) Probability
that an image from the set of exact nearest neighbors SN , with N = 50, is inside the approximate set of nearest neighbors ˆSM as a function of M. (b)
Number of approximate neighbors (M) that need to be considered as a function of the desired number of exact neighbors (N) in order to have a probability
of 0.8 of ﬁnding N exact neighbors. Each graph corresponds to a different dataset size, indicated by the color code. (c) Number of approximate neighbors
(M) that need to be considered as we reduce the number of principal components (C) used for the indexing (with N = 50).
Max normalized correlation ρ=(1-D1 / 2)
Cumulative probability of max correlation
70,000,000
white noise
Probability for same category
Pixelwise correlation
Probability match
number of images
Exploring the dataset using Dssd. (a) Cumulative probability that the nearest neighbor has a correlation greater than ρ. Each of the colored curves
shows the behavior for a different size of dataset. (b) Cross-section of ﬁgure (a) plots the probability of ﬁnding a neighbor with correlation > 0.9 as a
function of dataset size. (c) Probability that two images belong to the same category as a function of pixel-wise correlation (duplicate images are removed).
Each curve represents a different human labeler.
nearest-neighbor approach might be effective with our size of
dataset. We will explore this further in Section V.
B. Image similarity metrics
We can improve recognition performance using better measures
of image similarity. We now introduce two additional similarity
measures between a pair of normalized images I1 and I2, that
incorporate invariances to simple spatial transformations.
• In order to incorporate invariance to small translations,
scaling and image mirror, we deﬁne the similarity measure:
warp = min
(I1(x, y, c) −Tθ[I2(x, y, c)])2
In this expression, we minimize the similarity by transforming I2 (horizontal mirror; translations and scaling up to 10
pixel shifts) to give the minimum SSD. The transformation
parameters θ are optimized by gradient descent .
• We allow for additional distortion in the images by shifting
every pixel individually within a 5 by 5 window to give
minimum SSD. This registration can be performed with
more complex representations than pixels (e.g., Berg and
Malik ). In our case, the minimum can be found by
exhaustive evaluation of all shifts, only possible due to the
low resolution of the images.
(I1(x, y, c) −ˆI2(x + Dx, y + Dy, c))2
In order to get better matches, we initialize I2 with the
warping parameters obtained after optimization of Dwarp,
ˆI2 = Tθ[I2].
Fig. 5 shows a pair of images being matched using the 3 metrics
and shows the resulting neighbor images transformed by the
optimal parameters that minimize each similarity measure. The
ﬁgure shows two candidate neighbors: one matching the target
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
Pixel shifting
a) Image matching using distance metrics Dssd, Dwarp and Dshift. Top row: after transforming each neighbor by the optimal transformation; the
sunglasses always results in a poor match. However, for the car example on the bottom row, the matched image approximates the pose of the target car. b)
Sibling sets from 79,302,017 images, found with distance metrics Dssd, and Dshift. Dshift provides better matches than Dssd.
79,000,000
As we increase the size of the dataset from 105 to the 108 images, the quality of the retrieved set increases dramatically. However, note that we need
to increase the size of the dataset logarithmically in order to have an effect. These results are obtained using Dshift as a similarity measure between images.
semantic category and another one that corresponds to a wrong
match. For Dwarp and Dshift we show the closest manipulated
image to the target. Dwarp looks for the best translation, scaling
and horizontal mirror of the candidate neighbor in order to match
the target. Dshift further optimizes the warping provided by Dwarp
by allowing pixels to move in order to minimize the distance with
the target.
Fig. 5(b) shows two examples of query images and the retrieved
neighbors (sibling set), out of 79,302,017 images, using Dssd and
Dshift. For speed we use the same low dimensional approximation
as described in the previous section by evaluating Dwarp and
Dshift only on the ﬁrst 16,000 candidates. This is a good indexing
scheme for Dwarp, but it results in slightly decrease of performance
for Dshift which would require more neighbors to be considered.
Despite this, both measures provide good matches, but Dshift
returns closer images at the semantic level. This observation will
be quantiﬁed in Section V. Fig. 6 shows examples of query images
and sets of neighboring images, from our dataset of 79,302,017
images, found using Dshift.
V. RECOGNITION
A. Wordnet voting scheme
We now attempt to use our dataset for object and scene
recognition. While an existing computer vision algorithm could
be adapted to work on 32 × 32 images, we prefer to use a simple
nearest-neighbor scheme based on one of the distance metrics
Dssd, Dwarp or Dshift. Instead of relying on the complexity of
the matching scheme, we let the data to do the work for us:
the hope is that there will always be images close to a given
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
instrumentality
instrumentality
psychological
phenomen 5
instrument
vertebrate
a) Input image
b) Neighbors c) Ground truth
d) Wordnet voted branches
a) Input image
b) Neighbors
c) Ground truth
d) Wordnet voted branches
organism 44
vertebrate
communicator
administrative
instrument
This ﬁgure shows two examples. (a) Query image. (b) First 16 of 80 neighbors found using Dshift. (c) Ground truth Wordnet branch describing
the content of the query image at multiple semantic levels. (d) Sub-tree formed by accumulating branches from all 80 neighbors. The number in each node
denotes the accumulated votes. The red branch shows the nodes with the most votes. Note that this branch substantially agrees with the branch for vise and
for person in the ﬁrst and second examples respectively.
query image with some semantic connection to it. The goal of
this section is to show that the performance achieved can match
that of sophisticated algorithms which use much smaller training
An additional factor in our dataset is the labeling noise. To cope
with this we propose a voting scheme based around the Wordnet
semantic hierarchy. Wordnet provides semantic relationships
between the 75,062 nouns for which we have collected images.
For simplicity, we reduce the initial graph-structured relationships
between words to a tree-structured one by taking the most
common meaning of each word. The result is a large semantic tree
whose nodes consist of the 75,062 nouns and their hypernyms,
with all the leaves being nouns Fig. 7(c) shows the unique branch
of this tree belonging to the nouns “vise” and “chemist”. Other
work making use of Wordnet includes Hoogs and Collins 
who use it to assist with image segmentation. While not using
Wordnet explicitly, Barnard et al. and Carbonetto et al. 
learn models using both textual and visual cues.
Given the large number of classes in our dataset (75,062)
and their highly speciﬁc nature, it is not practical or desirable
classify each of the classes separately. Instead, using the Wordnet
hierarchy, we can perform classiﬁcation at a variety of different
semantic levels. So instead of just trying to recognize the noun
“yellowﬁn tuna”, we may also perform recognition at the level
of “tuna” or “ﬁsh” or “animal”. This is in contrast to current
approaches to recognition that only consider a single, manually
imposed, semantic meaning of an object or scene.
If classiﬁcation is performed at some intermediate semantic
level, for example using the noun “person”, we need not only
consider images gathered from the Internet using “person”. Using
the Wordnet hierarchy tree, we can also draw on all images
belonging to nouns whose hypernyms include “person” (for
example, “arithmetician”). Hence, we can massively increase the
number of images in our training set at higher semantic levels.
Near the top of the tree, however, the nouns are so generic
(e.g. “object”) that the child images recruited in this manner have
little visual consistency, so despite their extra numbers may be of
little use in classiﬁcation 5.
Our classiﬁcation scheme uses the Wordnet tree in the following way. Given a query image, the neighbors are found using
some similarity measure (typically Dshift) . Each neighbor in turn
votes for its branch within the Wordnet tree. Votes from the entire
sibling set are accumulated across a range of semantic levels,
with the effects of the labeling noise being averaged out over
many neighbors. Classiﬁcation may be performed by assigning
the query image the label with the most votes at the desired
height (i.e. semantic level) within the tree, the number of votes
acting as a measure of conﬁdence in the decision. In Fig. 7(a)
we show two examples of this procedure, showing how precise
classiﬁcations can be made despite signiﬁcant labeling noise and
spurious siblings. Using this scheme we now address the task of
classifying images of people.
B. Person detection
In this experiment, our goal is to label an image as containing
a person or not, a task with many applications on the web and
elsewhere. A standard approach would be to use a face detector
but this has the drawback that the face has to be large enough to
be detected, and must generally be facing the camera. While these
limitations could be overcome by running multiple detectors, each
tuned to different view (e.g. proﬁle faces, head and shoulders,
torso), we adopt a different approach.
As many images on the web contain pictures of people, a large
fraction (23%) of the 79 million images in our dataset have people
in them. Thus for this class we are able to reliably ﬁnd a highly
consistent set of neighbors, as shown in Fig. 8. Note that most
of the neighbors match not just the category but also the location
and size of the body in the image, which varies considerably in
the examples.
To classify an image as containing people or not, we use
the scheme introduced in Section V-A, collecting votes from
5The use of Wordnet tree in this manner implicitly assumes that semantic
and visual consistency are tightly correlated. While this might be the case for
certain nouns (for example, “poodle” and “dachshund”), it is not clear how true
this is in general. To explore this issue, we constructed an interactive poster
that may be viewed at: http:\\people.csail.mit.edu\torralba\
tinyimages.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
Some examples of test images belonging to the “person” node of the Wordnet tree, organized according to body size. Each pair shows the query
image and the 25 closest neighbors out of 79 million images using Dshift with 32 × 32 images. Note that the sibling sets contain people in similar poses,
with similar clothing to the query images.
detection rate
false alarm rate
79,000,000
(a) Examples showing the fraction of the image occupied by the head. (b)–(d): ROC curves for people detection (not localization) in images drawn
randomly from the dataset of 79 million as a function of (b) head size; (c) similarity metrics and (d) dataset size using Dshift.
the 80 nearest neighbors. Note that the Wordnet tree allows us
make use of hundreds of other words that are also related to
“person” (e.g. artist, politician, kid, taxi driver, etc.). To evaluate
performance, we used two different sets of test images. The ﬁrst
consisted of a random sampling of images from the dataset. The
second consisted of images returned by Altavista using the query
1) Evaluation using randomly drawn images: 1125 images
were randomly drawn from the dataset of 79 million (Fig. 8
shows 6 of them, along with some of their sibling set). For
evaluation purposes, any people within the 1125 images were
manually segmented6.
Fig. 9(b) shows the classiﬁcation performance as the size of
the person in the image varies. When the person is large in the
image, the performance is signiﬁcantly better than when it is
small. This occurs for two reasons: ﬁrst, when the person is large,
the picture become more constrained, and hence ﬁnding good
matches becomes easier. Second, the weak labels associated with
each image in our dataset typically refer to the largest object in
the image. Fig. 9(c)&(d) show precision-recall curves for different
similarly measures and varying dataset size respectively, with the
full 79 million images and Dshift yielding the best performance.
6The images and segmentations are available at: 
csail.mit.edu/browseLabelMe/static_web_tinyimages_
testset.html
2) Evaluation using Altavista images: Our approach can also
be used to improve the quality of Internet image search engines.
We gathered 1018 images from Altavista image search using the
keyword “person”. Each image was classiﬁed using the approach
described in Section V-A. The set of 1018 images was then
re-ordered according to the conﬁdence of each classiﬁcation.
Fig. 10(a) shows the initial Altavista ranking while Fig. 10(b)
shows the re-ordered set, showing a signiﬁcant improvement in
To quantify the improvement in performance, the Altavista
images were manually annotated with bounding boxes around any
people present. Out of the 1018 images, 544 contained people,
and of these, 173 images contained people occupying more than
20% of the image.
Fig. 10 shows the precision-recall curves for the people detection task. Fig. 10(c) shows the performance for all Altavista
images while Fig. 10(d) shows the performance on the subset
where people occupy at least 20% of the image. Note that the
raw Altavista performance is the same irrespective of the persons’
size (in both plots, by 5% recall the precision is at the level
of chance). This illustrates the difference between indexing an
image using non visual vs. visual cues. Fig. 10 also shows the
results obtained when running a frontal face detector (an OpenCV
implementation of Viola and Jones boosted cascade , ).
We run the face detector on the original high-resolution images.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
a) Altavista ranking
b) Sorted by the tiny images
Altavista ranking
Tiny images ranking
VJ detector (high-res)
VJ detector (32x32)
(a) The ﬁrst 70 images returned by Altavista when using the query “person” (out of 1018 total). (b) The ﬁrst 70 images after re-ordering using
our Wordnet voting scheme with the 79,000,000 tiny images. (c) Comparison of the performance of the initial Altavista ranking with the re-ordered images
using the Wordnet voting scheme and also a Viola & Jones-style frontal face detector. (c) shows the recall-precision curves for all 1018 images gathered from
Altavista, and (d) shows curves for the subset of 173 images where people occupy at least 20% of the image.
Note that the performance of our approach working on 32 × 32
images is comparable to that of the dedicated face detector on
high resolution images. For comparison, Fig. 10 also shows the
results obtained when running the face detector on low-resolution
images (we downsampled each image so that the smallest axis has
32 pixels, we then upsampled the images again to the original
resolution using bicubic interpolation. The upsampling operation
was to allow the detector to have sufﬁcient resolution to be able
to scan the image.). The performance of the OpenCV detector
drops dramatically with low-resolution images.
C. Person localization
While the previous section was concerned with an object
detection task, we now address the more challenging problem
of object localization. Even though the tiny image dataset has not
been labeled with the location of objects in the images, we can use
the weakly labeled (i.e. only a single label is provided for each
image) dataset to localize objects. Much the recent work in object
recognition uses explicit models that labels regions of images
as being object/background. In contrast, we use the tiny image
dataset to localize without learning an explicit object model. It is
important to emphasize that this operation is performed without
manual labeling of images: all the information comes from the
loose text label associated with each image.
The idea is to extract multiple putative crops of the high
resolution query image (Fig. 11(a)–(c)). For each crop, we resize
it to 32 × 32 pixels and query the tiny image database to obtain
it’s siblings set (Fig. 11(d)). When a crop contains a person, we
expect the sibling set to also contain people. Hence, the most
prototypical crops should get have a higher number of votes for
the person class. To reduce the number of crops that need to
be evaluated, we ﬁrst segment the image using normalized cuts
 , producing around 10 segments (segmentation is performed
on the high resolution image). Then, all possible combinations
of contiguous segments are considered, giving a set of putative
crops for evaluation. Fig. 11 shows an example of this procedure.
Fig. 11(d) shows the best scoring bounding box for images from
the Altavista test set.
D. Scene recognition
Many web images correspond to full scenes, not individual
objects. In Fig. 12, we attempt to classify the 1125 randomly
drawn images (containing objects as well as scenes) into “city”,
“river”, “ﬁeld” and “mountain” by counting the votes at the
corresponding node of the Wordnet tree. Scene classiﬁcation for
the 32x32 images performs surprisingly well, exploiting the large,
weakly labeled database.
detection rate
false alarm rate
detection rate
false alarm rate
detection rate
false alarm rate
detection rate
false alarm rate
Scene classiﬁcation using the randomly drawn 1125 image test set.
Note that the classiﬁcation is “mountain” vs all classes present in the test set
(which includes many kinds of objects), not “mountain” vs “ﬁeld”, “city”,
“river” only. Each quadrant shows some examples of high scoring images
for that particular scene category, along with an ROC curve (yellow = 7,900
image training set; red = 790,000 images; blue = 79,000,000 images).
E. Automatic image annotation and dataset size
Here we examine the classiﬁcation performance at a variety
of semantic levels across many different classes as we increase
the size of the database. For evaluation we use the test set
of 1125 randomly drawn tiny images, with each image being
fully segmented and annotated with the objects and regions that
compose each image. To give a distinctive test set, we only use
images for which the target object is absent or occupies at least
20% of the image pixels. Using the voting tree described in
Section V-A, we classiﬁed them using K = 80 neighbors at a
variety of semantic levels. To simplify the presentation of results,
we collapsed the Wordnet tree by hand (which had 19 levels)
down to 3 levels (see Fig. 13 for the list of categories at each
In Fig. 13 we show the average ROC curve area (across words
at that level) at each of the three semantic levels for Dssd and Dshift
as the number of images in the dataset is varied. Note that (i)
the classiﬁcation performance increases as the number of images
increases; (ii) Dshift outperforms Dssd; (iii) the performance drops
off as the classes become more speciﬁc. A similar effect of dataset
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
Localization of people in images. (a) input image, (b) Normalized-cuts segmentation, (c) three examples of candidate crops, (d) the 6 nearest
neighbors of each crop in (c), accompanied by the number of votes for the person class obtained using 80 nearest neighbors under similarity measure Dshift.
(e) Localization examples.
Organism 0.75
Artifact 0.71
Location 0.81
Geological
formation 0.88
Body of water 0.77
Person 0.87
Animal 0.75
Plant life 0.79
Vehicle 0.80
Mountain 0.86
River 0.86
Insect 0.82
Flower 0.70
Average ROC area
# of images
# of images
# of images
Classiﬁcation at multiple semantic levels using 1125 randomly
drawn tiny images. Each plot shows a different manually deﬁned semantic
level, increasing in selectivity from left to right. The curves represent the
average (across words at that level) ROC curve area as a function of number
of images in the dataset (red=Dssd, blue=Dshift). Words within each of the
semantic levels are shown in each subplot, accompanied by the ROC curve
area when using the full dataset. The red dot shows the expected performance
if all images in Google image search were used (∼2 billion), extrapolating
size has already been shown by the language understanding
community .
By way of illustrating the quality of the recognition achieved
by using the 79 million weakly labeled images, we show in
Fig. 14, for categories at three semantic levels, the images
that were more conﬁdently assigned to each class. Note that
despite the simplicity of the matching procedure presented here,
the recognition performance achieves reasonable levels even for
relatively ﬁne levels of categorization.
Class frequency
Class rank (sorted by frequency)
Tiny images
Distribution of labels in image datasets. The vertical axis gives the
percentage of polygons in the two datasets containing each object category
(objects are sorted by frequency rank). The plot is in log-log axis.
VI. THE IMPORTANCE OF SOPHISTICATED METHODS FOR
RECOGNITION
The plot in Fig. 15 shows the frequency of objects in the
tiny images database (this distribution is estimated using the
hand labeled set of 1148 images). This distribution is similar to
word frequencies in text (Zipf’s law). The vertical axis shows the
percentage of annotated polygons for each object category. The
horizontal axis is the object rank (objects are sorted by frequency).
The four most frequent objects are people (29%), plant (16%), sky
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
Geological
formation (32)
detection rate
false alarm rate
detection rate
false alarm rate
detection rate
false alarm rate
detection rate
false alarm rate
detection rate
false alarm rate
Plant life
detection rate
false alarm rate
detection rate
false alarm rate
detection rate
false alarm rate
detection rate
false alarm rate
detection rate
false alarm rate
Test images assigned to words, ordered by conﬁdence. The number indicates the total number of positive examples in the test set out of the 1148
images. The color of the bounding box indicates if the image was correctly assigned (black) or not (red). The middle row shows the ROC curves for three
dataset sizes (yellow = 7,900 image training set; red = 790,000 images; blue = 79,000,000 images). The bottom row shows the corresponding precision-recall
(9%) and building (5%). In the same plot we show the distribution
of objects in the LabelMe dataset . Similar distributions are
also obtained from datasets collected by other groups . As the
distribution from Fig. 15 reveals, even when collecting extremely
large databases, there will always be a large number of categories
with very few training samples available. For some classes, a large
amount of training data will be available and, as we discuss in this
paper, nearest neighbor methods can be very effective. However,
for many other classes learning will have to be performed with
small datasets (for which we need to use sophisticated object
models and transfer learning techniques).
VII. CONCLUSIONS
This paper makes the following important contributions: a) The
compilation of a dataset of 79 million 32×32 color images, each
with a weak text label and link to the original image. b) The
characterization of the manifold of 32 × 32 images, showing that
Internet sized datasets (108–109) yield a reasonable density over
the manifold of natural images, at least for the purposes of object
recognition. c) Showing that simple non-parametric methods, in
conjunction with large datasets, can give reasonable performance
on object recognition tasks. For richly represented classes, such
as people, the performance is comparable to leading class-speciﬁc
detectors.
Previous usage of non-parametric approaches in recognition
have been conﬁned to limited domains (e.g.
pose recognition
 ) compared with the more general problems tackled in this
paper, the limiting factor being the need for very large amounts
of data. The results obtained using our tiny image dataset are
an encouraging sign that the data requirements may not be
insurmountable. Indeed, search engines such as Google index
another 2–3 orders of magnitude more images, which could yield
a signiﬁcant improvement in performance.
In summary, all methods in object recognition have two components: the model and the data. The vast majority of the effort in
recent years has gone into the modeling part – seeking to develop
suitable parametric representations for recognition. In contrast,
this paper moves into other direction, exploring how the data
itself can help to solve the problem. We feel the results in this
paper warrant further exploration in this direction.
VIII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Funding for this research was provided by NGA NEGI-1582-
04-0004, Shell Research, Google, ONR MURI Grant N00014-06-
1-0734, and NSF Career award (IIS0747120).