Case study of the physics component of an integrated curriculum
R. Beichner, L. Bernold, E. Burniston, P. Dail, R. Felder, J. Gastineau, M. Gjertsen,
and J. Risley
North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27695
~Received 14 November 1997; accepted 12 April 1999!
Over a four-year time span, several departments at North Carolina State University offered
experimental sections of courses taken by freshman engineering students. The acronym IMPEC
~Integrated Math, Physics, Engineering, and Chemistry curriculum! describes which classes were
involved. This paper discusses the physics component of the curriculum and describes the impact of
the highly collaborative, technology-rich, activity-based learning environment on a variety of
conceptual and problem-solving assessments and attitude measures. Qualitative and quantitative
research results indicate that students in the experimental courses outperformed their cohorts in
demographically matched traditional classes, often by a wide margin. Student satisfaction and
conﬁdence rates were remarkably high. We also noted substantial increases in retention and success
rates for groups underrepresented in science, math, and engineering. Placing students in the same
teams across multiple courses appears to have been the most beneﬁcial aspect of the learning
environment. © 1999 American Association of Physics Teachers.
I. INTRODUCTION
The ﬁrst year of the engineering curriculum can be quite
difﬁcult and takes its toll on students. Many studies1,2 have
attempted to understand the cause of this substantial ‘‘narrowing of the pipeline’’ leading to employment as a scientist
or engineer. This project was an attempt to promote student
success by combining the most effective features of a wide
variety of new and old methodologies for teaching technical
information. Over a four-year time span, faculty from four
disciplines combined their efforts to see if they could minimize attrition and improve student understanding and attitudes toward the topics covered during a typical freshman
year at a large engineering school. Subjects studied during
this critical time in the pre-engineer’s preparation include
differential and integral calculus, general chemistry, the ﬁrst
semester of physics ~statics, kinematics and dynamics!, and a
general introduction to the ﬁeld of engineering. This paper
deals with the revisions made directly to the physics component as well as aspects of the rest of the experimental curriculum that may have indirectly affected student success in
physics. The focus is on the 1995–96 and 1996–97 academic
Because of demonstrated weaknesses3–5 in the understanding of introductory physics students following traditional instruction, this aspect of the curriculum looked like it would
be a promising area for improvement. The freedom provided
by the experimental nature of the project allowed us to combine many different research-based approaches to teaching
and learning, including activity-based pedagogies,6–9 collaborative
learning,10,11
integration
curricula,12
context-rich problems,13,14 and the use of technology.15–17
We were looking to see if the proper combination of elements from these successful approaches would allow us to
improve learning and attitudes. By paying close attention to
inter-student and student–instructor interactions in controlled
surroundings and situations, we also hoped to determine
what aspects of classroom layout and usage facilitated the
type of student-centered learning environment championed
by these pedagogies.
II. INSTRUCTIONAL ENVIRONMENT
During the fall semester, students took calculus, general
chemistry, and a one-credit introduction to engineering. In
the spring, the students took the second semester of calculus,
the ﬁrst semester of physics, and a second one-credit engineering course. Besides these 10 credit hours each semester,
students also registered for 4–8 hours of other classes like
English in the fall and a programming course in the spring.
The experimental classes were all taught in a single room.
Students were assigned to three-person teams where they
worked on homework and lab assignments. Membership was
designed so that the groups were heterogeneous by ability as
measured by GPA and academic background. Women and
minorities were paired within groups to the greatest possible
extent. These same teams extended across all three integrated
courses. Roles of recorder, checker, and coordinator were
rotated with each assignment so that all aspects of teamsmanship could be practiced by each group member. Students
received explicit instruction on how to work in groups and
were given protocols for dealing with problems that might
arise when different people work together on common tasks.
Grading schemes were devised to ensure both individual accountability and positive interdependence. Descriptions of
the internal workings of the groups were part of many assignments, ensuring a processing of group operation, which
is recognized10,11 as important to ensuring group success. A
variety of seating arrangements ranging from long benches
to round tables of differing diameters were tested to see
which would best facilitate group work. The room was open
24 hours/day ~although it was used by several other classes!
and was often the site of outside-of-class group meetings set
up by the students.
A great deal of effort was given to developing activities
that would keep students’ interest and minimize the need for
lecturing. The limitations of the ‘‘transmissionist’’ style of
instruction have been clearly documented in numerous studies, and have perhaps been most clearly stated by Arnold
‘‘...I point to the following unwelcome truth: much as
we might dislike the implications, research is showing
Phys. Educ. Res., Am. J. Phys. Suppl. 67 ~7!, July 1999
© 1999 American Association of Physics Teachers
that didactic exposition of abstract ideas and lines of
reasoning ~however engaging and lucid we might try to
make them! to passive listeners yields pathetically thin
results in learning and understanding—except in the
very small percentage of students who are specially
gifted in the ﬁeld.’’ ~p. vii!
Of course, that small number of students who are particularly successful in traditional instructional settings often go
on to academia where they teach the way they were taught,
perpetuating an often inappropriate instructional methodology.
Although there was some lecturing to prepare the way for
the study of new topics, provide an organizational scheme, or
motivate the students, much of the class time was spent
working on special activities. During these tasks, students
had to make predictions, develop models of physical phenomena, collect and analyze data from probes, and work on
design projects. Students were responsible for reading material from the textbook and asking about difﬁculties when
they arose. It was explained to them that the only occasions
when content from the book would be directly addressed was
when their questions about it were being discussed or at
those times when the instructor had an alternative way of
presenting a topic. ~This permitted coverage of the same material as the traditional course, while spending more class
time on speciﬁc problem areas.! Quizzes on the text, coupled
with weekly homework assignments of end-of-chapter problems, ensured that most students were taking their reading
responsibility seriously. Except for chemistry, there were no
separately scheduled labs. Laboratory hours were combined
with the time normally reserved for large-scale lecturing, resulting in 5 hours/week of chemistry ~fall! or physics
~spring!, 5 hours/week of math, and 2 hours/week of engineering.
Although there was a default schedule describing which
courses were to be taught during speciﬁc time periods, there
were some situations ~exams, ﬁeld trips, etc.! where the instructors modiﬁed the schedule to better ﬁt the students’
needs. There were also several occasions where more than
one of the instructors would be in the classroom at the same
time. Students seemed to particularly enjoy special workshops on topics like differential equations, ‘‘jigsaw’’ projects
~where individual group members collected information on
different topics and then shared their expertise with the rest
of their team!, and chances to work on semester-long, complex design projects. They also appeared to value explicit
skill development and metacognitive training, including discussions of the outcome of a personal learning styles
inventory.19 The engineering course included sessions on
how to work in teams, effective ways to communicate in
writing and orally, and time management.
Technology was used to create an environment that focused student attention on the topic of discussion. We varied
the number of students per computer to study the implications for group dynamics. The computers were available to
the students at all times. Field notes of the classes reveal that
the phrase ‘‘Monitors off!’’ was heard occasionally as the
instructor brought students back on task and away from web
surﬁng or e-mailing. In spite of this potential for distraction,
continuous accessibility to computers with MBL interfaces
and software ~for curve ﬁtting, conducting video analyses,
etc.! added enormously to the classroom milieu.
A wide variety of hands-on physics activities were developed for the students or adapted from existing curricula like
Workshop Physics,20 Physics by Inquiry,6 Concept Tests,21
and ALPS worksheets.22 Students were regularly directed to
model physical phenomena with Interactive Physics ~a simulation engine! and to compare their results with data collected
equivalent
real-world
situations.
Studentgenerated models were then modiﬁed to account for
discrepancies between theory and experiment. Using technology to present real and simulated situations for study
freed the instructors to move about the classroom and enter
into Socratic dialogs23 with the students. Because of fast connections to the Internet, the students were able to search Web
pages from around the world for facts relevant to the task at
hand. They were then able to use local productivity tools like
spreadsheets and symbolic algebra processors to work with
the information they were accumulating. Ready access to
these tools made use of them an everyday occurrence, no
different than using a calculator. This not only was apparent
in the students’ proﬁciency, but also in the ease with which
instructors would change the ﬂow of their lessons to utilize
technology to address a student question.
In most cases, labs were conducted as short exercises directly and immediately related to the material being discussed. For example, during an introduction to the concept of
center of mass, a female student challenged the instructor
with the questions: ‘‘Why are we learning this? What is it
good for?’’ ~We found that the students, especially when
supported by their peers, quite commonly expressed this type
of concern. We believe this behavior indicates that they were
thinking critically about the material.! These questions provided a natural opportunity for the instructor to begin a
‘‘mini-lab’’ utilizing the Interactive Physics simulation engine. ~The students probably assumed that the activity was
an impromptu one, and no effort was made to dispel that
notion.! The simulation began with the instructor building a
simple situation where one ball was thrown into another ball
that was freely falling. On their own the students related this
to an earlier ‘‘Monkey and Hunter’’ demonstration so it was
clear that they understood the physical situation being represented. The program was then adjusted to show the system’s
center of mass moving in a smooth parabolic arc across the
screen. The instructor then showed that if gravity were not
acting, the center of mass would move at constant velocity,
thereby illustrating the application of Newton’s ﬁrst law to
the system. The instructor then added another ball with a
different initial velocity so that the three objects collided in a
complicated manner. Students were asked to predict the path
of the system’s center of mass. Some guessed correctly, but
most did not. After running the simulation, the students appeared to grasp the idea that the c.m. still moved uniformly.
At this point the instructor directed the students to build
their own simulations. After they had modeled several
simple arrangements of two or three objects, they were told
to come up with a situation where the c.m. did not move in a
predictable manner. They tried a wide variety of arrangements, including irregularly shaped objects held together by
springs and strings that were sent spinning in erratic paths
after a dozen or more collisions with other objects. In every
case, the students discovered that the system c.m. moved in a
parabolic arc ~or with constant velocity if gravity was
‘‘turned off’’! as if a single object were experiencing projectile motion. The questions that started the whole endeavor
were then repeated and the students were easily able to answer them for themselves. The entire activity took less than
Phys. Educ. Res., Am. J. Phys. Suppl., Vol. 67, No. 7, July 1999
Beichner et al.
In another exercise, students spent a considerable amount
of time with hands-on activities and had to submit a written
lab report, exercising important communications skills in addition to building a better understanding of physical concepts. In this case, each group of students was given a large
spring and a 100 g mass. They were asked to predict the
motion of the mass as it oscillated at the end of the spring,
but were not told how to make those predictions. All groups
realized they needed an estimate of the spring constant.
Some determined its value by measuring the displacement
caused by the hanging mass. Others simply used a force
meter ~which was merely a previously calibrated spring! to
ﬁnd k. The students then quickly sketched graphs of position
versus time and indicated the expected oscillation period,
after which each group set about oscillating their mass/spring
system and recording the time. Photographic records of the
activity show at least four different ways in which groups
conducted this portion of the lab. In each case, the measured
period differed substantially from the predicted value. This
disparity was not a major concern to the students until they
began to realize that repeating their measurements resulted in
the same unexpected value. Anxiety increased once comparisons to other groups indicated that all were consistently measuring the same ‘‘wrong’’ value for the period even though
the theoretical predictions were similar across the classroom.
This led some groups to bring out microcomputer-based lab
equipment to make more accurate measurements, which
merely conﬁrmed their earlier data. Other students tried setting up computer simulations that veriﬁed their theoretical
predictions but didn’t ﬁt the real world data. There was deﬁnitely a problem.
The instructor, through Socratic dialog, was able to bring
about a third of the groups to the realization that the mass of
the spring was inﬂuencing the situation. ~The instructor made
a conscious effort not to simply reveal the answer.! The rest
of the groups overheard what was going on and the entire
class went about trying to ﬁnd a way to correct for the fact
that the mass of the spring itself was greater than the mass
hanging from it. Eventually they discovered that they could
model the situation as a series of masses with stiffer springs
between them. Doing so not only resulted in a simulation
that correctly matched the measured period, but it also displayed the amplitude variations ~from internal vibrations!
that the students originally attributed to spurious noise in the
MBL data. This activity, which the students believed would
only take a few minutes, ended up lasting an hour and a half.
~Never knowing what to expect in class proved to be an
excellent motivator.! The unsolicited e-mail comment of one
of the students is noteworthy:
‘‘I just want to say that the lab you had for us yesterday
@sic# was very interesting. I was pretty frustrated with it
at ﬁrst but in the end I did learn a lot more about SHM.
Just wanted to tell you. Have a great day.’’
As the year progressed, it became increasingly apparent
that the class members were challenging each other and their
teachers as they constructed their own understanding. The
strong group ties that were cultivated throughout the courses
let students quietly ‘‘check with their neighbor’’ before raising a question or pointing out an area of difﬁculty. This
support for each other was seen in many situations and will
be discussed in more detail later.
Most of the data presented in this paper was collected
during the Spring 97 semester when the 5th edition of Halliday, Resnick, and Walker24 was used as the physics text. In
the previous year Reif’s text25 was used.
III. EVALUATION AND ASSESSMENT
A. IMPEC and control populations
In the summers of 1995 and 1996, incoming freshman
engineering students received letters inviting them to a special meeting held during orientation before the beginning of
the fall semester. Those attending were introduced to the
IMPEC ~Integrated Math, Physics, Engineering, and Chemistry Curriculum! faculty and the types of instruction that
would be presented in the upcoming two semesters, and were
invited to enroll in IMPEC. Each year we had about twice as
many student volunteers as openings in the experimental
classes. This allowed us to admit approximately half those
volunteering for the program and track the others in their
regular courses, thus adjusting for bias that might be present
because of the voluntary nature of student participation in the
project. The IMPEC class members were selected at random
from the group of volunteers, except for the constraint that
we wanted the experimental courses to have the same gender
and racial demographics as the entire engineering freshman
student body. We will present comparisons of academic performance and attitudes for two different academic years. We
did not track nonselected volunteers during the second year
of the study. The Spring 97 IMPEC physics instructor ~RJB!
also presented instruction in a lecture hall setting to a group
of 78 physics students in the fall of 1997. They were examined as a control group for speciﬁc concepts in physics.
B. Qualitative procedures
The regular collection and subsequent analysis of the
class’ electronic Listserv mail was just one of a wide variety
of approaches taken to help us understand what was going on
in the classroom and to provide insight into what the students
were thinking. Each technique yielded a different view of the
scene. Comparing and contrasting qualitative and quantitative data built up a more complete picture.
Throughout the Spring 1996 semester one of the researchers ~RJB! attended the physics class and recorded ﬁeld notes
from observations. In the fall of 1996 he observed all the
classes and collected notes and videotape. The bulk of the
2001 hours of notes were straightforward recordings of as
many of the teacher–student and student–student activities
as possible. Videotapes were made for comparison to the
handwritten notes, to ensure valid and reasonably complete
data collection. Most of the ﬁeld observations comprised
whole-class observations ~during teacher-directed instruction! along with close, but noninterfering, recording of group
interactions. In addition, several days were spent making
timed observations where speciﬁc activities were noted at
regular intervals—a ‘‘sweep’’ of the classroom was completed every 2 min.
Notes were also recorded during or immediately after nonstructured and structured interviews with individual students
and groups. These were supplemented with a variety of surveys that were administered throughout the year.
To analyze this large body of qualitative data, an adaptation of Strauss and Corbin’s26 Grounded Theory methodology was employed, progressing from open to axial coding. A
rainbow of highlighters was used to perform multiple catego-
Phys. Educ. Res., Am. J. Phys. Suppl., Vol. 67, No. 7, July 1999
Beichner et al.
rization of the notes. A legend relating each color to a category was slowly built up as the researchers made their way
through the information and created new classiﬁcations
~open coding! as they read. Each additional pass through the
data brought slight modiﬁcations to previous categories or
new combinations or splitting of categories ~axial coding!
until a ﬁnal, fairly stable classiﬁcation scheme was induced
from the tall stack of ﬁeld notes. Different researchers compared their categories to improve the validity of the effort.
Strauss and Corbin’s approach of selective coding led to the
recognition of the critical importance of socialization in the
classroom.
We also kept copies of student work. These portfolios of
exams, diagnostic tests, labs, and other materials were compared to the classroom observations and interviews. Questionnaires gave students the opportunity to directly report
their impressions of the learning environment. We speciﬁcally looked for places where the different data streams con-
ﬁrmed and disputed other analyses. This triangulation adds
considerably to the validity of the qualitative research and
strengthens our commitment to the conclusions we have
C. Quantitative assessment
The sizable battery of quantitative assessments included
the Force Concept Inventory,27 and the Test of Understanding Graphs in Kinematics.28 In addition to these two concept
assessments, we attempted to evaluate problem-solving skills
by replicating the calculation-oriented problems from the traditional class exams. ~These tests are prepared by one of the
Physics Department’s faculty members who has had this task
for more than a decade. They are reviewed by other faculty
for completeness and as an error check.! Both experimental
and control group students took a common ﬁnal exam that
was prepared in the same manner.
IV. RESULTS
A. Qualitative data
We will ﬁrst consider the ﬁndings of the qualitative research. We developed the following broad categories from
the iterative analysis of ﬁeld notes: socialization, metacognition & team skills, esteem building ~from faculty!, task orientation, and critical thinking. Each area was followed
through the notes and general trends for each were noted. We
also tried to quantify data where appropriate. For example,
2/3 of the e-mail from students originated from approximately 1/3 of the students, but it was fairly evenly distributed
among these main contributors. The remaining students averaged less than one message per week. Note that we have no
records for direct student-to-student e-mail. They appeared
to utilize the class Listserv almost exclusively for communication with each other.
We categorized 439 e-mail messages from the 96–97 class
discovered,
unexpectedly,
socialization—basically
conversation—was the main student use of the network.
~These students were still using the Listserv to communicate
with each other more than a year after their direct involvement in IMPEC was over.! Messages that directly related to
course material were relatively infrequent. Faculty messages
frequently,
socialization—and
particularly
noteworthy,
encouragement—made up a substantial fraction of their
notes to the class. Course administration was a common
topic of the instructors’ messages. ~The only papers distributed to students in the physics course were the exams.!
Several interesting ﬁndings emerged from our review of
the ﬁeld note and videotape data. First of all, it became quite
apparent that the same students, in the same room, working
in the same groups, responded differently to different teachers. Although all students appeared to respect all the faculty
they were dealing with, their interactions depended greatly
on the personalities involved. This in itself is not surprising,
but it was interesting to see it so clearly in this situation
where everything else was held fairly constant. What we
found that was unusual is that it was possible, through a
directed effort, to change the nature of these interactions. In
one case it was noted that the level of questioning presented
by a faculty member was rather shallow, of a sort we called
‘‘ﬁll-in-the-blank’’ sentences. For example, during a presentation, the following was recorded:
Instructor: ‘‘The slope of this line is...one, right?’’
Contemporaneous ﬁeld notes:‘‘Short wait time, short
response time. Student responses very superﬁcial.’’
Analysis notes:‘‘Superﬁcial questions keep students in
class, but perhaps not deep into material.’’
Many questions were followed by a very short ~typically
less than a second! waiting interval. The instructor then ﬁlled
in the blank for the students. Students became rather passive
in these situations even though for other aspects of the same
class and for other faculty they were quite aggressive in their
responses and challenging with their own questions. When
they could be persuaded to react to the ﬁll-in-the-blank questions, their answers were typically very brief. After a discussion of the problem among the project faculty, the instructor
began paying particular attention to the types of questions he
asked and their mode of presentation. It took several days for
the students to begin reacting to these modiﬁcations. But
soon they began to take more active roles in this portion of
the class and were putting considerable effort into answering
the more demanding questions posed to them by their instructor, especially when an adequate wait time was incorporated into the instruction. Of course, this has been born out in
Phys. Educ. Res., Am. J. Phys. Suppl., Vol. 67, No. 7, July 1999
Beichner et al.
the classic study by Rowe,29 but the ability to change student
responses as a result of speciﬁcally modifying the type of
questions asked is a useful ﬁnding. We believe this indicates
that it is possible to make directed efforts to improve teaching and the results can be immediate and tangible. In this
case, it also illustrates the value of peer ~as in instructor–
instructor! learning.
We experimented with several different classroom layouts,
requesting feedback from both faculty and students to
supplement the ﬁeld notes. An interaction analysis led to the
nonsurprising conclusion that long, rectangular tables were
not particularly well suited for group work. We had much
more success with round tables. Students adjusted seating to
ﬁt their needs at the time and both within-group and
between-group communications were much more commonly
observed than when these same students were at rectangular
tables. The circular tables also promoted easy movement of
the instructor from group to group while providing convenient access to individuals. Table diameter did not appear to
have a substantial impact on classroom interactions, although
students preferred the extra space provided by a larger table.
We also placed different numbers of students at computers to
ascertain how to best utilize the technology. We did not
reach any conclusions in this area other than the ratio of two
computers per three students was not effective. ~Often one of
the computers would go unused or else the one student of a
trio who did not have a computer would go back and forth,
looking over the shoulders of the two students who did.! We
did note that large monitors on the tables interfered with
inter-group discussions.
Overall, the qualitative data indicated a successful implementation of the learning environment. This is perhaps most
evident from the results of the standard ~used by all service
courses in the NCSU Physics Department! end-of-semester
course evaluation. Students were asked to indicate their general satisfaction with the course, on a Likert scale with 1
being ‘‘Not at all satisﬁed’’ and 5 reporting ‘‘Very satis-
ﬁed.’’ Of the last two classes queried, all but one student
selected 5. The lone holdout chose 4.
B. Quantitative results
While the qualitative data of this study shed light primarily on the day to day interactions in the classroom, the quantitative information we gathered examined academic performance for the most part. Most of the results are shown in
During the ﬁrst year of the study we compared the success
rate ~the percentage of students with grades of C or better in
science, math, and engineering courses! of IMPEC students
with the other volunteers who had not been selected to participate. Comparisons were also made with the rest of the
demographically matched students in the traditional course
sequence. The IMPEC students were much more successful
than either of the control groups. Although this indicates that
there was probably not a bias favoring the IMPEC students
because they were volunteers, it is possible that people who
had shown an interest in a highly interactive learning situation were disappointed when they were not selected and this
affected their performance in the traditional classes. Note,
however, that the success rate of the nonselected volunteers
in 1995–1996 is approximately the same as the success rate
for the traditional students.
Our concern with volunteer bias was an outgrowth of our
desire to conduct a valid study. We were actually much more
interested in examining the effect of the experimental curriculum on students who are typically underrepresented in
science, math, and engineering ﬁelds. Table I shows that in
1995–96, the core course passing rate for all the IMPEC
students was signiﬁcantly higher ~Wilcoxon test, p,0.1)
than that for the control group of volunteers and for the
freshman engineering class as a whole. In 1996–97, the performance differences (p,0.01) between IMPEC and non-
IMPEC students were even greater. But we were especially
pleased to see that for both years, the passing rates for
IMPEC women were much higher than the rates for their
non-IMPEC counterparts. And it is noteworthy that all the
African-American students in IMPEC passed each year.
Beyond the rather coarse measures of ‘‘passing’’ or ‘‘success,’’ evidence from a variety of assessments suggests that
the quality of learning was high relative to that for students
in the traditional ﬁrst year course sequence. Compared to
students in the control group and to all the students in the
regular freshman orientation course, the IMPEC students ﬁnished with signiﬁcantly higher levels of conﬁdence in their
abilities in science and mathematics, writing, speaking, and
computer skills. Most of the ﬁnal engineering project reports
and presentations were surprisingly good ~with some outside
faculty observers comparing them to senior papers!, and
IMPEC helped conﬁrm the decision to major in engineering
for a large percentage of the students who successfully completed the curriculum. A number of measures of student satisfaction and conﬁdence levels in various skills were utilized.
The results were disturbing in that students in the regular
courses ~both those who had volunteered for IMPEC but
were not selected and the rest of the engineering freshman!
had lowered self-conﬁdence levels. This is seen in Figs. 2
and 3. Students who had indicated interest in the IMPEC
curriculum but were not selected to participate appeared to
be the most adversely affected. More details of these attitudinal surveys can be found in Felder et al.30,31
Although positive attitudes are valued, engineers are in the
problem-solving business. Engineering faculty rate problem
Table I. Comparison of overall success rates and passing rates for females and minorities. ~Success is deﬁned
as grades of C or better in two math courses, chemistry, physics, and engineering.! Rates are given as percentages.
1995–96 Academic year
1996–97 Academic year
Nonselected volunteers
Traditional
Phys. Educ. Res., Am. J. Phys. Suppl., Vol. 67, No. 7, July 1999
Beichner et al.
solving as a vital skill that their students need to acquire. We
assessed this ability by utilizing the exams developed for the
traditional students by the Physics Department. Figure 4 illustrates that the IMPEC students did better on the shared
mid-semester exam questions, averaging 80% as compared
to 68% for the traditional students, even though both populations were carefully matched in scholastic achievement and
demographics. The IMPEC students’ grades on the common
ﬁnal exam were nearly half a letter grade higher than their
traditionally taught peers.
Knowing that it is possible for students to perform fairly
well on typical problem-oriented exams while still having
substantial gaps in their understanding, we conducted several
conceptual evaluations as well. Kinematics graph interpretation scores ~on the TUG-K! averaged 8962% for IMPEC
students while their peers at other institutions made only
4862%. ~The uncertainties are percentages derived from the
standard error of measurement, s/AN.) This astonishing result caused us to worry about instructional bias, especially
since the instructor had previously developed the testing
instrument.28 A visiting faculty member ~not part of the research team! was acting as an outside observer during the
physics classes. Before revealing the results of the TUG-K
administration, we asked him to review his notes and the
instrument and comment on whether he thought the instructor ‘‘taught to the test.’’ His response was that although the
course dealt with the same content ~as it should!, the individual test items were not part of the instruction. In his opinion, the test results were valid.
Table II and Fig. 5 show that the 1995–96 IMPEC students performed at a much higher level on the Force Concept
Inventory ~FCI! than did a national sample of traditionally
taught students. The 1996–97 group even did better than
students in many other innovative ‘‘interactive engagement’’
courses. This is not believed to be due to a teacher effect
since the same instructor taught a control group ~via traditional instruction in a lecture hall! where the FCI gain was
actually slightly lower than the national norm for traditional
instruction, much to his dismay.
As a follow-up, we tracked the 1995–96 students who
took the electricity and magnetism course ~which was traditionally taught! in the following semester. There was no signiﬁcant difference between them and their peers on exam
performance, t(19, 0.05)50.50. We did not really know
what to expect. On the one hand, one could hope that the
critical thinking and problem-solving skills that had been
part of the previous semester’s instruction would help students in all their subsequent courses, even if those courses
were traditionally taught. Conversely, we were concerned
that after exposure to the highly engaging nature of the experimental instruction, the students might react negatively to
lecture-based teaching and end up doing poorly. In the end, it
did not appear to make any difference on standard exam
performance, although this may be due to the nature of the
tests. It would have been interesting to test both groups of
students on more complex, content-rich problems to see if
the post-IMPEC group could apply their training on such
problems to new situations. Although the students did continue to socialize, we have no data as to whether they used
the group-related skills they learned as participants in
V. DISCUSSION
A. Socialization is critical
We believe the most important ﬁnding from our analysis
of the qualitative data is the central role that socialization
played in the success of the students. For example, during an
unstructured ~where the student led the direction of the discussion! interview, a student was recalling the previous semester and said, ‘‘...because we @emphasis added# made a B
in engineering...’’ unconsciously referring to her group
members. We also saw evidence of long-term commitments
being made among the students, including plans to room
together in subsequent semesters and even to ‘‘gang-
Phys. Educ. Res., Am. J. Phys. Suppl., Vol. 67, No. 7, July 1999
Beichner et al.
register’’ for non-IMPEC classes so that they could continue
their collaborations. This phenomenon is seen in the following two excerpts from the class’ Listserv messages:
‘‘There is a lab on thursday from 12:50–3:40 that only
has 16 people in it. If we all tried to get into that one we
would be over half the lab!’’
‘‘guys, i’m compiling a list of summer phone numbers
so we don’t lose touch... .’’
The electronic mail system also revealed how the class
members functioned as a support group. These notes to the
entire class are from two different students:
‘‘I made some hasty decisions at the beginning @sic# of
the semester ~fraternity involvement! and in addition to
that I wrecked my car, my great uncle died, I ran out of
money, and my mother was rushed to the emergency
room one Friday night. Without your unconditional support and kindness, there is no way that I would have
made it through this semester.’’
‘‘it isn’t often that you get a chance to realize how
many friends you truly have...so, this note goes out to
all of the students and professors that are in impec...you
guys were 110% supportive through my recent ordeal
and that really means a lot to me... .’’
The last major area of social interaction that was carefully
scrutinized was that of gender and race issues. We were very
pleased to see that these barriers were nonexistent, as far as
we could tell. Based on reviews of videotapes and ﬁeld
notes, minorities and females appeared to be just as involved
in class discussions and group work as the rest of the students. This is consistent with data from e-mail records that
indicates African-American students, making up 14% of the
class, sent 16% of the messages. Females, 17% of the
IMPEC students, sent 22% of the e-mail. An incident from
the ﬁeld notes is particularly revealing of the lowering of
racial barriers. Students were preparing to give end-ofsemester presentations and an instructor complimented student K about his clothing.
Instructor: ‘‘That’s a pretty ﬂashy tie!’’
K @a white student#: ‘‘Yeah! @smiling, then points to J,
an African-American student# It’s J’s. In fact, this
whole outﬁt @motioning to his suit coat and pants# is
B. Technology and activities were important in
establishing the learning environment
Because of the central role of technology in this curriculum, we paid close attention to how students utilized it. Although there were many examples of students being drawn
off task by having access to electronic mail and the web
during class, these situations were readily corrected by a request to turn the monitors off. What is more important to
note is how the assignment of a computer-related task
brought everyone back to the topic at hand. Students who
had not been actively engaged in the discussion quickly became involved when they had to ‘‘tell the technology’’ to do
something for them. We see this as a variant of the peer
instruction that often goes on during group work. Because
the students had to focus their attention on what they wanted
the software or hardware to do, they were much more easily
kept on task. This pattern was seen repeatedly with different
teachers throughout both years. Of course, the use of technology as a means for students to gather data and analyze it
meant that the instructor did not have to be ‘‘up front and
talking’’ for most of the class time. He was free to move
about the classroom, making inquiries and offering guidance
where and when it was needed. The focus was kept on the
phenomenon being studied rather than on an authority talking about the phenomenon.
Table II. Comparison of the groups to a national sample on ^g&, Hake’s normalized gain factor ~Ref. 9! ~the
fraction of the maximum possible gain in score from pretest to post-test! for the Force Concept Inventory.
Signiﬁcance of comparisons are based on unequal variances one-tailed t-tests at the a50.05 conﬁdence level.
The Spring 97 IMPEC group ^g& was also signiﬁcantly higher ~equal variances t52.86, df54491) than the
mean for the interactively taught students in Hake’s national sample. Note that the same instructor taught the
IMPEC Spring 97 and the local traditional course as a control in Fall 97.
Statistical
Signiﬁcant difference
compared to national
sample ~traditional!
Traditional
sample ~Ref. 9!
Interactive
Phys. Educ. Res., Am. J. Phys. Suppl., Vol. 67, No. 7, July 1999
Beichner et al.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
instruction
experimental
courses—a highly collaborative, technology-rich, activitybased learning environment—had a substantial positive effect on the students’ conceptual understanding, problemsolving skills, attitudes toward the courses, and conﬁdence
levels. We believe that the socialization promoted by
IMPEC’s cooperative learning environment was the most
critical factor in these gains, although there was probably a
synergistic effect from the active learning and technology
orientation of the instruction.
Much additional work remains. We would like to study
the relative importance of the different teaching methods
used in these classes. Students seemed to respond most positively when many instructors used many different techniques
in a fairly short time period. The changing roles and relationships of instructors and students would also be an interesting
subject of study. Moreover, since attitudes seemed to be so
strongly impacted, we should take advantage of newer assessment instruments like the VASS32 and MPEX33 tests to
provide additional insight.
Because of the great success of this experiment in terms of
both performance and attitudes, we feel it is absolutely critical to ﬁnd a way to maximize the ‘‘exportability’’ of this
approach to instruction. We have begun a related project
called SCALE-UP ~Student Centered Activities for Large
Enrollment University Physics! where we are continuing
these efforts. The task is to maintain the engaging learning
environment in classrooms of 100 students. Teacher guides
and classroom materials from the project will be made available to schools interested in reforming their introductory
physics instruction. Visit for
more information.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to express our appreciation to the
National Science Foundation, which supported this study
through SUCCEED Coalition funding. Thanks are also extended to Dr. Jeffery Saul, who provided useful feedback
during the writing of this article.
1. Engineering orientation courses
During the fall semester, students were exposed to the
different engineering disciplines and introduced to the campus computer network. A graduate of the NCSU engineering
program visited the class and spoke about life in the ‘‘real
world,’’ and a ﬁeld trip to a chemical plant included discussions with several on-site engineers. During both fall and
spring semesters, strong emphasis was placed on how different types of engineering would be utilized in complex problems that integrated content areas. For example, in the Fall of
1996, student teams worked on a lengthy project where they
designed a shower system for a recreational vehicle incorporating a propane burner and heat exchanger, and prepared a
thorough written report and oral presentation. The following
semester had them studying the engineering of racing cars
and ﬁnding the applications of math and physics in the design of high performance automobiles. The engineering
courses were where most of the integration of topical material was emphasized and where students received explicit
instruction in communication and teamwork, project management, technical written and oral presentation, and principles of metacognition. Landis’s Studying Engineering34
was used as a text.
2. Math courses
Here the students used the Hughes-Hallett Calculus text35
that forms the basis of the Harvard calculus reform effort.
MAPLE, a symbolic and numerical mathematics program, was
used heavily as an instructional tool and for completing assignments. Students become quite good at using the software
and would spontaneously utilize it in their other courses for
solving problems. There were many ‘‘hands-on’’ activities
where students explored the behavior of functions or built
intuitive understandings of procedures like differentiation
and integration.
3. Chemistry course
In the fall, students used the Chang Chemistry text36 and a
locally produced study packet. Exploring Chemistry and Introduction to General Chemistry, distributed by Falcon Software, were also used frequently. A separate wet chemistry
laboratory was the only component of the entire IMPEC curriculum that met in a separate room.
1A. W. Astin, ‘‘Engineering Outcomes,’’ ASEE Prism 27–30 ~Sept. 1993!.
2R. W. Heckel, ‘‘Engineering Freshman Enrollments: Critical and Noncritical Factors,’’ J. Engr. Educ. 85, 15–21 ~1996!.
3L. C. McDermott, ‘‘Millikan Lecture 1990: What we teach and what is
learned–Closing the gap,’’ Am. J. Phys. 59, 301–315 ~1991!.
4D. Hestenes, ‘‘Toward a Modeling Theory of Physics Instruction,’’ Am. J.
Phys. 55, 440–454 ~1987!.
5J. H. Larkin, ‘‘Expert and novice performance in solving physics problems,’’ Science 208, 1335–1342 ~1980!.
6L. C. McDermott, Physics by Inquiry ~Wiley, New York, 1997!.
7P. Laws, Workshop Physics Activity Guide ~Wiley, New York, 1997!.
8J. M. Wilson, ‘‘The CUPLE Physics Studio,’’ Phys. Teach. 32, 518–523
9R. R. Hake, ‘‘Interactive-engagement vs traditional methods: A sixthousand-student survey of mechanics test data for introductory physics
courses,’’ Am. J. Phys. 66, 64–74 ~1998!.
10D. Johnson, R. Johnson, and K. Smith, ‘‘Cooperative Learning: Increasing
College Faculty Instructional Productivity,’’ ASHE-ERIC Higher Education Report No. 4 ~The George Washington University, School of Education and Human Development, Washington, DC, 1991!.
11R. M. Felder and R. Brent, ‘‘Cooperative Learning in Technical Courses:
Procedures, Pitfalls, and Payoffs,’’ ERIC Document Reproduction Service, ED 377038 ~1994!.
12B. Panitz, ‘‘The Integrated Curriculum,’’ ASEE Prism 24–29 ~Sept.
13T. Foster and P. Heller, ‘‘Problem solving labs at the University of Minnesota. 1. Context-rich problems,’’ AAPT Announcer 26 ~2!, 79 ~1996!; P.
Heller, R. Keith, and S. Anderson, ‘‘Teaching problem solving through
cooperative grouping. 1. Group versus individual problem solving,’’ Am.
J. Phys. 60, 627–636 ~1992!.
14R. Chabay and B. Sherwood, ‘‘Where is the physics in homework problems?’’ AAPT Announcer 26 ~2!, 104 ~1996!.
15H. Brasell, ‘‘The Effect of Real-time Laboratory Graphing on Learning
Graphic Representations of Distance and Velocity,’’ J. Res. Sci. Teach.
24, 385–395 ~1987!.
16R. Beichner, ‘‘Impact of video motion analysis on kinematics graph interpretation skills,’’ Am. J. Phys. 64, 1272–1278 ~1996!.
17E. F. Redish, J. M. Saul, and R. N. Steinberg, ‘‘On the effectiveness of
active-engagement microcomputer-based laboratories,’’ Am. J. Phys. 65,
45–54 ~1997!.
18A. Arons, A Guide to Introductory Physics Teaching ~Wiley, New York,
19Excel Inc., Learning Type Measure ~Excel Inc., Barrington, IL, 1987!.
20See Ref. 7. See also P. Laws, ‘‘Calculus-based physics without lectures,’’
Phys. Today 44, 24–31 ~1991!.
Phys. Educ. Res., Am. J. Phys. Suppl., Vol. 67, No. 7, July 1999
Beichner et al.
21E. Mazur, Peer Instruction: A User’s Manual ~Prentice–Hall, Upper
Saddle River, NJ, 1997!.
22A. Van Heuvelen, Overview: Case Study Physics; Study Guide I ~The
Ohio State U.P., Columbus, OH, 1995!.
23R. R. Hake, ‘‘Socratic pedagogy in the introductory physics laboratory,’’
Phys. Teach. 30, 546–552 ~1992!.
24D. Halliday, R. Resnick, and J. Walker, Fundamentals of Physics ~Wiley,
New York, 1997!, 5th ed., Vol. 1.
25F. Reif, Understanding Basic Mechanics ~Wiley, New York, 1995!.
26A. Strauss and J. Corbin, Basics of Qualitative Research: Grounded
Theory Procedures and Techniques ~SAGE, Newbury Park, CA, 1990!.
27D. Hestenes, M. Wells, and Swackhamer, ‘‘Force concept inventory,’’
Phys. Teach. 30, 141–158 ~1992!.
28R. Beichner, ‘‘Testing student interpretation of kinematics graphs,’’ Am.
J. Phys. 62, 750–762 ~1994!.
29M. Rowe, ‘‘Wait-time and rewards as instructional variables, their inﬂuence on language, logic and fate control: Part one-Wait time,’’ J. Res. Sci.
Teach. 11, 263–279 ~1974!.
30R. M. Felder, L. E. Bernold, E. E. Burniston, P. R. Dail, H. Fuller, and J.
E. Gastineau, ‘‘IMPEC: Integrated Mathematics, Physics, Engineering,
and Chemistry Curriculum,’’ 1996 Report to the National Science Foundation, N.C. State University, November 1996.
31R. M. Felder, R. Beichner, L. E. Bernold, E. E. Burniston, P. R. Dail, and
H. Fuller, ‘‘IMPEC: Integrated Mathematics, Physics, Engineering, and
Chemistry Curriculum,’’ 1997 Report to the National Science Foundation,
N.C. State University ~unpublished!.
32I. Halloun, ‘‘Views about science and physics achievement: The VASS
story,’’ in The Changing Role of Physics Departments in Modern Universities: Proceedings of the International Conference on Undergraduate
Physics Education, College Park, MD, 31 July–3 August 1996, edited by
E. F. Redish and J. S. Rigden ~AIP Press, Woodbury, NY, 1997!, pp.
33E. F. Redish, J. M. Saul, and R. N. Steinberg, ‘‘Student expectations in
introductory physics,’’ Am. J. Phys. 66, 212–224 ~1998!.
34R. Landis, Studying Engineering ~Discovery, Burbank, CA, 1995!.
35D. Hughes-Hallett et al., Calculus ~Wiley, New York, 1994!.
36R. Chang, Chemistry ~McGraw–Hill, New York, 1994!, 5th ed.
Winning coaches, for example, recognize the different learning styles of their players. Former
Raiders coach John Maden says that for some players you simply tell them the play and they know
it; others must be shown diagrams before they can form their own mental image of what to do; and
still others won’t really grasp the play until they physically run through it so that they can feel the
play as well as see and hear it. The same is true for the ‘‘coaches’’ of military recruits and
corporate training programs.
Quoted in ‘‘The Now Habit’’ by Neil A. Fiore, page 180, Jeremy P. Tarcher, Inc., Los Angeles, CA, 1989 ~Distributed by
St. Martin’s Press, NY!.
Phys. Educ. Res., Am. J. Phys. Suppl., Vol. 67, No. 7, July 1999
Beichner et al.