Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Long Papers), pages 866–876
Melbourne, Australia, July 15 - 20, 2018. c⃝2018 Association for Computational Linguistics
Style Transfer Through Back-Translation
Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yulia Tsvetkov, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Alan W Black
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
{sprabhum,ytsvetko,rsalakhu,awb}@cs.cmu.edu
Style transfer is the task of rephrasing the
text to contain speciﬁc stylistic properties without changing the intent or affect
within the context. This paper introduces
a new method for automatic style transfer. We ﬁrst learn a latent representation of
the input sentence which is grounded in a
language translation model in order to better preserve the meaning of the sentence
while reducing stylistic properties. Then
adversarial generation techniques are used
to make the output match the desired style.
We evaluate this technique on three different style transformations:
sentiment,
gender and political slant.
to two state-of-the-art style transfer modeling techniques we show improvements
both in automatic evaluation of style transfer and in manual evaluation of meaning
preservation and ﬂuency.
Introduction
Intelligent, situation-aware applications must produce naturalistic outputs, lexicalizing the same
meaning differently, depending upon the environment.
This is particularly relevant for language generation tasks such as machine translation , caption generation , and natural language generation . In
conversational agents ,
for example, modulating the politeness style, to
sound natural depending upon a situation: at a
party with friends “Shut up! the video is starting!”, or in a professional setting “Please be quiet,
the video will begin shortly.”.
These goals have motivated a considerable
amount of recent research efforts focused at “controlled” language generation—aiming at separating the semantic content of what is said from
the stylistic dimensions of how it is said. These
include approaches relying on heuristic substitutions, deletions, and insertions to modulate demographic properties of a writer , integrating stylistic and demographic speaker traits in statistical machine translation ,
and deep generative models controlling for a particular stylistic aspect, e.g., politeness , sentiment, or tense . The latter approaches to style
transfer, while more powerful and ﬂexible than
heuristic methods, have yet to show that in addition to transferring style they effectively preserve
meaning of input sentences.
This paper introduces a novel approach to transferring style of a sentence while better preserving its meaning. We hypothesize—relying on the
study of Rabinovich et al. who showed
that author characteristics are signiﬁcantly obfuscated by both manual and automatic machine
translation—that grounding in back-translation is
a plausible approach to rephrase a sentence while
reducing its stylistic properties. We thus ﬁrst use
back-translation to rephrase the sentence and reduce the effect of the original style; then, we generate from the latent representation, using separate
style-speciﬁc generators controlling for style (§2).
We focus on transferring author attributes:
(1) gender and (2) political slant, and (3) on sentiment modiﬁcation.
The second task is novel:
given a sentence by an author with a particular political leaning, rephrase the sentence to preserve
its meaning but to confound classiﬁers of political slant (§3). The task of sentiment modiﬁcation
enables us to compare our approach with state-of-
Figure 1: Style transfer pipeline: to rephrase a sentence and reduce its stylistic characteristics, the sentence is back-translated. Then, separate style-speciﬁc generators are used for style transfer.
the-art models .
Style transfer is evaluated using style classi-
ﬁers trained on held-out data. Our back-translation
style transfer model outperforms the state-of-theart baselines 
on the tasks of political slant and sentiment modiﬁcation; 12% absolute improvement was attained
for political slant transfer, and up to 7% absolute
improvement in modiﬁcation of sentiment (§5).
Meaning preservation was evaluated manually, using A/B testing (§4). Our approach performs better than the baseline on the task of transferring
gender and political slant. Finally, we evaluate the
ﬂuency of the generated sentences using human
evaluation and our model outperforms the baseline
in all experiments for ﬂuency.
The main contribution of this work is a new
approach to style transfer that outperforms stateof-the-art baselines in both the quality of input–
output correspondence (meaning preservation and
ﬂuency), and the accuracy of style transfer. The
secondary contribution is a new task that we propose to evaluate style transfer: transferring political slant.
Methodology
Given two datasets X1 = {x(1)
1 , . . . , x(n)
X2 = {x(1)
2 , . . . , x(n)
2 } which represent two different styles s1 and s2, respectively, our task is to
generate sentences of the desired style while preserving the meaning of the input sentence. Speciﬁcally, we generate samples of dataset X1 such that
they belong to style s2 and samples of X2 such
that they belong to style s1. We denote the output of dataset X1 transfered to style s2 as ˆ
2 , . . . , ˆx(n)
2 } and the output of dataset X2
transferred to style s1 as ˆ
X2 = {ˆx(1)
1 , . . . , ˆx(n)
Hu et al. and Shen et al. introduced state-of-the-art style transfer models
that use variational auto-encoders and cross-aligned autoencoders, respectively, to model a latent content
variable z. The latent content variable z is a code
which is not observed. The generative model conditions on this code during the generation process. Our aim is to design a latent code z which
(1) represents the meaning of the input sentence
grounded in back-translation and (2) weakens the
style attributes of author’s traits.
To model the
former, we use neural machine translation. Prior
work has shown that the process of translating a
sentence from a source language to a target language retains the meaning of the sentence but does
not preserve the stylistic features related to the author’s traits . We hypothesize that a latent code z obtained through backtranslation will normalize the sentence and devoid
it from style attributes speciﬁc to author’s traits.
Figure 1 shows the overview of the proposed
method. In our framework, we ﬁrst train a machine translation model from source language e
to a target language f.
We also train a backtranslation model from f to e. Let us assume our
styles s1 and s2 correspond to DEMOCRATIC and
REPUBLICAN style, respectively. In Figure 1, the
input sentence i thank you, rep. visclosky. is labeled as DEMOCRATIC. We translate the sentence
using the e →f machine translation model and
generate the parallel sentence in the target language f: je vous remercie, rep. visclosky. Using
the ﬁxed encoder of the f →e machine translation model, we encode this sentence in language
f. The hidden representation created by this encoder of the back-translation model is used as z.
We condition our generative models on this z. We
then train two separate decoders for each style
s1 and s2 to generate samples in these respective
styles in source language e. Hence the sentence
could be translated to the REPUBLICAN style using the decoder for s2. For example, the sentence
i’m praying for you sir. is the REPUBLICAN ver-
Figure 2: The latent representation from back-translation and the style classiﬁer feedback are used to
guide the style-speciﬁc generators.
sion of the input sentence and i thank you, senator
visclosky. is the more DEMOCRATIC version of it.
Note that in this setting, the machine translation
and the encoder of the back-translation model remain ﬁxed. They are not dependent on the data
we use across different tasks. This facilitates reusability and spares the need of learning separate
models to generate z for a new style data.
Meaning-Grounded Representation
In this section we describe how we learn the latent content variable z using back-translation. The
e →f machine translation and f →e backtranslation models are trained using a sequence-tosequence framework with style-agnostic corpus. The
style-speciﬁc sentence i thank you, rep. visclosky.
in source language e is translated to the target language f to get je vous remercie, rep. visclosky.
The individual tokens of this sentence are then
encoded using the encoder of the f →e backtranslation model. The learned hidden representation is z.
Formally, let θE represent the parameters of the
encoder of f →e translation system. Then z is
z = Encoder(xf; θE)
where, xf is the sentence x in language f. Specifically, xf is the output of e →f translation system when xe is given as input. Since z is derived
from a non-style speciﬁc process, this Encoder is
not style speciﬁc.
Style-Speciﬁc Generation
Figure 2 shows the architecture of the generative
model for generating different styles. Using the
encoder embedding z, we train multiple decoders
for each style. The sentence generated by a decoder is passed through the classiﬁer. The loss
of the classiﬁer for the generated sentence is used
as feedback to guide the decoder for the generation process.
The target attribute of the classiﬁer is determined by the decoder from which
the output is generated. For example, in the case
of DEMOCRATIC decoder, the target attribute is
DEMOCRATIC and for the REPUBLICAN decoder
the target is REPUBLICAN.
Style Classiﬁers
We train a convolutional neural network (CNN)
classiﬁer to accurately predict the given style. We
also use it to evaluate the error in the generated
samples for the desired style. We train the classi-
ﬁer in a supervised manner. The classiﬁer accepts
either discrete or continuous tokens as inputs. This
is done such that the generator output can be used
as input to the classiﬁer. We need labeled examples to train the classiﬁer such that each instance
in the dataset X should have a label in the set
s = {s1, s2}. Let θC denote the parameters of
the classiﬁer. The objective to train the classiﬁer
is given by:
Lclass(θC) = EX[log qC(s|x)].
To improve the accuracy of the classiﬁer, we augment classiﬁer’s inputs with style-speciﬁc lexicons. We concatenate binary style indicators to
each input word embedding in the classiﬁer. The
indicators are set to 1 if the input word is present
in a style-speciﬁc lexicon; otherwise they are set to
0. Style lexicons are extracted using the log-odds
ratio informative Dirichlet prior , a method that identiﬁes words that are statistically overrepresented in each of the categories.
Generator Learning
We use a bidirectional LSTM to build our decoders which generate the sequence of tokens ˆx =
{x1, · · · xT }. The sequence ˆx is conditioned on
the latent code z (in our case, on the machine
translation model).
In this work we use a corpus translated to French by the machine translation system as the input to the encoder of the backtranslation model. The same encoder is used to encode sentences of both styles. The representation
created by this encoder is given by Eq 1. Samples
are generated as follows:
p(ˆxt|ˆx<t, z)
where, ˆx<t are the tokens generated before ˆxt.
Tokens are discrete and non-differentiable. This
makes it difﬁcult to use a classiﬁer, as the generation process samples discrete tokens from the
multinomial distribution parametrized using softmax function at each time step t.
This nondifferentiability, in turn, breaks down gradient
propagation from the discriminators to the generator.
Instead, following Hu et al. we
use a continuous approximation based on softmax,
along with the temperature parameter which anneals the softmax to the discrete case as training
proceeds. To create a continuous representation of
the output of the generative model which will be
given as an input to the classiﬁer, we use:
ˆxt ∼softmax(ot/τ),
where, ot is the output of the generator and τ is the
temperature which decreases as the training proceeds. Let θG denote the parameters of the generators. Then the reconstruction loss is calculated
using the cross entropy function, given by:
Lrecon(θG; x) = EqE(z|x)[log pgen(x|z)]
Here, the back-translation encoder E creates the
latent code z by:
z = E(x) = qE(z|x)
The generative loss Lgen is then given by:
minθgenLgen
Lrecon + λcLclass
where Lrecon is given by Eq. (5), Lclass is given
by Eq (2) and λc is a balancing parameter.
We also use global attention of to aid our generators. At each time step t of
the generation process, we infer a variable length
alignment vector at:
exp(score(ht, ¯hs))
s′ exp(score(ht, ¯hs′)
score(ht, ¯hs) = dot(hT
where ht is the current target state and ¯hs are all
source states. While generating sentences, we use
the attention vector to replace unknown characters
(UNK) using the copy mechanism in (See et al.,
Style Transfer Tasks
Much work in computational social science has
shown that people’s personal and demographic
characteristics—either publicly observable (e.g.,
age, gender) or private (e.g., religion, political afﬁliation)—are revealed in their linguistic
choices . There are practical scenarios, however, when these attributes need
to be modulated or obfuscated.
For example,
some users may wish to preserve their anonymity
online, for personal security concerns , or to reduce stereotype threat . Modulating authors’ attributes while
preserving meaning of sentences can also help
generate demographically-balanced training data
for a variety of downstream applications.
Moreover, prior work has shown that the quality of language identiﬁcation and POS tagging
degrades signiﬁcantly on African American Vernacular English ; YouTube’s automatic captions have
higher error rates for women and speakers from
Scotland .
Synthesizing balanced training data—using style transfer
techniques—is a plausible way to alleviate bias
present in existing NLP technologies.
We thus focus on two tasks that have practical and social-good applications, and also accurate style classiﬁers. To position our method with
respect to prior work, we employ a third task of
sentiment transfer, which was used in two stateof-the-art approaches to style transfer . We describe the three
tasks and associated dataset statistics below. The
methodology that we advocate is general and can
be applied to other styles, for transferring various
social categories, types of bias, and in multi-class
In sociolinguistics, gender is known to
be one of the most important social categories
driving language choice proposed a
heuristic-based method to obfuscate gender of a
This method uses statistical association
measures to identify gender-salient words and substitute them with synonyms typically of the opposite gender. This simple approach produces highly
ﬂuent, meaning-preserving sentences, but does not
allow for more general rephrasing of sentence beyond single-word substitutions. In our work, we
adopt this task of transferring the author’s gender
and adapt it to our experimental settings.
We used Reddy and Knight’s dataset of
reviews from Yelp annotated for two genders corresponding to markers of sex.1 We split the reviews to sentences, preserving the original gender
labels. To keep only sentences that are strongly
indicative of a gender, we then ﬁltered out genderneutral sentences (e.g., thank you) and sentences
whose likelihood to be written by authors of one
gender is lower than 0.7.2
Political slant.
Our second dataset is comprised
of top-level comments on Facebook posts from all
412 current members of the United States Senate and House who have public Facebook pages
 .3
Only top-level comments
that directly respond to the post are included. Every comment to a Congressperson is labeled with
the Congressperson’s party afﬁliation: democratic
or republican. Topic and sentiment in these comments reveal commenter’s political slant. For example, defund them all, especially when it comes
to the illegal immigrants .
and thank u james,
praying for all the work u do . are republican,
whereas on behalf of the hard-working nh public
school teachers- thank you ! and we need more
strong voices like yours ﬁghting for gun control .
1We note that gender may be considered along a spectrum , but use gender
as a binary variable due to the absence of corpora with
continuous-valued gender annotations.
2We did not experiment with other threshold values.
3The posts and comments are all public; however, to protect the identity of Facebook users in this dataset Voigt et al.
 have removed all identifying user information as well
as Facebook-internal information such as User IDs and Post
IDs, replacing these with randomized ID numbers.
Table 1: Sentence count in style-speciﬁc corpora.
represent examples of democratic sentences. Our
task is to preserve intent of the commenter (e.g.,
to thank their representative), but to modify their
observable political afﬁliation, as in the example
in Figure 1.
We preprocessed and ﬁltered the
comments similarly to the gender-annotated corpus above.
Sentiment.
To compare our work with the stateof-the-art approaches of style transfer for nonparallel corpus we perform sentiment transfer,
replicating the models and experimental setups of
Hu et al. and Shen et al. . Given a
positive Yelp review, a style transfer model will
generate a similar review but with an opposite sentiment. We used Shen et al.’s corpus of
reviews from Yelp. They have followed the standard practice of labeling the reviews with rating of
higher than three as positive and less than three as
negative. They have also split the reviews to sentences and assumed that the sentence has the same
sentiment as the review.
Dataset statistics.
We summarize below corpora statistics for the three tasks: transferring gender, political slant, and sentiment. The dataset for
sentiment modiﬁcation task was used as described
in . We split Yelp and Facebook
corpora into four disjoint parts each: (1) a training
corpus for training a style classiﬁer (class); (2) a
training corpus (train) used for training the stylespeciﬁc generative model described in §2.2; (3)
development and (4) test sets. We have removed
from training corpora class and train all sentences
that overlap with development and test corpora.
Corpora sizes are shown in Table 1.
Table 2 shows the approximate vocabulary sizes
used for each dataset. The vocabulary is the same
for both the styles in each experiment.
Vocabulary
Table 2: Vocabulary sizes of the datasets.
Table 3 summarizes sentence statistics. All the
sentences have maximum length of 50 tokens.
Avg. Length
republican
democratic
Table 3: Average sentence length and class distribution of style corpora.
Experimental Setup
In what follows, we describe our experimental settings, including baselines used, hyperparameter
settings, datasets, and evaluation setups.
We compare our model against the
“cross-aligned” auto-encoder ,
which uses style-speciﬁc decoders to align the
style of generated sentences to the actual distribution of the style. We used the off-the-shelf sentiment model released by Shen et al. for the
sentiment experiments. We also separately train
this model for the gender and political slant using
hyper-parameters detailed below.4
Translation
French neural machine translation system and a
French–English back-translation system. We used
data from Workshop in Statistical Machine Translation 2015 (WMT15) to train
our translation models.
We used the French–
English data from the Europarl v7 corpus, the
news commentary v10 corpus and the common
crawl corpus from WMT15. Data were tokenized
using the Moses tokenizer .
Approximately 5.4M English–French parallel sentences were used for training. A vocabulary size of
100K was used to train the translation systems.
Hyperparameter settings.
In all the experiments, the generator and the encoders are a twolayer bidirectional LSTM with an input size of 300
and the hidden dimension of 500. The generator
4In addition, we compared our model with the current
state-of-the-art approach introduced by Hu et al. ; Shen
et al. use this method as baseline, obtaining comparable results. We reproduced the results reported in using their tasks and data. However, the same model
trained on our political slant datasets (described in §3), obtained an almost random accuracy of 50.98% in style transfer.
We thus omit these results.
samples a sentence of maximum length 50. All
the generators use global attention vectors of size
500. The CNN classiﬁer is trained with 100 ﬁlters
of size 5, with max-pooling. The input to CNN is
of size 302: the 300-dimensional word embedding
plus two bits for membership of the word in our
style lexicons, as described in §2.2.1. Balancing
parameter λc is set to 15. For sentiment task, we
have used settings provided in .
We evaluate our approach along three dimensions.
(1) Style transfer accuracy, measuring the proportion of our models’ outputs that generate sentences
of the desired style. The style transfer accuracy
is performed using classiﬁers trained on held-out
train data that were not used in training the style
transfer models. (2) Preservation of meaning. (3)
Fluency, measuring the readability and the naturalness of the generated sentences. We conducted
human evaluations for the latter two.
In what follows, we ﬁrst present the quality of
our neural machine translation systems, then we
present the evaluation setups, and then present the
results of our experiments.
Translation
English–French
32.52 and for French–English MT system is
31.11; these are strong translation systems. We
deliberately chose a European language close to
English for which massive amounts of parallel
data are available and translation quality is high,
to concentrate on the style generation, rather than
improving a translation system. 5
Style Transfer Accuracy
We measure the accuracy of style transfer for the
generated sentences using a pre-trained style classiﬁer (§2.2.1). The classiﬁer is trained on data that
is not used for training our style transfer generative models (as described in §3). The classiﬁer has
an accuracy of 82% for the gender-annotated corpus, 92% accuracy for the political slant dataset
and 93.23% accuracy for the sentiment dataset.
5Alternatively, we could use a pivot language that is typologically more distant from English, e.g., Chinese. In this
case we hypothesize that stylistic traits would be even less
preserved in translation, but the quality of back-translated
sentences would be worse. We have not yet investigated how
the accuracy of the translation model, nor the language of
translation affects our models.
We transfer the style of test sentences and then
test the classiﬁcation accuracy of the generated
sentences for the opposite label. For example, if
we want to transfer the style of male Yelp reviews
to female, then we use the ﬁxed common encoder
of the back-translation model to encode the test
male sentences and then we use the female generative model to generate the female-styled reviews.
We then test these generated sentences for the female label using the gender classiﬁer.
Experiment
Political slant
Table 4: Accuracy of the style transfer in generated sentences.
In Table 4, we detail the accuracy of each
classiﬁer on generated style-transfered sentences.6
We denote the Shen et al.’s Cross-aligned
Auto-Encoder model as CAE and our model as
Back-translation for Style Transfer (BST).
On two out of three tasks our model substantially outperforms the baseline, by up to 12% in
political slant transfer, and by up to 7% in sentiment modiﬁcation.
Preservation of Meaning
Although we attempted to use automatics measures to evaluate how well meaning is preserved
in our transformations; measures such as BLEU
 and Meteor , or even cosine similarity between distributed representations of sentences do
not capture this distance well.
Meaning preservation in style transfer is not
trivial to deﬁne as literal meaning is likely to
change when style transfer occurs. For example
“My girlfriend loved the desserts” vs “My partner
liked the desserts”. Thus we must relax the condition of literal meaning to intent or affect of the
utterance within the context of the discourse. Thus
if the intent is to criticize a restaurant’s service
in a review, changing “salad” to “chicken” could
still have the same effect but if the intent is to order food that substitution would not be acceptable.
Ideally we wish to evaluate transfer within some
6In each experiment, we report aggregated results across
directions of style transfer; same results broke-down to style
categories are listed in the Supplementary Material.
Experiment
Political slant
Table 5: Human preference for meaning preservation in percentages.
downstream task and ensure that the task has the
same outcome even after style transfer. This is a
hard evaluation and hence we resort to a simpler
evaluation of the “meaning” of the sentence.
We set up a manual pairwise comparison following Bennett . The test presents the original sentence and then, in random order, its corresponding sentences produced by the baseline and
our models. For the gender style transfer we asked
“Which transferred sentence maintains the same
sentiment of the source sentence in the same semantic context (i.e. you can ignore if food items
are changed)”. For the task of changing the political slant, we asked “Which transferred sentence maintains the same semantic intent of the
source sentence while changing the political position”.
For the task of sentiment transfer we
have followed the annotation instruction in and asked “Which transferred sentence is semantically equivalent to the source sentence with an opposite sentiment”
We then count the preferences of the eleven
participants, measuring the relative acceptance of
the generated sentences.7 A third option “=” was
given to participants to mark no preference for either of the generated sentence. The “no preference” option includes choices both are equally bad
and both are equally good. We conducted three
tests one for each type of experiment - gender, political slant and sentiment. We also divided our
annotation set into short (#tokens ≤15) and long
(15 < #tokens ≤30) sentences for the gender and
the political slant experiment. In each set we had
20 random samples for each type of style transfer. In total we had 100 sentences to be annotated.
Note that we did not ask about appropriateness of
the style transfer in this test, or ﬂuency of outputs,
only about meaning preservation.
The results of human evaluation are presented
in Table 5.
Although a no-preference option was chosen often—showing that state-ofthe-art systems are still not on par with hu-
7None of the human judges are authors of this paper
man expectations—the BST models outperform
the baselines in the gender and the political slant
transfer tasks.
Crucially, the BST models signiﬁcantly outperform the CAE models when transferring style in
longer and harder sentences. Annotators preferred
the CAE model only for 12.5% of the long sentences, compared to 47.27% preference for the
BST model.
Finally, we evaluate the ﬂuency of the generated
sentences. Fluency was rated from 1 (unreadable)
to 4 (perfect) as is described in .
We randomly selected 60 sentences each generated by the baseline and the BST model.
The results shown in Table 6 are averaged
scores for each model.
Experiment
Political slant
Overall Short
Overall Long
Table 6: Fluency of the generated sentences.
BST outperforms the baseline overall. It is interesting to note that BST generates signiﬁcantly
more ﬂuent longer sentences than the baseline
model. Since the average length of sentences was
higher for the gender experiment, BST notably
outperformed the baseline in this task, relatively to
the sentiment task where the sentences are shorter.
Examples of the original and style-transfered sentences generated by the baseline and our model are
shown in the Supplementary Material.
Discussion
The loss function of the generators given in Eq.
5 includes two competing terms, one to improve
meaning preservation and the other to improve the
style transfer accuracy. In the task of sentiment
modiﬁcation, the BST model preserved meaning
worse than the baseline, on the expense of being better at style transfer.
We note, however,
that the sentiment modiﬁcation task is not particularly well-suited for evaluating style transfer: it
is particularly hard (if not impossible) to disentangle the sentiment of a sentence from its propositional content, and to modify sentiment while preserving meaning or intent. On the other hand, the
style-transfer accuracy for gender is lower for BST
model but the preservation of meaning is much
better for the BST model, compared to CAE model
and to ”No preference” option. This means that
the BST model does better job at closely representing the input sentence while taking a mild hit
in the style transfer accuracy.
Related Work
Style transfer with non-parallel text corpus has become an active research area due to the recent advances in text generation tasks. Hu et al. 
use variational auto-encoders with a discriminator
to generate sentences with controllable attributes.
The method learns a disentangled latent representation and generates a sentence from it using a
This paper mainly focuses on sentiment
and tense for style transfer attributes. It evaluates
the transfer strength of the generated sentences
but does not evaluate the extent of preservation
of meaning in the generated sentences.
work, we show a qualitative evaluation of meaning preservation.
Shen et al. ﬁrst present a theoretical analysis of style transfer in text using non-parallel
corpus. The paper then proposes a novel crossalignment auto-encoders with discriminators architecture to generate sentences.
It mainly focuses on sentiment and word decipherment for
style transfer experiments.
Fu et al. explore two models for style
transfer. The ﬁrst approach uses multiple decoders
for each type of style. In the second approach,
style embeddings are used to augment the encoded
representations, so that only one decoder needs to
be learned to generate outputs in different styles.
Style transfer is evaluated on scientiﬁc paper titles and newspaper tiles, and sentiment in reviews.
This method is different from ours in that we use
machine translation to create a strong latent state
from which multiple decoders can be trained for
each style.
We also propose a different human
evaluation scheme.
Li et al. ﬁrst extract words or phrases
associated with the original style of the sentence,
delete them from the original sentence and then
replace them with new phrases associated with the
target style. They then use a neural model to ﬂuently combine these into a ﬁnal output.
et al. learn a representation which is styleagnostic, using adversarial training of the autoencoder.
Our work is also closely-related to a problem of
paraphrase generation , including methods relying
on (phrase-based) back-translation . More recently, Mallinson et al. and
Wieting et al. showed how neural backtranslation can be used to generate paraphrases.
An additional related line of research is machine
translation with non-parallel data. Lample et al.
 and Artetxe et al. have proposed
sophisticated methods for unsupervised machine
translation. These methods could in principle be
used for style transfer as well.
Conclusion
We propose a novel approach to the task of style
transfer with non-parallel text.8
We learn a latent content representation using machine translation techniques; this aids grounding the meaning
of the sentences, as well as weakening the style
attributes. We apply this technique to three different style transfer tasks. In transfer of political
slant and sentiment we outperform an off-the-shelf
state-of-the-art baseline using a cross-aligned autoencoder. The political slant task is a novel task
that we introduce. Our model also outperforms the
baseline in all the experiments of ﬂuency, and in
the experiments for meaning preservation in generated sentences of gender and political slant. Yet,
we acknowledge that the generated sentences do
not always adequately preserve meaning.
This technique is suitable not just for style
transfer, but for enforcing style, and removing
style too. In future work we intend to apply this
technique to debiasing sentences and anonymization of author traits such as gender and age.
In the future work, we will also explore whether
an enhanced back-translation by pivoting through
several languages will learn better grounded latent
meaning representations. In particular, it would be
interesting to back-translate through multiple target languages with a single source language .
experiments will be released to facilitate reproducibility at
 
Translation
Measuring the separation of style from content
is hard, even for humans. It depends on the task
and the context of the utterance within its discourse.
Ultimately we must evaluate our style
transfer within some down-stream task where our
style transfer has its intended use but we achieve
the same task completion criteria.
Acknowledgments
This work was funded by a fellowship from Robert
Bosch, and in part by the National Science Foundation through award IIS-1526745. We would like
to thank Sravana Reddy for sharing the Yelp corpus used in gender transfer experiments, Zhiting
Hu for providing an implementation of a VAEbased baseline, and the 11 CMU graduate students
who helped with annotation and manual evaluations.
We are also grateful to the anonymous
reviewers for their constructive feedback, and to
Dan Jurafsky, David Jurgens, Vinod Prabhakaran,
and Rob Voigt for valuable discussions at earlier
stages of this work.