Volume 48, Number 6, 2011
Pages 719–738
Journal of Rehabilitation Research & Development
Myoelectric forearm prostheses: State of the art from a user-centered
perspective
Bart Peerdeman, MSc;1–2 Daphne Boere, MSc;2–4 Heidi Witteveen, MSc;2,5 Rianne Huis in ‘t Veld, PhD;2–3
Hermie Hermens, PhD;2–3,5 Stefano Stramigioli, PhD;1–2 Hans Rietman, MD, PhD;2–4 Peter Veltink, PhD;2,5
Sarthak Misra, PhD1–2*
1Control Engineering, University of Twente, the Netherlands; 2MIRA-Institute for Biomedical Technology and Technical
Medicine, University of Twente, the Netherlands; 3Roessingh Research and Development, the Netherlands; 4Biomechanical
Engineering, University of Twente, the Netherlands; 5Biomedical Signals and Systems, University of Twente, the Netherlands
Abstract—User acceptance of myoelectric forearm prostheses is
currently low. Awkward control, lack of feedback, and difficult
training are cited as primary reasons. Recently, researchers have
focused on exploiting the new possibilities offered by advance­
ments in prosthetic technology. Alternatively, researchers could
focus on prosthesis acceptance by developing functional require­
ments based on activities users are likely to perform. In this arti­
cle, we describe the process of determining such requirements
and then the application of these requirements to evaluating the
state of the art in myoelectric forearm prosthesis research. As part
of a needs assessment, a workshop was organized involving clini­
cians (representing end users), academics, and engineers. The
resulting needs included an increased number of functions, lower
reaction and execution times, and intuitiveness of both control
and feedback systems. Reviewing the state of the art of research
in the main prosthetic subsystems (electromyographic [EMG]
sensing, control, and feedback) showed that modern research
prototypes only partly fulfill the requirements. We found that
focus should be on validating EMG-sensing results with patients,
improving simultaneous control of wrist movements and grasps,
deriving optimal parameters for force and position feedback, and
taking into account the psychophysical aspects of feedback, such
as intensity perception and spatial acuity.
Key words: amputee, control, EMG , feedback, forearm, hand,
myoelectric, prosthetic, rehabilitation, sensing, user acceptance.
INTRODUCTION
The loss of a hand from amputation or congenital
defects causes disability. Prostheses have been developed
throughout history to restore some of the hand’s original
functionality and appearance. Though a variety of forearm
prostheses are presently available, such as purely cos­
metic hands and body-powered prostheses, modern pros­
thesis research is mainly focused on myoelectric (ME)
prostheses . A major problem for the development of
new ME prostheses is that despite significant technologi­
cal advancements, a large number of amputees choose not
to use them . The issues associated with acceptance of
ME forearm prostheses have been investigated in the literature . In these investigations, three main problems
were mentioned as reasons that amputees stop using their
ME prostheses: nonintuitive control, lack of sufficient
Abbreviations: DC = direct current, EMG = electromyographic, EPP = extended physiological proprioception, EPT =
extended physiological taction, ME = myoelectric.
*Address all correspondence to Sarthak Misra, PhD; Control Engineering, Carre 3609 CE-EWI, University of Twente,
PO Box 217, Enschede 7500 AE, the Netherlands; +31-53-
489-2704; fax: +31-53-489-2223. Email: 
DOI:10.1682/JRRD.2010.08.0161
JRRD, Volume 48, Number 6, 2011
feedback, and insufficient functionality. However, these
studies only considered prostheses that were commer­
cially available at the time, and their information was
mostly collected through questionnaires, which offer no
opportunity for discussion or patient feedback.
Recent research projects have implemented new
technologies in an attempt to overcome the shortcomings
outlined by Atkins et al. and others . However, the
effect of these new technologies on user acceptance is
currently unknown, because most of these systems are
still in the prototype stage. Though several commercial
ME forearm prostheses have recently been developed that have greater functionality than those evaluated by
Atkins et al. and others , their control systems do
not yet take advantage of the recent improvements in
sensing, control, and feedback research.
Klopsteg and Wilson recommend a user-centered
approach for improving prosthesis performance and accep­
tance . Therefore, we investigated the state of the art in
ME forearm prosthesis research by determining a set of
requirements for user acceptance and using these require­
ments to evaluate recent technological developments.
The structure of the prosthesis should result in intuitive control to improve user acceptance. This can be
accomplished by making the signal flow between the
prosthesis and the user resemble that of the nondisabled
body. The signal flow can be divided into three parts:
user intent, motion control, and sensory feedback. A
prosthesis should contain subsystems that account for
each of these parts; such a desired system is shown in
Figure 1. The subsystems are described as follows: elec­
tromyographic (EMG) sensing, which determines user
intent by detecting the activity of residual muscles
through electrodes on the skin; control system, which
actuates the prosthesis according to control signals
received from EMG sensing; and feedback system, which
provides the user with artificial sensory information. The
combination of these three subsystems gives the user a
noninvasive way to control an electronic prosthesis with
the residual limb.
In the “Needs Assessment Method” section, we
describe the process of assessing the needs for ME forearm
prostheses. A workshop with participants from various
relevant fields was arranged to establish these needs. We
discuss the workshop results and formulate functional
requirements for user acceptance in the section “Needs
Assessment Results.” In the “Literature Survey” section,
we investigate the state of the art in ME prosthesis research
with a literature review covering the aforementioned
requirements. In the “Discussion,” we discuss the applica­
bility of the needs assessment method. We then combine
the results of the preceding two sections, evaluating the
research state of the art using the functional requirements
for user acceptance. Finally, we make recommendations
for future research.
NEEDS ASSESSMENT METHOD
In this section, we describe the method used to deter­
mine user-centered needs. A workshop was organized in
which the functional and nonfunctional needs of the ideal
forearm prosthesis with regard to the EMG sensing, con­
trol, and feedback subsystems were discussed. Combin­
ing information from the literature and the results
of the workshop, we derived the functional requirements
for ME forearm prostheses. The complete structure of the
needs assessment used in this research is presented in a
flow chart (Figure 2).
Participants
To develop a user-accepted ME forearm prosthesis,
both users and technicians should be involved in the
design process . However, directly involving users in
the design process may be difficult, because of differences
Comparison of signal flow in sound human forearm and desired signal
flow and main subsystems of modern myoelectric forearm prosthesis.
EMG = electromyographic.
PEERDEMAN et al. Myoelectric forearm prostheses
in terminology and methodology . In this case, repre­
sentative users (i.e., clinicians with first-hand experience)
can provide a useful alternative. As someone who has regu­
lar contact with many forearm prosthesis users, a repre­
sentative user is highly familiar with the opinions and
wishes of their patients. Therefore, the workshop partici­
pants comprised a multidisciplinary group (9 men and 10
women) of representative users and engineers from multi­
ple centers throughout the Netherlands. All participants had
interests and expertise in the area of upper-limb amputation
and prostheses. The representative users were two occupa­
tional therapists, three rehabilitation medicine physicians,
two physiotherapists, a certified prosthetist/orthotist,
and a movement scientist. Six researchers and four engi­
neers constituted the academic contributors.
Orientation and Preparation
Concrete representations of ME prosthesis use are nec­
essary to facilitate good user-designer communication .
Therefore, activities of daily living that are relevant for
forearm prosthesis users formed the starting point of the
needs assessment. In preparation for the workshop, the
participants were shown an educational video about differ­
ent prosthetic options and user opinions. Important aspects
of the daily use of forearm prostheses were investigated, in
light of the first-hand knowledge of occupational therapists
and physiotherapists (representing end users).
Professional Involvement Workshop
A plenary discussion led to a selection of five activi­
ties in which the important aspects of upper-limb pros­
thesis use are well represented. A refined version of the
list of instrumental activities of daily living of Bookman
et al., which was formed using these aspects as criteria,
was used as a starting point . Three different aspects
of these activities were examined, focusing on the three
prosthesis subsystems. Each activity was analyzed using
a structured worksheet specially designed for this work­
shop (Figure 3). The worksheet contained a set of six
predefined wrist movements and seven grasps.
Overview of needs assessment approach, including internal structure
of workshop.
Example of workshop activity sheet filled in by multidisciplinary
group. Needs for using coat zippers are evaluated. Each column of
blocks represents part of activity and is referred to as subtask.
JRRD, Volume 48, Number 6, 2011
Multidisciplinary groups were each asked to divide
one activity into subtasks. For every aspect, the worksheet
contained several questions to be answered for each sub­
task of the activity (Figure 3). After the analyses in small
groups, the needs for all aspects were validated and refined
in a plenary discussion and consensus was reached.
NEEDS ASSESSMENT RESULTS
By combining the results of the workshop with the
information obtained through the literature, we con­
structed a list of requirements for each of the prosthesis’
subsystems. In this section, the needs as well as the
resulting requirements derived from the workshop are
described.
Workshop Results
In the workshop, the participants determined the spe­
cific needs associated with several activities of daily living.
These activities, as mentioned in the “Needs Assessment
Methods” section, were selected from a list of relevant
activities to represent various aspects of prosthesis func­
tionality, such as fine and gross motor control, speed, force,
and coordination. The following activities were analyzed:
using zippers, making a bed, grabbing a cup, catching a
ball, and using a fork and knife.
Grasps and Wrist Movements
In general, the workshop participants considered grasps
to be more important than wrist movements in executing
the tasks. The main grasp types selected in the plenary
discussion were the lateral, cylindrical, and tripod grasps
(Figure 4). Additionally, the index finger point was men­
tioned as an important gesture for various other activities
(e.g., typing). Of the wrist movements, rotation and flexion/
extension were considered equally useful when used to per­
form a natural grasping maneuver in combination with a
grasp. These wrist movements would also avoid awkward
elbow and shoulder motions.
The main focus of the discussion on prosthesis control
was on selecting the functions that the prosthesis should
automatically control. Generally, the initiation of actions
was considered to be best controlled by the user, whereas
the actual execution of those actions can be performed
automatically. Grasp selection, wrist movement control,
and initiation of grasp execution were mentioned as deci­
sions that the user should control.
The participants felt the prosthesis should automati­
cally continue holding an object once grasped. This
allows the user to focus on moving the object with arm
and wrist movements. During such an action, slipping of
the object should be prevented.
It was considered desirable to have wrist movements
under direct user control. Performing two wrist movements
simultaneously was also considered desirable, but it could
require a more automated execution of these movements.
Direct user control of the speed of grasping or the force
applied to a grasped object were found useful in several
Three main grasp types selected during workshop: (a) lateral, (b) cylindrical, and (c) tripod.
PEERDEMAN et al. Myoelectric forearm prostheses
activities and could be implemented as an optional alterna­
tive to automatic grasping and holding.
For each activity, both the type of information to be
fed-back and the method of feedback were considered.
Workshop participants stated that force was the most
important type of information for feedback, because it is
impossible to determine through visual inspection. Apply­
ing the right amount of force is essential when handling
fragile objects or interacting with humans and animals.
Feedback on the position of the fingers was considered
important to reduce the attention required and allow for
more intuitive grasping. A combination of both force and
position information could provide the user with a meas­
ure of object stiffness. Feedback was also mentioned as
being useful for indicating control system status, such as
when grasp closure has been completed.
The discussion on feedback methods revolved mostly
around the choice between continuous and discrete feed­
back. Although continuous feedback can improve the
user’s ability to handle the prosthesis intuitively, the
user’s perception of a nonphysiological signal may fade
over time. In contrast, discrete feedback should not be so
abrupt that it disturbs the user. This type of feedback
could be useful for indicating control system status but
was considered less important than continuous feedback.
Feedback was only considered of added value when
intuitive and simple. Other mentioned requirements for
feedback were for it to be unobtrusive to others and com­
fortable to the user. The ability to adjust feedback for
individual patients was also considered essential.
Requirements
In this section, a list of functional requirements based
on the workshop results and the literature is pre­
sented. During the plenary discussion at the end of the
workshop, the functional requirements were determined
based on the results of analyzing the activities, as shown
in Figure 2. In Table 1, these requirements are listed for
each subsystem in no particular order.
LITERATURE SURVEY
In this section, the state of the art of recent ME fore­
arm prosthesis research is described with regard to each
of the requirements in Table 1, separated by subsystem.
EMG Sensing
The sensing part of ME prostheses is based on EMG
signals. These signals are the electrical expression of the
neuromuscular activation generated by skeletal muscles
 and contain rich information regarding the
Functional requirements for user acceptance of myoelectric forearm prostheses, sorted by subsystem. These requirements were obtained through
combination of needs assessment workshop and literature review.
Requirement
EMG Sensing
Multiple wrist movements and grasp types should be easily selectable.
Time delay should be short enough to not disturb user.
User should be able to indicate desired speed of wrist movements and force of grasps.
Wrist movement and grasp type should be simultaneously distinguishable.
Available grasp types: cylindrical grasp, tripod grasp, lateral grasp.
Available wrist movements: flexion/extension and rotation.
Prosthesis should automatically continue holding an object once grasped.
Prosthesis should automatically prevent slipping of any held objects.
Grasp execution time should not disturb user.
User should be able to directly control speed of wrist movements and force of grasps.
Continuous and proportional feedback on grasping force should be provided.
Position feedback should be provided to user.
Interpretation of stimulation used for feedback should be easy and intuitive.
Feedback should be unobtrusive to user and others.
Feedback should be adjustable.
EMG = electromyographic.
JRRD, Volume 48, Number 6, 2011
motion intended by the user. In modern prosthesis
research, EMG is used for pattern-recognition–based ME
control systems. The sensing principle for every system
is basically the same (Figure 5) .
Of the functional requirements list that resulted from
the workshop (Table 1), four requirements fall into the
sensing category. In this section, the current state of the art
of EMG sensing is evaluated with respect to how these
requirements are addressed and what results are achieved.
Table 2 provides an overview of sensing systems for ME
forearm prostheses; it will be used to represent the current
state of the art of EMG sensing systems research.
Sensing Requirement 1: Multiple Selectable Wrist
Movements and Grasps
Over the last 20 years, the focus of the literature has
been on increasing the number of prosthesis functions that
can be controlled, since this is the biggest drawback of
commercially available forearm prostheses . In
principle, the number of controllable functions can be
increased by using pattern recognition. Among many other
features, amplitude features (mean absolute value and
root-mean-square value) are often used to distinguish dif­
ferent contraction patterns (ranging from 4 to 8) and high
accuracies (between 92% and 99%) can be achieved with
them . Examples of frequently used classifiers in
the literature are linear discriminant analysis 
and artificial neural networks . The highest
achieved accuracies for both classifiers were around
98 percent. Most classification results in Table 2 were
achieved with nondisabled subjects. A limited number of
results can be found for transradial amputee patients
 .
Concerning the type of classes that are included in the
studies, most research only investigates forearm and wrist
movement contractions. For a higher than 4-class prob­
lem, opening and closing of the hand is often included.
Studies by Tenore et al. and Sebelius et al. 
incorporated flexion and extension of the separate fingers
and thumb in classification. In recent studies, more focus
is found on functional grasps, such as the cylindrical, tri­
pod, and lateral grasps .
To enable easily selectable prosthesis functions,
Ajiboye and Weir state that a balance must be found
between choosing sites at which the user can easily con­
tract his/her muscles and choosing sites that are most natu­
rally mapped to the appropriate function of the prosthesis
(direct mapping) . Both Shenoy et al. and Tenore
et al. emphasized that with direct mapping, a more
natural and intuitive control strategy can be achieved.
Sensing Requirement 2: Nondisturbing Time Delay
Short observation windows are required to ensure that
the user’s perceived delay is not considered disturbing.
Here, this perceived time delay is defined as the time from
user input to initiation of the intended motion and consists of
the calculation times of all elements depicted in Figure 5.
Yet, a trade-off exists in response time and accuracy, since
an analysis window should be long enough to reliably esti­
mate features . In 1993, Hudgins et al. stated that the
window for analysis plus the processing time should be
equal to or less than 300 ms, otherwise the perceived time
delay will become unacceptable for the user . Although
this limit has been generally accepted and implemented in
studies of the last 20 years, relatively little work has been
performed on the objective examination of the effect of con­
troller delays on prosthesis performance .
Recently, Farrell and Weir readdressed the subject of
optimal time delay . By testing prostheses with non­
disabled subjects, they found the optimal delay lies within
the 100 to 125 ms range. This research raised discussions
as to whether it would be desirable to use shorter windows
to create a more usable prosthesis, even though this would
cause lower control accuracy. Hargrove et al. state that
users would prefer more controllable functions and a
slower system over less functions and a faster system
 . Nevertheless, researchers try to incorporate the new
Electromyographic sensing subsystems describing signal flow from
detection of muscle contraction to feature extraction and classification.
Adapted from Asghari Oskoei M, Hu H. Myoelectric control systems—
A survey. Biomed Signal Process Control. 2007;2(4):275–94.
PEERDEMAN et al. Myoelectric forearm prostheses
Electromyographic sensing systems.
Classifier
Electr Accuracy
Finley & Wirta 
Graupe & Cline 
Almström et al. 
Saridis & Gootee 
Doerschuk et al. 
Ito et al. 
Nondisabled (2), TR (1)
Kelly et al. 
Mean frequency
Nondisabled (5)
Hudgins et al. 
TD set (5)
TR (4), TH (2)
Kuruganti et al. 
MAV, MAVS, ZC, WL
Nondisabled (9)
Itakura et al. 
Nondisabled (3)
Eriksson et al. 
Karlik 
Nondisabled (1)
Englehart et al. 
Nondisabled (11)
Lamounier et al. 
Light et al. 
TD set (4)
Englehart & Hudgins 
TD set (4)
Nondisabled (12)
Englehart et al. 
TD set (4)
Nondisabled (11)
Karlik et al. 
Nondisabled (1)
Koçyigit & Korürek 
Soares et al. 
Nondisabled (1)
Davidge et al. 
Ajiboye & Weir 
Nondisabled (3), TH (2)
Chan & Englehart 
Nondisabled (11)
Farrell & Weir 
Nondisabled (4)
Huang et al. 
RMS, AR6, TD set (4)
Nondisabled (12)
Sebelius et al. 
Sebelius et al. 
Nondisabled (6)
Al-Assaf 
Nondisabled (5)
Chu et al. 
Nondisabled (10)
León et al. 
Nondisabled (2)
Arvetti et al. 
TD set (5), AC, STFT, WT
Nondisabled (2)
Hargrove et al. 
RMS, AR6, TD set (4)
Nondisabled (6)
Hargrove et al. 
TD set (4)
Nondisabled (6)
Khezri & Jahed 
MAV, SSC, AR, WT
Nondisabled (4)
Khushaba & Al-Jumaily 
PSO features
Nondisabled (6)
Asghari Oskoei & Hu 
Nondisabled (11)
TD set (4)
RMS, AR6, TD set (4)
Liu & Luo 
WPT entropy
Nondisabled (1)
Shenoy et al. 
Nondisabled (3)
Tenore et al. 
TD set (4)
Nondisabled (1)
Karlik et al. 
Nondisabled (1)
Sensinger et al. 
TD set (4)
Nondisabled (7)
Tenore et al. 
MAV, VAR, WL, WA
Nondisabled (5), TR (1)
Kuruganti et al. 
Nondisabled (8)
Zhou et al. 
AR6, RMS, ZC, MAV, WA
JRRD, Volume 48, Number 6, 2011
*Denotes monopolar.
†Denotes rest included.
1. Finley FR, Wirta RW. Myocoder studies of multiple myopotential response. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 1967;48(11):598–601. [PMID: 6060789]
2. Graupe D, Cline WK. Functional separation of EMG signals via ARMA identification methods for prosthesis control purposes. IEEE Trans Syst Man Cybernetics.
1975;5(2):252–59.
3. Almström C, Herberts P, Körner L. Experience with Swedish multifunctional prosthetic hands controlled by pattern recognition of multiple myoelectric signals.
Int Orthop. 1981;5(1):15–21. [PMID: 7275404]
4. Saridis GN, Gootee TP. EMG pattern analysis and classification for a prosthetic arm. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 1982;29(6):403–12. [PMID: 7106790]
DOI:10.1109/TBME.1982.324954
5. Doerschuk PC, Gustafson DE, Willsky AS. Upper extremity limb function discrimination using EMG signal analysis. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 1983;30(1):18–29.
[PMID: 6826182]
DOI:10.1109/TBME.1983.325162
6. Ito K, Tsuji T, Kato A, Ito M. Limb-function discrimination using EMG signals by neural network and application to prosthetic forearm control. Proceedings of the IEEE
International Joint Conference on Neural Networks; 1991 Nov 18–21; Singapore. Los Alamitos (CA): IEEE; 1991. p. 1214–19. DOI:10.1109/IJCNN.1991.170562
7. Kelly MF, Parker PA, Scott RN. Neural network classification of myoelectric signal for prosthesis control. J Electromyogr Kinesiol. 1991;1(4):229–36.
[PMID: 20870513]
DOI:10.1016/1050-6411(91)90009-T
8. Hudgins B, Parker P, Scott RN. A new strategy for multifunction myoelectric control. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 1993;40(1):82–94. [PMID: 8468080]
DOI:10.1109/10.204774
9. Kuruganti U, Hudgins B, Scott RN. Two-channel enhancement of a multifunction control system. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 1995;42(1):109–11. [PMID: 7851924]
DOI:10.1109/10.362912
10. Itakura N, Kinbara Y, Fuwa T, Sakamoto K. Discrimination of forearm’s motions by surface EMG signals using neural network. Appl Human Sci. 1996;
15(6):287–94. [PMID: 9008983]
DOI:10.2114/jpa.15.287
11. Eriksson L, Sebelius F, Balkenius C. Neural control of a virtual prosthesis. Proceedings of the International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks
(ICANN); 1998; Skövde, Sweden. p. 905–10.
12. Karlik B. Differentiating type of muscle movement via AR modeling and neural network classification. Turk J Elec Eng. 1999;7(1):45–52.
13. Englehart K, Hudgins B, Parker PA. A wavelet-based continuous classification scheme for multifunction myoelectric control. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 2001;
48(3):302–11. [PMID: 11327498]
DOI:10.1109/10.914793
14. Lamounier E, Soares A, Andrade A, Carrijo R. A virtual prosthesis control based on neural networks for EMG pattern classification. Proceedings of Artificial
Intelligence and Soft Computing (ASC); 2002 Jul 17–19; Banff, Canada. p. 1–9.
15. Light CM, Chappell PH, Hudgins B, Engelhart K. Intelligent multifunction myoelectric control of hand prosthesis. J Med Eng Technol. 2002;26(4):139–46.
[PMID: 12396328]
DOI:10.1080/03091900210142459
16. Englehart K, Hudgins B. A robust, real-time control scheme for multifunction myoelectric control. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 2003;50(7):848–54. [PMID: 12848352]
DOI:10.1109/TBME.2003.813539
17. Englehart K, Hudgins B, Chan AD. Continuous multifunction myoelectric control using pattern recognition. Technol Disabil. 2003;15(2):95–103.
18. Karlik B, Tokhi MO, Alci M. A fuzzy clustering neural network architecture for multifunction upper-limb prosthesis. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 2003;50(11):
1255–61. [PMID: 14619995]
DOI:10.1109/TBME.2003.818469
19. Koçyigit Y, Korürek M. EMG signal classification using wavelet transform and fuzzy clustering algorithms. Proceedings of the International Conference on
Electrical and Electronics Engineering (ELECO); 2003; Bursa, Turkey.
20. Soares A, Andrade A, Lamounier E, Carrijo R. The development of a virtual myoelectric prosthesis controlled by an EMG pattern recognition system based on
neural networks. J Intelligent Inform Syst. 2003;21(2):127–41. DOI:10.1023/A:1024758415877
21. Davidge K, Englehart K, Parker PA. Multifunction myoelectric control of prostheses using a linear electrode array. Proceedings of the 19th Congress of the
International Society of Electrophysiological Kinesiology; 2005 Jun; Boston, MA. p. 59–65.
22. Ajiboye AB, Weir RF. A heuristic fuzzy logic approach to EMG pattern recognition for multifunctional prosthesis control. IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng.
2005;13(3):280–91. [PMID: 16200752]
DOI:10.1109/TNSRE.2005.847357
23. Chan AD, Englehart KB. Continuous myoelectric control for powered prostheses using hidden Markov models. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 2005;52(1):121–24.
[PMID: 15651571]
DOI:10.1109/TBME.2004.836492
24. Farrell TR, Weir RF. Pilot comparison of surface vs. implanted EMG for multifunctional prosthesis control. In: Proceedings of the IEEE 9th International Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics (ICORR); 2005 Jun 28–Jul 1; Chicago, IL. Los Alamitos (CA): IEEE; 2005. p. 277–80. DOI:10.1109/ICORR.2005.1501101
25. Huang Y, Englehart KB, Hudgins B, Chan AD. A Gaussian mixture model based classification scheme for myoelectric control of powered upper limb prostheses. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 2005;52(11):1801–11. [PMID: 16285383]
DOI:10.1109/TBME.2005.856295
26. Sebelius FC, Rosén BN, Lundborg GN. Refined myoelectric control in below-elbow amputees using artificial neural networks and a data glove. J Hand Surg
Am. 2005;30(4):780–89. [PMID: 16039372]
DOI:10.1016/j.jhsa.2005.01.002
Table 2. (cont)
Electromyographic sensing systems.
PEERDEMAN et al. Myoelectric forearm prostheses
recommendation of Farrell and Weir, as can be found in
Hargrove et al. and others .
Sensing Requirement 3: Proportional Control of Force
A natural and intuitive control strategy would reflect
the original neuromuscular system, which is capable of
proportionally and simultaneously controlling multiple
functions. The amplitude of the EMG signal caused by iso­
metric steady-state contraction of an individual muscle is
proportional to the force produced by the muscle . However, few studies include so-called proportional
control in pattern-recognition systems; this could be due to
the larger challenge of deriving the contraction speed or
27. Sebelius F, Axelsson M, Danielsen N, Schouenborg J, Laurell T. Real-time control of a virtual hand. Technol Disabil. 2005;17(3):131–41.
28. Al-Assaf Y. Surface myoelectric signal analysis: Dynamic approaches for change detection and classification. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 2006;53(11):2248–56.
[PMID: 17073330]
DOI:10.1109/TBME.2006.883628
29. Chu JU, Moon I, Mun MS. A real-time EMG pattern recognition system based on linear-nonlinear feature projection for a multifunction myoelectric hand.
IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 2006;53(11):2232–39. [PMID: 17073328]
DOI:10.1109/TBME.2006.883695
30. León M, Leija L, Munoz R. System for the identification of multiple movements of the hand. Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Electrical and
Electronics Engineering; 2006 Sep 6–8; Veracruz, Mexico. Los Alamitos (CA): IEEE; 2006. p. 1–3.
31. Arvetti M, Gini G, Folgheraiter M. Classification of EMG signals through wavelet analysis and neural networks for controlling an active hand prosthesis. Proceedings of the IEEE 10th International Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics; 2007 Jun 13–15; Noordwijk, the Netherlands. Los Alamitos (CA): IEEE; 2007.
p. 531–36. DOI:10.1109/ICORR.2007.4428476
32. Hargrove LJ, Englehart K, Hudgins B. A comparison of surface and intramuscular myoelectric signal classification. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 2007;54(5):847–53.
[PMID: 17518281]
DOI:10.1109/TBME.2006.889192
33. Hargrove LJ, Losier Y, Lock B, Englehart K, Hudgins B. A real-time pattern recognition based myoelectric control usability study implemented in a virtual
environment. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2007;2007:4842–45. [PMID: 18003090]
34. Khezri M, Jahed M. Real-time intelligent pattern recognition algorithm for surface EMG signals. Biomed Eng Online. 2007;6:45. [PMID: 18053184]
DOI:10.1186/1475-925X-6-45
35. Khushaba RN, Al-Jumaily A. Channel and feature selection in multifunction myoelectric control. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2007;2007:5182–25.
[PMID: 18003175]
36. Asghari Oskoei M, Hu H. Evaluation of support vector machines in upper limb motion classification using myoelectric signal. Proceedings of the Iranian Conference on Biomedical Engineering; 2008; Shahed University, Iran. p. 176–80.
37. Liu Z, Luo Z. Hand motion pattern classifier based on EMG using wavelet packet transform and LVQ neural networks. Proceedings of IEEE International Symposium on IT in Medicine and Education; 2008 Dec 12–14; Xiamen, China. Los Alamitos (CA): IEEE; 2008. p. 28–32.
38. Shenoy P, Miller KJ, Crawford B, Rao RN. Online electromyographic control of a robotic prosthesis. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 2008;55(3):1128–35. [PMID: 18334405]
DOI:10.1109/TBME.2007.909536
39. Tenore F, Armiger RS, Vogelstein RJ, Wenstrand DS, Harshbarger SD, Englehart K. An embedded controller for a 7-degree of freedom prosthetic arm. Conf
Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2008;2008:185–88. [PMID: 19162624]
40. Karlik B, Koçyigit Y, Korürek M. Differentiating types of muscle movements using a wavelet based fuzzy clustering neural network. Expert Systems.
2009;26(1):49–59. DOI:10.1111/j.1468-0394.2008.00496.x
41. Sensinger JW, Lock BA, Kuiken TA. Adaptive pattern recognition of myoelectric signals: Exploration of conceptual framework and practical algorithms. IEEE
Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng. 2009;17(3):270–78. [PMID: 19497834]
DOI:10.1109/TNSRE.2009.2023282
42. Tenore FV, Ramos A, Fahmy A, Acharya S, Etienne-Cummings R, Thakor NV. Decoding of individuated finger movements using surface electromyography.
IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 2009;56(5):1427–34. [PMID: 19473933]
DOI:10.1109/TBME.2008.2005485
43. Kuruganti U, Daley H, Englehart KB. High density EMG data of normally limbed and transradial amputees. Proceedings of the Congress of the International
Society of Electrophysiology and Kinesiology (ISEK); 2010 Jun 16–19; Aalborg, Denmark.
44. Zhou R, Liu X, Li G. Myoelectric signal feature performance in classifying motion classes in transradial amputees. Proceedings of the Congress of the International Society of Electrophysiology and Kinesiology (ISEK). 2010 Jun 16–19; Aalborg, Denmark.
AC = autocorrelation coefficients, Accuracy = percentage of correctly classified muscle-activation patterns, ANFIS = adaptive neurofuzzy inference system, ANN =
artificial neural network, AR# = autoregressive model (#th order), ARMA# = autoregressive-moving-average model (#th order), DFT = discrete Fourier transform,
Electr = number of electrodes, FCNN = fuzzy clustering neural network, FKNN = fuzzy k-nearest neighbor classifier, FLS = fuzzy logic system, GMM = Gaussian mixture model, HMM = hidden Markov model, LDA = linear discriminant analysis, LLA = lazy learning algorithm, LVQ NN = learning vector quantization neural network, MAV = moving average, MAVS = moving average slope, MLP = multilayer perceptron, NN = neural network, NNC = nearest neighbor classifier, PC =
polynomial classifier, PSO = particle swarm optimization, RMS = root-mean-square, SSC = slope sign changes, STFT = short-time Fourier transform, SVM = support
vector mechanism, TD = time domain [set(4): MAV, ZC, SSC, WL; set(5): MAV, ZC, SSC, WL, MAVS], TH = transhumeral amputee, TR = transradial amputee, VAR = variance, WA = Willison amplitude, WL = wavelength, WPT = wavelet packet transform, WT = wavelet transform, ZC = zero crossings.
Table 2. (cont)
Electromyographic sensing systems.
JRRD, Volume 48, Number 6, 2011
force per class in a multiclass problem . Hargrove et al.
computed a linear combination of root-mean-square values
over all channels and normalized them by a “motion
specific factor” derived from training data . Jiang et al.
and others recently included proportional control in the
experimental setup . By using a standard time
domain feature set, they were able to capture more than
80 percent of the measured force variability of three simul­
taneously activated wrist movements.
Sensing Requirement 4: Simultaneous Control of Wrist
Movements and Grasps
As opposed to the previous requirements, simulta­
neous control of wrist movements and grasps is rarely
addressed in the EMG literature. While this was men­
tioned as being performed during testing of the SVEN
Hand , no qualitative results were found. As men­
tioned previously, simultaneous control of two or three
contraction patterns at once has been explored by Jiang et
al. and others . However, their focus was on pro­
portional control, and therefore, no explicit results on
simultaneous control were reported.
Control systems for ME prostheses combine the out­
put signals of the EMG sensing system with data from
internal and external sensors to generate the motions
intended by the user. These systems can be broken down
into two parts: first, the high-level control system that
interprets the classified EMG signals to produce desired
angles for each joint; second, the low-level control sys­
tem that takes the high-level system’s set points and
controls the individual joints to the proper angles. The
low-level control systems are less important in
establishing user control of the prosthesis’ functions and
as such are not covered in detail in this article.
The various prosthesis control systems that have
been evaluated are listed in Table 3. Though not intended
to be comprehensive, this list of systems has been chosen
to represent the state of the art in prosthesis control
research and to cover various different approaches.
Control Requirement 1: Available Grasp Types
The reviewed systems feature two main methods of
grasp control: either a selection of discrete grasp types or
direct user finger control (Table 3). With the first approach,
used by the MANUS hand , Fluidhand , and
Southampton hybrid systems, the user chooses from a
set list of grasps. This approach can allow the specific grasp
types available to be customized to the user’s preference
during training .
The second approach is used in the AR III Hand sys­
tem and one of the Cyberhand control systems .
Although direct finger control can be considered more
natural than the grasp selection approach, it could be
more difficult for the user to get the fingers in the right
position for the task given the limited amount of control
inputs available.
The second Cyberhand control system was used
to test both a selection of two or three discretely select­
able grasps and direct control of the thumb opposition
angle. Users had difficulty taking advantage of direct
thumb control and often disregarded it entirely.
Control Requirement 2: Wrist Movement
Currently, only a few prosthesis prototypes feature
user-controlled wrist movement, so few of the control
systems support it. One example of both rotation and
flexion/extension has been found in the SVEN Hand
 . The MANUS hand and Southampton con­
trol systems enable control of wrist rotation only. With
the latter two systems, wrist movement control is imple­
mented in the same way as grasp selection, which makes
simultaneous grasping and wrist movement impossible.
Control Requirements 3 and 4: Automatic Holding and
Slip Prevention
The MANUS hand and Fluidhand systems
will both continue to hold a grasped object unless given
another signal. The Southampton system automati­
cally holds objects as well, but also prevents slipping of
objects, which is detected by way of acoustic sensors.
While the Cyberhand contains the force sensors needed
for slip prevention, it currently does not have a response
time short enough to use it .
Control Requirement 5: Grasp Execution Time
For the control system’s reaction time, the most
important factor is the number of control signals a user
needs to provide to activate a certain action. This number
varies from hand to hand. For example, the MANUS
hand system always requires a three-symbol code to
execute any command. In contrast, the Southampton
hand system requires a single close signal to perform
a simple grasp; however, an additional control signal is
PEERDEMAN et al. Myoelectric forearm prostheses
required to increase the applied force, which causes some
delay in its execution.
Once grasp execution has started, the grasping speed
depends mainly on the type of actuators used. All hands
in Table 3 except the Fluidhand use direct current
(DC) motor actuators, which require a transmission with
high gear ratio to produce the required torque. This
reduces the motor’s speed significantly.
Control Requirement 6: User-Controlled Force and Speed
Two main methods of force control implementation
are commonly used. The first gives the user direct control
over the force with which the grasp is closed and with
which objects are held and is used by the Cyberhand and
MANUS hand . The second method automatically
applies sufficient force but gives the user the option of
switching to direct force control during grasping; the
Southampton control system features this option.
Speed control is relatively rare among the reviewed
control systems, only being supported by the Fluidhand
 . This is because of the low priority of speed versus
force control, which is performed through a similar channel.
It should be noted that various modern prosthesis prototypes
have grasp closing times on the order of 1 s (Table 3), which
would diminish the effect of speed control.
For the majority of forearm prosthesis research, force
and position information is only directed to the prosthesis
itself (e.g., in automated slip control) , but some
efforts have been made to provide feedback to the user. A
natural way to close the prosthesis control loop that also
incorporates feedback is the use of extended physiologi­
cal proprioception (EPP) as proposed by Simpson .
However, the focus of this article is on ME prostheses,
and therefore, feedback applications of the EPP principle
are not considered here.
Examples of artificial feedback through nerve stimu­
lation or haptic feedback can be found, but the focus in
research is on vibrotactile and electrotactile stimulation
because of their unobtrusive nature, easy applicability in
prostheses, and comfort for the user. In this section, the
EMG-based prosthetic hand systems. M1–3 designate three different control systems evaluated by Cipriani et al. .
Prototype Name
Grasp Control
Wrist Control Force/Speed
Available Types
Selection Method
Execution Time*
User Control
Pons et al. 
MANUS Hand
Customizable
Yang et al. 
AR III Hand
Finger control†
Schulz et al. 
Lateral, cylindrical,
tripod, spherical
EMG classification
Herberts et al. 
EMG classification
Rotation, F/E
Light et al. 
Southampton Hand
Customizable
EMG classification
Matrone et al. 
Finger control†
Cipriani et al. 
Cyberhand (M1)
Lateral, cylindrical
Cyberhand (M2)
Lateral, cylindrical
Cyberhand (M3)
Finger control†
*Approximate time needed to close grasp (in seconds).
†Direct finger control replaces separate grasp selection method.
1. Cipriani C, Zaccone F, Micera S, Carrozza MC. On the shared control of an EMG-controlled prosthetic hand: Analysis of user-prosthesis interaction. IEEE Trans
Robotics. 2008;24(1):170–84. DOI:10.1109/TRO.2007.910708
2. Pons JL, Ceres R, Rocon E, Levin S, Markovitz I, Saro B, Reynaerts D, Van Moorleghem W, Bueno L. Virtual reality training and EMG control of the MANUS
hand prosthesis. Robotica. 2005;23(3):311–17. DOI:10.1017/S026357470400133X
3. Yang DP, Zhao JD, Gu YK, Wang XQ, Li N, Jiang L, Liu H, Huang H, Zhao DW. An anthropomorphic robot hand developed based on underactuated mechanism
and controlled by EMG signals. J Bionic Eng. 2009;6(3):255–63. DOI:10.1016/S1672-6529(08)60119-5
4. Schulz S, Pylatiuk C, Reischl M, Martin J, Mikut R, Bretthauer G. A hydraulically driven multifunctional prosthetic hand. Robotica. 2005;23(3):293–99.
DOI:10.1017/S0263574704001316
5. Herberts P, Almström C, Kadefors R, Lawrence PD. Hand prosthesis control via myoelectric patterns. Acta Orthop Scand. 1973;44(4):389–409. [PMID: 4771275]
6. Light CM, Chappell PH, Hudgins B, Engelhart K. Intelligent multifunction myoelectric control of hand prosthesis. J Med Eng Technol. 2002;26(4):139–46.
[PMID: 12396328]
DOI:10.1080/03091900210142459
7. Matrone G, Cipriani C, Secco EL, Carrozza MC, Magenes G. Bio-inspired controller for a dexterous prosthetic hand based on principal components analysis.
Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2009;2009:5022–25. [PMID: 19964659]
EMG = electromyographic, F/E = flexion/extension, N/A = not applicable.
JRRD, Volume 48, Number 6, 2011
state of the art research on feedback is evaluated accord­
ing to the requirements found in Table 1.
Feedback Requirement 1: Force Feedback
The most natural way to directly close the loop
between sensing and feedback would be the direct stimu­
lation of the afferent nerves, which is being investigated
in several studies . To avoid the invasive charac­
ter of this solution, but still provide feedback by the same
modality, many researchers use extended physiological
taction (EPT), in which force measured by force sensors
is transmitted to the user via force applied to the skin
with the same amplitude and modality .
Early applications of force feedback have mainly
used electrotactile stimulation. Force levels were modu­
lated either by amplitude—following a linear or
nonlinear relation —or by pulse rate . Effects
of feedback were mainly subjectively evaluated and
showed positive results . The rare quantitative
analyses showed increased performance in grasping tasks
 . However, electrotactile stimulation has several
potential disadvantages, the most significant of which is
the likelihood of painful stimulations. Since there have
been several advancements in vibrotactile stimulation
(e.g., the miniaturization of the stimulators), most recent
research projects have abandoned electrotactile stimula­
tion in favor of vibrotactile stimulation.
Force feedback systems using vibrotactile stimula­
tion have been incorporated in the hands of three projects
mentioned previously: the MANUS hand , Cyber­
hand , and Fluidhand . Subjective evaluation
through questionnaires showed positive experiences in
comfort and utility , but feedback became disturbing
when applied continuously . Evaluation of grasping
performances showed a 15 to 77 percent decrease in
applied grasping forces , but no significant differ­
ences in performance were noted when compared with
the nonfeedback situation .
Feedback Requirement 2: Position Feedback
In comparison to the application of force feedback,
feedback of position is even more rarely described; only
two applications of tactile position feedback in arm pros­
thesis prototypes were found. The first approach, for the
Utah arm , is a combination of feedback of grasp
force (via varying electrotactile pulse width) and level of
hand opening (by pulse rate modulation) by a single elec­
trode. Evaluation showed that it was not possible to pro­
vide force and position feedback using the same electrode,
but performance in distinguishing object sizes does
increase with feedback. The second approach uses the
phantom sensation phenomenon , in which sensations
are felt in between two simultaneously activated stimula­
tors with different intensities. Feedback of the level of
flexion and extension of the elbow was provided by this
method. The performance of the subjects in matching and
reaching tasks was considerably improved and comparable
to performance with a body-powered prosthesis.
Feedback Requirement 3: Interpretability and Intuitiveness
Although the interpretability and intuitiveness of
feedback are not described for prosthesis applications,
they are influenced by both the perception of stimulus
intensity and the perceived sensation and have been
described in psychophysical studies.
The perceived stimulus intensity is strongly related to
the applied stimulus intensity and best described by an
(adjusted) power function , of which the exponent
can vary greatly. For electrotactile stimulation, this is
mainly due to the relationship between stimulus duration
and stimulus intensity , and for vibrotactile stimu­
lation, this depends on the position of stimulation . The
perceived stimulus intensity is influenced by the intensity,
the duration and number of bursts of stimulation, the hous­
ing of the stimulator, the characteristics of the preceding
stimulus, and the number of simultaneous stimuli .
The perceived sensations with vibrotactile stimulation
are influenced by intensity, frequency and waveform of
stimulation, actuator size, and location of stimulation.
Therefore, they vary largely over the literature ,
from buzzing to sharp pain. Variations in perceived sensa­
tions with electrotactile stimuli are related to stimulus
intensity, electrode characteristics, preparation of the skin,
and the use of cathodic or anodic stimulation . It
was shown that sensations perceived by amputees do not
differ from the sensations of nondisabled subjects for per­
cutaneous stimulation .
Feedback Requirement 4: User Comfort
In the workshop, comfort was defined as a prosthesis
not being obtrusive and not causing pain or skin problems.
Therefore, auditory or optical feedback options were con­
sidered to be unsuitable for feedback in forearm prosthe­
ses. As mentioned previously, a major problem with
feedback through electrical stimulation is the risk of gener­
ating painful sensations. This risk is influenced by the skin
PEERDEMAN et al. Myoelectric forearm prostheses
contacts, skin condition, type of stimulation (cathodic/
anodic), and the size of the electrode . Alles showed
that after 4 weeks of use, no adverse effects of vibrotactile
stimulation on the skin occurred . However, the effects
of long-term vibrotactile or electrotactile stimulation are
not addressed in the literature.
Feedback Requirement 5: Adjustability of Location and
Stimulus Intensity
The ability to adjust the location or intensity of stimu­
lation is influenced by the effects of the position of stimu­
lation on the sensitivity, the subjective perception of
position (localization), and the smallest detectable distance
between stimulators (spatial acuity). The effects of the
position of vibrotactile or electrotactile stimulation on all
three aspects have been investigated in the literature, but
their implications for prosthesis applications are not given.
At the glabrous skin, the sensitivity for vibrotactile
stimulation is highest with its maximum for stimulations
at 250 Hz (with a detection threshold of only several
microns), but at the hairy skin, the sensitivity is lower
and the maximum shifts to 200 to 220 Hz .
Localization performance is not only related to the
position of stimulation, effects were also found for the
space between the stimulators and the neighborhood of
(bony) landmarks .
The spatial acuity highly depends on the stimulus
position and can therefore vary greatly, from 2 mm to
several centimeters . For electrotactile stimulation,
variations can also be caused by changes in frequency,
pulse width, and pulse time delays . Furthermore,
temperature and stimulus type affect the spatial acuity for
both types of stimulation .
An aspect that plays an important role in the adjust­
ability of the stimulus intensity is adaptation, because if it
occurs, the stimulus intensity should be adjusted to pre­
vent fading. Adaptation can be reduced by changing the
frequency of the subsequent stimulus or by applying the
stimuli intermittently . For electrotactile stimula­
tion, adaptation is lowest for high current stimulation
(just below the pain threshold) and can also be reduced
by intermittent stimulation .
DISCUSSION
Functional requirements for user acceptance were
determined in the “Needs Assessment Results” section,
and the state of the art in ME forearm prosthesis research
was reviewed according to these requirements in the “Lit­
erature Survey” section. Based on these studies, we can
show to what degree recent research has been able to fulfill
the acceptance requirements. In this section, the method
used to perform the needs assessment is evaluated and the
results of the literature review are discussed. For those
requirements that are presently not completely fulfilled,
recommendations for future research are made.
Needs Assessment Evaluation
The needs assessment devised for this article was set
up in such a way that it would be generally applicable in
future development of forearm prostheses. The workshop
approach was well-structured, starting with selecting a
number of relevant activities of daily living for forearm
prosthesis users. The step-by-step worksheet (Figure 3)
focused on the individual subtasks involved in each
activity; this method was effective in pinpointing the spe­
cific needs associated with each activity. The workshop
also encouraged communication between clinicians and
engineers by having each activity investigated by small
mixed subgroups. The therapists involved had firsthand
experience with many different users, which gave them a
broad perspective on the users’ needs. However, for addi­
tional verification of the resulting requirements, we rec­
ommend reviewing them through questionnaires aimed at
both users and professionals.
Literature Discussion and Recommendations
The discussions of the state of the art and recommen­
dations for future research follow the structure of the
requirements table (Table 1) and the literature survey.
EMG Sensing
The focus of recent research on ME prostheses has
been on overcoming the major shortcoming of limited
selectivity in control by increasing the number of controlla­
ble functions, which would ultimately lead to more efficient
usage. As can be concluded from the overview of sensing
systems in the literature (Table 2), classifiers that can distin­
guish multiple wrist movements with good accuracy are
widely available. However, these results may be skewed
because many studies are performed using nondisabled sub­
jects and a number of restraints in the contractions. More­
over, these classifier systems are not used in commercially
available prostheses. With regard to grasps, far fewer results
are found. A requirement resulting from the workshop was
JRRD, Volume 48, Number 6, 2011
not only to include more functions in forearm prostheses
but also to accommodate more practical functions, such as
grasps to manipulate and maneuver different types of
objects. The functions of the prosthesis should match the
contraction patterns the user has to make as much as possi­
ble (direct mapping) to enable natural and intuitive control.
Therefore, to completely fulfill the first EMG sensing
requirement, the following is required: a thorough valida­
tion with amputee patients and a real-time experimental
setup of a pattern-recognition system that is also able to dis­
tinguish grasp patterns.
Concerning the nondisturbing time delay requirement,
most studies keep within the 300 ms boundary of per­
ceived user delay, as can be seen in Table 2. The possibil­
ity of achieving acceptable accuracies with analysis
windows under 125 ms needs to be investigated. It should
be noted that the clinical relevance of higher accuracies is
hard to determine, as it is unknown what degree of accu­
racy is satisfactory for actual use. Among other things,
performance depends on the activity performed and the
objects involved, and these influences need to be further
investigated.
To reiterate, the prosthesis control should resemble
the original neuromuscular control as much as possible to
make it natural and intuitive. Therefore, an ideal sensing
system should enable user control of force, speed, or
both, as well as simultaneous control of multiple move­
ments. However, the requirements on proportional and
simultaneous control are rarely covered in the literature;
future research in this area is therefore recommended.
In order to ensure user acceptance of a new ME pros­
thesis, both the control system and the mechanical design
would need to accommodate several new features and an
elegant way of controlling these features.
The prosthesis prototypes featuring discrete grasp types
are capable of performing most, if not all, of the required
grasps. However, the relative absence of wrist movements
beyond occasional rotation needs to be addressed. If wrist
rotation or flexion/extension is made available, we recom­
mend including simultaneous control of wrist movement
and grasp selection. The degree of automation in the
reviewed systems is also important; it can reduce the control
required from the user but may also be considered unintui­
tive. A good example of a feature that greatly benefits from
automation is the holding of a grasped object, which is
implemented in several of the reviewed systems
 . Since it allows the user to focus their attention
on using the object they are holding, we recommended this
feature be included in any user-friendly system. An exten­
sion of this concept is active force control by the prosthesis,
which is application of just enough pressure to prevent slip­
ping. This function, though less common , can allow a
much wider range of objects to be easily handled; however,
fragile or flexible objects could prove difficult to manage.
The average grasp execution time among the reviewed
prototypes is still quite high (Table 3). Decreasing this
time is recommended in order to increase the prosthesis’
responsiveness and dynamic appearance as well as making
direct speed control more useful. Improving the prosthesis’
speed can be accomplished by using faster actuators, such
as the hydraulic actuators of the Fluidhand , or the
various types of pneumatic actuators available .
User force control should be available for when auto­
matic holding and slip prevention are unwanted or imprac­
tical. However, because of the inevitable delays and
inaccuracies in the feedback loop between the prosthesis
and the user, maintaining precise control over the applied
force can be difficult. Instead, an approach such as used on
the Southampton hand , providing optional force con­
trol when an object is being held, would be preferable.
Feedback of force and position is only marginally
addressed in research applications. The use of direct nerve
stimulation and EPT seem to have a high potential to cir­
cumvent differences in modalities between sensing and
stimulation. However, pressure systems as used in EPT are
highly sensitive to adaptation and the application of direct
nerve stimulation is still in a very experimental stage.
More applications were found for electrotactile stimula­
tion, but the sensations evoked by it can be painful and
unfamiliar to the user, likely because of the various kinds
of mechanoreceptors that are activated simultaneously
 . For this reason, the recent focus is mainly on vibro­
tactile stimulation, which has great potential because it is
relatively unobtrusive to the user and the environment and,
therefore, fulfills the comfort requirement. However, the
developed methods should be investigated on a larger scale
as well as on amputee patients.
No distinction is made between continuous and dis­
crete feedback in the literature. In almost every case, pro­
portional feedback is presented by amplitude or frequency
modulation in a linear or nonlinear way. Future focus
should be on the determination of the optimal modulation
techniques for feedback applications.
PEERDEMAN et al. Myoelectric forearm prostheses
Research on interpretability, intuitiveness, and adjust­
ability is mainly focused on psychophysical experiments
and described extensively. However, the right way to
implement the findings from these studies in a successful
forearm prosthesis still has to be investigated. Furthermore,
the applicability for amputee patients and any comfort
issues are hardly described and should be investigated in
future research.
CONCLUSIONS
Recent developments in ME forearm prosthesis
research are mainly technology driven, doing little to
increase the low user acceptance rates. In this study, a
user-centered approach is used to derive the requirements
for a natural and intuitive prosthesis.
One of the main requirements is the application of
force and position feedback, which is rarely implemented
in recent prototype prostheses. The focus of future
research should therefore be on the implementation of
these kinds of feedback, whereby the extensively investi­
gated psychophysical aspects should be taken into account.
Recent research in grasp selection and control is prom­
ising, fulfilling most of the associated requirements. How­
ever, simultaneous control of grasps and wrist movements
should be implemented to increase the natural motion and
intuitiveness of grasping maneuvers.
The automation of object holding and slip prevention
can reduce the required attention during bimanual tasks.
The implementation of this feature in future prostheses
was recommended in the needs assessment.
The long reaction time of many modern prostheses
was noted, which decreases the intuitiveness of their con­
trol. In EMG sensing, reducing the time window for clas­
sification while maintaining sufficient accuracy is being
investigated. Similarly, the grasp execution time is still
significantly impaired, mainly because of the use of DC
motors. Research into alternative actuation is therefore
highly recommended.
Although many of the required components for a nat­
ural and intuitive prosthesis system are currently avail­
able or being developed, more attention needs to be paid
toward their integration and validation by a large group
of users. Hopefully, these user-centered requirements and
recommendations will increase acceptance of the next
generation of ME forearm prostheses.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Author Contributions:
Drafting of manuscript: B. Peerdeman.
Workshop organization: R. Huis in ‘t Veld.
Literature review: B. Peerdeman, D. Boere, H. Witteveen.
Critical revision of manuscript for important intellectual content:
S. Misra, P. Veltink, H. Rietman, H. Hermens, S. Stramigioli.
Financial Disclosures: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
Funding/Support: This material (project Myopro: was based on work supported by the Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs and the Province of Overijssel, within the Pieken in de
Delta (PIDON) initiative. All authors are affiliated with MIRA–Institute for Biomedical Technology and Technical Medicine, University
of Twente.
Additional Contributions: We would like to acknowledge the support of Laura Kallenberg for organizing the workshop and useful discussions that led to this research. The contributions of all participants
in the workshop are greatly appreciated.