Procedia Computer Science 00 000–000
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia
1st Workshop on Recommender Systems for Technology Enhanced Learning 
Nikos Manouselis
,a, Hendrik Drachslerb, Katrien Verbertc, Olga C. Santosd
a Greek Research and Technology Network (GRNET), 56 Messogeion Av., 115 27, Athens, Greece
b Open University of the Netherlands (OUNL), P.O. Box 2960, 6401 DL Heerlen, The Netherlands
cPostdoctoral fellow FWO at the Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Celestijnenlaan 200A, 3001 Leuven, Belgium
d aDeNu Research Group, UNED. Calle Juan del Rosal, 16, Madrid 28040, Spain
Technology enhanced learning (TEL) aims to design, develop and test socio-technical innovations that will support
and enhance learning practices of both individuals and organisations. It is an application domain that generally
addresses all types of technology research & development aiming to support teaching and learning activities.
Information retrieval is a pivotal activity in TEL, and the deployment of recommender systems has attracted
increased interest during the past years.
Recommendation methods, techniques and systems open an interesting new approach to facilitate and support
learning and teaching. There are plenty of resources available on the Web, both in terms of digital learning content
and people resources (e.g. other learners, experts, tutors) that can be used to facilitate teaching and learning tasks.
The challenge is to develop, deploy and evaluate systems that provide learners and teachers with meaningful
guidance in order to help identify suitable learning resources from a potentially overwhelming variety of choices.
The 1st Workshop on Recommender Systems for Technology Enhanced Learning (RecSysTEL) builds upon the
tradition of a series of workshops on Social Information Retrieval for Technology Enhanced Learning (SIRTEL),
Context-Aware Recommendation for Learning and Towards User Modelling and Adaptive Systems for All
(TUMAS-A)a. RecSysTEL was organised jointly by the 4th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems and the 5th European Conference on Technology Enhanced Learning , on 29-30 September
2010 in Barcelona, Spain. Its main goal was to bring together researchers and practitioners who are working on
topics related to the design, development and testing of recommender systems in educational settings as well as
present the current status of research in this area and create cross-disciplinary liaisons between the RecSys and EC-
TEL communities. Overall, its contributions outline the rich potential of TEL as an application area for
recommender systems and identify the challenges of developing such systems in a TEL context.
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +30-210-7474267; fax: +30-210-7474 490
E-mail address: 
a 
Procedia Computer Science 1 2773–2774
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia
1877-0509 c⃝2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/S1877-0509(10)00329-7
We would like to take this opportunity to thank all the authors who submitted valuable contributions to this
workshop. We would also like to thank in particular our steering committee members for their work and assistance
over the last few months in helping to shape this workshop: Jesus G. Boticario (aDeNu - Spanish National
University for Distance Education, Spain), Peter Brusilovsky (University of Pittsburgh, USA), Erik Duval
(Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Belgium), Denis Gillet (Swiss Federal Institute of Lausanne, Switzerland),
Stefanie Lindstaedt (Know-Center Graz, Austria), Peter Scott (Open University, UK), Fridolin Wild (Open
University, UK), Martin Wolpers (Fraunhofer FIT, Germany) and Riina Vuorikari (European Schoolnet, Belgium).
Finally, we would like to thank the workshop PC members for their valuable review comments, which significantly
contributed to the high quality of the accepted papers: Liliana Ardissono (Universita di Torino, Italy), Katrin
Borcea-Pfitzmann (Dresden University of Technology, Germany), Julien Broisin (IRIT Universite Paul Sabatier,
France), Carlos Delgado Kloos (University of Carlos III de Madrid, Spain), Stavros Demetriadis (Aristotle
University of Thessaloniki, Greece), Jon Dron (Athabasca University, Canada), Joel Duffin (Tatemae, USA), Rosta
Farzan (Carnegie Mellon University, USA), Alexander Felfernig (Graz University of Technology, Austria), Rick D.
Hangartner (Strands, USA), Eelco Herder (L3S, Germany), Tsukasa Hirashima (Hiroshima University, Japan),
Geert-Jan Houben (Technical University Delft, The Netherlands), Ralf Klamma (RWTH Aachen University,
Germany), Martin Memmel (DFKI GmbH, Germany), Pedro J. Munoz Merino (University of Carlos III de Madrid,
Spain), Brandon Muramatsu (MIT, USA), Wolfgang Nejdl (L3S & Leibniz Universitat, Germany), Xavier Ochoa
(Escuela Superior Politecnica del Litoral, Ecuador), Mimi Recker (Utah State University, USA), Christoph Rensing
(TU Darmstadt, Germany), Hans-Christian Schmitz (Fraunhofer FIT, Germany), Miguel-Angel Sicilia (University
of Alcala, Spain) and Sergey Sosnovsky (DFKI GmbH, Germany).
Nikos Manouselis
Hendrik Drachsler
Katrien Verbert
Olga C. Santos
Guest editors
N. Manouselis et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 2773–2774