CompilerGym: Robust, Performant Compiler
Optimization Environments for AI Research
Chris Cummins,
Bram Wasti,
Jiadong Guo,
Brandon Cui,
Jason Ansel,
Sahir Gomez,
Somya Jain,
Olivier Teytaud,
Benoit Steiner,
Yuandong Tian,
Hugh Leather
 
Abstract—Interest in applying Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) techniques to compiler optimizations is increasing rapidly, but compiler research has a high entry barrier. Unlike in other domains,
compiler and AI researchers do not have access to the datasets
and frameworks that enable fast iteration and development
of ideas, and getting started requires a signiﬁcant engineering
investment. What is needed is an easy, reusable experimental
infrastructure for real world compiler optimization tasks that
can serve as a common benchmark for comparing techniques,
and as a platform to accelerate progress in the ﬁeld.
We introduce CompilerGym1, a set of environments for real
world compiler optimization tasks, and a toolkit for exposing
new optimization tasks to compiler researchers. CompilerGym
enables anyone to experiment on production compiler optimization problems through an easy-to-use package, regardless of their
experience with compilers. We build upon the popular OpenAI
Gym interface enabling researchers to interact with compilers
using Python and a familiar API.
We describe the CompilerGym architecture and implementation, characterize the optimization spaces and computational
efﬁciencies of three included compiler environments, and provide
extensive empirical evaluations. Compared to prior works, CompilerGym offers larger datasets and optimization spaces, is 27×
more computationally efﬁcient, is fault-tolerant, and capable of
detecting reproducibility bugs in the underlying compilers.
In making it easy for anyone to experiment with compilers –
irrespective of their background – we aim to accelerate progress
in the AI and compiler research domains.
I. INTRODUCTION
There is a growing body of work that shows how the
performance and portability of compiler optimizations can
be improved through autotuning , machine learning ,
and reinforcement learning , , . The goal of these
approaches is to supplement or replace the optimization
decisions made by hand-crafted heuristics with decisions
derived from empirical data. Autotuning makes these decisions
by automatically searching over a space of conﬁgurations. This
is effective, but search may be prohibitively costly for large
search spaces, and must be repeated from scratch for each new
problem instance. The promise of supervised and reinforcement
learning techniques is to reduce or completely eliminate this
search cost by inferring optimization decisions from patterns
observed in past data.
Despite many strong experimental results showing that
these techniques outperform human experts , , , the
complexity of experimental infrastructure for compiler research
1Available at: 
CompilerGym
Environment
Compiler APIs
Extractors
Observation
View of Program
Performance Metric
Action Space
Optimization Decisions
(Python API,
web interface,
or commandline)
Fig. 1: The CompilerGym interaction loop. A CompilerGym
environment exposes an observation, reward, and action space.
The user’s goal is to select the action that will lead to
the greatest cumulative reward. This may be through handcrafted heuristics, search, supervised machine learning, or
reinforcement learning.
hampers progress in the ﬁeld. In many other ﬁelds there are
simple environments, each using standard APIs that machine
learning researchers can interact with. From Atari games to
physics simulations, a known interface abstracts the problems
to the point that AI researchers do not need deep knowledge
of the problem to apply their machine learning techniques.
CompilerGym provides just that for compilers. AI researchers
can solve compiler problems without being compiler experts,
and compiler experts can integrate state-of-the-art ML without
being AI experts.
To support this ease of use and performance CompilerGym
offers the following key features:
1) Easy to install. Precompiled binaries for Linux and
macOS can be installed with a single command.
2) Easy to use. Builds on the Gym API that is easy to
learn and widely used by researchers.
3) Comprehensive. Includes a full suite of millions of
benchmarks. Provides multiple kinds of pre-computed
program representations and appropriate optimization
targets and reward functions out of the box.
4) Reproducible. Provides validation for correctness of
results and public leaderboards to aggregate results.
5) Accessible. Includes code-free ways to explore CompilarXiv:2109.08267v2 [cs.PL] 22 Dec 2021
Management
Error Handlers
Compilation
LLVM Service
GCC Service
Other compiler
C++ / Python / other
Fig. 2: The client-server architecture. The dashed line indicates
the boundary between the frontend Python process that the
user interacts with and the backend compiler services. The processes communicate over RPC, providing simple distribution,
parallelization, and fault tolerance.
erGym environments, such as an interactive command
line shell and a browser-based graphical user interface.
6) Performant. Supports the high throughput required for
large-scale experiments on massive datasets.
7) Fault-tolerant. Detects and gracefully recovers from
ﬂaky compiler errors that can occur during autotuning.
8) Extensible. Removes the substantial engineering effort
required to expose new compiler problems for research
and integrate new machine learning techniques.
In this paper, we make the following contributions:
• We introduce CompilerGym, a Python library that formulates compiler optimization problems as easy-to-use
Gym environments with a simple API.
• We provide environments for three compiler optimization
problems: LLVM phase ordering, GCC ﬂag selection, and
CUDA loop nest generation. The environments are designed from the ground up for large-scale experimentation:
they are 27× faster than prior works, expose larger search
spaces, include millions of programs for training, and
support optimizing for both code size and runtime.
• We demonstrate the utility of CompilerGym as a platform
for research by evaluating a multitude of autotuning and
reinforcement learning techniques. By using a standard
interface, CompilerGym seamlessly integrates with third
party libraries, offering a substantial reduction in the
engineering effort required to create compiler experiments.
• We release a suite of tools to lower the barrier-to-entry to
compiler optimization research: the core CompilerGym
library and environments, a toolkit for integrating new
compiler optimization problems, public leaderboards to
aggregate and verify research results, a web interface
and API, extensive command line tools, and large ofﬂine
datasets comprising millions of performance results.
II. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
CompilerGym’s architecture comprises two components: a
Python frontend that implements the Gym APIs and other
user-facing tools, and a backend that provides the integrations
with speciﬁc compilers.
Frontend: The CompilerGym frontend is a Python library
that exposes compiler optimization tasks using the OpenAI
import compiler_gym
# Create a new environment, selecting the compiler to
# use, the program to compile, the feature vector to
# represent program states, and the optimization target:
env = compiler_gym.make(
"llvm-v0",
benchmark="cbench-v1/qsort",
observation_space="Autophase",
reward_space="IrInstructionCount",
# Start a new compilation session:
observation = env.reset()
# Run a thousand random optimizations. Each step of the
# environment produces a new state observation and reward:
for _ in range(1000):
observation, reward, done, info = env.step(
env.action_space.sample()
# User selects action.
env.reset()
# Save output program:
env.write_bitcode("/tmp/output.bc")
Listing 1: Example of the CompilerGym environment API. A
CompilerGym environment builds on gym.Env, formulating
a compiler optimization task as a Markov Decision Process,
and provides additional compiler-speciﬁc functionality such as
saving the compiled program to disk.
Gym environment interface. Figure 1 shows the interaction
loop for the Gym environments. This allows researchers to
interact with important compiler optimization problems in
a familiar language and vocabulary with which many are
comfortable. The frontend is described in Section III.
Backend: CompilerGym uses a client-server architecture,
shown in Figure 2. This design provides separation of concerns
as systems developers can easily add support for new compiler
problems by implementing a simple Compilation Session
interface that comprises only four methods. The backend is
described in Section IV.
III. FRONTEND API AND TOOLS
This section describes CompilerGym’s user-facing tools. We
ﬁrst describe the core formulation of compiler optimization
problems as Gym environments, then the API extensions and
other features tailored for compiler optimization research.
A. OpenAI Gym Environments
We formulate compiler optimization tasks as Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) and expose them as environments using
the popular OpenAI Gym interface. A Gym environment
comprises ﬁve ingredients:
1) An Action Space deﬁnes the set of possible actions that
can be taken from a given MDP state. In CompilerGym, action
spaces can be composed of discrete choices (e.g. selecting an
optimization pass from a ﬁnite set), continuous choices (e.g.
selecting a function inlining threshold), or any combination of
the two. The action space can change between states, such as
in the case where one optimization precludes another.
2) An Observation Space from which observations of the
MDP state are drawn. CompilerGym environments support
multiple observation types such as numeric feature vectors
generated by compiler analyses, control ﬂow graphs, and strings
of compiler IR. Each environment exposes multiple observation
spaces that can be selected from or composed.
3) A Reward Space deﬁnes the range of values generated by
the reward function, used to provide feedback on the quality of
a chosen action, either positive or negative. In CompilerGym,
reward spaces can be nondeterministic (e.g. change in program
runtime), platform speciﬁc (e.g. change in the size of a compiled
binary), or entirely deterministic.
4) A Step operator applies an action at the current state and
responds with a new observation, a reward, and a signal that
indicates whether the MDP has reached a terminal state. Not
all compiler optimization problems have terminal states.
5) A Reset operator resets the environment to an initial state
and returns an initial observation.
Listing 1 demonstrates how the core CompilerGym API
is used. A make() function instantiates a subclass of the
gym.Env environment that represents a particular compiler optimization task. The Gym interface is self describing: the action
space and observation spaces are described by action_space
and observation_space attributes, respectively. This enables
CompilerGym environments to be integrated directly with
techniques that are compatible with other Gym environments.
Listing 2 shows one such integration.
In interacting with an environment the user’s goal is to
select the sequence of actions that maximizes the cumulative
reward. Although Gym is designed primarily for reinforcement
learning research, it makes no assumptions about the structure
of user code and therefore can be used with a wide range of
approaches. For a single environment, the best sequence of
actions may be found through search. To generalize a solution
that works for unseen environments, a policy is learned to map
from observation to optimal actions, or a Q-function is learned
to give expected cumulative rewards for state-action pairs.
B. API Extensions for Compiler Optimization
The advantage of the Gym interface is that it is simple and
can be used across a range of domains. We supplement this
interface with additional APIs that are speciﬁc to compilers.
1) Benchmark Datasets: An instance of a compiler optimization environment requires a program to optimize. We refer to
these programs as benchmarks, and collections of benchmarks
as datasets. We designed an API to manage datasets that
efﬁciently scales to millions of benchmarks, and a mechanism
for downloading datasets from public servers. This API supports
program generators (like CSmith ), compiling user-supplied
code to use as benchmarks, iterating and looping over sets
of benchmarks, and specifying an input dataset and execution
environment for running compiled binaries.
2) State Serialization: We provide a mechanism to save and
restore environment state that includes the benchmark, action
history, and cumulative reward.
3) Validating States: Serialized states can be replayed to
validate that results are reproducible. We use this to ensure
reproducibility of the underlying compiler infrastructure. For
import compiler_gym
from ray import tune
from ray.rllib.agents.ppo import PPOTrainer
def make_env(config):
# Create an LLVM environment using the Autophase
# observation space and instruction count rewards.
env = compiler_gym.make("llvm-autophase-ic-v0")
# Optionally create a time limit for the RL agent.
env = compiler_gym.wrappers.TimeLimit(env, 45)
# Loop over the NPB benchmark suite for training.
dataset = env.datasets["benchmark://npb-v0"]
env = compiler_gym.wrappers.CycleOverBenchmarks(
env, dataset.benchmarks()
return env
tune.register_env("CompilerGym", make_env)
tune.run(PPOTrainer, config={"env": "CompilerGym"})
Listing 2: Using RLlib to train a reinforcement learning
agent on one of the CompilerGym environments.
example, we detected a nondeterminism bug in an LLVM
optimization pass1; we removed this pass from CompilerGym.
4) Validating Semantics: For runnable benchmarks, we provide an additional layer of results validation that automatically
applies a differential testing regime to detect correctness
errors in the compiled binaries. For the LLVM environments we
also integrate LLVM’s address, thread, and undeﬁned behavior
sanitizers to detect program logic errors.
5) Lazy and batched operations: Typically, the observation
and reward spaces of a Gym environment are determined at
construction time, and each step() operation takes a single
action and produces a single observation and reward. We extend
this method in CompilerGym environments to optionally accept
multiple actions, and a list of observation and reward spaces
to compute and return. Passing multiple actions enables the
backend to more efﬁciently execute them in a single batch
and return a ﬁnal state and reward, evaluated in Section VII-A.
Specifying the observation and reward spaces as arguments to
step() enables efﬁcient lazy computation of observations or
rewards in cases where the values are not needed at every step,
or to ﬂexibly change observation and reward space during the
liftetime of an environment.
6) Lightweight deep copy operator: CompilerGym environments provide a fork() operator that efﬁciently creates
independent deep copies of environment states. This can be
used to optimize backtracking or other techniques that require
frequently evaluating a common subsequence of actions. For
example, a greedy search can be implemented by creating n
forks of an environment with an n-dimensional action space,
running a single action in each fork, and selecting the one
which produced the greatest reward. Backtracking is especially
expensive in compilers because most actions have no “undo”.
C. Customizing Environment Behavior
The Gym library deﬁnes environment wrapper classes
to mutate the MDP formulation of a wrapped environment.
1LLVM’s -gvn-sink pass contains an operation that sorts a vector of
basic block pointers by address, causing inconsistent output.
Fig. 3: CompilerGym Explorer, a website that enables users
to interact with the LLVM phase ordering environment. The
left side of the page renders the phase ordering search space
as an interactive tree; the right side of the page visualizes the
program features and their trends.
CompilerGym provides an additional suite of environment
wrappers for a broad range of compiler research uses. These
include specifying a subset of command line ﬂags to use in an
action space, iterating over a suite of benchmarks, and deﬁning
derived observation spaces such as using custom compiler
analyses on compiler IR. These wrappers can be composed.
Listing 2 shows integration with the popular RLlib library
using two of these wrappers.
D. Command Line Tools
We include a complete set of command line tools for
CompilerGym, including scripts to run parallelized searches,
replay and validate results from past runs, and an interactive
shell that includes inline documentation and tab completion,
enabling users to interact with the compiler optimization
environments without writing any code.
E. Web Service and CompilerGym Explorer
We designed a REST API to enable CompilerGym environments to be used over a network, and CompilerGym Explorer1,
a web frontend that makes it easy to navigate compiler
optimization spaces, implemented using React. CompilerGym
Explorer presents a visualization of the search tree, shown in
Figure 3, and asynchronously calls the REST API to update
the tree in real time as the user interacts with it.
A key feature of the tool is to visualize not only the current
state, but also historical trends of the rewards and observation
metrics. This allows users to easily pinpoint interesting actions
in a large search tree and trigger new explorations. We expect
this to be valuable for feature engineering, debugging the
behavior of agents, and as a general educational tool.
1Available at: 
benchmark_uri: str
actions: int[]
state_id: sha1
end_of_episode: bool
rewards: ﬂoat[]
state_id: sha1
compressed_ir: bytes
instcounts: int[]
Observations
state_id: sha1
action: int
next_state_id: sha1
rewards: ﬂoat[]
StateTransitions
Fig. 4: The relational database schema for state transitions
in LLVM environments. Fields that comprise unique primary
keys are emboldened. We are releasing an instance of this
database comprising over 1M unique states that can be used
for pre-training, off-policy learning, or general ofﬂine analysis.
F. State Transition Dataset
We designed a relational database schema to log the state
transitions of CompilerGym environments for later ofﬂine
analysis, shown in Figure 4. A Steps table records every
unique action sequence for a particular benchmark and a hash of
the environment state. An Observations table stores various
representations of each unique state, indexed by state hash.
A StateTransitions table encodes the unique transitions
between states and the rewards received for each.
We implemented a wrapper class for CompilerGym environments that asynchronously populates the Steps and
Observations tables of a state transition database upon every
step of an environment. A post-processing script de-duplicates
and populates the StateTransitions table.
We are releasing a large instance of this database (50+GB)
which contains over 1M unique LLVM environment states,
suitable for a range of ofﬂine supervised and unsupervised
learning tasks. We evaluate an example usage in Section VII-F.
IV. BACKEND RUNTIME AND INTERFACE
The CompilerGym backend comprises a CompilationSession
interface for integrating compilers and a common client-server
runtime that map this interface to the Gym API.
A. The CompilationSession Interface
CompilerGym is designed for seamless compiler integration.
The integration centers around implementing a state machine to
interact with the compiler called a CompilationSession. A CompilationSession exposes actions and observations using a simple
schema and must implement two methods, apply_action
and get_observation, as shown in Figure 5. We provide
CompilationSession interfaces for Python and C++. Listing 3
demonstrates an example implementation.
B. Compiler Service Runtime
A common runtime maps implementations of the CompilationSession interface (Listing 3) to the Gym API (Listing 1).
This runtime is shared by all compiler integrations and is
architected to be performant and scalable. The design is
Fig. 5: A graphical representation of the CompilationSession
integration. To add a new compiler to CompilerGym, users
need only deﬁne the boxes highlighted in blue. Grey boxes
demonstrate the integration of the CompilerSession with a
typical reinforcement learning loop.
resilient to failures, crashes, inﬁnite loops, and nondeterministic
behavior in backend compiler services. All compiler service
operations have appropriate timeouts, graceful error handling,
or retry loops. Improvements to the runtime can be made
without changing compiler integration or user code.
A key design point of the CompilerGym runtime is that the
service that provides the compiler integration is isolated in a
separate process to the user’s Python interpreter. The Python
interpreter invokes operations on the compiler service through
Remote Procedure Calls (RPCs). The beneﬁts of this are fault
tolerance and recovery in cases where the compiler crashes or
terminates abruptly; support for compiling on a different system
architecture than the host by running the compiler service on
a remote machine; and scalability as the expensive compute
work is ofﬂoaded, enabling many user threads to interact with
separate compiler environments without contention on Python’s
global interpreter lock.
V. ENVIRONMENTS
This section describes three compiler integrations shipped
in CompilerGym.
A. LLVM Phase Ordering
LLVM is a modular compiler infrastructure used
throughout academia and industry. After parsing an input source
program to a language-agnostic Intermediate Representation
(IR), the LLVM optimizer applies a conﬁgurable pipeline of
optimization passes to the IR. The selection and ordering of
compiler optimizations – known as phase ordering – greatly
impacts the quality of the ﬁnal binary and has been the focus
of much research , .
We include a phase ordering environment in CompilerGym
as an example of a challenging, high-dimensional optimization
problem in which signiﬁcant gains can be achieved.
#include "compiler_gym/service/CompilationSession.h"
#include "compiler_gym/service/runtime/Runtime.h"
using namespace compiler_gym;
struct MyCompilationSession: public CompilationSession{
vector<ActionSpace> getActionSpaces() {...}
vector<ObservationSpace> getObservationSpaces() {...}
Status init(
const ActionSpace& actionSpace,
const Benchmark& benchmark) {...}
Status applyAction(
const Action& action,
bool& endOfEpisode,
bool& actionSpaceChanged) {...}
Status setObservation(
const ObservationSpace& observationSpace,
Observation& observation) {...}
int main(int argc, char** argv) {
runtime::createAndRunService<MyCompilationSession>(
argc, argv, "My compiler service");
Listing 3: A C++ implementation of the CompilationSession
interface to add support for a new compiler. Method bodies
are omitted for brevity. There is an equivalent API for Python.
Actions: The action space consists of a discrete choice from
124 optimization passes extracted automatically from LLVM.
There is no maximal episode length as episodes can run forever
(except in the case of a compiler bug leading to an error), the
user must estimate when no further gains can be achieved and
no further actions should be taken. For any particular program
the optimal phase ordering may omit or repeat actions.
Rewards: We support optimizing for three metrics: code
size, which is the number of instructions in the IR; binary
size, which is the size of the .text section in the compiled
object ﬁle; and runtime, which is the wall time of the compiled
program when run using a speciﬁc conﬁguration of inputs
on the machine hosting the CompilerGym backend. When
used as a reward signal each metric returns the change in
value between the previous environment state and the new
environment state. Each reward signal can optionally be scaled
against the gains achieved by the compiler’s default phase
orderings, -Oz for size reduction and -O3 for runtime. Code
size is platform-independent and determinsitic, binary size
is platform-dependent and deterministic, and runtime is both
platform-speciﬁc and nondeterministic.
Observations: We provide ﬁve observation spaces for LLVM
ranging from counter-based numeric feature vectors to
sequential language models up to graph-based program
representations . See Table III for a comparison.
Datasets: We provide millions of programs for evaluation,
summarized in Table I. We aggregate C, C++, OpenCL,
and Fortran programs from benchmark suites in a variety
of domains, open source programs, and synthetic program
generators. Accessing these datasets within CompilerGym is
as simple as specifying the name of the dataset and optionally
the name of a speciﬁc benchmark. Presently only cBench 
and Csmith support optimizing for runtime.
Number of Benchmarks
Autophase 
CompilerGym
AnghaBench 
cBench 
CHStone 
CLgen 
GitHub 
Linux kernel
MiBench 
POJ-104 
TensorFlow 
Csmith 
llvm-stress 
Proprietary
TABLE I: LLVM benchmark datasets included in Compiler-
Gym, compared to the number of benchmarks used in two
recent machine learning works. † denotes random program
generators with 32-bit seeds. Excluding the program generators,
the total number of benchmarks is 1,145,499.
B. GCC Flag Tuning
We include an environment that exposes the optimization
space deﬁned by GCC’s command line ﬂags. The environment
works with any version of GCC from 5 up to and including the
current version at time of writing, 11.2. The environment uses
Docker images to enable hassle free install and consistency
across machines. Alternatively, any local installation of the
compiler can be used. This selection is made by simple string
speciﬁer of the path or docker image name. The only change
that an RL agent needs to make to work with GCC instead of
LLVM is to call env = gym.make("gcc-v0"), instead of
using "llvm-v0".
While the LLVM phase ordering action space is unbounded
as passes may be executed forever, the number of GCC
command line conﬁgurations is bounded. GCC’s action space
consists of all the available optimization ﬂags and parameters
that can be speciﬁed from the command line. These are automatically extracted from the “help” documentation of whichever
GCC version is used. For GCC 11.2.01, the optimization space
includes 502 options:
• the six -O<n> ﬂags, e.g. -O0, -O3, -Ofast, -Os.
• 242 ﬂags such as -fpeel-loops, each of which may be
missing, present, or negated (e.g. -fno-peel-loops).
Some of these ﬂags may take integer or enumerated
arguments which are also included in the space.
• 260 parameterized command line ﬂags such as --param
inline-heuristics-hint-percent=<number>. The
number of options for each of these varies. Most take
numbers, a few take enumerated values.
This gives a ﬁnite optimization space with a modest size of
approximately 104461. Earlier versions of GCC report their
parameter spaces less clearly and so the tool ﬁnds smaller
111.2.0 is the latest stable version of GCC at time of writing.
for a in 1048576 : L0 [thread]
for a’ in 1 : L1
for a’’ in 1 : L2
%0[a] <- read()
for a’’ in 1 : L4
%1[a] <- read()
for a’’ in 1 : L6
%2[a] <- add(%0, %1)
for a’’ in 1 : L8
%3[a] <- write(%2)
Listing 4: An example loop tree in the loop tool environment.
spaces when pointed at those. For example, on GCC 5, the
optimization space is only 10430.
Actions: We provide two action spaces that can be used
interchangeably. The ﬁrst directly exposes the optimization
space via a list of integers, each encoding the choice for one
option with a known cardinality. A second action space is
intended to make it easy for RL tools that operate on a ﬂat
list of categorical actions. For every option with a cardinality
of fewer than ten, we provide actions that directly set the
choice for that action. For options with greater cardinalities
we provide actions that add and subtract 1, 10, 100, and 1000
to the choice integer corresponding to the option. For GCC
11.2.0, this creates a set of 2281 actions that can modify the
choices of the current state.
Rewards: We provide two deterministic reward signals: the
sizes in bytes of the assembly or the object code.
Observations: We provide four observation spaces: a numeric instruction count observation, the Register Transfer
Language code at the end of compilation, the assembly code
as text, and the object code as a binary.
C. CUDA Loop Nest Code Generation
Manually tuning CUDA code requires sweeping over many
parameters. Due to the sheer size of the tunable space, the
problem of generating fast CUDA is well suited for automated
techniques , . As a ﬂexible compilation environment,
CompilerGym is well equipped to handle compilers for tuning
GPU workloads. We integrated loop_tool, a simple dense
linear algebra compiler . loop_tool takes a minimalist
approach to linear algebra representations by decomposing
standard BLAS-like routines into a DAG of n-dimensional
applications of arithmetic primitives. The DAG is then annotated with three pieces of information about loop ordering: the
order in which loops are emitted, the nesting structure of each
loop, and the reuse of loops by subsequent operations. This is
lowered to a loop tree that can be annotated with which loop
should be run in parallel. These four annotations across a slew
of point-wise operations represent a large optimization space.
Actions: We map interacting with the loop structure for
point-wise additions to a cursor-based discrete action space.
At any point the cursor will refer to an individual loop in the
loop hierarchy and will have an associated “mode” to control
either moving the cursor or modifying the current loop. There
is an action “toggle mode” to swap between these two. When
moving the cursor, the actions “up” and “down” will shift
the cursor inward and outward respectively. When modifying
the current loop, the action “up” will increase its size by
one. This is done by changing the size of the parent loop
to accommodate the new inner size. Often this induces tail
logic, which is handled automatically. Finally, any loop can
be changed to be threaded. This will schedule loop execution
across CUDA threads which may span multiple warps or even
multiple streaming multiprocessors. A second, extended action
space allows loops to be split, creating a larger hierarchy.
Rewards: The environment reward signal is a measurement
of ﬂoating point operations per second (FLOPs) achieved by
benchmarking the loop nest in the given state. This is both
platform dependent and non-deterministic due to the noise
involved in benchmarking.
Observations: There are two observations spaces: action
state, which describes the cursor position and mode, and loop
tree structure, which is a textual dump of the current state of
the loop_tool environment, as shown in Listing 4.
VI. IMPLEMENTATION
CompilerGym is implemented in a mixture of Python and
C++. The core runtime comprises 12k lines of code. The
compiler integrations comprise 6k lines of code for LLVM,
3k for GCC and 0.5k for loop_tool. CompilerGym is open
source and available under a permissive license.
Binary Releases: Periodic versioned releases are made from
a stable branch. We ship pre-compiled release binaries for
macOS and Linux (Ubuntu 18.04, Fedora 28, Debian 10 or
newer equivalents) that can be installed as Python wheels.
Documentation: Our public facing documentation includes
full API references for Python and C++, a getting started
guide, FAQ, and code samples demonstrating integration with
RLlib , implementations of exhaustive, random, and greedy
searches, and Q-learning and Actor Critic .
Testing: We have a comprehensive unittest suite with 85.8%
branch coverage that is run on every code change across a test
matrix of all supported operating systems and Python versions.
Additionally, a suite of fuzz and stress tests are ran daily by
continuous integration services to proactively identify issues.
VII. EVALUATION
We evaluate CompilerGym ﬁrst by comparing the computational efﬁciency of the environments to prior works. We then
show how the simplicity of the CompilerGym APIs enables
large-scale autotuning and reinforcement learning experiments
to be engineered with remarkably few lines of code.
Experimental Platforms: Results in this section are obtained
from shared compute servers equipped with Intel Xeon 8259CL
CPUs, NVIDIA GP100 GPUs, and ﬂash storage.
A. Computational Efﬁciency
A key design goal of CompilerGym is to provide the best
performance possible, enabling researchers to train larger models, try more conﬁgurations, and get better results in less time.
We evaluate the computational efﬁciency of CompilerGym’s
LLVM phase ordering environment and compare to two prior
works: Autophase and OpenTuner .
Step time (ms, log axis)
Probability
Fig. 6: Cumulative density plot of step times for each of the 23
programs in cBench . Each line shows a different program.
The difference between the median step times of the fastest
program (crc32) and the slowest (ghostbench) is 560.3×.
We use code size rewards signals for all three platforms
and the observation space used in for Autophase and
CompilerGym; OpenTuner is a black box search framework
and so does not provide observation spaces. We measure the
computational efﬁciencies of each environment by measuring
the wall times of operations during 1M random trajectories.
For CompilerGym, which uses a client-server architecture, we
also measure the initial server startup time.
Table II shows the results. CompilerGym achieves a much
higher throughput than Autophase while offering the same
interface, observation space, and reward signal. This is enabled
by CompilerGym’s client-server architecture. After initially
reading and parsing the bitcode ﬁle from disk, the Compiler-
Gym server incrementally applies an individual optimization
pass at each step. In contrast, Autophase and OpenTuner must,
at each step, read and parse the IR, apply the entire sequence
of passes, and then serialize the result. OpenTuner, which
was designed for uses where the search time is dominated by
compilation time, has the highest environment initialization
cost, as it requires several disk operations and the creation
of a database. The CompilerGym server maintains a cache of
parsed unoptimized bitcodes that enables an amortized O(1)
cost of environment initialization.
The distribution of operation wall times depends on the action
being performed and the program being optimized. Figure 6
shows the wide distribution of wall times within the benchmarks
of a single dataset.
B. Computational Efﬁciency of Observation Spaces
This experiment evaluates the computational efﬁciency of
the LLVM environment observation and reward spaces. We
recorded 1M wall times of each using random trajectories.
Table III summarizes the results. There is a 192× range
in observation space times, demonstrating a tradeoff between
observation space computational cost and ﬁdelity; and 4727×
range in reward space times, motivating the development of
fast approximate proxy rewards and cost models , .
C. Autotuning LLVM Phase Ordering
We evaluate various autotuning techniques on the LLVM
phase ordering task to demonstrate the ease and speed of
CompilerGym. We use the following autotuning techniques:
Greedy search, which at each step evaluates all possible actions
Service Startup
Environment Initialization
Environment Step
Autophase 
OpenTuner 
CompilerGym
CompilerGym-batched
TABLE II: Computational costs of CompilerGym operations compared to prior works when computing the same actions,
observations, and rewards. After paying a one-off startup penalty, CompilerGym is 27× faster than an equivalent prior work.
This much higher throughput enables training larger models with larger datasets. Cost denotes average-case time complexities
wrt. n the size of the program being compiled and m the number of actions in the episode. † denotes amortized cost, achieved
by caching initial environment states. p50 and p99 denote the 50th and 99th percentile of wall times, respectively. µ denotes
the arithmetic mean wall time. We also measured the throughput of CompilerGym when batches of actions are processed in a
single environment step, denoted CompilerGym-batched above. This improves throughput by a further 2.9× by reducing RPC
round trips, but loses intermediate observations and rewards. Measurements taken from 1M randon trajectories, evenly divided
across all benchmark datasets.
70-D int64 vector
Autophase 
56-D int64 vector
inst2vec 
200-D ﬂoat vector list
ProGraML 
Directed multigraph
Int64 count
Binary size
Int64 byte count
Float wall time
TABLE III: Computational costs of the observation and
reward spaces of LLVM environments from 1M wall time
measurements, evenly divided across all benchmark datasets.
p50 and p99 denote the 50th and 99th percentile, respectively,
and µ denotes the arithmetic mean.
and selects the action which provides the greatest reward,
terminating once no positive reward can be achieved by any
action; LaMCTS , an extension of Monte Carlo Tree
Search that partitions the search space on the ﬂy to
focus on important search regions ; Nevergrad and
OpenTuner , two black box optimization frameworks that
contain ensembles of techniques; and Random Search, which
selects actions randomly until a conﬁgurable number of steps
have elapsed without a positive reward.
We run single threaded versions of each autotuning technique
on each benchmark in the cBench suite for one hour.
Hyperparameters for all techniques were tuned on a validation
set of 50 Csmith benchmarks. We evaluate each technique
when optimizing for three different targets: code size, binary
size, and runtime. For runtime we use the median of three
measurements to provide the reward signals during search, and
the median of 30 measurements for ﬁnal reported values. Each
experiment was repeated 10 times.
The standard interface exposed by CompilerGym makes
it simple to integrate with third party autotuning libraries or
to develop new autotuning approaches. Table IV shows the
number of lines of code required to integrate each search
technique, and the performance achieved.
Phase ordering is challenging because the optimization space
is unbounded, high-dimensional, and contains sparse rewards.
Nevertheless, autotuning – when furnished with a sufﬁciently
binary size
Greedy Search
LaMCTS 
Nevergrad 
OpenTuner 
Random Search
TABLE IV: Lines of code required to integrate or implement
autotuning techniques for the LLVM phase ordering task, and
performance achieved when optimizing for three targets on
the cBench suite given a 1hr search budget. Results are
compared against -Oz for size reduction and -O3 for runtime.
generous search budget – outperforms the default compiler
heuristics by tailoring the conﬁguration to each benchmark.
We note that the optimal conﬁguration differs between all
benchmarks and optimization targets.
D. Autotuning GCC Command Line Flags
For GCC we show a different aspect of the CompilerGym.
For these experiments we explore the GCC environment’s
high-dimensional action space using a number of simple
search techniques. These experiments are performed using
GCC version 11.2.0 in Docker. That version of GCC has 502
optimization settings that can be selected. We evaluate three
search techniques on the the CHstone suite:
1) Random search. A random list of 502 integers from the
allowable range is selected at each step.
2) Hill climbing search. At each step a small number of
random changes are made to the current choices. If this
improves the objective then the current state is accepted and
future steps modify from there.
3) Genetic algorithm (GA). A population of 100 random choices is maintained. We use the Python library
geneticalgorithm with its default parameters.
Table V shows the geometric mean of the object code size
objective across the benchmarks in CHstone , averaged
over 3 searches. Each search was allowed 1000 compilations.
Lines of code
Geomean binary size
Genetic Algorithm 
Hill Climbing
Random Search
TABLE V: Lines of code required to integrate or implement
autotuning techniques for the GCC ﬂag tuning task, and
performance achieved when optimizing the CHstone suite ,
given a search budget of 1000 compilations per benchmark.
Results are compared against -Os.
Fig. 7: A sweep over a particular conﬁguration in the CompilerGym provided search space for point-wise addition on a
GPU using loop_tool to generate CUDA.
E. Autotuning CUDA Loop Nests
The loop_tool environment provides an easily accessible
interface to being exploring the landscape of GPU optimizations.
Tuning a simple space by searching threading and then sizing
the inner loop reaches 73.5% of theoretical peak performance
on our GP100 test hardware (∼6e10 FLOPs or ∼750GB/s for
two 4-byte ﬂoating point reads and one write), and parity with
PyTorch performance on the same operation across a variety
of problem sizes. Figure 7 shows the results for different loop
conﬁgurations, demonstrating potentially useful hardware and
compiler characteristics, notably a drop in performance near
100k threads.
F. Learning a Cost Model using the State Transition Dataset
Auxiliary tasks are commonly used in reinforcement learning to produce better representation learning and help with
downstream tasks , . This experiment demonstrates
using the State Transition Dataset (Section III-F) to learn a
cost model of instruction count from a graph representation of
program state.
We implemented a Gated Graph Neural Network in
PyTorch and used Mean Squared Error loss to train a
regressor to predict the instruction count of a program after
two rounds of message passing on the PROGRAML graph
representation built into CompilerGym. We trained on 80% of
the State Transition Database by iterating over pairs of (graph,
instruction count) from the database. We used the remaining
20% of the database as a validation set. Figure 8 shows the
convergence of the neural network. The network achieves a
relative error of 0.025, while a naive mean prediction scores
Fig. 8: Predicting program instruction using a Graph Neural
Networks trained on CompilerGym’s State Transition Dataset.
This shows performance on a holdout validation set as a
function of the number of training epochs.
Geomean code size reduction
Test Dataset
IMPALA 
AnghaBench 
cBench 
CHStone 
CLgen 
Csmith 
GitHub 
Linux kernel
llvm-stress 
MiBench 
POJ-104 
TensorFlow 
TABLE VI: Comparison of four reinforcement learning algorithms, trained for 100k episodes on Csmith programs,
when evaluated on datasets from a range of program domains.
The programs used for testing on Csmith are different from
those used for training. Results are compared to -Oz.
G. Reinforcement Learning for LLVM Phase Ordering
CompilerGym offers seamless integration with third party
reinforcement learning frameworks. For example, by changing
a single parameter value in Listing 2 we can use any of the
26 reinforcement learning algorithms included in RLlib .
We use CompilerGym to replicate the LLVM phase ordering
environment used in . Speciﬁcally: we ﬁx episode lengths
to 45 steps, use the same observation space comprising a
feature vector concatenated with a histogram of the agent’s
previous actions, and we use a subset of the full action space1.
We note that each of these modiﬁcations to the base LLVM
environment can be achieved using the wrapper classes built
into CompilerGym (Section III-C). Our environment differs
from in that we use a code size reward signal rather than
simulated cycle counts.
We train three different reinforcement learning algorithms
for 100k episodes and periodically evaluate performance on a
holdout validation set. We use Csmith to generate both training
and validation sets, as in .
Table VI shows the performance of the trained agents when
evaluated on a random 50 programs from each of the datasets
available out of the box in CompilerGym. 3 of the 4 algorithms
1We use 42 actions (out of 124 total) rather than the 45 actions used in 
as three of the actions have been removed in recent versions of LLVM.
Training Set
Csmith 
Github 
TensorFlow 
Csmith 
Github 
TensorFlow 
TABLE VII: CompilerGym includes millions of programs to
train on that can be selected by simply specifying the name of
the dataset(s) to use. Here we cross-validate the generalization
performance of a PPO agent by varying the training and
test sets. The row indicates the dataset used for training, the
column indicates the dataset used for testing. The values are
geomean code size reduction relative to -Oz.
achieve positive results when generalizing to programs within
the same domain (Csmith), but only PPO is able to achieve
a positive score on two of the 13 other datasets. This highlights
the challenge of generalization across program domains.
H. Effect of Training Set on RL
The generalization of reinforcement learning agents across
domains is the subject of active research , , . As
demonstrated in the previous experiment, the performance of
agents trained on one dataset can differ wildly on datasets
from other domains. We evaluate the effect of training set on
generalization by training a PPO agent on different training
sets and then evaluating their generalization performance on test
sets from different domains. All other experimental parameters
are as per the previous experiment.
Table VII shows the results. As can be seen, each algorithm
performs best when generalizing to benchmarks from within
the same dataset, suggesting the importance of training on
benchmarks across a wide range of program domains.
I. Effect of Program Representation on Learning
Representation learning and feature engineering is an area
of much research , , . CompilerGym environments
provide multiple state representations for each environment.
We evaluate the performance of two different program representations, and their performance when concatenated with a
histogram of the agent’s previous actions, as used in . We
use the same experimental setup as in the prior sections.
The results are shown in Figure 9. In both cases stronger
performance is achieved when coupling the program representation with a histogram of the agent’s previous actions.
The Autophase representation encodes more attributes of the
structure of programs than InstCount and achieves greater
performance. We believe that representation learning is one of
the most exciting areas for future research, and CompilerGym
provides the supporting infrastructure for this research.
VIII. RELATED WORK
We present a suite of tools for compiler optimization research.
Other compiler research tools include OpenTuner and
YaCoS , autotuning frameworks that include an ensemble
of techniques for compiler optimizations; cTuning , a
framework for distributing autotuning results; TenSet and
#. training episodes (log)
Mean codesize reduction
Autophase w. hist
InstCount w. hist
Fig. 9: The convergence rate and ﬁnal performance of learned
agents depends on the observation space. CompilerGym
includes several observation spaces out of the box. By changing
one line of code we trained four PPO agents on different
observation spaces. This plot shows the performance on a
holdout validation set as a function of the number of training
episodes. We applied a Gaussian ﬁlter (σ = 5) to aid in
visualizing the trends.
LS-CAT , large-scale performance datasets suitable for
ofﬂine learning; and ComPy-Learn , a library of program
representations for LLVM. CompilerGym has a broader set
of features than these prior works, providing several compiler
problems, program representations, optimization targets, and
ofﬂine datasets all in a single package.
There is a growing body of research that applies AI
techniques to compilers optimizations . Many approaches
have been proposed to phase ordering, including collaborative
ﬁltering , design space exploration , and Bayesian
Networks . Even removing passes from standard optimization pipelines has been shown to sometimes improve
performance . Autophase and CORL use reinforcement learning to tackle the LLVM phase ordering problem.
Both works identify generalization across programs as a key
challenge. Our work aims to accelerate progress on this problem
by combining several observation spaces with millions of
training programs to serve as a platform for research.
Other reinforcement learning compiler works include
MLGO which learns a policy for a function inling heuristic,
NeuroVectorizer which formulates instruction vectorization
as single-step environments, and PolyGym which targets
Polyhedral loop transformations. Compared to these works, the
search spaces in CompilerGym environments are far larger.
CompilerGym is not limited to reinforcement learning.
Prior work has cast compiler optimization tasks as supervised
learning problems using classiﬁcation to select optimization
decisions , or regression to learn cost models , ,
 . CompilerGym is as an ideal platform for gathering the
data to train and evaluate these approaches, including both
ofﬂine datasets and the infrastructure to generate new ones.
IX. CONCLUSIONS
We aim to lower the barrier-to-entry to compiler optimization
research. We present CompilerGym, a suite of tools that
removes the signiﬁcant engineering investment required try out
new ideas on production compiler problems.