HAL Id: pasteur-01202629
 
Submitted on 21 Sep 2015
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of scientific research documents, whether they are published or not.
The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
Critical assessment of methods of protein structure
prediction (CASP)–round x.
John Moult, Krzysztof Fidelis, Andriy Kryshtafovych, Torsten Schwede, Anna
Tramontano
To cite this version:
John Moult, Krzysztof Fidelis, Andriy Kryshtafovych, Torsten Schwede, Anna Tramontano. Critical assessment of methods of protein structure prediction (CASP)–round x.. Proteins - Structure,
Function and Bioinformatics, 2014, 82 Suppl 2, pp.1-6. ￿10.1002/prot.24452￿. ￿pasteur-01202629￿
Critical assessment of methods of protein structure prediction
(CASP) — round x
John Moult1,*, Krzysztof Fidelis2, Andriy Kryshtafovych2, Torsten Schwede3, and Anna
Tramontano4
1Institute for Bioscience and Biotechnology Research, and Department of Cell Biology and
Molecular Genetics, University of Maryland, Rockville, Maryland 20850 2Genome Center,
University of California, Davis, California 95616 3University of Basel, Biozentrum & SIB Swiss
Institute of Bioinformatics, Basel, Switzerland 4Department of Physics and Istituto Pasteur-
Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti, Sapienza University of Rome, 00185 Rome, Italy
This article is an introduction to the special issue of the journal PROTEINS, dedicated to the tenth
Critical Assessment of Structure Prediction (CASP) experiment to assess the state of the art in
protein structure modeling. The article describes the conduct of the experiment, the categories of
prediction included, and outlines the evaluation and assessment procedures. The 10 CASP
experiments span almost 20 years of progress in the field of protein structure modeling, and there
have been enormous advances in methods and model accuracy in that period. Notable in this
round is the first sustained improvement of models with refinement methods, using molecular
dynamics. For the first time, we tested the ability of modeling methods to make use of sparse
experimental three-dimensional contact information, such as may be obtained from new
experimental techniques, with encouraging results. On the other hand, new contact prediction
methods, though holding considerable promise, have yet to make an impact in CASP testing. The
nature of CASP targets has been changing in recent CASPs, reflecting shifts in experimental
structural biology, with more irregular structures, more multi-domain and multi-subunit structures,
and less standard versions of known folds. When allowance is made for these factors, we continue
to see steady progress in the overall accuracy of models, particularly resulting from improvement
of non-template regions.
CASP; community wide experiment; protein structure prediction
© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
*Corresponding author: John Moult, Institute for Bioscience and Biotechnology Research and Department of Cell Biology and
Molecular Genetics, University of Maryland, 9600 Gudelsky Drive, Rockville, MD 20850. .
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Proteins. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 13.
 
Proteins. 2014 February ; 82(0 2): 1–6. doi:10.1002/prot.24452.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
INTRODUCTION
This article is an introduction to the special issue of the journal Proteins reporting the results
of the tenth Critical Assessment of Structure Prediction (CASP) experiment. CASP is an
organization that conducts community-wide experiments to measure the state-of-the-art in
modeling of protein structure from amino acid sequence. The core principle of CASP is fully
blinded testing of structure prediction methods, and that is what CASP has been doing every
2 years, since 1994. The experiment covers an approximately 9-month period. Sequences of
proteins for which the structure is about to be solved by X-ray or NMR methods are first
solicited from the experimental community. These sequences are distributed to registered
members of the modeling community, who submit models before there is any release of the
experimental data. Models are then evaluated by a battery of automated methods and
assessed by independent assessors.
Experimental structures are currently available for less than 1/1000th of the proteins for
which sequence is known, so modeling has a major role to play in providing structural
information for a wide range of biological problems.1,2 During the almost 20 years of the
CASP experiments the structure modeling field has changed enormously. In 1994, there
were only 229 unique protein folds known ( so that most sequences of
interest had no detectable homology to known structures, and could only be modeled by “ab
initio” methods. Such modeling was regarded as a “grand challenge” problem in
computational biology3 and it was expected that physics methods, together with a better
understanding of the process by which proteins fold, would lead to a solution. At that time it
was already very clear that, since structures with detectably similar sequences have closely
related structures, modeling by homology would be important, but there were relatively few
cases where an accurate model could be obtained, and therefore, the field was regarded as
largely of academic interest. At present, there are about 87,000 structures in the Protein
databank, and these span about 1393 folds, so that a homology model can be produced for in
excess of half of all protein domains of known sequence.4,5 Homology models vary greatly
in accuracy depending on a number of factors, and for that reason CASP has encouraged the
development of methods that can estimate the likely overall accuracy of a model and
accuracy at the individual amino acid level. That, together with testing of modeling methods
themselves, has led to wide acceptance of models as legitimate and well-characterized
sources of information on structure. Also important has been the emergence of robust online6 and off-line7–9 user-friendly modeling software packages, and the provision of
databases of models.10–12 The accuracy of homology models, as monitored by CASP, has
improved dramatically, through a combination of improved methods, larger databases of
structure and sequence, and feedback from the CASP process. Ab initio modeling methods
have also improved substantially, from a very low base in the first CASP experiment. It is
now not unusual to see topologically accurate models for small (<100 residues), regular, and
single domain non-template proteins.13 Very few new structures of such proteins are now
appearing, so this capability in itself does not find wide application. However, these
methods have become useful in building those parts of homology models that were not
easily obtained from a template, a key modeling area which has seen considerable advance
in recent CASPs.13 Physics and knowledge of the protein folding process have not played a
Moult et al.
Proteins. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
major role in these advances. Refinement of initial models is also an area where more
physics-based approaches are expected to contribute. CASP has focused on the issue of
refinement and encouraged members of the physics community to become involved, and
these efforts bore fruit in CASP10, as outlined later, and reported more in Ref. 14. CASP
also monitors progress in several other areas, particularly identification of disordered
regions in proteins, and the ability to predict three-dimensional (3D) contacts that can be
used as restraints in constructing 3D models. Specifics are outlined below, and reported
more fully in other articles in this issue. Particulars of the previous nine CASP experiments
can be found in the corresponding Proteins special issues.15–23
This article outlines the structure and conduct of the CASP10 experiment. It is followed by a
paper describing the procedures and model evaluation methods used by the CASP Prediction
Center.24 Next is a paper25 describing the CASP10 target proteins, guidelines for splitting
these into domain-based evaluation units, and general principles for assigning the relative
difficulty of constructing an accurate model in each case. Then there is a paper highlighting
some of the most challenging CASP10 targets from the perspective of members of the
experimental community who submitted targets.26
As is standard for four CASPs now, targets are divided into two categories of difficulty. One
category is for template-based modeling (TBM), where a relationship to one or more
experimentally determined structures could be identified, providing at least one modeling
template and often more. There is a paper from the assessment team for that class of
models.27 The second category is free modeling (FM), where there are either no usefully
related structures, or the relationship is so distant that it cannot be detected. As fewer and
fewer new folds are discovered experimentally, targets in the FM category have become
increasingly difficult to obtain. To address this problem, starting in December 2011, CASP
introduced a mechanism by which FM targets are continuously solicited from the
experimental community and immediately presented to the prediction community, in a
procedure known as CASP ROLL. The CASP10 FM assessment team evaluated models for
these targets together with the CASP FM targets from the CASP10 prediction season and
there is a paper describing their findings.28
Six other categories of modeling were evaluated. New in this CASP is a “contact-assisted”
category. Modeling methods have proven to be instrumental in solving structures based on
NMR data in the form of distance restraints or only chemical shift information,29 and new
experimental methods, using cross-linking30 and surface labeling,31 are also beginning to
provide sparse structural information. The idea in the CASP contact-assisted category is to
investigate how much experimental information is needed to deliver what level of model
accuracy, and to encourage the development of new methods for this purpose. A separate
article describes the outcome of the assessment of the 3D models built with the assistance of
sparse contact information.32
As in three recent CASPs, refinement of initial models was also included as a category.
Relatively fine scale tuning of models is the end game in modeling33 and is critical to the
production of final structures that rival experiment in accuracy. For this reason, refinement
receives special emphasis in CASP, including evaluation of the outcome by an independent
Moult et al.
Proteins. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
assessment team. In this category, selected best models submitted in the TBM category were
provided as starting structures, and participants were invited to see if they could improve
these. There is an article reporting the work of the assessment team in this category also.14
In experimental work of any kind, one is almost always obliged to provide estimates of
accuracy. In computer modeling of protein structures, in spite of very widely varying
accuracy, historically, that was not the case. Emphasis on this aspect of modeling over the
last four CASP experiments has led to development and testing of a number of quite
effective methods. An article describes the evaluation of these in CASP10.34
CASP continues to evaluate the effectiveness of methods for predicting which parts of a
protein do not exhibit a single 3D structure—that is, they are in some sense disordered.35
Although there has been little change in the accuracy of methods for six rounds of CASP,
their importance in the real world of modeling continues to increase. An article 36 describes
results for CASP10.
The identification of amino acid residues in proteins involved in binding small molecule
ligands can provide valuable hints for their functional characterization, as the function of a
protein often depends on specific interactions with other molecules. An article reports on the
evaluation of binding site prediction methods in CASP10.37
Finally, there is an article38 on the effectiveness of methods for predicting 3D contacts in
protein structures. These methods have always been considered potentially important in
structure modeling, though performance has not changed much recently. In the last 3 years a
number of new methods have been published,39 and the explosion of sequence data has also
facilitated the use of deeper alignments, the core input to most methods, leading to strong
renewed interest in the possibilities.
The assessment papers are followed by five papers from some of the more successful
modeling groups. As in CASP9, contributing modeling groups were asked to concentrate on
details of the methods rather than describing the results.
An additional article40 describes a method developed by the TBM assessment team to
objectively determine which parts of NMR experimental structures are sufficiently well
determined that it is reasonable to evaluate the accuracy of models.
The last article in the issue considers the results of this CASP experiment in the context of
the previous ones, and discusses progress.13 As always, the assessors’ articles are the most
important in the issue, and describe the state-of-the-art as they found it in CASP10.
THE CASP10 EXPERIMENT
The structure of the experiment was very similar to that of the earlier ones, described in
previous articles in this series.23 Participants registered for the experiment in two ways: as
human-expert teams, where a combination of computational methods and investigator
expertise may be used; or as servers, where methods are only computational and fully
automated, so that a target sequence is sent directly to a machine. Investigators may register
Moult et al.
Proteins. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
in both categories and limited additional groups may be registered by the same igroups to
allow for testing of different methods. The expert groups are allowed a longer time period
(typically 3 weeks vs. 72 hours for servers) between the release of a target and submitting a
prediction. There are now very few groups where significant human expertise is brought to
bear, and the longer period is primarily utilized in two ways—to make use of initial models
produced by the rapid server stage, and to perform longer calculations.
Information about “soon to be solved” structures was collected from the experimental
community and passed on to the modeling community. As is customary, the main CASP
prediction season lasted for 3 months, from May through July. The new ROLL arrangements
for template FM targets ran longer, from December 2011 until the end of the CASP
prediction season. Continuing the trend of recent CASPs, about 80% of regular CASP
targets were obtained from the structural genomics community, primarily the NIH Protein
Structure Initiative centers (the PSI, ROLL
targets had a higher fraction contributed by the broader structural biology community (11
out of 18). The ROLL experiment is continuing. The PDB now provides an ongoing system
for depositors to identify a structure as a CASP target, greatly helping the flow of the
Groups were limited to a maximum of five models per target, and were instructed that most
emphasis in assessment would be placed on the model they designated as the most accurate
(referred to as “model 1”), particularly for TBM. The models were compared with
experiment, using numerical evaluation techniques and expert assessment, and a meeting
was held to discuss the significance of the results.
MANAGEMENT AND ORGANIZATION
The CASP organization was essentially unchanged from CASP9, and fuller details can be
found in Ref. 23. The organizers are the authors of this article. One important change is the
addition of Torsten Schwede to the organization team, who joined immediately after the
CASP9 meeting. A discussion site (FORCASP) provides a forum for participants
(www.FORCASP.org). There is an advisory board composed of senior members of the
modeling community who advise the organizers on aspects of the CASP experiments and
related activities. A participants’ meeting during each CASP conference allows for more
direct interaction, including votes on issues of CASP policy. The Protein Structure
Prediction Center is responsible for all data management aspects of the experiment,
including the distribution of target information, collection of predictions, generation of
numerical evaluation data, developing tools for data analysis, data security, and maintenance
of a web site where all data are available. A corner stone of the CASP system is the use of
independent assessors to judge the quality of the models received, and interpretation in
terms of progress and bottlenecks.
TARGETS AND PARTICIPATION
In the main CASP experiment 114 protein sequences were released as modeling targets, of
which 53 were designated “all groups” (human and server) targets, 18 targets were
cancelled, leaving 96 where the experimental structures were available for evaluation and
Moult et al.
Proteins. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
assessment. In cases where significant domain movements where observed, or individual
domains were classified in different categories (FM, TBM), the targets were divided into
separate evaluation units. In all, 131 evaluation units were included. For 28 TBM domains,
selected models were released as starting points for the refinement exercise, and for 15 FM
or harder TBM domains, sets of contacts were released after the initial models had been
collected, to test the extent to which these could guide modeling.32
The level of participation in the CASP experiment remains high, with 217 registered groups
representing a large fraction of the relevant community.
COLLECTION AND VALIDATION OF MODELS
There were a total of 66,297 models deposited in CASP10, of which 45,836 were 3D coordinate sets. The remaining submissions are for residue–residue contacts (2514), structural
disorder (3136), binding site identification (1817), and estimation of 3D model quality
(7679). About 4320 3D structures were refinements of initial models and 1005 were
structures contact-assisted models. All predictions were submitted to the Prediction Center
in a machine-readable format. Accepted submissions were issued an accession number,
serving as the record that a prediction had been made by a particular group on a particular
NUMERICAL EVALUATION OF PREDICTIONS
The well evolved standard CASP numerical evaluation methods were again used,41–44 and
two new measures, CAD45 and IDDT46 were added. For each model, values for all metrics
were provided to assessors and subsequently released through the Center web site.
As always, assessors were encouraged to develop their own additional measures to
complement the established CASP ones, a process that has led to many new and useful
approaches over the course of the experiments. In this experiment, a new metric was
introduced by the template-based assessment team, based on their previous work comparing
NMR structures. The template FM assessment team built on procedures introduced in
previous CASPs to provide a well-integrated and tested package. Collaboration with the
UCSF Chimera team47 also resulted in a useful graphics tool for rapidly inspecting large
numbers of models, a very labor intensive part of the assessment process.
The key principle of CASP has always been that primary responsibility for assessing the
significance of the results is placed in the hands of independent assessors. This continues to
be a major source of insight and innovation in CASP, as well as ensuring that organizer
biases are not imposed on the outcome. In CASP10, the TBM assessment team was led by
Gaetano Montelione (Rutgers University, NJ); for Template free modeling, BK Lee (NCI/
NIH, BD) and for Refinement and physics-based prediction methods, David Jones
(University College London, UK).
Moult et al.
Proteins. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
MEETINGS, WEB SITE, AND PUBLICATIONS
A planning workshop was held before the start of the CASP10 experiment, attended by the
CASP9 and CASP10 assessors and the organizers, with the goal of briefing the new
assessors, and deciding on procedures and rules to be followed. A second planning
workshop was held about 2 months after the close of the modeling season, at which the
assessors presented their results to each other and to the organizers. As always, the identities
of participating groups were hidden from the assessors until after those presentations, to
avoid ranking bias.
The meeting to discuss the outcome of the experiment was held in Gaeta (Italy) in December
2012. To celebrate 10 successful CASP experiments, the meeting included eight keynote
talks from members of the modeling community who have made major contributions both to
the field and to CASP. The speakers were Janet Thornton (EBI, Hinxton, UK), David Jones
(University College London, UK), Michael Levitt (Stanford), David Baker (University of
Washington, Seattle, WA), Joel Sussman (Weizmann Institute, Israel), Nick Grishin
(University of Texas, Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX), and Roland Dunbrack
(Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA). In addition to sessions devoted to the
outcome of the experiment in each of the modeling categories, the meeting again
emphasized discussion of methods, with talks selected by the participants on the basis of the
abstracts. In addition to talks by representatives of some of the more successful prediction
groups, there were several round table discussions to further probe methods and to discuss
directions for future progress. The full program can be found on the Prediction Center web
This issue of PROTEINS is the official report of the CASP10 experiment and the outcome
of the meeting. All the modeling and assessment papers in this issue have been peer
reviewed. The CASP web site ( provides extensive details of the
targets, the predictions, and the numerical analyses.
PROGRESS IN CASP10
The most significant improvement seen in CASP10 was in the Refinement category, where
for the first time, one prediction group succeeded in improving the accuracy of all the
targets.48 Although the overall average improvement was not large, there are impressive
examples for particular targets. Encouragingly, this result was achieved with molecular
dynamics methods, showing that the more physics-derived approaches are finally making a
contribution in modeling. Results in the new category of contact-assisted modeling
confirmed that these methods can indeed produce substantially more accurate models with
moderate amounts of extra information.32 On the other hand, the new contact prediction
methods39 did not result in detectable improvements.38 Two factors may account for that.
First, only one group made a serious effort to use these. Second, those approaches are
expected to yield most improvement when a deep, well-balanced sequence alignment is
available. That was not the case for most targets. We look forward to more representative
results in CASP11. Over the last few CASP experiments there has been little obvious overall
improvement in model accuracy, for both TBM and template FM. That appeared to be the
Moult et al.
Proteins. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
case in this round using the established scale of target difficulty.49 A more thorough analysis
of target properties showed that these are increasing in difficulty in ways not well reflected
by the standard scale. Particularly for template FM, folds are less regular (e.g., exhibiting a
larger radius of gyration) than in earlier CASPs, and more likely to be domains of larger
proteins and parts of multi-molecular complexes. For TBM, discoverable templates for
CASP10 targets on average provided about 10% less coverage than those in CASP5. The
resulting loss of main chain accuracy has been off-set by notably improved methods of
modeling regions of the target not covered by the best template.13
FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS
The contact-assisted modeling category will be included in the next experiment, enhanced
based on experience in CASP10. To better address the specific needs of the ligand binding
site prediction category the evaluation procedure has been changed: instead of making
binary predictions, the new format allows for predicting continuous probability values,
including the specification of ligand type/ligand identity. In order to increase the number of
prediction targets, ligand binding site prediction servers are now evaluated continuously
using an automated system called Continuous Automated Model Evaluation (CAMEO,
 which is based on weekly pre-released sequences from the PDB.
A CASP11 experiment is planned, beginning of spring 2014, and culminating in a meeting
in December of that year. The meeting is expected to take place in the United States. Those
interested should check the CASP web site for further announcements.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to the members of the experimental community, particularly the structural genomics centers, who
agreed to provide targets. Taking part required courage and commitment on the part of all the modeling groups. The
assessment teams worked extremely hard and effectively to extract major insights from the results. We again thank
PROTEINS for providing a mechanism for peer reviewed publication of the outcome of the experiment. We are
also grateful to Wiley and PROTEINS for agreeing to make these special issues open access, so that all scientists
may easily make use of the results. We thank Helen Berman and the PDB staff for their key role in target
processing.
Grant sponsor: the US National Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS/NIH); Grant number:
R01GM100482 (to KF); Grant sponsors: KAUST Award KUK-I1-012-43 (to AT) and by EMBO.