Australian Journal of
Educational Technology
2000, 16(1), 58-72
Designing learning environments for cultural
inclusivity: A case study of indigenous online
learning at tertiary level
Catherine McLoughlin
The University of New England
Ron Oliver
Edith Cowan University
Flexible delivery of educational resources must take account of cultural
variables and recognise the specific learning needs, preferences and styles
of learners. In designing instruction, there may be a tension between the
need to ensure access for a diverse student population, while at the same
time taking into account the need for localisation to accommodate learners’
particular cultures, cognitive styles and preferences. Considering the micro
and macro cultural levels of instructional design is therefore essential if
appropriate learning environments are to be created. The acceptance, use
and impact of WWW sites is affected by the cultural backgrounds, values,
needs and preferences of learners.
One of the limitations in current instructional design models is that they do
not fully contextualise the learning experience, and are themselves the
product of particular cultures. The design of Web based instruction is not
culturally neutral, but instead is based on the particular epistemologies,
learning theories and goal orientations of the designers themselves.
Recently, theorists have argued for a cultural dimension in the design
process and the need to provide culturally sensitive learning environments.
In this paper, we trace the design processes involved in the development of
an online learning environment for indigenous Australian learners
preparing to enter university, and account for the cultural issues that
impacted on creation of learning tasks and styles of communication. The
paper argues for cultural localisation, which means incorporating the local
values, styles of learning and cognitive preferences of the target population.
It also means going beyond surface level design considerations, to achieve
culturally inclusive constructivist learning environments. Examples of
tasks, activities and forms of online interaction are provided in the context
of a bi-cultural model of learning that recognises diversity and different
learning needs. It is recommended that when creating WWW based course
support sites for cultural inclusivity, systematic attention must be given to
McLoughlin and Oliver
particular design guidelines, which include responsiveness to learner
needs, community based learning and cultural contextualisation of learning
activities.
Cultural dimensions in the design process: Recognising
Culture pervades learning, and in designing instructional environments
there needs to be serious debate about issues concerning the social and
cultural dimensions of task design, communication channels and
structuring of information if the needs of culturally diverse learners are to
be met. Educational computing, or the use of technology to mediate
learning, is imbued with cultural values and assumptions. Research has
shown that computer based collaborative work can transform classroom
cultures, the roles of teachers and students and the expectations of learners
 .
Reeves & Reeves emphasise that greater challenges may arise when
the core pedagogical values in one culture are culturally inappropriate in
another: for example the expectation that students will question
knowledge or the teacher is a not a universally accepted form of
interaction. Reeves concludes that not enough is known about the
complexities of cultural inclusivity for cognitive design of learning
resources and that further research is needed. Collis et al similarly
conclude that there is little extant research on instructional design for cross
cultural Web site development.
Cultural aspects of WWW design
As learning is a cultural activity, the design of Web sites is also infused
with cultural meaning and with cultural nuances and identity issues, as
the instructional designers and developers bring their own viewpoints and
perspectives into the design process.
Local sites
Cross cultural sites
High level of cultural
contextualisation
Local needs
Low level of cultural
contextualisation
International needs
Figure 1: Categories of Web sites
Collis & Remmers have defined two categories of sites that have
cross cultural implications:
Australian Journal of Educational Technology, 2000, 16(1)
Category 1
Sites that are 'local' in the sense that they are made in one
context and culture, but visited by other cultures
Category 2
Sites that are 'international' or designed specifically for
cross cultural participation. (See Figure 1.)
Category 1 Web sites, for example, are made for a local context and culture
and may not be culturally portable, as they are highly contextualised and
embedded in the nuances and interaction styles of a particular culture and
serve the needs of a particular audience. Category 2 sites are those which
strive to reach a cross cultural population, and serve the needs of an
international audience. If cross cultural Web sites are to be developed for
international use, there needs to be consideration of a range of
instructional design issues so that cross cultural participation and
communication is made possible for all participants. However, cultural
variations in interpreting and communicating information are influenced
by pedagogical and instructional design decisions, and the cultural
dimensions of learning must be constantly problematised and not
marginalised .
It has been argued that one of the essential foundations of student
centered learning environments is cultural inclusivity with a focus on
enabling learners to access learning resources in a manner that is
congruent with their values, beliefs and styles of learning . This perspective would support designing sites for local needs
with high levels of cultural contextualisation. In other words, it may be
assumed that highly contextualised and culturally specific learning
environments are likely to meet the needs of the learners for whom they
are intended, if appropriate design princples are applied. Technologies are
not value free however. Joo suggests that the use of the Internet
affects learner-teacher relations within the micro-culture of the classroom
and macro-culture of the larger political arena, and promotes an
independent, exploratory view of learning that may be alien to students
who have experienced asymmetrical, teacher centred pedagogies.
Distributed communities of inquiry are flourishing and are quite foreign to
the centralized and hierarchical systems for knowledge distribution in
many countries . In summary, we can conclude that the
design of WWW instructional environments is imbued with cultural
meanings and can influence modes of communication, styles of learning
and participation at both micro and macro levels.
McLoughlin and Oliver
Culture, constructivist learning and situated cognition
Increasingly, technologies are being described as ‘cognitive tools’, which
transform, augment and support cognitive engagement among peers,
school age children and adult learners . Cole 
describes technology as a ‘cultural amplifier’ signifying that it transforms
the nature of human productivity it can also quantitatively change the
processes of cognition and amplify the cultural dimensions of
communication, task analysis and problem solving. Similarly, Brown,
Collins & Duguid analyse learning as a situated achievement,
incorporating authentic cultural activity in a range of settings.
Within the last ten years, the culture of teaching has also undergone
transformation: teachers have been urged to encourage more collaborative
structures for learning, which have been shown to be effective in terms of
learning outcomes . These
pedagogies spring from a common source, constructivist learning theory
 . Constructivism is characterised by a set of
principles relating to how knowledge is created and how individuals
develop understanding. Socio-cultural theory, originating with the
writings of Vygotsky emphasises that learning is a form of
enculturation, in which the individual is socialised through gradual
participation in tasks, scaffolded or assisted by adults until full
competence is attained. One interpretation of constructivism is situated
cognition, based on the work of Lave who maintains that learning is
best achieved when learning tasks are encountered, practiced and applied
in real world contexts. Situated cognition can be summarised as follows:
• Learning is situated and contextualised in action and everyday
situations;
• Knowledge is acquired through active participation;
• Learning is a process of social action and engagement involving ways
of thinking, doing and communicating;
• Learning can be assisted by experts or supportive others and through
apprenticeship;
• Learning is a form of participation in social environments.
The community of inquiry approach is based on the same
principles of cognitive apprenticeship, common goals, shared inquiry and
peer learning and offers a robust theoretical basis for the design of
culturally specific environments. With its emphasis on collaboration,
shared experience and participation, the community of inquiry model has
Australian Journal of Educational Technology, 2000, 16(1)
been used as an epistemological framework to address the needs of
culturally diverse learners . In addition to adopting an appropriate pedagogical foundation for
cultural inclusivity, issues of cultural inclusivity in instructional design
must also be considered.
Is cultural pluralism possible in instructional design?
In order to design a culturally appropriate online unit of instruction,
instructional designers need to follow design principles and instructional
methods that best attain the desired outcomes. Instead of applying a set of
prescriptive theories, instructional design needs to be sufficiently flexible
and to ensure that learning activities and tasks are designed to take
learners’ needs and perspectives into account. According to Scheel &
Branch ‘instruction which acknowledges and incorporates
cultural backgrounds regardless of subject matter domain, may be called
culturally pluralistic instruction’.
There are many current instructional design models and paradigms, each
of which can be interpreted as culturally and socially determined . Instructional design models include cognitive, social and
pedagogical issues, but may not acknowledge the need for cultural
contextuality. Reeves & Reeves for instance, outline a dozen
pedagogical dimensions that can be used to design interactive multimedia
tools and learning environments. Among these dimensions is cultural
sensitivity which is explained as follows: ‘Web based instruction should
accommodate diverse ethnic and cultural backgrounds among the learners
expected to use it’. Henderson has argued that . ‘Instructional
design cannot and does not, exist outside of a consideration of culture’,
and that it impinges on notions of cultural identity and cannot be
culturally neutral. How then, can the dimensions of cultural contextuality
inform instructional design?
An important part of Henderson’s work has been the
identification of several design paradigms, each of which reflects
particular world views, and consists of values, pedagogies, inclusions, and
exclusions that results from the designers own societal context. As
instructional designers are instrumental in creating and developing
interactive multimedia, courseware and learning environments, they can
also influence material and symbolic culture. Among the instructional
design paradigms identified by Henderson there are three identifiable
approaches, all of which are limited with respect to cultural dimensions of
learning and pedagogy. (See Table 1). These can be summarised as
McLoughlin and Oliver
• the inclusive or perspectives approach which imports the social, cultural
and historical perspectives of minority groups, but does not challenge
the dominant culture and is therefore cosmetic;
• the inverted curriculum approach which attempts to design an
instructional component from the minority perspective but fails to
provide the learners with educationally valid experiences as it does not
admit them into the mainstream culture;
• the culturally unidimensional approach which excludes or denies cultural
diversity and assumes that educational experiences are the same for
minority students as they are for others.
Table 1: Existing instructional design (ID) paradigms and their limitations
ID Paradigm
Definition
Limitations
Inclusive or
perspectives
• Acknowledges
multicultural realities,
driven by equity and
social justice
• soft multiculturalism
• inclusion of the exotic
• tokenism
curriculum
• conceptualises society as
• minority perspectives
• does not cater for cognitive
• does not support equity in
learning outcomes
Culturally
unidimensional
• cultural minorities are
• culture is presented as
homogenous
• dominant cultures only are
acknowledged
• culture is represented as
peripheral
Henderson proposes a further instructional design model, which is a
multiple cultural model of instructional design. This is characterised by an
approach which endorses multiple cultural realities or zones of
development . Essentially, this approach is a form of
‘eclectic paradigm’ which entails designing learning resources that allow
variability and flexibility while enabling students to learn through
interaction with materials that:
• reflect the multicultural realities of society;
• include multiple cultural ways of learning and teaching;
• promote equity of learning outcomes.
Australian Journal of Educational Technology, 2000, 16(1)
Application of the multiple cultural model requires a global and inclusive
perspective, sensitivity to cultural difference and an appreciation of the
numerous ways in which culture influences learning. Instructional
designers need to consider the philosophical and pedagogical underpinning of goals, objectives, content and instructional activities, and
incorporate not one, but multiple pedagogies according to learner needs.
The design should also be validated by a member of the group or groups
to whom the learning materials are addressed, and materials need to be
tested with the target groups during the development phase to ensure
authenticity.
The adoption of the multiple cultural model requires the design team to
investigate the pedagogical dimensions of the cultures they are providing
resources for, and to be aware of the multiple ways in which each culture
could interpret instruction. Some questions that would require answers
• What kind of learning environment is most familiar to the students?
• How does the cultural background of these students influence their
conceptions of learning?
• How do students conceive the role of the teacher?
• What kind of relationship do students want with an online tutor?
• What kinds of assessment tasks will support learning and cultural
inclusivity?
• What rewards and forms of feedback will be most motivating for these
• Is the locus of control congruent with these students’ own sense of
personal control?
• What cognitive styles characterise the target group?
In the context of designing an online unit for indigenous Australian
learners, a pragmatic approach to culturally appropriate design is
proposed. This entails drawing on current knowledge of pedagogical,
cultural and epistemological factors that influence learning and
communication, and then generating guidelines that minimize deficit
views of cultural difference, while promoting contructivist, contextualised,
culturally responsive learning. The following design principles emerged
from empirical work conducted in the process of designing tertiary level
units of study for indigenous learners seeking entry to university. (See
Table 2 for a summary of design guidelines).
McLoughlin and Oliver
Ten design principles for culturally inclusive instructional design
1. Adopt an epistemology that is consistent with, and supportive of
constructivist learning and multiple perspectives.
For indigenous Australian students, becoming bicultural is part of their
adaptation to learning in tertiary study, and fundamental to academic
success. Many approaches to the education of indigenous students
have been labeled reductionist or based on a deficit model, as they
implicitly espouse the view that Aboriginal students enter universities
without the requisite skills and have to be remediated into mainstream
tertiary settings. This deficit view is negative and destructive and
denies learner input. The adoption of the ‘community of practice
model’ for online delivery enables learners to have access to
community knowledge, support structures and shared interests
 . This form of emancipatory pedagogy ensures
recognition of students’ capacity to construct their own knowledge,
bring prior experience and culturally preferred ways of knowing to
learning tasks and develop a sense of ownership and pride in their own
knowledge.
2. Design authentic learning activities.
In adult indigenous education, instructional design of educational
programs must incorporate the skills and values of the community, its
cultural traditions and its values and issues in order to create a unified
and authentic learning environment. Subject matter that is relevant to
these communities must be taught . In Australia and
North America, research conducted with indigenous adults shows that
purely cognitive based approaches have had limited success, while
interactive, dialogic approaches have been found to equip indigenous
students with the analytic and verbal skills they need to succeed in the
contemporary world .
3. Create flexible tasks and tools for knowledge sharing.
One of the basic principles of instructional design is that indigenous
learners should be able to share what they have constructed with
others. This reinforces the social, collaborative focus of learning and
creates and online community. Collaborative task design that enables
groups to combine expertise and distribute control for parts of the task
affirms learner control. Knowledge sharing can be fostered by
designing bulletin boards for students to discuss assignments, offer
peer support and feedback.
Australian Journal of Educational Technology, 2000, 16(1)
4. Ensure different forms of support, within and outside the
community.
One of the principles of a ‘community of practice’ is that there is
scaffolding for novices until they develop skill and competence. In an
online community, similar structures can be provided to learners
through Web based tools. The tutors can engage with students in
dialogue though discussion forums, and can provide examples of
communication protocols and learning processes that are required in
tasks. Models of ideas from other tertiary graduates are additional
resources that students can access, and bulletin boards give students an
opportunity to engage in guided reflective discussion with tutors and
peers. Figure 1 is an illustration of the help desk feature which
provides multiple forms of support for indigenous online learners,
including Telephone assistance, Online mentor and Frequently asked
questions.
Figure 1: The online help desk offering multiple forms of scaffolding
5. Establish flexible and responsive student roles and responsibilities.
From the outset, awareness of student needs must inform the design
process. For most students, initiation into an online community is often
a new experience and therefore technology related skills have to be
learnt. Clear communication of learning outcomes can be established
McLoughlin and Oliver
through the design of the Web site, with navigation tools to allow
multi-layered exploration of unit requirements, assessment tasks and
learning activities. Learners should not expected to have advanced
computing skills, but development of information literacy skills need to
be integral to the learning outcomes.
6. Provide communication tools and social interaction for learners to coconstruct knowledge.
Learners should be able to access multiple channels of communication
with tutors and with other learners. Through the use of chat rooms and
bulletin boards, learners can share ideas, discuss topics and participate
in a virtual classroom. Social interaction can be fostered through an
informal, virtual meeting place or ‘Yarning Place’ where new topics can
be raised and personal interests explored. Figure 2 shows a ‘Yarning
place’ bulletin board, which offers a range of discussion tools, social
interaction spaces and feedback channels.
Figure 2: The Yarning place bulletin board, including negotiated
interaction and feedback forum, and forum for social interaction.
7. Create tasks for self direction, ownership and collaboration.
For indigenous community members a sense of place is critical to
identity and belonging. In the academic unit of study described here,
Australian Journal of Educational Technology, 2000, 16(1)
students can create their own sense of progress and decide on a
learning path that will lead them to successful completion of the unit.
Various tasks and choices are presented, and a reflective space (an
online journal) is provided to enable students to consider decisions
taken and to alter their course of action if so desired. Shared
workspaces are also provided for distributed groups of students
working on projects. In addition, students are encouraged to explore
the wider learning space of the Web by searching for URL’s and
resources to augment the ones provided. In this way, affirmation of
learner contribution to the online experience is realised.
8. Ensure flexible tutoring and mentoring roles that are responsive to
learner needs.
If students are studying online for the first time, the need for support,
conversation and direction may be great at the initial stages of the
course. Roles of tutors need to be interchangeable and modifiable in the
light of student feedback. In Web based environments, flexibility and
support can be built in by ensuring that tutors have an online presence
that is visible, with help features and discussion forums providing
learners with rapid feedback and scaffolding.
9. Create access to varied resources to ensure multiple perspectives.
This can be achieved by moving away from instructivist approaches
where all texts are prescribed by the teacher to constructive approaches
where learners actively add to the resources by posting new URL’s,
suggesting additional resources of interest and discussing alternatives
through the bulletin boards. For indigenous learners the creation and
inclusion of the indigenous perspectives is an important dimension and
a means of recognising and integrating cultural knowledge.
10. Provide flexibility in learning goals, outcomes and modes of
assessment.
The WWW can support flexibility in many forms, and learners should
have control over their own learning goals, the topics they choose to
research and the pace and sequence in which they access the resources.
For indigenous learners studying online, flexibility in assessment is
essential, as many are mature age learners with diverse life experiences
and close community ties that need to be maintained while studying at
tertiary level. By offering choice and structure learners can develop self
knowledge of their own learning needs and levels of performance.
McLoughlin and Oliver
Table 2 provides a summary of the design guidelines and features for
planning an online unit for indigenous Australian learners
commencing tertiary study.
Table 2: Design guidelines for flexible, culturally responsive Web design
Cognitive/cultural issue
Instructional design consideration
Awareness of learner needs
and preferences
Instruction and learning tasks must support
differences in learning style and
communication.
Communication and social
interaction
Multiple channels and forums for
communication between learners and tutors
should be provided.
Authentic task design
Learning activities build on diversity and
provide bridges to the students’ culture and
community.
Multiple perspectives and
access to resources
Enable learners to create resources and to add
culturally relevant sources of information.
Emphasise learner input.
Scaffolding and support
Students need scaffolding or support
structures to ensure that they develop skills
and confidence. Include peer scaffolding in
task design.
Flexibility in goals, modes
of assessment and learning
Ensure flexibility and inclusivity by offering
choice, multiple modes of delivery and
assessment. Students should be able to choose
their own pathways through the content and
negotiate tasks for assessment.
Tutor roles
Create multiple roles for online tutors and
mentors at various stages of the course to
ensure provision of feedback and support.
Collaboration and coconstruction
Create motivating tasks where learners can
share ideas and work on projects, drawing on
cultural resources.
Clear communication of
aims, objectives and
requirements
Plan for maximum clarity and ease of use,
while designing for choice. Avoid
assumptions about cultural stereotypes and
expectations.
Self direction and
integration of skills
Plan activities so that technology use and
information access and become part of
students’ repertoire of study skills and
lifelong learning strategies.
Australian Journal of Educational Technology, 2000, 16(1)
Conclusions and implications for practice
The rationale for considering culture as a design dimension for effective
WWW instruction is straightforward: it enables learners to develop a
cognitive anchor for new knowledge and enables them to relate and
integrate new concepts within a coherent perspective that recognises and
values their cultural heritage. It is recommended that instructional
designers begin the process of culturally inclusive design by adopting the
epistemology and pedagogy of social, constructivist learning. By
recognising that learning is culturally and socially contextualised, the
design process becomes grounded and located within the communities
and individuals for whom the learning materials are intended. Tasks and
environment design need to be imbued with the particular culture, values
and expectations of the target group. By designing from a culturally
informed, constructivist theory such as situated cognition or cognitive
apprenticeship, instructional designers can plan activities where learning
is a process of participation, communication and co-construction of
knowledge .
Culturally inclusive Web based environments should provide learning
activities, supportive contexts, and learning processes that allow for
inclusivity and flexibility, while offering learners a scaffolded, structured
learning environment. To achieve this balance, instructional designers
need to move beyond the narrowly prescriptive boundaries of current
instructional design models. It is proposed that a multiple cultural model
of design that caters for diversity, flexibility and cultural inclusivity in the
design process affirms the social and cultural dimensions of constructed