Proceedings of the
NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES
- Number 9
* September 15, 1961
THE KINETICS OF FORMATION OF NATIVE RIBONUCLEASE
DURING OXIDATION OF THE REDUCED POLYPEPTIDE CHAIN
BY C. B. ANFINSEN, E. HABER,* M. SELAJf AND F. H. WHITE, JR.
LABORATORY OF CELLULAR PHYSIOLOGY AND METABOLISM, NATIONAL HEART INSTITUTE,
NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH
Communicated by John T. Edsall, July 31, 1961
Bovine pancreatic ribonuclease is completely reduced by treatment with mercaptoethanol in 8 M urea to yield a randomly coiled polypeptide chain containing
eight cysteine residues. -'3
Under optimal conditions of polypeptide concentration
and pH, essentially complete reformation of the disulfide bonds of the native
enzyme occurs in the presence of molecular oxygen.2
From chemical and physical
studies of the reformed enzyme, it may be concluded that the information for the
correct pairing of half-cystine residues in disulfide linkage, and for the assumption
of the native secondary and tertiary structures, is contained in the amino acid
sequence itself.
Preliminary to studies on the interactions involved in the refolding process, and
to establish the order of chemical events during the formation of active protein,
we have followed the rates of disappearance of sulfhydryl groups, and of the
appearance of the spectral properties characteristic of the native enzyme and its
active derivatives.
The appearance of increased positive optical rotation associated with secondary structure was also studied.
The results rule out the sequential formation of one active molecule after another.
They suggest as a major
possibility that some disulfide bonds formed during the early stages of oxidation are
not identical with those of the native protein but undergo rearrangement to yield
the native configuration.
Materials and Methods.-Bovine pancreatic ribonuclease (RNase) was purchased from the
Sigma Chemical Company, St. Louis, Missouri.
Test samples of the lot employed in these
studies (#R60B-204, "chromatographic grade") were subjected, before use, to chromatography4
on the cation exchanger, carboxymethylcellulose3 (Brown Paper Company, Lot 1069; 0.6 meq/gm)
and on IRC-50,6 and were found to consist almost entirely of the major "A" peak with a smaller
peak (approximately 5% of the major peak) running in the position of the usual "B" component
Amino acid analysis according to the procedure of Spackman, Stein and Moore7 yielded values in
good agreement with those reported for the commercial preparations that have been used for most
of the structural studies on this enzyme.
Reduced RNase was prepared by treatment of the native enzyme with mercaptoethanol in 8 M
urea followed by separation of the reduced chain from reagents on Sephadex-G25 (Pharmacia,
Uppsala, Lot 6493) as described earlier.3
The procedure employed for oxidation of fully reduced RNase consisted of adjustment of the
concentrationAbf the solution of reduced protein in 0.1 M acetic acid that emerged from the
BIOCHEMISTRY: ANFINSEN ET AL.
PROC. N. A. S.
Sephadex-G25 columns with water to the desired protein concentration, followed by adjustment
to pH 8.2 with tris (hydroxymethyl) aminomethane (tris)-acetate buffer.
Three large-scale
oxidations were carried out, two at 2.0 mg/ml and one at 0.1 mg/ml.
Oxidation in two experiments was allowed to proceed at room temperature (23-240C) in open beakers without stirring.
In a third experiment (at 2.0 mg/ml), slow stirring was employed, without detectable differences
in results except for a slight increase in the amount of turbidity produced.
The soluble protein
concentration, after as long as 24 hr, was still 95% or more of the original concentration.
oxidation, and particularly frequently during the early stages, samples were withdrawn, diluted
to the desired concentrations with 0.1M acetate buffer, pH 5.0, and assayed8 for enzyme activity
against ribonucleic acid prepared according to Crestfield, Smith, and Allen,9 and against uridylic-
2',3'-cyclic phosphate (barium salt, Schwarz BioResearch).
The latter assays were carried out
with the Cary Recording ultraviolet spectrophotometer as previously described.2'
Each analysis was compared with simultaneous controls run on native RNase solutions.
The Cary spectrophotometer was also employed for the serial determination of the absorption
spectra of the solutions, with the speed of reading adjusted to yield curves that permitted accurate
estimation of the differences in absorbancy at various wavelengths.
Protein concentrations were
estimated from the same spectra at 275 mju where RNase and reduced RNase have the same molar
extinction (E = 9,200).
Optical rotatory measurements were made with a Rudolph precision ultraviolet polarimeter,
model 80, equipped with the Rudolph photometric polarimeter attachment and an oscillating
polarizer prism.
The measurements were carried out at a wavelength of 366 m1A, using a mercury
lamp as the light source.
At this wavelength, the changes in specific optical rotation were sufficiently large to permit reasonable accuracy with 20 cm polarimetric tubes even with relatively dilute solutions of protein (2 mg/ml).
The specific optical rotation for native RNase at this wave
length was - 2880, and for fully reduced RNase, -372'.
In one experiment, where oxidation was
carried out on a solution of reduced RNase at a concentration of 0.1 mg/ml, samples of the reoxidation mixture were taken at various times, acidified with acetic acid to approximately pH 4, and
lyophilized.
The resulting material, when dissolved in water at a concentration of 2 mg/ml, gave
optical rotations inexcellent agreement with corresponding samples taken at similar times of
oxidation in other experiments at higher protein concentrations.
Most samples taken during the
latter stages of oxidation were somewhat turbid and required brief centrifugation at approximately 15,000 g before measurement.
The extent of reduction and the kinetics of SH disappearance during oxidation were determined
both by titration with p-chloromercuribenzoatell and by reaction with 1-C,4-iodoacetic acid of
known specific radioactivity followed by determination of radioactivity on the alkylated protein.3
Aliquots of the protein solution (approximately 2 mg protein in 1.0 ml were added to 1.0
ml 1.0 M tris-acetate buffer, pH 8.5 containing 10 emoles C14 iodoacetic acid (0.2 jicurie) and
the alkylation was allowed to proceed for 10 min.
After this time, excess iodoacetic acid was
immobilized by the addition of an excess (5 gl) of mercaptoethanol.
After reaction for 15 min,
the alkylated protein was separated from the various reagents by passage of the sample through a
(1 X 40) cm column of Sephadex G25 in 0.1 M acetic acid, and the radioactivity was subsequently
counted in the Packard Scintillation counter in the presence of a water-miscible phosphor.'2
Protein concentration in the samples counted was calculated from absorbancy measurements at 275
Results.-The data in Figure 1 summarize the changes in the sulfhydryl group
content, specific optical rotation and enzyme activity during oxidation of the SH
groups of fully reduced RNase under the conditions presented in the experimental
Final values obtained, expressed as percentages of the differences between
fully reduced RNase and native RNase, are shown at the right of the figure.
These values indicate essentially complete restoration of the native properties.
A final value for the activity of the oxidation mixture toward the synthetic substrate
is not given since this value was quite variable (generally 60-70% of the native
level) due, possibly, to inhibition by components of the solution.
This possibility
has not been investigated as part of the present study.
It has been found, however,
VOL. 47, 1961
BIOCHEMISTRY: ANFINSEN ET AL.
that on chromatography of samples of reformed RNase, the major component is
identical to that present in commercial samples of the enzyme and possesses
completely normal activity toward both RNA and synthetic substrates.2
The most striking phenomenon observed in these studies is the marked lag phase
before enzymatic activity appears, during which period the sulfhydryl titer and the
specific optical rotation change along a curve similar to that of a first-order reaction.
The presence of this lag phase (various explanations for which are offered in the
discussion) immediately rules out the possibility that disulfide bonds are formed in
such a way that detectable amounts of complete, native molecules are produced in
a one-by-one fashion.
TIME OF REOXIDATION (MINUTES)
FIG. 1.-Changes, during the oxidation of reduced ribonuclease, in
SH groups as followed by titration with p-chloromercuribenzoate (0)
and by reaction with radioactive iodoacetate (a), in optical rotation
(n), and in enzymatic activity as measured against ribonucleic acid
(-) and against uridylic-2',3'-cyclic phosphate (A).
Changes in spectral properties during oxidation (from one typical experiment)
are summarized in Table 1 and conform, in general, to earlier observations on the
relationship between activity and spectral properties.
Native RNase shows an
absorption maximum at 277.5 mu, which is also shown by such active derivatiTieS13, 14 as RNase-S, carboxypeptidase-treated RNase and RNase which has been
modified by addition of polyalanine side chains of considerable length on available
amino groups.'5
On the other hand, inactive derivatives still possessing intact SS
bonds (pepsin-inactivated RNase, methylated RNase, etc.) have shown a maximum
at 276 mji.'3, 14
Both oxidized and reduced RNase show still another absorption
maximum, at 275 m,4, which appears to be characteristic of the chain devoid of
disulfide cross-links.
In the present studies (see Table 1) the position of the maximum changes from
275 mjA to 276 mu during the lag period prior to the appearance of enzyme activity,
and then increases roughly in parallel with the appearance of enzyme activity to a
BIOCHEMISTRY: ANFINSEN ET AL.
PROC. N. A. S.
SPECTRAL CHANGES
Wavelength of
Molar extinction,
maximum absorption, mp
Native RNase
final value of 277.5 mwi.
The presence of a maximum at 276 mjA is, incidentally,
also characteristic of the randomly cross-linked derivative obtained during oxidation
in urea, guanidine, and other disorienting reagents15 and may be characteristic of
tyrosine interactions of a nonspecific sort, occurring when the specific interaction of
the phenolic hydroxyl groups is prevented.
The reaction was also followed at 287 mu, as this is the peak of the difference
spectrum between RNase and inactive RNase derivatives.
Although the data are
not included in Figure 1, a direct correlation becomes evident between change in
activityand change in molar extinction at 287 mu when these parameters are
plotted as functions of the tine of oxidation, assuming as final and initial values the
absorptions at 287 m/A of native RNase and of the inactive form of the enzyme
with "shifted spectrum," having a maximum at 276 mw.
Discussion.-During the formation of native RNase from the reduced chain,
sulfhydryl groups might be converted to disulfide bonds by one of two general
mechanisms, the first involving the initial pairing of the correct half-cystine residues
and the second, of random pairing with subsequent reshuffling to yield the native
arrangement.
A. Correct pairing:
(1) The process might proceed by a "one-by-one" mechanism
in which each molecule of reduced RNase is rapidly oxidized to the native, active
form without the accumulation of significant quantities of partial oxidation products.
The formation of the first bond would, in this system, greatly increase the
likelihood that a second bond would form in the same molecule over the probability
that a first bond would form in another molecule.
(2) The rates of formation of
successive disulfide bonds might be sufficiently different that, at any time, the
population of molecules would be predominantly of one kind; e.g., one SS bond with
six SH groups, two SS bonds with four SH groups, etc.
Although the correct
pairing of SH groups is assumed in this mechanism, enzyme activity would first
appear only after the formation of the final, fourth, bond (if all four are indeed
essential).
(3) A variation of mechanism No. 2 would involve rates of oxidation
of the four pairs of SH groups that are essentially the same.
This variation would
lead to the formation of a mixture of partially oxidized molecules; activity would
appear upon oxidation of the fourth pair or possibly earlier, should some molecules
having only two or three disulfide bonds possess activity.
(4) A situation might be
visualized in which the correct arrangement of disulfide bonds has been formed but
where the resulting molecules are inactive because of incorrect secondary and
structure.
The appearance of enzyme activity and "native" spectral
properties would result from the rearrangement of noncovalent interactions to
yield the native form.
VOL. 47, 1961
BIOCHEMISTRY: ANFINSEN ET AL.
B. Random pairing:
Pairing might be random in the initial stages of reaction
and activity might first appear after reshuffling, through disulfide interchange, to
yield the native configuration.
The results presented in this paper make it possible to rule out mechanism A1
since only traces of enzyme activity and of the native spectral characteristics have
appeared even after the disappearance of approximately half of the total SH group
content of the reduced protein.
Alternatives A2 and A3 are somewhat more
difficult to rule out, particularly without a careful examination of the chemical
nature of the disulfide bridges that have formed at various times by techniques
similar to those used in establishing the disulfide bridges of the native enzyme.'6
However, on a purely kinetic basis, these mechanisms seem unlikely since, when
three-fourths of the SH groups have disappeared, enzyme activity has risen to
more than half of the theoretical value.
Mechanisms A2 and A3 would require
that no activity appear before three of the four final SS bonds were complete in all
the molecules present (unless partially oxidized molecules with only three SS bonds
reformed possess some activity).
Mechanism A4 permits a lag in the appearance of activity even if the conditions
of mechanism Al obtain.
Nevertheless, this mechanism is somewhat improbable
on the basis of the known characteristics of rearrangement of the secondary and
tertiary structures of native RNase after distortion in solutions of 8 M urea.
has been shown, for example, that the modifications in spectral and optical rotatory
properties of RNase occurring in urea solutions are entirely reversible upon dilution
to lower urea concentrations or upon dialysis.'4' 17
Further, the time required
for reversal is relatively short, and certainly only a small fraction of the time
involved in the 1-2-hour lag period found in the present experiments.
refolding of the urea-distorted configuration of native RNase by polyanions"3
(presumably including ribonucleic acid itself) yields an active enzyme, also militates against aberrant three dimensional structure as a major reason for the existence of a lag phase in activity in the present experiments on the reformation of SS
Mechanism B is consistent with the kinetic data presented here and becomes
even more probable when other available information is taken into account.
mentioned above, oxidation of the SH groups of reduced RNase may be carried out
in the presence of various agents that cause the formation of enzymatically inactive
molecules, for which the typical spectrum of RNase, with a maximum at 277.5 mA,
is not obtained.
When such randomly cross-linked molecules are incubated under
conditions employed
for oxidations
as described
no detectable changes occur.
However, the addition of SH compounds (including
reduced RNase) under conditions known to favor disulfide interchange,'8 induces
the rearrangement of the molecule to yield an active product in high yield, possessing the physical properties of native RNase.19
The requirement for SH catalysis
supports the idea that the inactive materials are inactive because of random pairing
of half-cystine residues and that, in the case of the lag in appearance of enzyme
activity in the present experiments, a similar situation obtains.
It is tentatively concluded, therefore, that oxidation of SH groups in this system
occurs initially through relatively random formation of SS bonds with subsequent
rearrangement taking place under the influence of disulfide interchange driven by
BIOCHEMISTRY: ARNON ET AL.
PROC. N. A. S.
thermodynamic forces toward the most probable form, native ribonuclease.
of the less likely possibilities mentioned above can only be rigorously excluded
upon completion of current experiments on the nature of the pairing of half-cystine
residues during the lag phase.
The authors wish to thank Mrs. Juanita Cooke for her expert assistance in many of these
experiments.
* Present address:
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston 14, Massachusetts.
t On leave of absence from The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovoth, Israel.
1 Sela, M., F. H. White, Jr., and C. B. Anfinsen, Biochim. et Biophys. Acta, 31, 417 .
2 White, F. H., Jr., J. Biol. Chem., 236, 1353 .
3Anfinsen, C. B., and E. Haber, ibid., 236, 1361 .
4Aqvist, S. E. G., and C. B. Anfinsen, ibid., 234, 1112 .
6 Peterson, E. A., and H. A. Sober, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 78, 751 -.
6 Hirs, C. H. W., S. Moore, and W. H. Stein, J. Biol. Chem., 200, 493 .
7 Spackman, D. H., W. H. Stein, and S. Moore, Anal. Chem., 30, 1190 .
8 Anfinsen, C. B., R. R. Redfield, W. L. Choate, J. Page, and W. R. Carroll, J. Biol. Chem.,
207, 201 .
9 Crestfield, A. M., Smith, K. C., and F. W. Allen, ibid., 216, 185 .
10 Richards, F. M., Compt. rend. trav. lIb. Carlsberg, Ser. Chim., 29, 315 .
11 Boyer, P. D., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 76, 4331 .
12 Bray, G. A., Anal. Biochem., 1, 279 .
13 Sela, M., and C. B. Anfinsen, Biochim. et Biophys. Acta, 24, 229 .
14 Sela, M., C. B. Anfinsen, and W. F. Harrington, ibid., 26, 502 .
Haber, E., M. Sela, and C. B. Anfinsen, Federation Proc., 20, Part I, 217 .
16 Experimental work is now in progress to determine the nature of the pairing of half-cystine
residues at various times during the early stages of reoxidation.
Preliminary results indicate
that pairing is quite random and that "incorrectly" formed bonds are present.
17 Harrington, W. F., and J. A. Schellman, Compt. rend. trav. lib. Carlsberg, Ser. Chim., 30, 21
18 Sluyterman, L. A. A., Biochim. et Biophys. Acta, 48, 429 .
19 Haber, E., and C. B. Anfinsen, unpublished data.
PHOTOSYNTHETIC PHOSPHORYLATION AND MOLECULAR OXYGEN*
BY DANIEL I. ARNONt M. LOSADA, F. R. WHATLEY, H. Y. TsuJIMOTO, D. 0. HALL,
AND A. A. HORTON
DEPARTMENT OF CELL PHYSIOLOGY, UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY
Communicated July 3, 1961
Oxygen and photosynthesis were first linked about 200 years ago when both were
discovered almost simultaneously.
The earliest concept of photosynthesis was
that of planetary ventilation in which illuminated plants exchanged CO2 or "bad
air" for 02 or "vital air" (see historical review1).
A mechanism for this gas exchange
was proposed in 1796 by Ingenhousz.2
Green plants, he suggested, absorb from
"carbonic acid in the sunshine, the carbon, throwing out at that time the oxygen
alone, and keeping the carbon to itself as nourishment." 2
For over a hundred years afterward, the view that CO2 assimilation always involved a liberation of oxygen gas was so firmly entrenched that it was even extended to the dark CO2 assimilation by chemosynthetic bacteria.3-5