Performance Measures and a Data Set for
Multi-Target, Multi-Camera Tracking
Ergys Ristani1, Francesco Solera2, Roger S. Zou1,
Rita Cucchiara2, and Carlo Tomasi1
1 Computer Science Department, Duke University, Durham, USA
2 Department of Engineering, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy
Abstract. To help accelerate progress in multi-target, multi-camera
tracking systems, we present (i) a new pair of precision-recall measures
of performance that treats errors of all types uniformly and emphasizes
correct identiﬁcation over sources of error; (ii) the largest fully-annotated
and calibrated data set to date with more than 2 million frames of 1080p,
60fps video taken by 8 cameras observing more than 2,700 identities over
85 minutes; and (iii) a reference software system as a comparison baseline. We show that (i) our measures properly account for bottom-line
identity match performance in the multi-camera setting; (ii) our data set
poses realistic challenges to current trackers; and (iii) the performance
of our system is comparable to the state of the art.
Keywords: Performance Evaluation, Multi Camera Tracking, Identity
Management, Multi Camera Data Set, Large Scale Data Set
Introduction
Multi-Target, Multi-Camera (MTMC) tracking systems automatically track multiple people through a network of cameras. As MTMC methods solve larger and
larger problems, it becomes increasingly important (i) to agree on straightforward performance measures that consistently report bottom-line tracker performance, both within and across cameras; (ii) to develop realistically large
benchmark data sets for performance evaluation; and (iii) to compare system
performance end-to-end. This paper contributes to these aspects.
Performance Measures. Multi-Target Tracking has been traditionally deﬁned
as continuously following multiple objects of interest. Because of this, existing
performance measures such as CLEAR MOT report how often a tracker makes
what types of incorrect decisions. We argue that some system users may instead
be more interested in how well they can determine who is where at all times.
To see this distinction, consider the scenario abstractly depicted in Figure 1(a) and 1(c). Airport security is following suspect A spotted in the airport lobby. They need to choose between two trackers, 1(a) and 1(c). Both tag
⋆This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation
under grants CCF-1513816 and IIS-1543720 and by the Army Research Oﬃce under
grant W911NF-16-1-0392.
 
Ergys Ristani, Francesco Solera, Roger S. Zou, Rita Cucchiara, Carlo Tomasi
the suspect as identity 1 and track him up to the security checkpoint. System
1(a) makes a single mistake at the checkpoint and henceforth tags the suspect
as identity 2, so it loses the suspect at the checkpoint. After the checkpoint,
system 1(c) repeatedly ﬂips the tags for suspect A between 1 and 2, thereby
giving police the correct location of the suspect several times also between the
checkpoint and the gate, and for a greater overall fraction of the time. Even
though system 1(a) incurs only one ID switch, airport security is likely to prefer
system 1(c), which reports the suspect’s position longer—multiple ID switches
notwithstanding—and ultimately leads to his arrest at the gate.
We do not claim that one measure is better than the other, but rather that
diﬀerent measures serve diﬀerent purposes. Event-based measures like CLEAR
MOT help pinpoint the source of some errors, and are thereby informative for
the designer of certain system components. In the interest of users in applications
such as sports, security, or surveillance, where preserving identity is crucial, we
propose two identity-based measures (ID precision and ID recall) that evaluate
how well computed identities conform to true identities, while disregarding where
or why mistakes occur. Our measures apply both within and across cameras.
Data Set. We make available a new data set that has more than 2 million
frames and more than 2,700 identities. It consists of 8 × 85 minutes of 1080p
video recorded at 60 frames per second from 8 static cameras deployed on the
Duke University campus during periods between lectures, when pedestrian traf-
ﬁc is heavy. Calibration data determines homographies between images and the
world ground plane. All trajectories were manually annotated by ﬁve people
over a year, using an interface we developed to mark trajectory key points and
associate identities across cameras. The resulting nearly 100,000 key points were
automatically interpolated to single frames, so that every identity comes with
single-frame bounding boxes and ground-plane world coordinates across all cameras in which it appears. To our knowledge this is the ﬁrst dataset of its kind.
Reference System. We provide code for an MTMC tracker that extends a
single-camera system that has shown good performance to the multi-camera
setting. We hope that the conceptual simplicity of our system will encourage
plug-and-play experimentation when new individual components are proposed.
We show that our system does well on a recently published data set when
previously used measures are employed to compare our system to the state of
the art. This comparison is only circumstantial because most existing results on
MTMC tracking report performance using ground-truth person detections and
ground-truth single-camera trajectories as inputs, rather than using the results
from actual detectors and single-camera trackers. The literature typically justi-
ﬁes this limitation with the desire to measure only what a multi-camera tracker
adds to a single-camera system. This justiﬁcation is starting to wane as MTMC
tracking systems approach realistically useful performance levels. Accordingly,
we evaluate our system end-to-end, and also provide our own measures as a
baseline for future research.
Performance Measures and a Data Set for MTMC Tracking
Related Work
We survey prior work on MTMC performance measures, data sets, and trackers.
Measures. We rephrase existing MTMC performance measures as follows.
– A fragmentation occurs in frame t if the tracker switches the identity of a
trajectory in that frame, but the corresponding ground-truth identity does
not change. The number of fragmentations at frame t is φt, and Φ = P
– A merge is the reverse of a fragmentation: The tracker merges two diﬀerent
ground truth identities into one between frames t′ and t. The number of
merges at frame t is γt, and Γ = P
– A mismatch is either a fragmentation or a merge. We deﬁne µt = φt + γt
When relevant, each of these error counts is given a superscript w (for “withincamera”) when the frames t′ and t in question come from the same camera, and
a superscript h (for “handover”) otherwise.
The number of false positives fpt is the number of times the tracker detects
a target in frame t where there is none in the ground truth, the number of false
negatives fnt is the number of true targets missed by the tracker in frame t, and
tpt is the number of true positive detections at time t. The capitalized versions
TP, FP, FN are the sums of tpt, fpt, and fnt over all frames (and cameras, if
more than one), and the superscripts w and h apply here as well if needed.
Precision and recall are the usual derived measures, P = TP/(TP + FP)
and R = TP/(TP + FN).
Single-camera, multi-object tracking performance is typically measured by
the Multiple Object Tracking Accuracy (MOTA):
MOTA = 1 −FN + FP + Φ
and related scores (MOTP, MT, ML, FRG) . MOTA penalizes detection
errors (FN + FP) and fragmentations (Φ) normalized by the total number T of
true detections. If extended to the multi-camera case, MOTA and its companions
under-report across-camera errors, because a trajectory that covers nf frames
from nc cameras has only about nc across-camera detection links between consecutive frames and about nf −nc within camera ones, and nc ≪nf. To address
this limitation handover errors and multi-camera object tracking accuracy
(MCTA) measures were introduced, which we describe next.
Handover errors focus only on errors across cameras, and distinguish between
fragmentations Φh and merges Γ h. Fragmentations and merges are divided further into crossing (Φh
X) and returning (Φh
R) errors. These more
detailed handover error scores help understand diﬀerent types of tracker failures,
and within-camera errors are quantiﬁed separately by standard measures.
MCTA condenses all aspects of system performance into one measure:
MCTA = 2PR
within camera
Ergys Ristani, Francesco Solera, Roger S. Zou, Rita Cucchiara, Carlo Tomasi
Duration Cams Actors Overlap Blind Spots Calib. Resolution FPS
Laboratory 
Campus 
Outdoor 2008
Terrace 
Outdoor 2008
Passageway 
Issia Soccer 
Outdoor 2009
Apidis Basket. 
PETS2009 
Outdoor 2009
NLPR MCT 1 
NLPR MCT 2 
NLPR MCT 3 
NLPR MCT 4 
Dana36 
USC Campus 
Outdoor 2010
CamNeT 
DukeMTMC (ours) 2834
Outdoor 2016
Table 1: Summary of existing data sets for MTMC tracking. Ours is in the last row.
This measure multiplies the F1 detection score (harmonic mean of precision and
recall) by a term that penalizes within-camera identity mismatches (M w) normalized by true within-camera detections (T w) and a term that penalizes wrong
identity handover mismatches (M h) normalized by the total number of handovers. Consistent with our notation, T h is the number of true detections (true
positives TP h plus false negatives FN h) that occur when consecutive frames
come from diﬀerent cameras.
Comparing to MOTA, MCTA multiplies within-camera and handover mismatches rather than adding them. In addition, false positives and false negatives,
accounted for in precision and recall, are also factored into MCTA through a
product. This separation brings the measure into the range rather than
[−∞, 1] as for MOTA. However, the reasons for using a product rather than
some other form of combination are unclear. In particular, each error in any of
the three terms is penalized inconsistently, in that its cost is multiplied by the
(variable) product of the other two terms.
Data Sets. Existing multi-camera data sets allow only for limited evaluation of
MTMC systems. Some have fully overlapping views and are restricted to short
time intervals and controlled conditions . Some sports scenarios provide
quality video with many cameras , but their environments are severely
constrained and there are no blind spots between cameras. Data sets with disjoint
views come either with low resolution video , a small number of cameras
placed along a straight path , or scripted scenarios . Most
importantly, all existing data sets only have a small number of identities. Table
1 summarizes the parameters of existing data sets. Ours is shown in the last
row. It contains more identities than all previous data sets combined, and was
recorded over the longest time period at the highest temporal resolution (60 fps).
Systems. MTMC trackers rely on pedestrian detection and tracking 
or assume single-camera trajectories to be given . Spatial relations
between cameras are either explicitly mapped in 3D , learned by tracking
known identities , or obtained by comparing entry/exit rates across
pairs of cameras . Pre-processing methods may fuse data from partially
overlapping views , while some systems rely on completely overlapping and
unobstructed views . People entry and exit points may be explicitly
modeled on the ground or image plane . Travel time is also
modeled, either parametrically or not .
Performance Measures and a Data Set for MTMC Tracking
Appearance is captured by color and texture descriptors . Lighting variations are addressed through color normalization , exemplar based approaches , or brightness transfer functions
learned with or without supervision . Discriminative power
is improved by saliency information or learning features speciﬁc to body
parts , either in the image or back-projected onto an
articulated or monolithic 3D body model.
All MTMC trackers employ optimization to maximize the coherence of observations for predicted identities. They ﬁrst summarize spatial, temporal, and
appearance information into a graph of weights wij that express the aﬃnity of
node observations i and j, and then partition the nodes into identities either
greedily through bipartite matching or, more generally, by ﬁnding either paths
or cliques with maximal internal weights. Some contributions are as follows:
Single-Camera
Cross-Camera
 
 
 
Table 2: Optimization techniques employed by MTMC systems.
In this paper, we extend a previous clique method to formulate within- and
across-camera tracking in a uniﬁed framework, similarly to previous MTMC
ﬂow methods . In contrast with , we handle identities reappearing in
the same camera and diﬀerently from we handle co-occuring observations
in overlapping views naturally, with no need for separate data fusion methods.
Performance Measures
Current event-based MTMC tracking performance measures count mismatches
between ground truth and system output through changes of identity over time.
The next two Sections show that this can be problematic both within and across
cameras. The Section thereafter introduces our proposed measures.
Within-Camera Issues
With event-based measures, a truly-unique trajectory that switches between two
computed identities over n frames can incur penalties that are anywhere between
1, when there is exactly one switch, and n−1, in the extreme case of one identity
switch per frame. This can yield inconsistencies if correct identities are crucial.
For example, in all cases in Figure 1, the tracker covers a true identity A with
computed identities 1 and 2. Current measures would make cases (b) and (c)
equally bad, and (a) much better than the other two.
And yet the key mistake made by the tracker is to see two identities where
there is one. To quantify the extent of the mistake, we need to decide which of the
two computed identities we should match with A for the purpose of performance
evaluation. Once that choice is made, every frame in which A is assigned to the
wrong computed identity is a frame in which the tracker is in error.
Ergys Ristani, Francesco Solera, Roger S. Zou, Rita Cucchiara, Carlo Tomasi
Fig. 1: Where there is one true identity A (thick line, with time in the horizontal direction), a tracker may mistakenly compute identities 1 and 2 (thin lines) broken into two
fragments (a) or into eight (b, c). Identity 1 covers 67% of the true identity’s trajectory
in (a) and (b), and 83% of it in (c). Current measures charge one fragmentation error
to (a) and 7 to each of (b) and (c). Our proposed measure charges 33% of the length
of A to each of (a) and (b), and 17% to (c).
Since the evaluator—and not the tracker—makes this choice, we suggest that
it should favor the tracker to the extent possible. If this is done for each tracker
under evaluation, the choice is fair. In all cases in Figure 1, the most favorable
choice is to tie A to 1, because this choice explains the largest fraction of A.
Once this choice is made, we measure the number of frames over which the
tracker is wrong—in the example, the number of frames of A that are not matched
to 1. In Figure 1, this measure makes (a) and (b) equally good, and (c) better
than either. This penalty is consistent because it reﬂects precisely what the choice
made above maximizes, namely, the number of frames over which the tracker is
correct about who is where. In (a) and (b), the tracker matches ground truth
67% of the time, and in (c) it matches it 83% of the time.
Figure 1 is about fragmentation errors. It can be reinterpreted in terms of
merge errors by exchanging the role of thick and thin lines. In this new interpretation, choosing the longest ground-truth trajectory as the correct match for a
given computed trajectory explains as much of the tracker’s output as possible,
rather than as much of the ground truth. In both directions, our truth-to-result
matching criterion is to let ground truth and tracker output explain as much of
each other’s data as possible, in a way that will be made quantitative later on.
Handover Issues
Event-based measures often evaluate handover errors separately from withincamera errors: Whether a mismatch is within-camera or handover depends on
the identities associated to the very last frame in which a trajectory is seen in one
camera, and on the very ﬁrst frame in which it is seen in the next—a rather brittle
proposition. In contrast, our measure counts the number of incorrectly matched
frames, regardless of other considerations: If only one frame is wrong, the penalty
is small. For instance, in the cases shown in Figure 2, current measures either
charge a handover penalty when the handover is essentially correct (a) or fail
to charge a handover penalty when the handover is essentially incorrect (b).
Our measure charges a one-frame penalty in case (a) and a penalty nearly equal
to the trajectory length in camera II in case (b), as appropriate. These cases
are not just theoretical. In Section 6, we show that 74% of the 5,549 handovers
computed by our tracker in our data set show similar phenomena.
Performance Measures and a Data Set for MTMC Tracking
Fig. 2: (a) Ground-truth trajectory A is handed over correctly between cameras, because
it is given the same computed identity 1 throughout, except that a short fragment in
camera I is mistakenly given identity 2 (red). This counts as a handover error with
existing measures. (b) A is handed over incorrectly, but a short fragment in camera
II mistakenly given identity 1 (red) makes existing measures not count it as a handover error. Existing measures would charge a within-camera fragmentation and an
across-camera fragmentation to (a) and one within-camera fragmentation to (b), even
if assignment (a) is much better than (b) in terms of target identiﬁcation.
These issues are exacerbated in measures, such as MCTA, that combine measures of within-camera mismatches and handover mismatches into a single value
by a product (Eq. 2). If one of the anomalies discussed above changes a withincamera error into a handover error or vice versa, the corresponding contribution to the performance measure can change drastically, because the penalty
moves from one term of the product to another: If the product has the form wh
(“within” and “handover”), then a unit contribution to w has value h in the
product, and changing that contribution from w to h changes its value to w.
The Truth-To-Result Match
To address these issues, we propose to measure performance not by how often mismatches occur, but by how long the tracker correctly identiﬁes targets.
To this end, ground-truth identities are ﬁrst matched to computed ones. More
speciﬁcally, a bipartite match associates one ground-truth trajectory to exactly
one computed trajectory by minimizing the number of mismatched frames over
all the available data—true and computed. Standard measures such as precision, recall, and F1-score are built on top of this truth-to-result match. These
scores then measure the number of mismatched or unmatched detection-frames,
regardless of where the discrepancies start or end or which cameras are involved.
To compute the optimal truth-to-result match, we construct a bipartite graph
G = (VT , VC, E) as follows. Vertex set VT has one “regular” node τ for each
true trajectory and one “false positive” node f +
γ for each computed trajectory
γ. Vertex set VC has one “regular” node γ for each computed trajectory and
one “false negative” node f −
τ , for each true trajectory τ. Two regular nodes
are connected with an edge e ∈E if their trajectories overlap in time. Every
regular true node τ is also connected to its corresponding f −
τ , and every regular
computed node γ is also connected to its corresponding f +
The cost on an edge (τ, γ) ∈E tallies the number of false negative and false
positive frames that would be incurred if that match were chosen. Speciﬁcally,
let τ(t) be the sequence of detections for true trajectory τ, one detection for each
Ergys Ristani, Francesco Solera, Roger S. Zou, Rita Cucchiara, Carlo Tomasi
frame t in the set Tτ over which τ extends, and deﬁne γ(t) for t ∈Tγ similarly
for computed trajectories. The two simultaneous detections τ(t) and γ(t) are a
miss if they do not overlap in space, and we write
m(τ, γ, t, ∆) = 1 .
More speciﬁcally, when both τ and γ are regular nodes, spatial overlap between
two detections can be measured either in the image plane or on the reference
ground plane in the world. In the ﬁrst case, we declare a miss when the area
of the intersection of the two detection boxes is less than ∆(with 0 < ∆< 1)
times the area of the union of the two boxes. On the ground plane, we declare a
miss when the positions of the two detections are more than ∆= 1 meter apart.
If there is no miss, we write m(τ, γ, t, ∆) = 0. When either τ or γ is an irregular
γ ), any detections in the other trajectory are misses. When both
τ and γ are irregular, m is undeﬁned. We deﬁne costs in terms of binary misses,
rather than, say, Euclidean distances, so that a miss between regular positions
has the same cost as a miss between a regular position and an irregular one.
Matching two irregular trajectories incurs zero cost because they are empty.
With this deﬁnition, the cost on edge (τ, γ) ∈E is deﬁned as follows:
c(τ, γ, ∆) =
m(τ, γ, t, ∆)
False Negatives
m(τ, γ, t, ∆)
False Positives
A minimum-cost solution to this bipartite matching problem determines a
one-to-one matching that minimizes the cumulative false positive and false negative errors, and the overall cost is the number of mis-assigned detections for all
types of errors. Every (τ, γ) match is a True Positive ID (IDTP). Every (f +
match is a False Positive ID (IDFP). Every (τ, f −
τ ) match is a False Negative
ID (IDFN). Every (f +
τ ) match is a True Negative ID (IDTN).
The matches (τ, γ) in IDTP imply a truth-to-result match, in that they
reveal which computed identity matches which ground-truth identity. In general
not every trajectory is matched. The sets
MT = {τ | (τ, γ) ∈IDTP}
MC = {γ | (τ, γ) ∈IDTP}
contain the matched ground-truth trajectories and matched computed trajectories,
respectively. The pairs in IDTP can be viewed as a bijection between MT and
MC. In other words, the bipartite match implies functions γ = γm(τ) from MT
to MC and τ = τm(γ) from MC to MT.
Identiﬁcation Precision, Identiﬁcation Recall, and F1 Score
We use the IDFN, IDFP, IDTP counts to compute identiﬁcation precision
(IDP), identiﬁcation recall (IDR), and the corresponding F1 score IDF1. More
speciﬁcally,
Performance Measures and a Data Set for MTMC Tracking
m(τ, γm(τ), t, ∆)
m(τm(γ), γ, t, ∆)
len(τ) −IDFN =
len(γ) −IDFP
where AT and AC are all true and computed identities in MT and MC.
IDTP + IDFP
IDTP + IDFN
2 IDTP + IDFP + IDFN
Identiﬁcation precision (recall) is the fraction of computed (ground truth)
detections that are correctly identiﬁed. IDF1 is the ratio of correctly identiﬁed
detections over the average number of ground-truth and computed detections.
ID precision and ID recall shed light on tracking trade-oﬀs, while the IDF1 score
allows ranking all trackers on a single scale that balances identiﬁcation precision
and recall through their harmonic mean.
Our performance evaluation approach based on the truth-to-result match
addresses all the weaknesses mentioned earlier in a simple and uniform way, and
enjoys the following desirable properties: (1) Bijectivity: A correct match (with
no fragmentation or merge) between true identities and computed identities is
one-to-one. (2) Optimality: The truth-to-result matching is the most favorable
to the tracker. (3) Consistency: Errors of any type are penalized in the same
currency, namely, the number of misassigned or unassigned frames. Our approach
also handles overlapping and disjoint ﬁelds of view in exactly the same way—a
feature absent in all previous measures.
Additional Comparative Remarks
Measures of Handover Diﬃculty. Handover errors in current measures are
meant to account for the additional diﬃculty of tracking individuals across cameras, compared to tracking them within a single camera’s ﬁeld of view. If a
system designer were interested in this aspect of performance, a similar measure could be based on the diﬀerence between the total number of errors for the
multi-camera solution and the sum of the numbers of single-camera errors:
EM = IDFPM + IDFNM
ES = IDFPS + IDFNS .
The two errors can be computed by computing the truth-to-result mapping twice:
Once for all the data and once for each camera separately (and then adding the
single-camera errors together). The diﬀerence above is nonnegative, because the
Ergys Ristani, Francesco Solera, Roger S. Zou, Rita Cucchiara, Carlo Tomasi
multi-camera solution must account for the additional constraint of consistency
across cameras. Similarly, simple manipulation shows that ID precision, ID recall,
and IDF1 score are sorted the other way:
IDPS −IDPM ≥0
IDRS −IDRM ≥0
F1S −F1M ≥0
and these diﬀerences measure how well the overall system can associate across
cameras, given within-camera associations.
Comparison with CLEAR MOT. The ﬁrst step in performance evaluation
matches true and computed identities. In CLEAR MOT the event-based matching deﬁnes the best mapping sequentially at each frame. It minimizes Euclidean
distances (within a threshold ∆) between unmatched detections (true and computed) while matched detections from frame t−1 that are still within ∆in t are
preserved. Although the per-frame identity mapping is 1-to-1, the mapping for
the entire sequence is generally many-to-many.
In our identity-based measures, we deﬁne the best mapping as the one which
minimizes the total number of mismatched frames between true and computed
IDs for the entire sequence. Similar to CLEAR MOT, a match at each frame is
enforced by a threshold ∆. In contrast, our reasoning is not frame-by-frame and
results in an ID-to-ID mapping that is 1-to-1 for the entire sequence.
The second step evaluates the goodness of the match through a scoring function. This is usually done by aggregating mistakes. MOTA aggregates FP, FN
and Φ while we aggregate IDFP and IDFN counts. The notion of fragmentation
is not present in our evaluation because the mapping is strictly 1-to-1. In other
words our evaluation only checks whether every detection of an identity is explained or not, consistently with our deﬁnition of tracking. Also, our aggregated
mistakes are binary mismatch counts instead of, say, Euclidean distances. This
is because we want all errors to be penalized in the same currency. If we were to
combine the binary IDFP and IDFN counts with Euclidean distances instead of
IDTP, the unit of error would be ambiguous: We won’t be able to tell whether
the tracker under evaluation is good at explaining identities longer or following
their trajectories closer.
Comparison with Identity-Aware Tracking. Performance scores similar to
ours were recently introduced for this speciﬁc task . The problem is deﬁned as
computing trajectories for a known set of true identities from a database. This
implies that the truth-to-result match is determined during tracking and not
evaluation. Instead, our evaluation applies to the more general MTMC setting
where the tracker is agnostic to the true identities.
Another contribution of this work is a new, manually annotated, calibrated,
multi-camera data set recorded outdoors on the Duke University campus with 8
synchronized cameras (Fig. 3)⋆. We recorded 6,791 trajectories for 2,834 diﬀerent
⋆ 
Performance Measures and a Data Set for MTMC Tracking
identities (distinct persons) over 1 hour and 25 minutes for each camera, for a
total of more than 10 video hours and more than 2 million frames. There are on
average 2.5 single-camera trajectories per identity, and up to 7 in some cases.
Fig. 3: Images and annotations of our DukeMTMC data set for frame 30890.
The cumulative trajectory time is more than 30 hours. Individual camera
density varies from 0 to 54 people per frame, depending on the camera. There
are 4,159 hand-overs and up to 50 people traverse blind spots at the same time.
More than 1,800 self-occlusion events happen (with 50% or more overlap), lasting
60 frames on average. Our videos are recorded at 1080p resolution and 60 fps
to capture spatial and temporal detail. Two camera pairs (2-8 and 3-5) have
small overlapping areas, through which about 100 people transit, while the other
cameras are disjoint. Full annotations are provided in the form of trajectories
of each person’s foot contact point with the ground. Image bounding boxes are
also available and have been semi-automatically generated. The ﬁrst 5 minutes
of video from all the cameras are set aside for validation or training, and the
remaining 80 minutes per camera are for testing.
Unlike many multi-camera data sets, ours is not scripted and cameras have a
wider ﬁeld of view. Unlike single-camera benchmarks where a tracker is tested on
very short videos of diﬀerent challenging scenarios, our data set is recorded in a
ﬁxed environment, and the main challenge is persistent tracking under occlusions
and blind spots.
People often carry bags, backpacks, umbrellas, or bicycles. Some people stop
for long periods of time in blind spots and the environment rarely constrains
their paths. So transition times through blind spots are often but not always
informative. 891 people walk in front of only one camera—a challenge for trackers
that are prone to false-positive matches across cameras.
Working with this data set requires eﬃcient trackers because of the amount
of data to process. To illustrate, it took 6 days on a single computer to generate
all the foreground masks with a standard algorithm and 7 days to generate
all detections on a cluster of 192 cores using the DPM detector . Computing appearance features for all cameras on a single machine took half a day;
computing all tracklets, trajectories, and identities together also took half a day
with the proposed system (Sec. 5). People detections and foreground masks are
released along with the videos.
Ergys Ristani, Francesco Solera, Roger S. Zou, Rita Cucchiara, Carlo Tomasi
Limitations. Our data set covers a single outdoor scene from ﬁxed cameras. Soft
lighting from overcast weather could make tracking easier. Views are mostly
disjoint, which disadvantages methods that exploit data from overlapping views.
Reference System
We provide a reference MTMC tracker that extends to multiple cameras a system
that was previously proposed for single camera multi-target tracking . Our
system takes target detections from any detection system, aggregates them into
tracklets that are short enough to rely on a simple motion model, then aggregates
tracklets into single camera trajectories, and ﬁnally connects these into multicamera trajectories which we call identities.
In each of these layers, a graph G = (V, E) has observations (detections,
tracklets, or trajectories) for nodes in V , and edges in E connect any pairs of
nodes i, j for which correlations wij are provided. These are real values in [−1, 1]
that measure evidence for or against i and j having the same identity. Values
of ±∞are also allowed to represent hard evidence. A Binary Integer Program
(BIP) solves the correlation clustering problem on G: Partition V so as to
maximize the sum of the correlations wij assigned to edges that connect coidentical observations and the penalties −wij assigned to edges that straddle
identities. Sets of the resulting partition are taken to be the desired aggregates.
Solving this BIP is NP-hard and the problem is also hard to approximate ,
hence the need for our multi-layered solution to keep the problems small. To
account for unbounded observation times, solutions are found at all levels over
a sliding temporal window, with solutions from previous overlapping windows
incorporated into the proper BIP as “extended observations”. For additional
eﬃciency, observations in all layers are grouped heuristically into a number of
subgroups with roughly consistent appearance and space-time locations.
Our implementation includes default algorithms for the computation of appearance descriptors and correlations in all layers. For appearance, we use the
methods from the previous paper in the ﬁrst layers and simple striped color
histograms for the last layer. Correlations are computed from both appearance features and simple temporal reasoning.
Experiments
This Section shows that (i) traditional event based measures are not good proxies for a tracker’s ID precision or ID recall, deﬁned in Section 3; (ii) handover
errors, as customarily deﬁned, cause frequent problems in practice; and (iii) the
performance of our reference system, when evaluated with existing measures, is
comparable to that of other recent MTMC trackers. We also give detailed performance numbers for our system on our data under a variety of performance
measures, including ours, to establish a baseline for future comparisons.
Performance Measures and a Data Set for MTMC Tracking
identification recall
fragmentations
identification recall
identification precision
fragmentations
identification precision
Fig. 4: Scatter plots of ground-truth trajectory ID recall (a, b) and ID precision (c, d)
versus the number of trajectory fragmentations (a, c) and merges (b, d). Correlation
coeﬃcients are -0.24, -0.05, -0.38 and -0.41. This conﬁrms that event- and identitybased measures quantify diﬀerent aspects of tracker performance.
(a) 1692 (30.5%)
(b) 738 (13.3%)
(c) 70 (1.3%)
(d) 1065 (19.2%)
(e) 496 (8.9%)
(f) 58 (1.0%)
Fig. 5: [See Figure 2 for the interpretation of these diagrams.] In about 74% (4,119 out
of 5,549) of the handovers output by our reference system on our data set, a short
trajectory close to the handover causes a marked discrepancy between event-based,
traditional performance measures and our identity-based measures. A handover fragmentation error (a, b) or merge error (d, e) is declared where the handover is essentially
correct. A handover fragmentation error (c) or merge error (f) is not declared where
the handover is essentially incorrect. Each caption shows the number of occurrences
and the percentage of the total number of computed handovers.
ID Recall, ID Precision and Mismatches. Figure 4 shows that fragmentations and merges correlate poorly with ID recall and ID precision, conﬁrming that
event- and identity-based measures quantify diﬀerent aspects of performance.
Truth-to-Result Mapping. Section 3 and Figure 2 describe situations in which
traditional, event-based performance measures handle handover errors diﬀerently
from ours. Figure 5 shows that these discrepancies are frequent in our results.
Traditional System Performance Analysis. Table 3 (top) compares our
reference method to existing ones on the NLPR MCT data sets and evaluates
performance using the existing MCTA measure. The results are obtained under
the commonly used experimental setup where all systems start with the same
input of ground-truth single-camera trajectories. On average, our baseline system
ranks second out of six by using our simple default appearance features. The
highest ranked method uses features based on discriminative learning.
Ergys Ristani, Francesco Solera, Roger S. Zou, Rita Cucchiara, Carlo Tomasi
NLPR 1 NLPR 2 NLPR 3 NLPR 4 Avg. Rank
hfutdspmct 
CRIPAC-MCT 
Adb-Team 
CLEAR MOT Measures
Our Measures
FN↓IDS↓FRG↓MOTA↑MOTP↑
GT MT↑ML↓IDP↑IDR↑IDF1↑
9.70 52.90
67.57 1175
105 128 79.17 44.97 57.36
2 21.48 29.19
61.70 1106
50 69.11 63.78 66.34
7.04 39.39
42 81.46 55.11 65.74
4 10.61 33.42
21 79.23 61.16 69.03
3.48 23.38
33 84.86 67.97 75.48
6 38.62 48.21 1426
48.62 1043
91 48.35 43.71 45.91
8.28 29.57
53 85.23 67.08 75.07
1.29 61.69
69.07 1254
369 236 90.54 35.86 51.37
Upper bound 72.25 50.96 59.77
Baseline 52.35 36.46 42.98
Table 3: Top Table: MCTA score comparison on the existing NLPR data sets, starting from ground truth single camera trajectories. The last column contains the average dataset ranks. Bottom Table: Single-camera (white background) and multi-camera
(grey background) results on our DukeMTMC data set. For each separate camera we
report both standard multi-target tracking measures as well as our new measures.
System Performance Details. Table 3 (bottom) shows both traditional and
new measures of performance, both single-camera and multi-camera, for our
reference system when run on our data set. This table is meant as a baseline
against which new methods may be compared.
From the table we see that our IDF1 score and MOTA do not agree on how
they rank the sequence diﬃculty of cameras 2 and 3. This is primarily because
they measure diﬀerent aspects of the tracker. Also, they are diﬀerent in the
relative value diﬀerences. For example, camera 6 appears much more diﬃcult
than 7 based on MOTA, but the diﬀerence is not as dramatic when results are
inspected visually or when IDF1 diﬀerences are considered.
Conclusion
We deﬁne new measures of MTMC tracking performance that emphasize correct identities over sources of error. We introduce the largest annotated and
calibrated data set to date for the comparison of MTMC trackers. We provide a
reference tracker that performs comparably to the state of the art by standard
measures, and we establish a baseline of performance measures, both traditional
and new, for future comparisons. We hope in this way to contribute to accelerating advances in this important and exciting ﬁeld.
Performance Measures and a Data Set for MTMC Tracking