Behavioral/Systems/Cognitive
Visual Topography of Human Intraparietal Sulcus
Jascha D. Swisher,1 Mark A. Halko,1 Lotfi B. Merabet,1,2 Stephanie A. McMains,1,3 and David C. Somers1,4
1Perceptual Neuroimaging Laboratory, Program in Neuroscience and Department of Psychology, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, 2Center
for Noninvasive Brain Stimulation, Department of Neurology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02215, 3Neuroscience of Attention and Perception Laboratory, Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08544, and
4Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, Massachusetts 02129
Human parietal cortex is implicated in a wide variety of sensory and cognitive functions, yet its precise organization remains unclear.
Visual field maps provide a potential structural basis for descriptions of functional organization. Here, we detail the topography of a
series of five maps of the contralateral visual hemifield within human posterior parietal cortex. These maps are located along the medial
bank of the intraparietal sulcus (IPS) and are revealed by direct visual stimulation during functional magnetic resonance imaging,
allowing these parietal regions to be routinely and reliably identified simultaneously with occipital visual areas. Two of these maps (IPS3
and IPS4) are novel, whereas two others (IPS1 and IPS2) have previously been revealed only by higher-order cognitive tasks. Area V7, a
previously identified visual map, is observed to lie within posterior IPS and to share a foveal representation with IPS1. These parietal
maps are reliably observed across scan sessions; however, their precise topography varies between individuals. The multimodal organization of posterior IPS mirrors this variability in visual topography, with complementary tactile activations found immediately adjacent
to the visual maps both medially and laterally. These visual maps may provide a practical framework in which to characterize the
functional organization of human IPS.
Key words: retinotopy; parietal cortex; individual differences; vision; multisensory; tactile
Introduction
Posterior parietal cortex supports an extensive range of sensory
and cognitive functions, including spatial representation, multimodal integration, attentional control, numerosity judgments,
motor planning, and working memory . In macaque, a number of detailed cortical parcellation
schemes aid in the understanding of this functional diversity, but on an equivalent spatial scale,
human parietal cortex remains poorly described.
In contrast, the organization of human occipital cortex and its
relationship to that of nonhuman primates is comparatively well understood. Occipital cortex is tiled with visual field maps that can be rapidly,
precisely, and noninvasively identified using functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) and phase-encoded stimuli . These retinotopically defined borders provide important and practical “functional landmarks” for the interpretation of
task-related activations within individual subjects.
Equivalent approaches applied in parietal cortex have met
with success. In the dorsal visual processing stream, conventional
stimulus-driven retinotopic mapping has previously revealed a
topographic structure extending anteriorly as far as area V7, defined as a map of the contralateral visual hemifield adjacent and
superior to area V3A .
Recently, several groups have used specialized stimuli to identify
additional topographic representations in anterior and posterior parietal cortex. The tasks used in these
previous studies of posterior parietal cortex have relied on saccade planning or attention, without strong components of
“bottom-up” sensory drive. These groups have identified one or
two contiguous maps of the contralateral hemifield located dorsal to V7 on the medial bank of the posterior intraparietal sulcus
(IPS). However, these parietal maps are less evidently well organized than the clearly defined topography of early visual cortex.
The more recent reports find sporadic “dropouts” within the mapped regions where
responses fall beneath statistical thresholds. Furthermore, the
precise topography of these maps appears to vary substantially
between individuals. It is unclear whether this apparent variability is attributable to limitations of the mapping technique, or
whether it instead reflects true variability in the underlying topography of parietal cortex.
Using “checkerboard” retinotopic mapping stimuli and a
conservative statistical approach, we find five hemifield maps,
including V7, that extend along the medial bank of posterior IPS
Received Dec. 21, 2006; revised April 5, 2007; accepted April 5, 2007.
This work was supported by National Science Foundation Grant BCS-0236737 (D.C.S.) and National Institutes of
Health Grant K23 EY016131- 01 to (L.B.M.). Tactile patterns supplied by Steven Hsiao.
Correspondence should be addressed to Dr. Jascha D. Swisher, Program in Neuroscience, Boston University, 2
Cummington Street, Boston, MA 02215. E-mail: .
DOI:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0991-07.2007
Copyright © 2007 Society for Neuroscience
0270-6474/07/275326-12$15.00/0
5326 • The Journal of Neuroscience, May 16, 2007 • 27(20):5326–5337
and into the superior parietal lobule. These maps are highly reproducible both in global structure and fine details across sessions within individual subjects and can often be identified without resorting to extensive signal averaging. Additionally, we find
that intersubject variability in parietal visual topography is reflected in complementary patterns of activation produced in the
same subjects by a simple tactile roughness judgment. Tactile
responses are found both immediately adjacent to the visual
maps and within the dropouts in the map complex. These precise,
complementary activity patterns suggest that visual field maps
may provide a useful and practical basis for descriptions of the
multimodal functional organization of posterior parietal cortex.
Portions of this work have previously appeared in abstract
form .
Materials and Methods
Twenty subjects were recruited from the Boston University community.
All subjects provided informed consent and were scanned in accordance
with MR safety guidelines under an experimental protocol approved by
the Institutional Review Boards of Boston University and Massachusetts
General Hospital. One author (M.A.H.) also served as a subject. Most
subjects participated in two 1 h scan sessions, with high-resolution anatomical data collected in the first hour, followed by functional retinotopic mapping in the second session. Five subjects returned for additional intensive mapping sessions, as specified in Results. Three of these
five also participated in separate sessions of delayed saccade mapping.
Five subjects (three intensively mapped) additionally performed the tactile tasks in separate scan sessions.
Stimulus-driven mapping protocol
All visual stimuli were presented via a liquid crystal display projector
illuminating a screen placed in the scanner bore. Subjects viewed the
rear-projection screen through a mirror angled at 45°. The screen extended across a visual angle of 15° radius horizontally and 12° radius
vertically.
The stimulus-driven mapping protocol resembled the well established
procedures widely used to map the retinotopic organization of early
visual areas . The
primary mapping stimulus was made up of a static background, viewed
through a continuously moving transparent aperture in a dark foreground layer (supplemental Fig. 1, available at www.jneurosci.org as
supplemental material). The background was a static, flickering chromatic radial checkerboard, with check radius scaled logarithmically in
approximation of the cortical magnification function . Check luminance alternated spatially between “dark” and “light”
checks, in addition to a random chromatic component, to provide both
luminance and chromatic contrast. Dark and light checks reversed, and
the chromaticity was randomly reassigned, at the 4 Hz flicker frequency.
The transparent aperture through which the checkerboard background was viewed comprised either a wedge rotating about fixation on
polar angle mapping scans, or an expanding or contracting annulus on
eccentricity mapping scans. The periodicity of both types of stimuli was
32 s (16 cycles per 512 s run). During the subsequent intensive mapping
sessions, this periodicity was lengthened to 42.67 s (12 cycles/512 s). We
alternated between clockwise and counterclockwise rotation (or expansion and contraction) on subsequent runs. The polar angle wedge was 90°
in width (72° during intensive mapping) and extended to the edges of the
screen, resulting in an asymmetry in the maximum peripheral extent of
stimulation between the vertical and horizontal meridians. No substantive difference in response was observed between the two angular stimulus configurations used. During eccentricity mapping, the aperture increased logarithmically as a function of time in both size and rate of
expansion, in an attempt to match the estimated human cortical magnification function and create a “traveling wave” of constant width and
speed in early visual cortex. The duty cycle of the annulus was 5% (any
given point on screen was within the aperture for only 5% of the stimulus
period). The ring expanded uniformly beyond the maximum extent of
the screen and was offscreen entirely for 6 s of the 32 s stimulus period,
after which it wrapped around to the fovea (vice versa for runs of contracting ring stimulation).
Subjects were instructed to fixate a small (8 arcmin) dot in the center
of the screen and to respond with a button press whenever the fixation
point dimmed. Dimming events occurred at random intervals throughout the scan, every 4.5 s, on average. In a brief practice session before the
scan, subjects viewed the stimulus and practiced the button press response while the importance of holding fixation was emphasized. During
the scans, the subjects detected the dimming fixation point within 1 s on
upward of 95% of trials. This task was not intended to be highly attentionally demanding, but rather simply to encourage subject vigilance and
fixation during what would otherwise be an extraordinarily monotonous
stimulus presentation.
Delayed saccade mapping protocol
The delayed saccade task was modeled after paradigms previously used
by other investigators to investigate parietal topography . Subjects fixated a central point while a
peripheral (11.4° radius) target dot was briefly flashed (250 ms). The
flashed peripheral stimulus was quickly replaced by a ring of 100 distractor dots randomly positioned within a ring of from 10.8 to 12° radius.
The distractors remained on screen for 3 s, after which subjects made a
saccadic eye movement to the remembered position of the peripheral
target and then immediately made a saccade back to the central fixation
The position of the peripheral saccade target rotated around the periphery from trial to trial, so that after 12 trials the target completed one
full cycle. A trial lasted 4.27 s, with 10 cycles completed in a single 512 s
Tactile roughness judgment
The stimulus and task used have been described in detail previously
 . Briefly, raised dot patterns at one of seven dot densities were placed beneath the pad of the right
index finger of blindfolded subjects. The dots were 1 mm in diameter, 2
mm in elevation, and arranged in tetragonal arrays, the interdot spacing
of which varied from 1 to 7 mm. Subjects’ hands were positioned palm
down by their side as they lay supine in the scanner. They made two
scanning sweeps of the right index finger, judged the perceived roughness
of the dot pattern on a 1–4 scale, and responded with a button press in the
left hand. In a motor control condition, subjects made similar sweeping
motions over a smooth surface and responded with random button
presses. The tasks were presented in the scanner in 30 s blocks preceded
by an auditory task cue. Each trial within the block lasted 5–7 s.
Scan parameters
Data acquisition took place in either 3T Siemens (New York, NY) Allegra
or 3T Siemens Tim Trio scanners located at the Martinos Center for
Biomedical Imaging at Massachusetts General Hospital. fMRI scans used
echo planar imaging (EPI) sequences sensitive to blood oxygenation
level-dependent contrast [repetition time (TR), 2 s; echo time (TE), 30
ms; voxels: 2.8  2.8  3.3 mm (Allegra), 3.125  3.125  3.0 mm
(Trio)]. A custom-made surface coil (Advanced NMR, Wilmington,
MA) was used with the Allegra and placed at or slightly dorsal to the
occipital pole to maximize coverage of early visual and parietal areas. A
12-channel head matrix coil was used with the Trio. Only data from the
initial scan sessions in the Allegra were used in the comparison of signal
change across visual areas, described below. From 27 to 32 slices were
oriented approximately perpendicular to the calcarine sulcus, in most
subjects giving coverage of the brain as far anterior as the central sulcus.
Eight seconds of data were discarded at the beginning of each functional
Before functional imaging in each session, T1-weighted EPI images
were acquired using the same slice prescription as the functional scans to
allow for registration of the data from each session to a subject’s highresolution anatomical images. The high-resolution anatomical volume
was imaged in a previous session for each subject using an MPRAGE
(magnetization-prepared rapid gradient echo) sequence with 1  1 
1.33 mm resolution.
Swisher et al. • IPS Topography
J. Neurosci., May 16, 2007 • 27(20):5326–5337 • 5327
Statistics and analysis
Data preprocessing. Functional data were motion corrected and intensity normalized before manual registration to an
individual subject’s high-resolution anatomical volume.
Retinotopy analysis. Phase-encoded retinotopic mapping is based on the use of a
periodic stimulus to induce neural activity at the same frequency in
visually responsive voxels. Two components of the response are of interest: the amplitude of the response at the stimulus frequency relative to the
background spectrum determines the significance of the modulation,
whereas the phase of this response encodes the spatial position of the
receptive field of the voxel.
Multitaper spectral estimation. We used Thomson’s multitaper method
to generate a smoothed estimate of the spectrum of the time course at
each voxel . The multitaper method is a nonparametric form of spectral
analysis in which time series data are first windowed by a set of K mutually orthogonal tapers, thereby producing K-independent spectral estimates that have been smoothed in the frequency domain. The particular
tapers used are from the family of discrete prolate spheroidal sequences
 , which are finite, orthonormal sequences, the energy of
which is maximally concentrated within a user-defined bandwidth. This
bandwidth is often expressed implicitly as the time-bandwidth product
NW, where N is the sequence length (e.g., in seconds) and W is the design
bandwidth (e.g., in hertz). Typical values for NW are in the range 2–4,
with greater values indicating a greater degree of smoothing: the number
of Rayleigh frequencies over which the spectral estimate is smoothed is
given by 2NW. NW was set to 4 in this study.
Multitaper test for periodicity. The statistical methods previously used
in retinotopic mapping [including those based on coherence measures or
global F statistics ] require the
assumption of a strictly white background spectrum, an assumption that
is known not to hold for fMRI noise . A statistical test
associated with the multitaper estimator detects sinusoidal components that are significantly greater in amplitude than a
slowly changing background spectrum. This test requires only the assumption of “locally white” noise, where “local” refers to the smoothing
diameter 2NW. The test produces an F ratio with 2 and 2K  2 degrees of
freedom, where the numerator estimates the amplitude of a potential
harmonic component at the specified frequency and the denominator
estimates the local background spectrum, assumed to be noise. Here, K is
set to equal 2NW  1, thereby including only those tapers with potentially good bias properties . The multitaper
test requires that the background spectrum be slowly changing in the
vicinity of the signal, which is an assumption easily met at moderate to
fast stimulus frequencies. Thus, in contrast to previous tests, the significance values determined by the multitaper test are valid for statistical
inference, which is of critical importance when attempting to efficiently
detect weak signals. This approach has been previously applied to brain
imaging data but has not, to our knowledge,
been used previously for the detection of retinotopic maps. In practice,
the multitaper test has slightly less statistical power than tests previously
used in retinotopic mapping (e.g., global F-statistic-based tests), because
of a reduction in the degrees of freedom of the background noise amplitude estimate, but in return produces significance values that remain
valid even in the presence of substantial low-frequency noise (for more
details, see supplemental Figs. 2, 3, available at www.jneurosci.org as
supplemental material).
Thomson’s multitaper test was performed at the known stimulation
frequency for each voxel in each run. Because each run can be considered
to be independent, the voxelwise F-statistic numerator and denominator
of each run were summed separately to produce a combined F statistic for
the scan session with 2  Nruns and (4NW  4)  Nruns degrees of
Response phase estimation. The sinusoidal component at the stimulus
frequency is estimated by complex-valued regression as part of the multitaper test for significance. For significantly active voxels, the phase of
this estimated sinusoid is nearly identical to that obtained by the usual
method of calculating the Fourier transform of the time series directly.
The phase estimate was combined across clockwise and counterclockwise
(expanding/contracting) runs by taking the complex conjugate of the
signal estimates in the counterclockwise (contracting) runs, thereby reflecting the phase about 0 , and summing the resulting estimates across all runs via simple vector addition and reporting the
phase of the resulting vector sum.
Visualization on cortical surface
The above analysis produces four summary volumes (F-statistic numerator, F-statistic denominator, real and imaginary components of phase
estimate) for each mapping stimulus (ring or wedge) per session. These
volumes were upsampled by a factor of 4 in each dimension using linear
interpolation to reduce aliasing artifacts in the projection onto the
higher-resolution anatomical volume. No explicit smoothing was applied to the functional data at any stage of the analysis.
The cortical surface of each hemisphere of each subject was reconstructed as a triangular mesh from the subject’s automatically segmented
high-resolution anatomical volume using Freesurfer software . Both the gray/white matter and pial surfaces
were segmented. The upsampled functional statistic volumes were projected by nearest neighbor search onto the vertices of an interpolated
mesh located halfway between the gray/white and pial surfaces. The cortical mesh was then computationally inflated.
Flattened representations of parietal cortex were generated by first
separating the superior parietal surface from the remainder of the inflated cortex with a linear cutting plane. The resulting semicylindrical
surface of each hemisphere of each subject was then computationally
flattened with Freesurfer software so as to minimize both angular and
distance distortion . For display purposes, the flattened surface patches were cropped into a rectangle with the posterior
branch of the IPS aligned along the long axis. In some hemispheres, the
edge of the cutting plane falls partly within the cropped patch, appearing
as a ragged border within the rectangular boundaries of the cropped
The projected functional statistics were used to combine mapping data
across sessions on separate days. The significance of the periodic activation across sessions was assessed by separately summing across sessions
the projected F-statistic numerators and denominators at each vertex on
the cortical mesh and taking their ratio to produce a single cross-sessioncombined F statistic per surface vertex. These F statistics were converted
to significance values and used to threshold the visualization of the maps,
as described below. We generated cross-session phase estimates by first
weighting the real and imaginary phase components of each session by
the within-session F ratio, multiplied by the number of runs in the session. This weighting is proportional to the square of the within-session
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), which is the least-squares optimal weighting
for a combined phase estimate at moderate to high SNR . The resulting weighted real and imaginary components were then
summed vertexwise over the cortical surface, and the final vector sum at
each vertex was converted back into an angular phase measurement.
The resulting projected statistical image was then visualized similarly
to previous reports . Briefly, surface vertices, the
significance of which exceeded a specified threshold, were rendered in a
color indicating the phase of the signal estimate at that point. The color
map was defined so that the representation of the contralateral horizontal
meridian was rendered in blue, the upper vertical meridian was rendered
in red, the lower vertical meridian was rendered in green, and the ipsilateral horizontal meridian was rendered in yellow. For display purposes,
the color map was compressed slightly to overrepresent the contralateral
visual field, so as to approximately match the distribution of response
phase within the early retinotopic areas as described in Results. Surface
vertices, the significance of which did not exceed threshold, were rendered in dark or light gray to reveal cortical sulci and gyri. All maps
shown here are thresholded at a p  0.05 vertexwise level, except where
otherwise indicated.
Region-of-interest definitions
Two sets of regions of interest (ROIs) were defined for each hemisphere
of each subject on their reconstructed cortical mesh. The first set in-
5328 • J. Neurosci., May 16, 2007 • 27(20):5326–5337
Swisher et al. • IPS Topography
cluded ROIs defined primarily on retinotopic criteria, intended to correspond to the underlying visual maps. ROIs were defined for each quadrant of early retinotopic visual cortex (V1–V3) and for the V3A and V7
hemifield representations. In parietal cortex, ROIs were defined by the
posterior and anterior phase reversals of each hemifield map in the angular dimension (typically anterior/posterior) and the limits of significant ( p  0.05) angular response in the orthogonal (typically medial/
lateral) dimension. In those subjects where activation was not sufficient
to allow map boundaries to be determined based on functional criteria
alone, we defined similar V7 and IPS1–4 ROIs by reference to the sulcal
anatomy. All of these parietal regions were defined to be approximately
rectangular and contiguous with their neighboring ROIs. These ROIs
were used in the comparison of signal change across visual maps and for
the calculation of cross-session phase correlation, described below.
The second group of ROIs were large, anatomically defined regions
centered on the posterior IPS. The borders of these regions closely followed the boundaries of the cropped parietal surface patches shown in
Figures 4 and 6–8. These ROIs were used to define the region included in
the calculation of correlations between percentage signal change images,
described below.
Test–retest reliability
We assessed the test–retest reliability of the visuotopic maps in terms of
both their amplitude and their phase. Reproducible amplitudes of activation show that the activated regions of cortex are similar from one
session to the next, whereas reproducible phases demonstrate that the
maps within these areas remain aligned between sessions. The reproducibility of the activation patterns was assessed by first normalizing the
functional statistical volumes into percentage signal change units and
then upsampling and projecting these volumes onto the reconstructed
cortical surface as described previously. We then calculated the correlation between percentage signal change images from each session within a large anatomically defined posterior parietal ROI.
The mean signal change within the ROI was subtracted from the activation images separately for each session before the correlation being computed. High correlations indicate good reproducibility of the activation
patterns between mapping sessions. The same method was also used to
evaluate the relationship between the patterns of visuotopic and tactile
activation. A negative correlation indicates complementary patterns,
with high tactile drive in regions of low visuotopic activation and vice
The reproducibility of the phase maps within the visuotopically activated cortex was assessed separately for each cortical map by calculating
the circular correlation between the phase estimates of points within the ROI that were significantly ( p  0.05) modulated in both sessions. We evaluated the significance of these correlations via a permutation test. At each iteration of this test, the phases of the
set of significant voxels intersecting the ROI were randomly permuted
and projected onto the cortical surface (without upsampling), after
which the circular correlation between significant vertices was calculated.
This was repeated 10,000 times for each ROI per subject, creating an
estimate of the distribution of correlation values under the null hypothesis. The significance of the original correlation was then determined
with respect to this simulated null distribution.
Tactile data analysis
Analysis of the tactile session data used standard procedures and software
(FS-FAST, the FreeSurfer Functional Analysis STream; CorTechs, La
Jolla, CA). Briefly, the voxelwise time series were fit by a general linear
model, the regressors of which matched the time course of the experimental conditions as smoothed by a canonical hemodynamic response
function. The contrast of the roughness judgment versus the motor control conditions produced a volume of t statistics for each subject, which
were then converted into significance values and upsampled and projected onto the subject’s reconstructed cortical surface as described previously for the retinotopy data.
We used fMRI to map the representations of the visual field
found within human occipital and parietal cortex. Previous studies using similar methods have identified the hemifield maps
V3A, V3B, V7, LO1, and LO2 on the dorsal
and lateral aspects of the human occipital lobe, in addition to the
well known early visual areas V1, V2, and V3. Here, we simultaneously map an additional four representations of the contralat-
The angular mapping wedge stimulus reveals visuotopically specific activation throughout a substantial portion of the posterior cerebral cortex. The angular position of the wedge
resultinginthegreatestsignificant( p0.05)responseisindicatedbythecoloredoverlay(inset),withredrepresentingtheuppervisualmeridian,bluerepresentingthecontralateralhorizontal
meridian,andgreenrepresentingthelowermeridian.Potentialipsilateralresponsesareindicatedinyellow.Therighthemisphere(RH)ofasinglesubject(Subj1)isshownhere.A,Thereconstructed
pialsurfaceisshownfromposteriorlateral(topleft),posteriormedial(bottomleft),andposterior(right)views.B,Computationalinflationofthefoldedcorticalsurfacerevealsvisuotopicallyspecific
activation within the sulci. Reversals in the represented angular position correspond to areal boundaries in the early visual areas and are shown as overlaid lines. Dashed lines indicate reversals at
representationsoftheverticalmeridian,whereassolidlinesindicatereversalsathorizontalmeridianrepresentations.WefindfivehemifieldmapsalongthemedialbankoftheIPS,includingarea
V7andIPS1–IPS4.C,Aflattenedrepresentationoftheoccipitalcortex(extendingintoparietalandtemporalregions)showing14simultaneouslymappedvisualregions.Thedisorganizedresponses
in the peripheral regions of V1–V3 likely represent negative blood oxygenation level-dependent signal, leading to lagged or antiphase responses to the visual stimulus .
Swisher et al. • IPS Topography
J. Neurosci., May 16, 2007 • 27(20):5326–5337 • 5329
eral visual hemifield extending along the
medial bank of the IPS (Fig. 1, Table 1).
Areas V3A and V3B lie along the transverse occipital sulcus . Anterior and adjacent to area V3A, along the
inferior portion of the medial bank of the
IPS, is the V7 hemifield representation
 (Fig.
2). We find reliable, topographically specific responses to direct visual stimulation
well beyond this point, extending superiorly along the medial bank of the posterior
IPS and further into the superior parietal
lobule. Within this region, the representation of angular position in the visual field
changes continuously in the direction parallel to the length of the sulcus, with reversals at the representations of the upper and
lower visual meridians. The first two
hemifield representations beyond V7 are
consistent in topography and anatomical
location with the recently described IPS1
and IPS2 maps, which previously have
been revealed only by more cognitive,
“top-down” tasks such as delayed saccades
 or covert attention . In many subjects, one to two additional hemifield maps are found anterior to IPS2, usually continuing to parallel the sulcal anatomy as it turns mediolaterally. In
keeping with the naming convention established for the more
posterior parietal maps, we refer to these additional two hemifield representations as IPS3 and IPS4.
These parietal regions responded predominantly to stimuli
presented in the contralateral visual field (Fig. 3). As reported in
the covert attention studies of Silver et al. , the vertical
meridian is underrepresented, with the contralateral hemifield
representation appearing to be compressed toward the horizontal meridian. We also find a similar, although smaller, horizontal
bias in early visual cortex. A horizontal overrepresentation has
also been reported using fMRI in the human lateral geniculate
nucleus .
Eccentricity organization
Standard thin-ring stimuli revealed a representation of the eccentricity dimension of the visual field approximately orthogonal to the angular dimension on the cortical surface, although these responses were somewhat less robust than
those to the angular mapping wedge stimuli (Fig. 4). V3A and
V3B are separated by a local minimum in the eccentricity map;
however, as reported previously , this minimum often does not appear to represent the central 3° of the
visual field. We reliably find a continuous gradient of eccentricity
response phase along the V7/IPS1 border. This gradient reveals a
mediolateral eccentricity representation, with a laterally positioned foveal representation in the fundus of the IPS, moving
through parafoveal representations on the medial sulcal wall, to
representations of the peripheral extent of stimulation (12–15°
radius) on the adjacent gyrus. This lateral central field representation appears to be the same as that reported previously within
area V7 ;
however, the present angular phase maps indicate that it is more
properly considered to belong to both the V7 and IPS1 hemifield
maps, defining a map complex or cluster by virtue of the confluent foveal representation . Although the representation of eccentricity within
IPS3/4 is less clear, a parsimonious interpretation of the data
suggests that these anterior regions continue the pattern of foveal
responses laterally and peripheral responses medially seen in the
more posterior IPS, likely forming a second distinct foveal
representation.
Signal change across areas
To compare the strength of parietal responses to those in earlier
visual areas, we calculated the voxelwise percentage signal change
at the fundamental frequency of the angular mapping stimulus.
Each subject’s volume of voxelwise angular mapping percentage
signal change estimates was interpolated and projected onto the
cortical surface, and the percentage signal change for each point
within an ROI was averaged together. A second “null” signal
change was also calculated for each area, defined as the estimated
signal change at a frequency five cycles per run greater than the
Coronal slices. The location of V3A, V3B, V7, and IPS1–4 is indicated in coronal slices through the brain of subject 1
(Subj 1). Area V7 occupies a substantial portion of posterior/inferior IPS. RH, Right hemisphere; ANT, anterior; POS, posterior.
Table 1. MNI coordinates (in millimeters)
20, 90, 23
33, 85, 16
26, 79, 31
23, 73, 40
21, 68, 52
25, 61, 55
26, 57, 54
MNI, Montreal Neurological Institute.
5330 • J. Neurosci., May 16, 2007 • 27(20):5326–5337
Swisher et al. • IPS Topography
stimulus frequency. No periodic response is expected at this null
frequency.
As expected, periodic visual responses in parietal cortex are
much smaller than in early visual areas (Fig. 5A). Response amplitude drops off substantially between V3A and V7 and decreases gradually as one moves into higher parietal areas, reflecting, in part, increased distance from the surface coil. Across the
full population of 20 subjects scanned, signal change is significantly greater at the actual stimulus frequency than at the null
frequency within all areas up to and including IPS4 (Wilcoxon
rank test, all p  10 5). These responses are sufficiently strong as
to often allow the identification of these visual maps without
resorting to extensive signal averaging. Significant ( p  0.05 voxelwise) responses were observed in IPS1/2 in 14 of 20 subjects and
in IPS3/4 in 11 of 20 subjects, with 512 time points of data acquired (18 min of scanning with a TR of 2.0 s).
Test–retest reliability
Five subjects with relatively clear parietal maps revealed during
the initial scan sessions were brought back for subsequent intensive mapping, allowing the test–retest reliability of these measurements to be examined. The intensive sessions took place between 2 and 18 months after initial mapping, over which time the
parietal maps proved to be highly stable (Fig. 6). We examined
the reliability of these measurements both in terms of the cortical
regions activated and of the visual field maps revealed within
these activated areas. Across the population of five repeatedly
scanned subjects (10 hemispheres), the activation patterns within
posterior parietal cortex (as measured by percentage signal
change, thereby disregarding response phase) were highly correlated between sessions, with a mean correlation of r  0.77 across
10 hemispheres (median, r  0.79; maximum, 0.86; minimum,
0.68), demonstrating that the mapping stimulus reliably activated the same areas of cortex across sessions.
Within each defined parietal map, the response phases were
also well correlated between sessions. We initially determined a
cross-session phase correlation for each ROI in each hemisphere
by calculating the circular correlation 
across sessions of the response phases of all points within the ROI
that were significantly ( p  0.05) active in both sessions. We then
averaged these values across all hemispheres to find a mean population correlation for each ROI (Fig. 5B). There was one outlier
(subject 5, left hemisphere) who produced a spurious negative
correlation (r  0.66) in IPS2, based on five active voxels. This
hemisphere had zero overlapping voxels between sessions in IPS3
and IPS4. Accordingly, the hemisphere was excluded in the calculation of correlations for IPS2/3/4. The resulting population
correlation was significantly greater than expected by chance
(Wilcoxon rank test) within all parietal ROIs.
For a more stringent test of the reproducibility of these maps
within individual subjects, we contrasted the observed test–retest
circular correlation within each ROI versus correlations obtained
from random permutations of the maps. This tests whether the
between-sessions correlation for the ROI of a particular hemisphere is greater than would be expected from a random sampling of voxels of similar spatial extent and with similar visual
field preferences. The test is sensitive both to the similarity in
response phase of matching points as well as the amount of spatial
overlap between sessions, with greater overlap producing a more
significant correlation for equal agreement in phase at individual
points. Each identified parietal map was found to be significantly
( p  0.05) reproducible by this strict criterion in at least half of
the mapped hemispheres, with 8 of 10 hemispheres showing significant correlations in V7 and IPS1, 5 of 10 showing significant
correlations in IPS2, 6 of 10 showing significant correlations in
IPS3, and 5 of 10 showing significant correlations in IPS4. Maps
that were not found to be significantly correlated across sessions
were almost uniformly within small or minimally active ROIs,
and thus these failures to reach significance were likely attributable to limited statistical power, rather than to gross misalignment of the phase maps between sessions.
Comparison with delayed saccades
Previous reports of visual topography in human parietal cortex
have often used a delayed saccade task . To compare the topography revealed by
these differing paradigms, three subjects with clear, continuous
map structures were rescanned while performing a delayed saccade task similar to those used previously by other groups. We
find the pattern of activation during delayed saccade mapping is
typically more sparse than that generated by stimulus-driven
mapping (given equal acquisition times), but that both tasks activate the same regions of cortex (Fig. 7). The overall topography
is in reasonable agreement between the tasks, with an average
correlation between saccade and stimulus-driven percentage signal change data of r  0.36 (median, r  0.40; maximum, 0.43;
minimum, 0.18; n  6 hemispheres). Across this small sample,
we found significant phase correlations ( p  0.05, Wilcoxon
rank test) between saccade and stimulus-driven maps within
Radialhistogramsofpreferredangularresponsephase.Theserosediagramsshow
the distribution of response phase for surface vertices responding significantly to the angular
mapping stimulus, combined across all five intensively mapped subjects. The histograms have
beenrotatedsothattheangularpositionontheplotcorrespondstotheangularpositionwithin
thevisualfield.A,B,HistogramsforleftandrightcombinedV1,V2,andV3.C,D,Histogramsfor
left and right combined V7 and IPS1–4. All respond predominately to contralateral stimuli.
Bothearlyvisualandparietalcortexoverrepresentthehorizontalmeridian,althoughtheoverrepresentation is somewhat more pronounced in IPS. The color maps used to display the responsetotheangularmappingstimulus(asinFig.1)aredefinedtosimilarlyoverrepresentthe
contralateral hemisphere. LH, Left hemisphere; RH, Right hemisphere.
Swisher et al. • IPS Topography
J. Neurosci., May 16, 2007 • 27(20):5326–5337 • 5331
V7 and IPS1 and a trend toward significant correlation in IPS2
( p  0.1).
Individual differences and multisensory activation
Although the large-scale pattern of multiple alternating hemifield
maps along the IPS is evident in nearly all subjects, individuals
exhibit substantial variability in the fine details of this topography. To a large degree, this variation in functional organization
appears to reflect individual differences in the anatomy of the IPS
and surrounding gyri, which can vary greatly even between hemispheres of the same subject . In particular, the
IPS3/4 maps are often, but not always, found to be rotated mediolaterally relative to IPS1/2, usually following the local anatomy of the sulcus at that point.
Many individuals show an apparent dropout in the map complex within IPS1 or IPS2 (Fig. 7) . These dropouts are reproducible features of the activation patterns, suggesting that they do not simply reflect random deviations below statistical threshold as a result of insufficient signal averaging. Because IPS is generally regarded as an area
of multimodal integration , one specific
alternative hypothesis is that these dropouts may be responsive to
stimulation in other sensory modalities. In particular, tactual
roughness discriminations have been shown to activate posterior
parietal areas, potentially overlapping these visuotopically organized regions . To
test this, we compared the location of these parietal visual maps to
the activation patterns produced in five blindfolded subjects as
they performed a simple tactile roughness judgment with the
index finger of the right hand. The two patterns were strikingly
complementary, with significant tactile activations immediately
adjacent to the significant visuotopic responses on both medial
and lateral sides. There was often slight overlap at the boundaries
of the two regions, but even at a lenient statistical threshold ( p 
0.1) the areas responsive to visual and tactile modalities were
never observed to fully overlap (Fig. 8 and supplemental Fig. 5,
available at www.jneurosci.org as supplemental material). Crucially, however, in every hemisphere where an extensive dropout
in the visuotopic maps at the level of IPS1/2 resulted in two
discontinuous regions of significant ( p  0.05) parietal visuotopic activation, we observed significant ( p  0.05) tactile activation spanning the visuotopic dropout. This significant tactile
activation typically connected two stronger activation foci medial
and lateral to IPS, resulting in a single contiguous region of tactile
activity extending across the sulcus. Conversely, in hemispheres
where significant visuotopic activation extended in a single contiguous band parallel to the sulcus, tactile activation was always
separated by the visuotopic complex into two distinct foci medial
and lateral to the sulcus. These qualitatively complementary patterns are reflected quantitatively in an anticorrelation between
the parietal percentage signal change patterns for the two modalities (mean, r  0.28; maximum, 0.16; minimum, 0.42; 10
hemispheres). ROIs for this comparison were defined based on
anatomic criteria and corresponded to the regions of cortex
shown in the patches of Figure 8.
Discussion
Detailed retinotopic mapping permitted the simultaneous identification of up to 14 distinct visual field maps in the occipital and
parietal lobes of human subjects, including five contiguous regions extending along the medial bank of IPS and into the superior parietal lobule. Two of these IPS areas, IPS3 and IPS4, are
newly defined. Two of the IPS areas, IPS1 and IPS2, are reported
here using direct stimulus mapping; previous reports have used
higher-order saccade or spatial attention mapping tasks . The most
posterior region, V7, which has previously been reported via retinotopic mapping , is shown here to lie in IPS and to share a fovea representation with IPS1. These stimulus-driven visual field maps provide an important functional parcellation of IPS, which should
help guide future investigations of the mechanisms of spatial attention, multisensory integration, visuospatial motor planning,
Angularandeccentricitypatchesfortheleft(LH)andright(RH)hemispheresofasecondsubject(Subj2).Thelocationofthepatchesisindicatedbyshadingontheinflatedhemisphere
(far left). The patches are aligned so that posterior IPS runs vertically, from V3A/B at the bottom (inferiorly) to IPS4 at the top (superiorly). Angular (left) and eccentricity (Eccen; right) data are
displayed on the same anatomical patches, with identical borders overlaid. The eccentricity mapping color key goes from red at central eccentricities (here 0–3.5° radius) through mideccentricities in blue and the periphery in green. Foveal responses are indicated by circles.
5332 • J. Neurosci., May 16, 2007 • 27(20):5326–5337
Swisher et al. • IPS Topography
and the other cognitive functions that have been shown to use
intraparietal cortical circuitry.
These visual field maps were detected using multitaper analysis, a statistical approach that remains valid even under conditions of low-frequency noise , leading to more conservative estimates of the significance
of the activations than in previous phase-encoded mapping studies. We further note that variability between subjects in the precise pattern of visuotopic response is reflected in complementary
activation patterns produced in parietal cortex during a simple
tactile roughness judgment performed while blindfolded. This
suggests that these apparent intersubject differences in parietal
topography do reflect true underlying variability in cortical organization, rather than artifactual or methodological limitations.
Comparison with previous mapping
Previous investigations using stimulus-based mapping paradigms have not consistently detected these parietal hemifield
maps, leading to the belief that explicit covert attention or other
cognitive factors may be critical to revealing parietal topography.
As a result, visual mapping studies targeting the parietal lobes
have generally used more cognitively demanding tasks, including
covert attention tasks and delayed saccades
 . The use of unique
stimuli for each region to be mapped poses a practical barrier to
the routine functional parcellation of individual human cortex.
The present success in obtaining stimulus-driven maps in parietal cortex likely reflects the combined influence of several incremental improvements in the paradigm. Retinotopic mapping
studies have long been plagued by subject difficulties in maintaining fixation and/or arousal level, because of the monotonous
nature of the stimuli. To improve subject fixation and vigilance, a
simple foveal dimming detection paradigm was used. Although
endogenously directing attention to the foveal task may reduce
the amount of exogenous attention allocated to the flashing
checkerboard stimuli , the benefits in terms of stable fixation and vigilance
outweigh this reduction. Additional factors potentially aiding the
detection of parietal maps include technical considerations (e.g.,
use of a surface coil) as well as aspects of the stimulus itself (e.g.,
chromatic contrast, continuous motion, long duty cycle of angular stimulation).
The anatomic position and topography of the IPS1/2 maps we
find here are in excellent agreement with the saccade and attention maps of Schluppeck et al. and Silver et al. .
However, these authors note a discrepancy between the Talairach
positions of the IPS1/2 maps and the parietal hemifield map
found by Sereno et al. , suggesting that these may be distinct areas. Here, we have used the same software for atlas alignment and registration as Sereno et al. and find relatively
good agreement between the coordinates of our IPS1/2 and those
of Silver et al. and Schluppeck et al. (Table 2). The
parietal saccade map of Sereno et al. is in the vicinity of our
IPS2/3/4; this map was described as “often” having an upper field
representation positioned superiorly, consistent with the topography of IPS1 and IPS3. More recently, Sereno and Huang 
have reported a superior parietal map with aligned visual and
tactile receptive fields responsive to stimuli on or near the face,
located in anterior IPS at the level of the postcentral sulcus. The
reported coordinates of this map place it 15 mm anterior and
lateral to IPS4. Kitada et al. have reported a multisensory
region of anterior IPS responsive during both visual and tactile
orientation judgments, which also appears to be anterior and
lateral to IPS4. These authors found extensive parietal activation,
including activation of posterior parietal cortex, when contrasting tactile sensorimotor and motor tasks similar to the tactile
tasks used here.
Potential homologies and nomenclature
Whereas caution is needed when evaluating possible homologies
between human and nonhuman primates ,
there is increasing evidence to support an approximate homology
between one or more of the V7 and IPS1/2 hemifield maps and
macaque area LIP or its subdivisions . Homology can be evaluated on several criteria, including
functional properties, anatomical location, and topography.
IPS1/2 and cells in macaque LIP show similar functional properties, including delay period responses and oculocentric spatial
updating during delayed saccade tasks . Although
Average amplitude and reproducibility of visuotopic activity across areas. In A,
gray bars show the average signal change (mean to peak) within the retinotopically defined
visualmapsatthemappingstimulusfrequencyacrossthefullpopulationof20subjects(subjs)
scanned. Black bars show the signal change estimate at a frequency five cycles per run greater
than the mapping stimulus, at which no significant periodic component is expected. In B, bars
showthecircularcorrelationbetweenthephasesofpointssignificantlyactiveinbothmapping
sessions over the set of five repeatedly scanned subjects. Error bars indicate SEM. *p  0.05;
**p  0.01.
Swisher et al. • IPS Topography
J. Neurosci., May 16, 2007 • 27(20):5326–5337 • 5333
the topography of macaque LIP is weaker
than in earlier visual areas, a central visual
field representation is consistently found
dorsally along the lateral bank of the sulcus, whereas peripheral receptive fields are
located ventrally . Human V7 and
IPS1/2 are organized similarly to macaque
LIP in the eccentricity dimension, with a
lateral central field representation and medial peripheral representation. However,
the central field representation in humans
is found near to the fundus of the sulcus,
whereas the peripheral representation is
located on the medial bank, consistent
with a human LIP homolog shifting from
the lateral to the medial sulcal bank
 while retaining
the same topographic orientation.
Potential homologies with established
cortical areas in nonhuman primates may
suggest that similar nomenclature be used
in humans. But, as many others have noted
 , it is quite likely that there exist areas in human cortex with
no precise monkey homolog, limiting the extensibility of such a
naming scheme. In suggesting the names IPS3 and IPS4 for the
new hemifield visual maps, we have chosen to follow the naming
convention established by Silver et al. and Schluppeck et
al. , because the IPS3/4 maps often appear as a continuation of this same visuotopic complex.
Tootell et al. provisionally defined V7 as a quadrant
representation adjacent and anterior to area V3A. Subsequent
investigations showed that
this area contains a full hemifield map and a distinct foveal representation. We note that V7 (rather than IPS1) is now seen to be
the first (posteriormost) hemifield map on the medial bank of
posterior IPS. A comparison of Talairach coordinates reported in
previous studies (Table 3) indicates that regions previously referred to as inferior or posterior IPS correspond to V7.
This observation is significant because previous studies, in some
cases, have incorrectly assumed that posterior/inferior IPS was
not activated by direct stimulation. Thus, the present results may
force a reconsideration of the interpretation of some previous
visual attention and visual short-term memory results. Furthermore, the foveal representation of V7 is confluent with that of
IPS1, suggesting the two maps form a unitary complex or cluster
 . The existing
nomenclature misleadingly implies the two maps are markedly
anatomically distinct. A minimally disruptive change that may
help resolve this taxonomic confusion would be to refer to V7 as
“IPS0,” better reflecting its anatomical location.
Individual differences and tactile activation
Although a consistent pattern of IPS maps is evident across the
population of subjects, the precise topography of these maps varies from individual to individual. In many, but not all, subjects,
the anterior IPS3/4 maps are rotated mediolaterally relative to the
posterior IPS1/2 maps, and many hemispheres show substantial
gaps or dropouts in the map complex. The presence of these
dropouts is consistent with previous reports , but their size and prevalence calls into
question the characterization of this region as typically comprising a single, contiguous band of visual maps. This variability in
the patterns of visuotopic response is reflected in complementary
patterns of activation observed during a simple tactile task. The
consistent appearance of tactile activation within the visuotopic
dropouts provides additional evidence that these gaps in the map
complex are truly present in the underlying cortical organization
and do not result simply from methodological limitations, such
as insufficient signal averaging. Additionally, that these gaps are
Test–retest reliability of visual field maps. Maps acquired during separate sessions of stimulus-driven mapping (at
least2monthsapart)areshownprojectedontoparietalpatchesforbothhemispheresofasinglerepresentativesubject.Themaps
showqualitativelygoodreproducibilityacrosssessions.Inadditiontothereproducibilityofthemapsthemselves,largedropouts
in the visuotopic response [as seen for instance at the level of IPS1 in the left hemisphere of subject 1 (subj 1)] are also reliably
observed in the same positions across sessions. A, Left hemisphere (LH). B, Right hemisphere (RH).
Comparison of stimulus-driven and saccade maps. Both stimulus-driven and saccade maps acquired in separate sessions for a hemisphere with relatively extensive saccade
responses are shown. Each stimulus type produces similar angular phase maps, although we
typically find a larger region of significant response during stimulus-driven mapping. Subj 2,
Subject 2; LH, left hemisphere.
5334 • J. Neurosci., May 16, 2007 • 27(20):5326–5337
Swisher et al. • IPS Topography
present in some but not all hemispheres, even within the same
subject (Fig. 8, compare A, B), indicates substantial variability in
the functional organization of parietal cortex, possibly reflecting
either differing sensory experiences during development or continuing neuroplasticity into adulthood.
Despite the clear dissociation between visuotopic and tactile
responses, these patterns do not necessarily indicate the presence
of two or more functionally distinct, unimodal regions. Alternatively, the two tasks may drive separate portions of the same
large-scale multisensory spatial map. During the tactile task, the
stimulated right index finger was placed by the subject’s side as
they lay supine in the scanner, putting it outside the field of vision
even if the blindfold were to be removed. Thus, the primarily
disjoint tactile and visuotopic activations may be attributable to
the distinct regions of space occupied by the two stimuli in some
nonretinotopic underlying coordinate system . The presence or absence of apparent gaps in
Visuotopic and tactile activations form complementary patterns in posterior parietal cortex. Four hemispheres from three subjects are shown, each with visuotopic maps, tactile
activations,andtheconjunction(Conjunct)ofvisuotopicandtactileactivationsoverlaid.Tactilepatchesshowactivationinthecontrastofroughnessjudgmentversusamotorcontrol.Thediscrete
heat scale for the tactile map indicates significances at levels of p  0.1, 0.01, 10 5, and 10 20 in progressively warmer colors. In the conjunction maps, significant tactile activity is indicated in
warmcolorsalongtheverticalaxisusingthesamescaleasinthetactilemaps,whereassignificantvisuotopicactivityisshownincoolcolorsalongthehorizontalaxisatlevelsofp0.1,0.05,0.01,
and 10 5. The conjunction of significant activation in both tasks (logical “and”) is shown in shades of green. The minimum threshold for both tasks is set at a lenient 0.1 level, because the logical
and conjunction is intrinsically a conservative statistic . The activation patterns overlap at the edges; however, in no case have we observed tactile activation fully overlapping
a connected region of visuotopic activation (or vice versa). Notably, in hemispheres where the visuotopic activation pattern is separated into two noncontiguous clusters of significant activity, the
tactileactivation“fillsin”thisgap(Subj1LH,Subj3RH).Conversely,inhemisphereswithacontinuousbandofsignificantvisuotopicactivity,thetactileactivationpatternisdividedbythisbandinto
distinct, noncontiguous medial and lateral foci (Subj 1 RH, Subj 4 RH). Subj, Subject; LH, left hemisphere; RH, Right hemisphere.
Table 2. Distance of map centers from previously reported coordinates (in millimeters)
Sim02 pIPS
Sil05 IPS1
Sil05 IPS2
Sch05 IPS1
Sch05 IPS2
Ser01,Serenoetal.,2001;Sim02,Simonetal.,2002(pointing);Sil05,Silveretal.,2005;Sch05,Schluppecketal.,2005;Ser06,SerenoandHuang,2006;Kit06,Kitadaetal.,2006.Wherethesepreviousstudiesspecifiedpositionsrelativeto
theTalairachatlas,weconvertedourMNI(MontrealNeurologicalInstitute)coordinatesintoTalairachspaceviathealgorithmimplementedinBrett’smni2talbeforecalculatingthedistancebetweenpoints.Boldindicatesthree-dimensional
distances 1 SD.
Swisher et al. • IPS Topography
J. Neurosci., May 16, 2007 • 27(20):5326–5337 • 5335
the visuotopic complex may then result from intersubject variability in the scaling of this spatial representation , with the space outside the
visual field represented to varying degrees in different individuals, rather than reflecting intersubject differences in the adjacency
relationships of functionally distinct cortical areas. Determining
the precise coordinate system in use in these posterior parietal
areas remains an interesting topic for future research.
Functional significance of IPS0/1/2/3/4
Previous functional imaging studies have demonstrated that numerous functions, including saccades , multisensory integration ,
visual short-term memory , and visual attention , strongly
activate posterior parietal cortical circuitry. In many cases, Talairach coordinates reported in previous studies lie within 1 SD of
one or more of the IPS regions identified here (Tables 2, 3). Part
of the confusion in dissecting the functional roles of IPS may be
attributed to the fact that many previous studies divided IPS into
only two subregions, such as posterior and anterior. Here, five
distinct cortical maps are demonstrated to exist in just a posterior
subregion of the medial bank of IPS. As observed in the macaque
 , these visually driven areas are much
smaller than early visual cortical areas V1 and V2. Based on the
small size of these visual regions, it is conjectured that human
posterior parietal cortex may be quite dense with distinct cortical
areas. The substantial individual differences reported here emphasize the utility of within-subject analysis of this functional
circuitry. Reliable identification of these areas should provide a
useful tool for the dissection of the sensory and cognitive processes occurring within this region of the human brain.