Deep Learning with Coherent Nanophotonic
Yichen Shen1∗, Nicholas C. Harris1∗, Scott Skirlo1, Mihika Prabhu1, Tom Baehr-Jones2, Michael
Hochberg2, Xin Sun3, Shijie Zhao4, Hugo Larochelle5, Dirk Englund1, and Marin Soljačić1
1Research Laboratory of Electronics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
2Coriant Advanced Technology, 171 Madison Avenue, Suite 1100, New York, NY 10016, USA
3Department of Mathematics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
4Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
5Twitter Inc., 141 Portland St, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
⋆These authors contributed equally to this work.
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks are computational network models inspired by signal processing in the brain.
These models have dramatically improved the performance of many learning tasks, including speech and
object recognition. However, today’s computing hardware is ineﬃcient at implementing neural networks,
in large part because much of it was designed for von Neumann computing schemes. Signiﬁcant eﬀort
has been made to develop electronic architectures tuned to implement artiﬁcial neural networks that
improve upon both computational speed and energy eﬃciency. Here, we propose a new architecture for
a fully-optical neural network that, using unique advantages of optics, promises a computational speed
enhancement of at least two orders of magnitude over the state-of-the-art and three orders of magnitude
in power eﬃciency for conventional learning tasks. We experimentally demonstrate essential parts of our
architecture using a programmable nanophotonic processor.
Modern computers based on the von Neumann architecture are far more power-hungry and less eﬀective than
their biological counterparts – central nervous systems –
for a wide range of tasks including perception, communication, learning, and decision making. With the increasing
data volume associated with processing big data, developing
computers that learn, combine, and analyze vast amounts
of information quickly and eﬃciently is becoming increasingly important. For example, speech recognition software
(e.g., Apple’s Siri) is typically executed in the cloud since
these computations are too taxing for mobile hardware; realtime image processing is an even more demanding task .
To address the shortcomings of von Neumann computing
architectures for neural networks, much recent work has
focused on increasing artiﬁcial neural network computing
speed and power eﬃciency by developing electronic architectures (such as ASIC and FPGA chips) speciﬁcally tailored to
a task . Recent demonstrations of electronic neuromorphic hardware architectures have reported improved computational performance . Hybrid optical-electronic systems
that implement spike processing and reservoir computing have also been investigated recently. However,
the computational speed and power eﬃciency achieved with
these hardware architectures are still limited by electronic
clock rates and ohmic losses.
Fully-optical neural networks oﬀer a promising alternative
approach to microelectronic and hybrid optical-electronic
implementations. Linear transformations (and certain nonlinear transformations) can be performed at the speed of
light and detected at rates exceeding 100 GHz in photonic networks, and in some cases, with minimal power consumption . For example, it is well known that a common lens performs Fourier transform without any power
consumption, and that certain matrix operations can also
be performed optically without consuming power.
However, implementing such transformations with bulk optical
components (such as ﬁbers and lenses) has been a major
barrier because of the need for phase stability and large
neuron counts. Integrated photonics solves this problem by
providing a scalable solution to large, phase-stable optical
transformations .
Here, we experimentally demonstrate on-chip, coherent,
optical neuromorphic computing on a vowel recognition
dataset. We achieve a level of accuracy comparable to a
conventional digital computer using a fully connected neural network algorithm. We show that, under certain conditions, the optical neural network architecture can be at
least two orders of magnitude faster for forward propagation while providing linear scaling of neuron number versus
power consumption. This feature is enabled largely by the
fact that photonics can perform matrix multiplications, a
major part of nerual network algorithms, with extreme energy eﬃciency. While implementing scalable von Neumann
optical computers has proven challenging, artiﬁcial neural
networks implemented in optics can leverage inherent properties, such their weak requirements on nonlinearities, to
enable a practical, all-optical computing application. An optical neural network architecture can be substantially more
energy eﬃcient than conventional artiﬁcial neural networks
implemented on current electronic computers.
OPTICAL NEURAL NETWORK DEVICE ARCHITECTURE
An artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) consists of a set of
input artiﬁcial neurons (represented as circles in Fig. 1(a))
 
Z(1) = W0X
h(i) = f(Z(i))
Y = Wnh(n)
Input Layer
Hidden Layers
Output Layer
Input Optical
Optical Interference Unit
Optical Nonlinearity Unit
FIG. 1. General Architecture of Optical Neural Network a. General artiﬁcial neural network architecture composed of an input
layer, a number of hidden layers, and an output layer. b. Decomposition of the general neural network into individual layers. c.
Optical interference and nonlinearity units that compose each layer of the artiﬁcial neural network.
connected to at least one hidden layer and an output layer.
In each layer (depicted in Fig. 1(b)), information propagates by linear combination (e.g. matrix multiplication) followed by the application of a nonlinear activation function.
ANNs can be trained by feeding training data into the input
layer and then computing the output by forward propagation; weighting parameters in each matrix are subsequently
optimized using back propagation .
The Optical Neural Network (ONN) architecture is depicted in Fig. 1 (b,c). As shown in Fig. 1(c), signals are
encoded in the amplitude of optical pulses propagating in
integrated photonic waveguides where they pass through an
optical interference unit (OIU) and ﬁnally an optical nonlinearity unit (ONU). Optical matrix multiplication is implemented with an OIU and nonlinear activation is realized
with an ONU.
To realize an OIU that can implement any real-valued
matrix, we use the singular value decomposition (SVD) 
since a general, real-valued matrix (M) may be decomposed
as M = UΣV∗, where U is an m × m unitary matrix, Σ is
a m × n diagonal matrix with non-negative real numbers on
the diagonal, and V∗is the complex conjugate of the n × n
unitary matrix V. It was theoretically shown that any unitary transformations U, V∗can be implemented with optical
beamsplitters and phase shifters . Matrix multiplication implemented in this manner consumes, in principle,
no power. The fact that a major part of ANN calculations
involves matrix products enables the extreme energy eﬃciency of the ONN architecture presented here. Finally, Σ
can be implemented using optical attenuators; optical ampliﬁcation materials such as semiconductors or dyes could
also be used .
The ONU can be implemented using optical nonlinearities
such as saturable absorption and bistability 
that have been demonstrated seperately in photonic circuits.
For an input intensity Iin, the optical output intensity is thus
given by a nonlinear function Iout = f (Iin) .
EXPERIMENT
For an experimental demonstration of our ONN architecture, we implement a two layer, fully connected neural
network with the OIU shown in Fig. 2 and use it to perform vowel recognition. To prepare the training and testing
dataset, we use 360 datapoints that each consist of four log
area ratio coeﬃcients of one phoneme. The log area ratio coeﬃcients, or feature vectors, represent the power contained in diﬀerent logarithmically-spaced frequency bands
and are derived by computing the Fourier transform of the
FIG. 2. Illustration of Optical Interference Unit a. Optical micrograph of an experimentally fabricated 22-mode on-chip optical
interference unit; the physical region where the optical neural network program exists is highlighted in grey. The system acts
as an optical ﬁeld-programmable gate array–a test bed for optical experiments. b. Schematic illustration of the optical neural
network program demonstrated here which realizes both matrix multiplication and ampliﬁcation fully optically. c. Schematic
illustration of a single phase shifter in the Mach-Zehnder Interferometer (MZI) and the transmission curve for tuning the internal
phase shifter of the MZI.
voice signal multiplied by a Hamming window function. The
360 datapoints were generated by 90 diﬀerent people speaking 4 diﬀerent vowel phonemes . We use half of these
datapoints for training and the remaining half to test the
performance of the trained ONN. We train the matrix parameters used in the ONN with the standard back propagation algorithm using stochastic gradient descent method ,
on a conventional computer. Further details on the dataset
and backpropagation procedure are included in Supplemental Information Section 3.
The coherent ONN is realized with a programmable
nanophotonic processor composed of an array of 56
Mach-Zehnder interferometers (MZIs) and 213 phase shifting elements, as shown in Fig. 2.
Each interferometer
is composed of two evanescent-mode waveguide couplers
sandwiching an internal thermo-optic phase shifter to
control the splitting ratio of the output modes, followed
by a second modulator to control the relative phase of the
output modes. By controlling the phase imparted by these
two phase shifters, these MZIs perform all rotations in the
SU(2) Lie group given a controlled incident phase on the
two electromagnetic input modes of the MZI. The nanophotonic processor was fabricated in a silicon-on-insulator photonics platform with the OPSIS Foundry .
To experimentally realize arbitrary matrices by SVD, we
programmed an SU(4) core and a non-unitary diagonal matrix multiplication core (DMMC) into the nanophotonic processor , as shown in Fig. 2 (b). The SU(4)
core implements operators U and V by a Givens rotations algorithm that decomposes unitary matrices into sets
of phase shifters and beam splitters, while the DMMC implements Σ by controlling the splitting ratios of the DMMC interferometers to add or remove light from the optical mode
relative to a baseline amplitude. The measured ﬁdelity for
the 720 OIU and DMMC cores used in the experiment was
99.8 ± 0.003 %; see methods for further detail.
In this analog computer, ﬁdelity is limited by practical
non-idealities such as (1) ﬁnite precision with which an op-
tical phase can be set using our custom 240-channel voltage
supply with 16-bit voltage resolution per channel (2) photodetection noise, and (3) thermal cross-talk between phase
shifters which eﬀectively reduces the number of bits of resolution for setting phases.
As with digital ﬂoating-point
computations, values are represented to some number of
bits of precision, the ﬁnite dynamic range and noise in the
optical intensities causes eﬀective truncation errors. A detailed analysis of ﬁnite precision and low-ﬂux photon shot
noise is presented in Supplement Section 1.
In this proof-of-concept demonstration, we implement the
nonlinear transformation Iout = f (Iin) in the electronic domain, by measuring optical mode output intensities on a
photodetector array and injecting signals Iout into the next
stage of OIU. Here, f models the mathematical function
associated with a realistic saturable absorber (such as a
dye, semiconductor or graphene saturable absorber or saturable ampliﬁer) that could, in future implementations, be
directly integrated into waveguides after each OIU stage
of the circuit. For example, graphene layers integrated on
nanophotonic waveguides have already been demonstrated
as saturable absorbers . Saturable absorption is modeled
as (Supplement Section 2),
where σ is the absorption cross section, τs is the radiative
lifetime of the absorber material, T0 is the initial transmittance (a constant that only depends on the design of saturable absorbers), I0 is the incident intensity, and Tm is the
transmittance of the absorber. Given an input intensity I0,
one can solve for Tm(I0) from Eqn. 1, and the output intensity can be calculated as Iout = I0 · Tm(I0). A plot of the
saturable absorber’s response function Iout(Iin) is shown in
supplement Section 2.
After programming the nanophotonic processor to implement our ONN architecture, which consist of 4 layers of
OIUs with 4 neurons on each layer (which requires training
a total of 4 · 6 · 2 = 48 phase shifter settings), we evaluated
it on the vowel recognition test set.
Our ONN correctly
identiﬁed 138/180 cases (76.7%) compared to a simulated correctness of 165/180 (91.7%).
Since our ONN processes information in the analog signal domain, the architecture can be vulnerable to computational errors. Photodetection and phase encoding are the
dominant sources of error in the ONN presented here (as
discussed above). To understand the role of phase encoding
noise and photodection noise in our ONN hardware architecture and to develop a model for its accuracy, we numerically
simulate the performance of our trained matrices with varying degrees of phase encoding noise (σΦ) and photodection
noise (σD) (detailed simulation steps can be found in methods section). The distribution of correctness percentage vs
σΦ and σD is shown in Fig. 3 (a), which serves as a guide
to understanding experimental performance of the ONN.
Improvements to the control and readout hardware, including implementing higher precision analog-to-digital converters in the photodetection array and voltage controller, are
practical avenues towards approaching the performance of
digital computers. Well-known techniques can be applied
to engineer the photodiode array to achieve signiﬁcantly
higher dynamic range; for example, using logarithmic or
multi-stage gain ampliﬁers. Addressing these managable engineering problems can further enhance the correctness performance of the ONN to ultimately achieve correctness percentages approaching those of error-corrected digital computers.
In addition, ANN parameters trained by conventional back propagation algorithm can become suboptimal
when encoding errors are encountered. In such a case, robust simulated annealing algorithms can be used to
train ANN parameters which is error-tolerant, hence when
encoded in the ONN, will have better performance.
DISCUSSION
Processing big data at high speeds and with low power is
a central challenge in the ﬁeld of computer science, and, in
fact, a majority of the power and processors in data centers
are spent on doing forward propagation (test-time prediction). Furthermore, low forward propagation speeds limit
applications of ANNs in many ﬁelds including self-driving
cars which require high speed and parallel image recognition.
Our optical neural network architecture takes advantage
of high detection rate, high-sensitivity photon detectors to
enable high-speed, energy-eﬃcient neural networks compared to state-of-the-art electronic computer architectures.
Once all parameters have been trained and programmed on
the nanophotonic processor, forward propagation computing
is performed optically on a passive system. In our implementation, maintaining the phase modulator settings requires
some (small) power of ∼10 mW per modulator on average. However, in future implementations, the phases could
be set with nonvolatile phase-change materials , which
would require no power to maintain.
With this change,
the total power consumption is limited only by the physical size, the spectral bandwidth of dispersive components
(THz), and the photo-detection rate (100GHz). In principle,
such a system can be at least 2 orders of magnitude faster
than electronic neural networks (which are restricted at GHz
clock rate). Assuming our ONN has N nodes, implementing m layers of N×N matrix multiplication and operating
at a typical 100 GHz photo-detection rate, the number of
operations per second of our system would be
R = 2m · N2 · 1011operations/s
ONN power consumption during computation is dominated by the optical power necessary to trigger an optical
nonlinearity and achieve a suﬃciently high signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR) at the photodetectors (assuming shot-noise limited detection on n photons per pulse, SNR ≃√
Correctness (%)
FIG. 3. Vowel recognition. (a) Correct rate for vowel recognition problem with various phase encoding error (σΦ) and photodetection error (σD), the deﬁnition of these two variables can be found in method section. The solid lines are the contours for
different level correctness percentage. (b-e) Simulated and experimental vowel recognition results for an error-free training matrix
where (b) vowel A was spoken, (c) vowel B was spoken, (d) vowel C was spoken, and (e) vowel D was spoken.
assume a saturable absorber threshold of p ≃1 MW/cm2 –
valid for many dyes, semiconductors, and graphene .
Since the cross section for the waveguide is A = 0.2µm
×0.5µm, the total power needed to run the system is therefore estimated to be: P ≈N mW. Therefore, the energy
per operation of ONN will scale as R/P = 2m · N · 1014 operations/J (or P/R =
mN fJ/operation). Almost the same
energy performance and speed can be obtained if optical
bistability is used instead of saturable absorption
as the enabling nonlinear phenomenon. Even for very small
neural networks, the above power eﬃciency is already at
least 3 orders of magnitude better than that in conventional
electronic CPUs and GPUs, where P/R ≈1pJ/operation
(not including the power spent on data movement) ,
while conventional image recognition tasks require tens of
millions of training parameters and thousands of neurons
(mN ≈105) .
These considerations suggest that the
optical NN approach may be tens of millions times more
eﬃcient than conventional computers for standard problem
sizes. In fact, the larger the neural network, the bigger the
advantage of using optics is: this comes from the fact that
evaluating an N × N matrix in electronics requires O(N2)
energy, while in optics, it requires in principle no energy.
Further details on power eﬃciency calculation can be found
in the Supplementary information section 3.
ONNs enable new ways to train ANN parameters. On a
conventional computer, parameters are trained with back
propagation and gradient descent.
However, for certain
ANNs where the eﬀective number of parameters substantially exceeds the number of distinct parameters (including recurrent neural networks (RNN) and convolutional
neural networks(CNN)), training using back propagation
is notoriously ineﬃcient. Speciﬁcally the recurrent nature
of RNNs gives them eﬀectively an extremely deep ANN
(depth=sequence length), while in CNNs the same weight
parameters are used repeatedly in diﬀerent parts of an image for extracting features. Here we propose an alternative
approach to directly obtain the gradient of each distinct
parameter without back propagation, using forward propagation on ONN and the ﬁnite diﬀerence method. It is well
known that the gradient for a particular distinct weight parameter ∆Wij in ANN can be obtained with two forward
propagation steps that compute J(Wij) and J(Wij + δij),
followed by the evaluation of ∆Wij =
J(Wij+δij)−J(Wij)
step only takes two operations). On a conventional computer, this scheme is not favored because forward propagation (evaluating J(W)) is computationally expensive.
an ONN, each forward propagation step is computed in
constant time (limited by the photodetection rate which
can exceed 100 GHz ), with power consumption that
is only proportional to the number of neurons–making the
scheme above tractable.
Furthermore, with this on-chip
training scheme, one can readily parametrize and train unitary matrices–an approach known to be particularly useful
for deep neural networks . As a proof of concept, we
carry out the unitary-matrix-on-chip training scheme for our
vowel recognition problem (see Supplementary Information
Section 4).
Regarding the physical size of the proposed ONN, current technologies are capable of realizing ONNs exceeding
the 1000 neuron regime – photonic circuits with up to 4096
optical components have been demonstrated . 3-D photonic integration could enable even larger ONNs by adding
another spatial degree of freedom .
Furthermore, by
feeding in input signals (e.g. an image) via multiple patches
over time (instead of all at once) – an algorithm that has
been increasingly adopted by deep learning community 
– the ONN should be able to realize much bigger eﬀective neural networks with relatively small number of physical
CONCLUSION
The proposed architecture could be applied to other artiﬁcial neural network algorithms where matrix multiplications
and nonlinear activations are heavily used, including convolutional neural networks and recurrent neural networks.
Further, the superior forward propagation speed and power
eﬃciency of our ONN can potentially enable training the
neural network on the photonics chip directly, using only
forward propagation.
Finally, it needs to be emphasized
that another major portion of power dissipation in current
NN architectures is associated with data movement–an outstanding challenge that remains to be addressed. However,
recent dramatic improvements in optical interconnects using
integrated photonics technology has the potential to significantly reduce data-movement energy cost .
integration of optical interconnects and optical computing
units need to be explored to realize the full advantage of
all-optical computing.
Fidelity Analysis
We evaluated the performance of the SU(4) core with the
ﬁdelity metric f = ∑i
√piqi where pi, qi are experimental
and simulated normalized (∑i xi = 1 where x ∈{p, q})
optical intensity distributions across the waveguide modes,
respectively.
Simulation Method for Noise in ONN
We carry out the following steps to numerically simulate the
performance of our trained matrices with varying degrees of
phase encoding (σΦ) and detection (σD) noise.
1. For each of the four trained 4 × 4 unitary matrices
Uk, we calculate a set of {θk
i } that encode the
2. We add a set of random phase encoding errors,
i } to the old calculated phases {θk
where we assume each δθk
i is a random variable sampled from a Gaussian distribution G(µ, σ)
with µ = 0 and σ = σΦ. We obtain a new set of
perturbed phases {θk
3. We encode the four perturbed 4 × 4 unitary matrices
Uk′ based on the new perturbed phases {θk
4. We carry out the forward propagation algorithm based
on the perturbed matrices Uk′ with our test data set.
During the forward propagation, every time when a
matrix multiplication is performed (let’s say when we
compute −→v = Uk′ · −→
u ), we add a set of random
photo-detection errors −→
δv to the resulting −→v , where
we assume each entry of −→
δv is a random variable sampled from a Gaussian distribution G(µ, σ) with µ = 0
and σ = σD · |−→v |. We obtain the perturbed output
vector −→v ′ = −→v + −→
5. With the modiﬁed forward propagation scheme above,
we calculate the correctness percentage for the perturbed ONN.
6. Steps 2)-5) are repeated 50 times to obtain the distribution of correctness percentage for each phase encoding noise (σΦ) and photodetection noise (σD).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Yann LeCun, Max Tegmark, Isaac Chuang
and Vivienne Sze for valuable discussions. This work was
supported in part by the Army Research Oﬃce through
the Institute for Soldier Nanotechnologies under contract
W911NF-13-D0001, and in part by the Air Force Oﬃce of
Scientiﬁc Research Multidisciplinary University Research Initiative (FA9550-14-1-0052) and the Air Force Research Laboratory RITA program (FA8750-14-2-0120). M.H. acknowledges support from AFOSR STTR grants, numbers FA9550-
12-C-0079 and FA9550-12-C-0038 and Gernot Pomrenke, of
AFOSR, for his support of the OpSIS eﬀort, though both a
PECASE award (FA9550- 13-1-0027) and funding for OpSIS
(FA9550-10-1-0439). N. H. acknowledges support from the
National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship
grant no. 1122374.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Y.S., N.H., S.S., X.S., S.Z., D.E., and M.S., developed
the theoretical model for the optical neural network. N.H.,
M.P., and Y.S. performed the experiment. N.H. developed
the cloud-based simulation software for collaborations with
the programmable nanophotonic processor. Y.S., S.S., and
X.S. prepared the data and developed the code for training
MZI parameters. T.B.J. and M.H. fabricated the photonic
integrated circuit.
All authors contributed in writing the
 Hinton, G. E. & Salakhutdinov, R. R.
Reducing the dimensionality of data with neural networks.
Science 313,
504–507 .
 Mead, C. Neuromorphic electronic systems. Proceedings of
the IEEE 78, 1629–1636 .
 Poon, C.-S. & Zhou, K.
Neuromorphic silicon neurons and large-scale neural networks:
challenges and
opportunities.
Neuroscience
 
engineering/10.3389/fnins.2011.00108/full.
 Shaﬁee, A. et al.
Isaac: A convolutional neural network
accelerator with in-situ analog arithmetic in crossbars. In
Proc. ISCA .
 Misra, J. & Saha, I. Artiﬁcial neural networks in hardware:
A survey of two decades of progress. Neurocomputing 74,
239–255 .
 Silver, D. et al. Mastering the game of go with deep neural
networks and tree search. Nature 529, 484–489 .
 Tait, A. N., Nahmias, M. A., Tian, Y., Shastri, B. J. &
Prucnal, P. R. Photonic neuromorphic signal processing and
computing. In Nanophotonic Information Physics, 183–222
 .
 Tait, A. N., Nahmias, M. A., Shastri, B. J. & Prucnal, P. R.
Broadcast and weight: an integrated network for scalable
photonic spike processing. Journal of Lightwave Technology
32, 3427–3439 .
 Prucnal, P. R., Shastri, B. J., de Lima, T. F., Nahmias,
M. A. & Tait, A. N.
Recent progress in semiconductor
excitable lasers for photonic spike processing. Advances in
Optics and Photonics 8, 228–299 .
 Vandoorne, K. et al. Experimental demonstration of reservoir computing on a silicon photonics chip. Nature communications 5 .
 Appeltant, L. et al. Information processing using a single
dynamical node as complex system. Nature communications
2, 468 .
 Vivien, L. et al.
Zero-bias 40gbit/s germanium waveguide photodetector on silicon.
Opt. Express 20, 1096–
1101 .
URL 
abstract.cfm?URI=oe-20-2-1096.
 Cardenas, J. et al.
Low loss etchless silicon photonic
waveguides. Opt. Express 17, 4752 . URL http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1364/OE.17.004752.
 Harris,
N. C. et al.
Bosonic transport simulations
in a large-scale programmable nanophotonic processor.
 
 LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y. & Hinton, G. Deep learning. Nature
521, 436–444 . URL 
nature14539.
 Schmidhuber, J.
Deep learning in neural networks:
overview. Neural Networks 61, 85–117 .
 Lawson, C. L. & Hanson, R. J. Solving least squares problems, vol. 15 .
 Reck, M., Zeilinger, A., Bernstein, H. J. & Bertani, P.
Experimental realization of any discrete unitary operator.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 58–61 .
URL 
aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.73.58.
 Miller,
components.
 
cfm?URI=optica-2-8-747.
 Connelly, M. J. Semiconductor optical ampliﬁers .
 Selden, A. Pulse transmission through a saturable absorber.
British Journal of Applied Physics 18, 743 .
 Bao, Q. et al. Monolayer graphene as a saturable absorber
in a mode-locked laser. Nano Res. 4, 297–307 . URL
 
 Schirmer, R. W. & Gaeta, A. L. Nonlinear mirror based on
two-photon absorption. JOSA B 14, 2865–2868 .
 Soljačić, M., Ibanescu, M., Johnson, S. G., Fink, Y. &
Joannopoulos, J. Optimal bistable switching in nonlinear
photonic crystals. Physical Review E 66, 055601 .
 Xu, B. & Ming, N.-B. Experimental observations of bistability and instability in a two-dimensional nonlinear optical superlattice. Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 3959–3962 .
URL 
 Centeno, E. & Felbacq, D. Optical bistability in ﬁnite-size
nonlinear bidimensional photonic crystals doped by a microcavity. Phys. Rev. B 62, R7683–R7686 . URL http:
//link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.62.R7683.
 Nozaki, K. et al. Sub-femtojoule all-optical switching using
a photonic-crystal nanocavity. Nature Photonics 4, 477–
483 . URL 
 Ríos, C. et al. Integrated all-photonic non-volatile multilevel memory. Nature Photonics 9, 725–732 . URL
 
 Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I. & Hinton, G. E.
classiﬁcation with deep convolutional neural networks.
In Pereira, F., Burges, C. J. C., Bottou, L. & Weinberger,
K. Q. (eds.) Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 25, 1097–1105 .
 Deterding, D. H.
Speaker normalisation for automatic
speech recognition. Ph.D. thesis, University of Cambridge
 Harris, N. C. et al. Eﬃcient, compact and low loss thermooptic phase shifter in silicon.
Optics Express 22 .
URL 
 Baehr-Jones, T. et al.
A 25 Gb/s Silicon Photonics
ArXiv e-prints .
URL 
harvard.edu/abs/2012arXiv1203.0767B. 1203.0767.
 Miller, D. A. B.
Self-conﬁguring universal linear optical
component [invited]. Photonics Research 1 . URL
 
 Cheng, Z., Tsang, H. K., Wang, X., Xu, K. & Xu, J.-B.
In-plane optical absorption and free carrier absorption in
graphene-on-silicon waveguides. IEEE Journal of Selected
Topics in Quantum Electronics 20, 43–48 .
 On the repeatability of this experiment: we have carried out
the entire testing run 3 times. The reported result (76.7%
correctness percentage) is associated with the best calibrated run (highest measured ﬁdelity). The other two less
calibrated runs exceeded 70% correctness percentage. For
further discussion on enhancing the correctness percentage,
see S.I. (Section 6).
 Bertsimas, D. & Nohadani, O. Robust optimization with
simulated annealing.
Journal of Global Optimization 48,
323–334 .
 Ríos, C. et al. Integrated all-photonic non-volatile multilevel memory. Nature Photonics 9, 725–732 .
 Tanabe, T., Notomi, M., Mitsugi, S., Shinya, A. & Kuramochi, E.
Fast bistable all-optical switch and memory
on a silicon photonic crystal on-chip. Opt. Lett. 30, 2575–
2577 .
URL 
URI=ol-30-19-2575.
 Horowitz, M. 1.1 computing’s energy problem (and what
we can do about it). In 2014 IEEE International Solid-State
Circuits Conference Digest of Technical Papers (ISSCC),
10–14 .
 Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I. & Hinton, G. E.
classiﬁcation with deep convolutional neural networks. In
Advances in neural information processing systems, 1097–
1105 .
 Arjovsky, M., Shah, A. & Bengio, Y.
Unitary evolution
recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06464
 Sun, J., Timurdogan, E., Yaacobi, A., Hosseini, E. S. &
Watts, M. R. Large-scale nanophotonic phased array. Nature 493, 195–199 . URL 
1038/nature11727.
 Rechtsman, M. C. et al. Photonic ﬂoquet topological insulators. Nature 496, 196–200 .
 Jia, Y. et al. Caﬀe: Convolutional architecture for fast feature embedding. In Proceedings of the 22Nd ACM International Conference on Multimedia, MM ’14, 675–678 . URL 
10.1145/2647868.2654889.
 Sun, C. et al. Single-chip microprocessor that communicates
directly using light.
Nature 528, 534–538 .