Vol.:(0123456789)
Minds and Machines 31:239–256
 
GENERAL ARTICLE
Ethics as a Service: A Pragmatic Operationalisation of AI
Jessica Morley1   · Anat Elhalal2 · Francesca Garcia2 · Libby Kinsey2 ·
Jakob Mökander1 · Luciano Floridi1,3
Received: 16 February 2021 / Accepted: 1 June 2021 / Published online: 19 June 2021
© The Author(s) 2021
As the range of potential uses for Artificial Intelligence (AI), in particular machine
learning (ML), has increased, so has awareness of the associated ethical issues. This
increased awareness has led to the realisation that existing legislation and regulation provides insufficient protection to individuals, groups, society, and the environment from AI harms. In response to this realisation, there has been a proliferation of
principle-based ethics codes, guidelines and frameworks. However, it has become
increasingly clear that a significant gap exists between the theory of AI ethics principles and the practical design of AI systems. In previous work, we analysed whether
it is possible to close this gap between the ‘what’ and the ‘how’ of AI ethics through
the use of tools and methods designed to help AI developers, engineers, and designers translate principles into practice. We concluded that this method of closure is
currently ineffective as almost all existing translational tools and methods are either
too flexible (and thus vulnerable to ethics washing) or too strict (unresponsive to
context). This raised the question: if, even with technical guidance, AI ethics is
challenging to embed in the process of algorithmic design, is the entire pro-ethical
design endeavour rendered futile? And, if no, then how can AI ethics be made useful for AI practitioners? This is the question we seek to address here by exploring
why principles and technical translational tools are still needed even if they are limited, and how these limitations can be potentially overcome by providing theoretical
grounding of a concept that has been termed ‘Ethics as a Service.’
Keywords  Artificial Intelligence · Machine learning · Data ethics · Applied ethics ·
Business ethics
* Jessica Morley
 
Oxford Internet Institute, University of Oxford, 1 St Giles’, Oxford OX1 3JS, UK
Digital Catapult, 101 Euston Rd, London NW1 2RA, UK
Alan Turing Institute, The British Library, 2QR, 96 Euston Rd, London NW1 2DB, UK
J. Morley et al.
1  Introduction
As the range of potential uses for Artificial Intelligence (AI), in particular machine
learning (ML), has increased, so has awareness of the ethical issues posed by the
design, development, deployment and use of AI systems (henceforth collapsed into
‘Design’). Issues such as privacy, fairness, accountability, accessibility, environmental sustainability, and transparency are now not just discussed in academic literature
but also in mainstream media. This increased awareness has led to the realisation
that existing ‘hard’ governance mechanisms (such as legislation and other regulatory frameworks, e.g. ISO requirements) alone provide insufficient protection to
individuals, groups, society, and the environment. Similarly, these mechanisms
alone do not sufficiently incentivise the Design of socially preferable and environmentally sustainable AI. In an attempt to overcome these limitations, governments,
private sector organisations, and others have focused on the development of ‘soft’
governance mechanisms such as ethics codes, guidelines, frameworks, and policy
strategies . The development of these largely
principle-based documents has been an important and necessary phase in the evolution of AI governance . However, it has become
increasingly clear that highly abstract principles provide little protection from potential harms related to AI when AI practitioners have no guidance on how to design
and deploy algorithms within these ethical boundaries . In other words, a significant gap exists between theory and practice within
the AI ethics field . This is not unusual in ethics (consider for
example the development of bioethics), where changes are sometimes theory-led,
and can partly be explained by the relative ‘newness’ of the concept of AI ethical
principles in the public policy domain1: < 20% of all the AI ethics documents are
more than four-years old . However, it may also be a result of the
desire by influential private-sector organisations to ‘ethics wash’ in
an attempt to keep the ethics of AI a self-regulated field and delay legislative intervention .
In previous work , we analysed whether it may be possible
to start closing this gap between the ‘what’ and the ‘how’ of AI ethics by identifying the methods and tools already available to help AI developers, engineers, and
designers ) know not only what to
do or not to do, but also how to do it, or avoid doing it, by adopting an ethical perspective . We plotted the tools in a typology, matching them to ethical principles (beneficence, non-maleficence, autonomy, justice and
explicability) and to stages in the algorithm development pipeline. Although we
found that numerous tools and methodologies exist to help AI practitioners translate
between the ‘what’ and the ‘how’ of AI ethics, we also found that the vast majority
1  Differentiating between public policy and research domains is important here. AI researchers have long
been aware of the ethical implications of algorithms. Both Alan Turing and Norbert Wiener were writing
on the topic as early as 1940. It has taken a longer time for policymakers, regulators and legislators to
become interested in the topic.
Ethics as a Service: A Pragmatic Operationalisation of AI Ethics﻿
of these tools are severely limited in terms of usability. The development of these
translational tools and methods may have been useful for enabling individual groups
of researchers/companies to raise internal awareness of AI ethics and to examine
different interpretations of ethical principles. However, this impact has not been sufficiently tested and the external validity of all the tools/methods identified remains
questionable. There is, as of yet, little evidence that the use of any of these translational tools/methods has an impact on the governability of algorithmic systems.
As such, we cannot yet know whether they help disadvantaged groups in society be
heard and enabled to embed and protect their values in design tools, and then into
the resultant AI systems. Consequently, we concluded that the existing translational
tools and methods fail to operationalise AI ethics effectively. Almost all translational
tools are either too flexible or too strict in the following sense . When
something (ethical tools, methods or guidelines) is too flexible it does little to protect
against the risks of ethics shopping and ethics washing . In contrast,
if the same something is too strict, and is implemented in a top-down and non-flexible way, it fails to account for the fact that sometimes there is no social consensus
about what is the ‘right’ way to interpret or apply ethics or ethical principles—this
instead depends on how aggregate views of society are collected and which voices
are included . This overall conclusion (too flexible
or strict) forces the AI ethics community to face the difficult question: if, even with
technical guidance ) AI ethics is challenging to embed in the process of algorithmic Design, is the
entire pro-ethical design endeavour rendered futile? And, if no, then
how can AI ethics be made useful for AI practitioners?
In the following pages, we seek to answer these questions by exploring why principles and technical translational tools are still needed even if they are limited, and
how these limitations can be potentially overcome by providing theoretical grounding of a concept that has been termed ‘Ethics as a Service’.2 Specifically, the sections ‘lowering the level of abstraction’ and ‘limits of principlism and translational
tools’ explain in more detail the limitations of principlism and existing translational
tools and methods. The section titled ‘a series of compromises’ outlines the compromises that must be made to enable the practical operationalisation of AI ethics. The
section ‘Outlining Ethics as a Service’ provides the theory underpinning the concept
of ‘Ethics as a Service’. The final section concludes the article, highlighting where
further research is needed.
2  As will become clear through the development of the ‘Ethics as a Service’ concept in the following
pages—our use of the concept is one grounded in the theory of Habermas’s discourse ethics and Floridi’s distributed responsibility .
This makes our interpretation of the concept distinct from the technocratic interpretation espoused by
Google and other large tech firms claiming that they can ‘audit customers’ AI systems for ethical integrity’ . This paper should not, therefore, be read as being in support of such claims.
J. Morley et al.
2  Lowering the Level of Abstraction
AI ethical guidance documents have been produced by a range of stakeholders, from
technology companies, professional bodies and standards-setting bodies to governments and research organisations . According to the
Global Inventory of AI Ethics Guidelines, managed by Algorithm Watch, there are
now more than 160 documents in existence . Whilst it is
possible to summarise the principles contained within these documents as beneficence, non-maleficence, autonomy, justice and explicability , the range of concepts covered is vast and includes transparency; fairness;
responsibility; privacy; freedom; trust; sustainability; dignity and solidarity .
This variation, and consequential confusion, is perhaps to be expected. Many of
the ethical harms that the principles in these documents purport to protect against
are poorly understood because they are described too vaguely . The
vagueness of statements such as ‘AI systems may be discriminatory’ results in broad
and generic rather than deep and specific responses. Additionally, as Carrillo explains: ‘beyond the basic underlying principles and common elements, ethical conceptions and principles vary across traditions, cultures, ideologies, systems
and countries. In the end, if the expression ‘ethics’ in itself is universal, the content of ‘the ethical’ evolves and includes variable and flexible standards in accordance with the evolution of times and societies.’ The risks that arise from this lack of
clear ethical guidance are many and include: ethics washing; ethics shopping; ethics
dumping; ethics shirking and ethics lobbying . Hence, ethical principles have been accused of being too flexible (or too undefined) to be of practical use
to AI practitioners . The accusation is
mistaken insofar as the ethical principles should be seen as providing the foundation
and not the details of ethical practices, in a way comparable to what a Constitution
does when compared to specific legislation. It would be mistaken to criticise the
Constitution of a country for being of no direct practical use in the regulation of
medical appliances, for example. This is why a promising and reasonable approach
to the problem of not-yet actionable AI ethical principles is to bring ethical guidance
down to the Design level, by providing tools and methods that translate the ‘what’ of
AI ethics into the ‘how’ of technical specifications. In doing so we can hope to create a bridge between abstract principles and technical implementations . This is the solution that we explored in our previous research and it is also the solution Digital Catapult are exploring in practice with the
Digital Catapult AI Ethics Framework3 (Box 1). In both this theoretical and applied
work, we have concluded that this lowering of abstraction is, at best, a partial solution. Whilst translational tools and methods do help to lower the level of abstraction,
they leave a number of other issues unresolved, and can be manipulated by reprehensible actors .
3  LF is chair of Digital Catapult’s Independent Ethics Board. LK, EA and FG were employees of Digital
Catapult at the time of writing. JM’s work on applied AI ethics is partially funded by Digital Catapult.
Ethics as a Service: A Pragmatic Operationalisation of AI Ethics﻿
In the following section we explore the limitations of translational tools in
more detail. The Digital Catapult AI Ethics Framework (Box 1) can be considered
an illustrative example of what we mean by ‘translational tool’. The discussion is
deliberately generalised and we recognise that some of the limitations we discuss
can be overcome by combining the use of translational tools with other offerings.
For example, the Digital Catapult’s AI Ethics Framework is offered alongside more
hands-on ethics consultations. This should be kept in mind so that we do not appear
too critical and so that the motivation for us expanding on the concept of ‘Ethics as a
Service’ in Sect. 5 is clear.
3  Limits of Principlism and Translational Tools
The first limitation to highlight, is that translational tools and methods are extraempirical. This means, as explained by Fazelpour and Lipton , that they may
set standards against which algorithmic practices are assessed, without themselves
being subject to empirical evaluation. This leaves the translational tools vulnerable
to manipulation. AI practitioners may choose the translational tool that aligns with
what is for them the most convenient epistemological understanding of an ethical
principle, rather than the one that aligns with society’s preferred understanding
 . For example, certain types of ‘explanation’ can be used to obfuscate rather than illuminate patterns of injustice. In short, stated
motivations for using a specific translational tool might not reflect actual motivation
 .
Second, many of the existing translational tools and methods are ‘diagnostic’
but not ‘prescriptive’. For example, they might identify whether a dataset is biased,
but offer very little support to AI practitioners on how to overcome the issue. Others, as McMillan and Brown indicate, present ‘technical fixes’ to what are in
essence socially-derived harms. Furthermore, when the parameters for the ‘diagnosis’ of fairness, transparency or accountability are set by the AI practitioners themselves, the potential for objective critique is easily lost and so the aim of the translational tool or method ceases to ‘ensure the algorithmic system meets the criteria of
social preferability’ (and therefore ethical justifiability).
Instead, the aim of the translational tool or method becomes to ‘ensure the algorithmic system meets the practitioner’s optimal criteria’ . As Martin
 attests ‘delegating a task to a technology [in this instance a ‘translational’ tool or method] does not remove the associated responsibility for that task.
It is [still] a value-laden decision…’ In short, according to Fazelpour and Lipton,
 , when used in this way, translational tools and methods: (a) can lead
to systematic neglect of some [unethical] injustices and distort our understanding
of others; (b) do not by themselves offer sufficient practical guidance about what
should be done, sometimes leading to misguided mitigation strategies; (c) do not, by
themselves, make clear who, among decision-makers is responsible for intervening
to right specific [unethical]injustices (our additions in brackets).
Finally, too often these translational tools are positioned or perceived by AI
practitioners as a ‘one-off’ test: something that just needs to be completed for
J. Morley et al.
compliance purposes and then forgotten about. This encourages ethics by ‘tick-box’
and introduces the risk of writing ethics into the business case and coding them
out by the time the algorithmic system is deployed . Instead,
the ethical implications of an algorithmic system should be regularly evaluated, at
a minimum as part of three distinct phases: validation, verification and evaluation.
The first phase (validation) is concerned with whether the right algorithmic system
is being developed; the second phase (verification) is concerned with whether the
algorithmic system is being developed in the right way; and the third phase (evaluation) is concerned with whether the algorithmic system is continuing to operate in
the right way once deployed, needs to be revised, or can be improved (redacted).
Thus, unless ethical evaluation becomes an integral part of a system’s operation
 , there is no guarantee that pro-ethical translational tools
will have any positive impact on the ethical implications of AI systems. Indeed, they
could have a negative impact by fostering a false sense of security and consequential
complacency.
This critique of AI ethics principlism and translational tools and methods raises
the question whether the entire pro-ethical design endeavour is futile, if even with
technical guidance, AI ethics is difficult or impossible to embed in the process of
algorithmic design, development, deployment, and use. However, the experience of
other applied ethics fields (for example, medical ethics and research ethics) shows
that it is possible to operationalise abstract ethical principles successfully for the
purpose of protecting individuals, groups, society and the environment from particular social harms and incentivising the best outcomes. The effort is not futile. With
this reassurance in mind, the next pertinent question becomes: how can AI ethics be
usefully operationalised for AI practitioners? The next section offers a way forward.
3.1  Box 1: The Digital Catapult AI Ethics Framework
The DCEF was developed by the Digital Catapult’s independent ethics board following consultation with a number of Digital Ethicists and other experts. The
framework consists of four levels, and is intended to help AI start-ups working
with the Digital Catapult to define and translate, transparently and contextually,
high-level ethical principles into practice. The first level, therefore, consists of
the five unifying high-level principles identified by Floridi et al., : beneficence, non-maleficence, autonomy, justice, explicability. The second level consists of seven interpretations (or contextual definitions) of these principles identified through documentary analysis consultation with AI practitioners and those
affected by AI systems. The third level operationalises Habermas’s concept of
discourse ethics , i.e. an approach that seeks to establish
normative values and ethical truths through open discourse, and consists of a
series of questions that are designed to encourage AI practitioners to conduct ethical foresight analysis . The fourth level provides access to
more practical, and less discursive tools e.g. python libraries designed to identify
bias in data. The connections between the levels are shown below. Companies
Ethics as a Service: A Pragmatic Operationalisation of AI Ethics﻿
using the DCEF to translate high-level ethical principles into practice are encouraged to consult it at validation, verification and evaluation stages of their product
development pipeline, to ensure that at each stage time is dedicated to thinking
through the ethical implications of all decisions made. This discussion is supported by members of the independent4 ethics board through consultations which
also provide a vehicle for reviewing the efficacy of the Framework itself.
Beneficence:
well-being, preserving dignity,
and sustaining
the planet
Non-maleficence:
security and
‘capability caution.’
 . If necessary, this can be managed by
placing the board members under non-disclosure agreements.
J. Morley et al.
4  A Series of Compromises
Thus far we have seen that the need to Design AI solutions pro-ethically is well
recognised, and that the field of AI-ethics now has a solid foundation comprised of
principle-based governing documents and translational tools and methods. Developing this foundation has been essential and the individual components remain highly
valuable. However, pro-ethical Design practices remain difficult to operationalise
practically as the Goldilocks Level of Abstraction has not yet been found. Attempts
thus far remain either too flexible or too strict. To overcome these limitations,
the ‘just right’ Level of Abstraction needs to be identified by making a series of
compromises.
4.1  Finding a Compromise Between Too Flexible and Too Strict
Raab argues that when prescriptive guidelines are implemented in a topdown and non-flexible fashion, this gives the misleading impression that it is possible to take a formulaic approach to the application of ethical norms, principles and
general rules to specific instances. In reality, the argument continues, applied ethics
requires judgement. Specifically, it requires an ability to consider how risks, conflicting rights and interests, and social preferability varies depending on a particular
context. The ethical implications of deploying an AI system in a healthcare setting
are unlikely to be the same as the ethical implications of deploying an AI system
in an educational setting. Similarly, the boundaries of social preferability within
Europe may not be the same as the boundaries within Asia and these boundaries
may change with time or with type of algorithm, or even with stage of development.
Finally, ethical guidelines that are too strict portray algorithmic systems as static
products of code and data that once deployed continue to operate in the same way as
intended and have only the intended (positive) effects. Ananny and Crawford 
point out the reality is that algorithmic systems are assemblages of human and nonhuman actors which have many non-deterministic impacts. To understand (and
therefore govern) the ethical implications requires understanding how the whole system works—including what may happen once the system is deployed and used by
entities, or for purposes, other than the original practitioners or stated purpose.
With this in mind, if AI ethics is to be operationalised in a way that is useful
to AI practitioners and simultaneously protective of individuals, groups, society
and the environment, then the operationalisation must: (a) happen at the appropriate Level of Abstraction (where translational tools are neither too flexible, nor
too strict); and (b) must not consist solely of a one-off tick-box exercise completed only at the beginning of the Design process. Developing a practical proethical Design approach that meets these two criteria is not simple, but it is not
impossible. It requires a shift in the way that AI ethics is framed. The practice
of AI ethics should not be seen as an end-goal that can be objectively achieved,
observed, quantified, or compared. Instead it should be seen as a reflective
development process, which also aims to help AI practitioners understand their
Ethics as a Service: A Pragmatic Operationalisation of AI Ethics﻿
own subjectivity and biases within a given set of circumstances .
By enabling the development of this understanding, a reflective process can help
illuminate why unethical outcomes may occur so that the appropriate mitigation or avoidance strategy can be put in place . From
this perspective, the practical operationalisation of AI ethics becomes less about
the paternalistic imposition of inflexible standards that ignore context and more
about procedural regularity and public reason that can be adapted and shared
across contexts and societies . In practice, structured identification and transparent communication of tradeoffs help organisations arrive at resolutions that, even when imperfect, are at least publicly defensible .
An operationalisation of AI ethics focused on procedural regularity and public reason would commit a company producing algorithmic systems to:
(a) justifying all design decisions to a set of common principles agreed through an
inclusive and discursive process that involves all individuals, groups and environmental representatives likely to be directly or indirectly affected by the AI
products of a specific company or research group. These principles should be
reviewed periodically (e.g., annually);
(b) following a set and repeatable procedure to define and translate each of the
agreed upon principles into technical standards in a way that achieves an acceptable level of ethical justifiability and environmental sustainability within the
specific context; and
(c) ensuring appropriate oversight is in place at the validation, verification and
evaluation stages.
Companies operationalising AI ethics in this way would use translational tools
and ethical principles in the same way each time (and at repeated intervals to
cover validation, verification, evaluation) but accept that the exact way in
which they are applied is contextually dependent. This kind of shift away from
abstract rules towards negotiated ethics has already been seen in arguments for
a move from privacy by design to privacy engineering. Privacy engineering, as
described by Alshammari and Simpson , is a ‘means of applying engineering principles and process in developing and maintaining systems
in a systematic and repeatable way, with a view to achieving acceptable levels
of privacy protection’ without assuming that the way that this is achieved will
be the same in each instance or immutable through time or different contexts.
Additionally, this approach to operationalisation covers the five pillars of good
ethical governance set out by Winfield and Jirotka by turning AI ethics
into a ‘collaborative process, developed and iteratively (re)configured through
material practices and continued negotiations’ .
However, if the responsibility for the whole process still sits with just the AI
practitioners themselves, there remains a risk that the operationalisation process
itself becomes subject to manipulation and may be used solely for ethics washing purposes.
J. Morley et al.
4.2  Finding a Compromise Between Devolved and Centralised Responsibility
One often highlighted option for avoiding these potential issues—derived from
a lack of accountability and transparency—is to rely on external algorithmic
audits5 . In theory, the process described above could be managed internally by the company in question but
audited by a third party (Mökander et al., forthcoming). Several auditing mechanisms have been proposed as means of examining the inputs and outputs of algorithms for bias and other harms . For example, ‘Aequitas’ is an open source toolkit which audits algorithms for bias and fairness and ‘Turingbox’ is a proposed platform that would audit the explainability of an algorithmic system . As these technical methods,
and more human-based methods such as ‘sock-puppet’ auditing ,
have gained visibility, the perceived importance of the role they will play in ethical
governance has also increased. In the UK, for example, the Information Commissioner’s Office is developing an AI auditing framework that seeks to ensure organisations have measures in place to be compliant with data protection requirements,
and mitigate risks associated with (amongst other issues) fairness, accuracy, security, and fundamental rights . Similarly, auditing firm PwC includes
ethical audit as a key component of its responsible AI Framework . It is clear, therefore, that external ethical auditing will be a key component of
any form of operationalised AI ethics.
However, there remain limitations. Proposed external auditing mechanisms typically focus on specific parts of the system, rather than looking at the overall system function , and so do little to address the risks of ‘unpredictability’
described above. Audits cannot guarantee to reveal all aspects of a system , and so may miss the inputs that are the most harmful. In addition, they are
typically conducted after a system has already been deployed, and so may have
already had a negative impact . And, finally, audits may be rendered
not viable without legislative change due to legal concerns regarding protection of
consumer data or trade secrets . Moreover, it is difficult to quantify indirect externalities that accumulate over time .
External auditors may therefore not only lack access but also resources, know-how
and computational power to review AI systems . Raji et al. discuss these limitations in detail and also note that the agile nature of AI development
and typical lack of documentation challenges auditability. Furthermore, they stress
how the lack of foresight analysis typically included in external post-hoc audits
minimises the chances for audits to prevent future harms. They argue that internal
audits, conducted by a dedicated team of organisational employees—but not the AI
practitioners themselves—with full access to data and a focus on ethical foresight
could be a pragmatic alternative. There is certainly some promise in this proposal.
5  We recognise that currently the word ‘audit’ is often used in a rather loose and confusing manner. In
this context we simply define audit as ‘a structured process whereby an entitles’ present or past behaviour
is assessed for consistency with relevant principles or norms’ .
Ethics as a Service: A Pragmatic Operationalisation of AI Ethics﻿
Code review and internal checks for reliability and robustness are already common
practices within software engineering. Furthermore, internal auditing of this nature
would mitigate the risks associated with external auditing (or fully-external ethical
review boards) of ethically desensitising, de-skilling, and de-responsabilising company employees, and instead force companies to make their own critical choices and
assume explicit responsibilities . Yet, it is also undeniable that internal auditors may face conflicts of interest that make it hard for them to maintain an
independent and objective opinion . This is especially true when
there are currently limited incentives for companies to rigorously examine the implications behind technologies that are both profitable and powerful .
Thus, just as it was necessary to find a compromise between mechanisms that are
too flexible or too strict, it seems that there is also a need to find a compromise
between completely devolved and completely centralised responsibility for holding
the ethical governance process itself accountable.
The solution here lies in the creation of a multi-agent system where the responsibility is distributed across different agents (individuals, companies) in a way that (a)
aggregates the possibly good actions, so that the latter might reach the critical mass
necessary to make a positive difference to the targeted environment and its inhabitants, and (b) isolates possibly negative actions (e.g., attempts to ethics wash), so that
they never reach the necessary threshold to breach the fault-tolerance level of the
overall system and undermine its effectiveness as an ethical governance mechanism
 . This may seem overly theoretical, but it is actually a practically feasible approach, and a pragmatic analogy can be found in cloud computing,
as explained in the next section.
5  Outlining Ethics as a Service
Cloud computing, the on-demand delivery of various computing services over the
internet, has three models of service: Software as a Service (SaaS), Infrastructure as
a Service (IaaS), and Platform as a Service (PaaS).
Software as a Service is the model of cloud computing that consumers are most
readily familiar with. All aspects of the service are managed by a third-party, there
are few customisation opportunities, and often there is a high risk of vendor lockin. In our analogy regarding AI ethical governance, this would represent the fully
devolved model of governance (and one that is too strict). A third party would be
responsible for dictating the set of ethical principles, for outlining the process that
must be followed at each of the validation, verification, evaluation stages, and for
conducting an ethical audit to see whether the process was followed correctly and
whether this resulted in the expected positive outcomes.
Infrastructure as a Service, in comparison, represents the fully centralised governance model (and one that is too flexible). In cloud computing, servers, network
operating systems, and storage are all provided via a dashboard or application
programme interface (API), so that users have complete control over the entire
infrastructure. In terms of ethical governance, this would involve the AI practitioners being responsible for both developing the AI ethics principles as well as
J. Morley et al.
the process to follow internally with limited meaningful engagement with external stakeholders. The AI practitioners would also be responsible for conducting
internal audits.
Finally, there is Platform as a Service which represents the compromises we
have outlined above. It is the Goldilocks option found between methods that are
too flexible and strict, and between devolved governance and centralised governance. In the world of cloud computing, PaaS represents a set-up where the cloud
provider provides the core infrastructure, such as operating systems and storage,
but users have access to a platform that enables them to develop custom software
or applications. These three options are summarised in Fig. 1.
In the world of AI ethical governance, Ethics as a Service—based on Platform
as a Service model—could involve several components including, but not necessarily limited to: an independent multi-disciplinary ethics board; a collaboratively
developed ethical code; and AI practitioners themselves. Responsibility could
then be distributed across these components thus:
Fig. 1   Comparison of distributions of responsibility for ethics-related activities in different AI ethics
governance models. Centralised responsibility and devolved responsibility models represent the status
quo, the Ethics as a Service model is the new proposal
Ethics as a Service: A Pragmatic Operationalisation of AI Ethics﻿
1. Independent multi-disciplinary ethics advisory board responsible for providing
the core infraethics as described:
a. The development of a principle-based ethical code through a process of discussion and negotiation that treats ethical patients (i.e. individuals, businesses
and environments that may be impacted by the systems produced by the AI
company in question) as real interlocutors, who can genuinely impact the
design of the system  .
b. The setting out of a process that needs to be followed at validation, verification and evaluation stages of algorithmic Design to ensure pro-ethical design
by: (i) defining contextually the specific meaning of each of the principles in
the ethical code; and (ii) providing an appropriate range of proven-effective
translational tools which can be selected to translate from principles to practice, according to the contextually specific definitions. This process and selection of translational tools must include an element of ethical foresight analysis
 , and mechanisms for closing down, and rectifying
the consequences of a system that is found to be in breach of the principles
 . It must also recognise that positive, ethical features are
open to progressive increase, that is an algorithm can be increasingly fair, and
fairer than another algorithm or a previous version, but makes no sense to say
that it is fair or unfair in absolute terms (compare this to the case of speed: it
makes sense to say that an object is moving quickly, or that it is fast or faster
than another, but not that it is fast in absolute terms).
c. Conducting regular audits of the whole behaviour of the company—not just
the end product once launched—to see whether it is genuinely committed to
ethical conduct; whether AI practitioners are following the defined process;
and whether the final output is ethically justifiable according to contextuallydefined principles.
2. The internal company employees (the AI practitioners themselves) responsible
for providing the ‘customised software,’ namely:
a. Contextually defining the principles;
b. Identifying the appropriate tools, and putting them to use whilst designing a
specific algorithmic system;
c. Documenting how the process was followed, in public, and justifying why
specific decisions were made, when and by who.
In theory, distributing the responsibility for operationalising AI ethics in this
manner may overcome many (although definitely not all) of the limitations of
current approaches described above. However, whether it works in practice is
yet to be seen. It is also important to note that, because AI systems learn and
update their internal decision-making logic over time, code-audits (as described
in 1c above) need to be complemented with continuous functionality and impact
audits. However, such audits inevitably impose both financial and administrative
costs . Care should therefore be taken to not put undue
J. Morley et al.
burden on certain sectors in society . One way to balance the
need for audits with incentives for innovation is to introduce a progressive level
of AI governance that is proportional to the risk level associated with a specific
combination of technology and context. Therefore, testing of the concept must
involve experimentation to find the proportionate degree of oversight for different
AI solutions. For this reason (and others), further research is urgently needed on
how to evaluate translational tools and, in doing so, evaluate the current impact
of the AI ethics endeavour in order to highlight further ways in which it could be
improved. To start this research, a partial pilot of “Ethics as a Service,” which
includes the Digital Catapult AI Ethics framework (Box 1), ethics consultations
and an Independent multi-disciplinary ethics advisory board is being trialed by
Digital Catapult. We would encourage others to develop partial or complete pilots
of the concept, so that answers to the following questions might be developed:
how should members of the independent ethics board be selected; should members of the board be paid for their time or would this introduce conflicts of interest; should the independent ethics board be the same group who conducts the
audit, or would this introduce problematic incentives to make their work appear
more successful than it is in reality; where does the responsibility sit for deciding
to stop development of an AI solution if it is found to be harmful; how does the
implementation of Ethics as a Service vary between companies of different sizes
(e.g., start-up vs. large established company) and working in different sectors;
how do the benefits/drawbacks vary in these different contexts? We would ask
that those working on these, and other questions, publicly report on the successes
and failures so that a commons of knowledge related to ‘best ethical practice’ can
be established.
6  Conclusion
As Thomsen states, ‘ethics for AI cannot be expected to be any simpler than
ethics for humans.’ Indeed, it may be more complicated, since it adds to it further
technical issues. Research ethics and medical ethics have always involved a combination of the law, ethical governance policies, practices, and procedures, with
contextual discursive and procedural support. This combination approach has enabled these branches of applied ethics to find a good balance between being too strict
and too flexible, and between too centralised and too devolved. Therefore, it seems
reasonable to hypothesise that AI ethics would benefit from an equally customisable approach, and that if this balance can be achieved then the pro-ethical Design
endeavour may succeed. At the very least shifting the focus of AI ethics away from
principles to procedural regularity will make AI ethics seem more relatable to AI
practitioners. Encouraging a procedural approach can, for example, help make the
parallels between AI ethics and other quality assurance processes, such as safety
testing, clearer and thus make it more obvious why careful consideration needs to
be given to each Design decision. We hope that the idea of Ethics as a Service, as
outlined in the article, has at least highlighted this.
Ethics as a Service: A Pragmatic Operationalisation of AI Ethics﻿
Whilst these opportunities for moving forward the conversation about AI ethics and the role that Ethics as a Service may play in this, should be celebrated, it
must be acknowledged that the impacts of AI systems cannot be entirely controlled
through technical design .
Biased AI is not simply the result of biased datasets, for example. AI solutions
themselves are complex and are then deployed into complex systems. In complex
systems, agents interact with each other and with other systems in unexpected ways,
making their response to change unpredictable and non-linear. It is, therefore, likely
that we will genuinely not know whether any approaches to ‘pro-ethical’ Design
have made an impact (positive or negative) on the social impact of an algorithmic
system until after it has been deployed. Regular re-evaluation of all aspects of algorithm systems, and the extent to which they achieve their goals, including pro-ethical
Design approaches, will be crucial. Hence, further qualitative research and empirical
testing will be needed to understand in detail the benefits, and drawbacks, as well as
the practicalities of Ethics as a Service. This will be our next task.
Funding  Funding for JM was provided by Digital Catapult and a Wellcome Trust Doctoral Fellowship.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is
not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission
directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit 
ses/​by/4.​0/.