On the Computational Architecture of
the Neocortex I: The Role of the
Thalamo-Cortical Loop
Mumford, David Bryant. 1991. On the computational architecture of the neocortex I: The role
of the thalamo-cortical loop. Biological Cybernetics 65(2): 135-145.
Published version
 
 
Terms of use
This article was downloaded from Harvard University’s DASH repository, and is made
available under the terms and conditions applicable to Other Posted Material (LAA), as set
 
Accessibility
 
Share Your Story
The Harvard community has made this article openly available.
Please share how this access benefits you. Submit a story
Biol. Cybern. 65, 135-145 
Biological
Cybernetics
9 Springer-Verlag 1991
On the computational architecture of the neocortex
I. The role of the thalamo-cortical loop
D. Mumford
Mathematics Department, Harvard University, 1 Oxford Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
Received February 9, 1991
Abstract. This paper proposes that each area of the
cortex carries on its calculations with the active partici-
pation of a nucleus in the thalamus with which it is
reciprocally and topographically connected. Each corti-
cal area is responsible for maintaining and updating the
organism's knowledge of a specific aspect of the world,
ranging from low level raw data to high level abstract
representations, and involving interpreting stimuli and
generating actions. In doing this, it will draw on multi-
ple sources of expertise, learned from experience, creat-
ing multiple, often conflicting, hypotheses which are
integrated by the action of the thalamic neurons and
then sent back to the standard input layer of the cortex.
Thus this nucleus plays the role of an 'active black-
board' on which the current best reconstruction of
some aspect of the world is always displayed. Evidence
for this theory is reviewed and experimental tests are
proposed. A sequel to this paper will discuss the cor-
tico-cortical loops and propose quite different computa-
tional roles for them.
1 Introduction
When one attempts to theorize about the functioning of
the human brain, the task seems nearly impossible
because of the extraordinary complexity of the brain.
Anatomically, the brain is divided into hundreds, even
thousands of areas and nuclei and structures, connected
in a totally bewildering way, while physiologically more
and more chemicals, exchanged by neurons, are being
discovered which cause more and more types of effects
of one neuron on another. Likewise, if you start by
analyzing the computational task that the brain faces,
using the tools of either pattern recognition, artificial
intelligence or control theory, only the most simplified
versions of these tasks seem tractable. In the setting of
the real world, sensory data and motor requirements
are so complex and need to be robust in the fact of so
much noise, so many unforeseen disturbances, as to be
totally beyond present techniques.
The idea of the present two-part paper is that, at
the appropriate level of analysis, there are certain uni-
formities in the structure of the brain that suggest that
some simple general principles of organization must be
at work. If this is the case, looking at the tasks per-
formed by the brain from a computational perspective,
it may be possible to link the structures observed in the
brain with elements in a theoretical analysis of what is
needed to perform these tasks. The first part of this
paper will put forward a proposal for the role of the
thalamus based specifically on the existence of path-
ways between the cortex and the thalamus which are at
least roughly topographic, i.e. preserving the two-di-
mensional layout of the cortical sheet, and inverse to
each other. The second part of the paper will make
proposals for the computational significance of the
reciprocal cortico-cortical pathways and its relation to
the pyramidal cell populations in different layers of the
cortex and the fast oscillations recently observed in the
The uniformity which I have in mind is the unifor-
mity of the neocortex of mammals. In essentially all
species of mammal, including the very primitive opos-
sum, the neocortex has an extremely similar structure
throughout: it has six layers, a small number of cell
types, one of which, the pyramidal cell, accounts for
over half of all cells and a standard pattern of connec-
tivity, locally, globally within the cortex and subcorti-
cally. Phylogenetically, this structure has not been
changed in the evolution of mammals (except for being
simplified in some orders). The major expansion of
'association' cortex in the primate order has not in-
volved revision of this basic plan, but, apparently,
simply replicating it over ever larger areas. This sug-
gests very strongly that this structure embodies a basic
computational module so versatile that it can be
hooked together in ever larger configurations and still
function, with ever increasing subtlety, to both analyze
sensory input and organize motor actions. Even in
producing the most remarkable achievement of the
brain - language - the areas of the brain involved have
used the identical structure. The fact that this structure
is present in much simpler animals, moreover, suggests
that it may not be that hard to understand and that its
mode of operation may be fully revealed in quite simple
tasks. On the other hand, these structures are much
more specific, with their own characteristic architecture,
than those normally studied from a theoretical perspec-
tive under the name 'neural nets'. This suggests the
possibility of studying the architecture embodied in
these specific structures, looking for their computa-
tional significance.
Since this paper deals with a proposal for applying
computational ideas to biological structures, we have
tried to present the ideas so as to be clear both to
computer scientists and biologists. In order to do this, it
has been necessary to include a considerable amount of
basic anatomy for the sake of the former and of basic
computer science for the sake of the latter. I found with
preliminary versions of the paper that when this back-
ground was left out, there were frequently misunder-
standings and confusions and for this reason, I feel it is
essential to develop my ideas at this length. I want to
thank Francis Crick, Terry Deacon, Stephen Kosslyn,
Adam Mamelak, Ken Nakayama and Steve Zucker for
critical readings of various drafts of this paper that
helped me immensely in refining and clarifying my
ideas. In particular, while preparing this paper, I
learned of the work of Erich Harth , who made
proposals in a similar direction for the role of the
2 The connections of the cortex and the thalamus:
In order to put our proposals for the role of the
thalamus in perspective, I need to lay out the basic facts
about the structure of the cortex and its connections
with the thalamus. Everything in this section is stan-
dard neuroanatomy, but it is included here so that
readers with other backgrounds can follow our ideas.
The neocortex has an area of about 200,000 sq.mm.
in humans, a thickness of 2-3 mm., and a neuron
density around 100,000/sq.mm. ~ Over half of these cells
are so-called pyramidal cells, characterized by the fact
that at least one branch of their axons projects to
distant, e.g. a centimeter or more, targets. The neocor-
tex has a uniform structure with 6 layers, characterized
by their cell populations, which I will discuss in greater
detail below. There are local variations in the thickness
and prominence of the layers, 2 but in general the same
structure is there. (Reproduced in Fig. 1 is a composite
photo of the six layers in three different stains.) The
l There is a wide discrepancy in estimates ranging from 12,000/
sq.mm, to 160,000/sq.mm., but 100,000/sq.mm., resulting in 20 billion
cortical cells, seems to be a frequently cited figure e.g. Rockel et al.
 , after allowing for 18% shrinkage in each dimension, or
Cherniak . Note that the primary visual area is an exception
with at least twice as many ceils per sq.mm
2 e.g. the elaboration of layer IV in primary sensory areas and its
sparseness in the primary motor area
Fig. 1. The 6 cortical layers in Golgi, Nissl and myelin stains 
cortex as a whole includes two more primitive parts, the
paleocortex and the archicortex, with 4% of the total
cortical area in man .
This will play essentially no role in this paper so that I
usually refer to the neocortex simply as cortex. These
more primitive parts have a similar but simplified pat-
tern with a less elaborate pattern of layers.
The cortex of every mammal seems to be divided
into areas, each with a specialized role. The original
identification of these areas was based on tiny differ-
ences of cell types and cell distributions and led to maps
of cortical areas due to Brodmann and others. There
are, of course, species differences, so that the primitive
mammals have relatively few areas and primates more,
but the general map and often many of its details are
closely homologous for all species studied. More re-
cently, the possibility of tracing pathways in cortex very
accurately using chemicals which move both forward
and backward through axons has modified and fre-
quently subdivided Brodmann's areas (e.g. the third
visual area, Brodmann's area 19, turned out to be
composed of more than one area), but the picture of a
map-like division of the surface of the brain into inde-
pendent computational modules with specific intercon-
nections has been repeatedly confirmed. For a very
recent and comprehensive review of the areas known in
the Macaque monkey, see (Fellemann and Van Essen
All input to the cortex, except for the olfactory
sense, comes to it via the thalamus, which sits at the top
of the brain stem in two parts, one in the middle of
each cerebral hemisphere. It is not easy to expose
because it is totally surrounded by the white matter of
Fig. 2. The location of the thalamus within the cortex (from Luria
afferent and efferent axons, but it is shaped roughly like
a pair of small eggs, side by side (see Fig. 2). 3 It is
composed of a set of something like fifty nuclei (not all
dearly marked). Each part of the cortex is reciprocally
connected in a dense, continuous fashion with some
nucleus in the thalamus. Two examples will be repeat-
edly referred to in this paper. The first is the primary
visual area of the cortex V1 (Brodmann's area 17)
which is reciprocally connected to the lateral geniculate
nucleus, or LGN, in the thalamus. The second is the
primary motor area, Brodmann's area 4, which is recip-
rocally connected to the posterior ventral lateral nu-
cleus, or VLp, in the thalamus. It appears in the cases
which have been closely studied that the connection is
set-up by dividing up the thalamic nucleus into parallel
columns (i.e. volumes extended in one dimension along
some curve, but of small extent in the two dimensions
perpendicular to this curve), each of which is connected
to a column of cortical tissue cutting vertically across
the 6 layers. 4 Geometrically, it is as if the thalamus were
an elaborate 7th layer of the cortex, with a long (hence
slower) neuronal loop tieing it to the cortex proper. The
loop is made by the thalamus sending axons up to the
cortex where they synapse mainly in layer IV or the
deeper part of layer III, and receiving axons originating
in pyramidal cells in layer VI or the deeper part of layer
V of the cortex . The thala-
mus has a small population of inhibitory local interneu-
rons 
3 When we talk of the thalamus, we shall always mean the dorsal
thalamus, which is its largest part
4 See Sect. 3.6.3 in and, especially Fig. 3.20
and the remaining neurons all project directly to the
cortex with no collaterals (with one exception: see
discussion of RE thalamus below). Thus, except for the
RE nucleus, the nuclei in the thalamus are not directly
connected to each other.
Where does the thalamus get its input? Some nuclei
in the thalamus are the principal route for sensory
signals and 'relay' these up to the primary sensory areas
of the cortex, e.g. LGN to V1. And the nucleus VLp
transmits the motor related signals from the cerebellum
to area 4 in the cortex. Other nuclei get more elabo-
rated sensory, motor or emotional signals from further
subcortical structures- the superior colliculus, globus
pallidus, amygdala, mammilary nuclei, etc.- but, by
and large, their largest input is from the cortex itself,
via the reciprocal cortico-thalamic pathways described
above. 5 Roughly speaking, it seems as though each area
of the mammalian cortex receives input, via the thala-
mus, from that sub-cortical structure which was per-
forming similar cognitive functions in more primitive
animals. For instance, analysis of visual input and
integration of visual, auditory and tactile information is
carried out in the various layers of the superior col-
liculus (or tectum) in primitive animals. The superior
colliculus, in mammals, projects to the pulvinar com-
plex in the thalamus and thence to the association areas
of the occipital, parietal and temporal lobes, which
carry out the same functions. But, in the evolution of
the primate line, the visual input to the cortex via the
collicular-pulvinar path plays a smaller and smaller role
compared to the direct pathway from the retina to the
LGN to V1. For instance, the strength of this sec-
ondary visual pathway can be assessed by considering
the degree of blindness exhibited by animals in which
V1 has been destroyed, so that they must rely wholly on
this secondary pathway. Cats are not badly impaired by
such a loss, monkeys much more so and humans lose
all their sight except for a peculiar guessing skill known
as 'blindsight'. 6
The output of the cortex is more complex. As stated
above, every part of the cortex is talking to its corre-
sponding part of the thalamus. In addition, the princi-
pal motor output, the pyramidal tract, bypasses the
thalamus and goes directly from area 4 to the spinal
cord, resulting in an extremely fast command system.
Area 4, in other words, has two outputs, the pyramidal
tract and the posterior ventral lateral nucleus, VLp, of
the thalamus with which it is reciprocally connected.
Another output goes from vision-related frontal areas
to a subcortical structure, the superior colliculus, and
appears to be a motor output specifically for eye move-
ments. A third group of output pathways goes from
many cortical areas to the subcortical structures called
5 For instance, the output nucleus of the globus pallidus, the internal
segment, is estimated to contain merely 170,000 neurons . These
seem to play some global regulatory role. Moreover
there are also diffuse pathways which go between nuclei
of the thalamus which are already specifically connected
to one area of the cortex, but which connect it to
another area of cortex in a more 'diffuse', less point-to-
point way. In addition to being diffuse, they have a
different synaptic pattern: they are set up by pyramidal
cells in layer V of the cortex instead of VI and are
returned by thalamic neurons synapsing in layer I in-
stead of layers III and IV . For example,
the primary visual area V1 has its specific connection
with the LGN, but it is also connected diffusely to at
least one nucleus in the pulvinar area of the thalamus
 .
Because of this second type of connection, it usually
appears as though each nucleus in the thalamus is
connected to multiple cortical areas and vice versa.
Whether or not a single thalamic nucleus is ever con-
nected to several cortical areas in a specific way, i.e.
with the thalamus synapsing in the middle layers IV
and III (deeper part) of the cortex, does not seem to
have been dearly settled. The simplest hypothesis is
that the specific projections set up reciprocal maps
between the whole of the cortex and the specific nuclei
of the thalamus which are roughly one-to-one in each
direction. 7 Alternately, each nucleus in the thalamus
may communicate to one or more cortical areas via
specific projections . 8
The second complication is that all pathways be-
tween the cortex and thalamus pass through a thin
layer of cells on the surface of the thalamus known as
the reticular complex of the thalamus, or RE thalamus.
There the pathways in both directions excite RE cells,
which in turn send inhibitory axons both to each other
and back to the thalamus to the area of origin of the
pathway. Although the RE neurons are inhibitory,
experimental evidence shows that
peaks of activity in a part of the RE thalamus occur at
the same time as peaks of activity in the corresponding
nuclei of the thalamus proper. For this reason, the
mechanism by which the RE thalamus and the thala-
mus proper interact is not clear . In any case, as Crick says : "If the thalamus is the gateway to the cortex, the
reticular complex might be described as the guardian of
the gateway."
3 The thalamus as a window on the world
What, then, is the function of the thalamus? Originally
it was thought to be merely a passive relayer of sensory
signals to the cortex proper. The small number of
7 There is one well-known exception to this hypothesis: in small
mammals, the somato-sensory and motor areas of the cortex can
overlap or even coincide. Then two quite separate parts of the
thalamus, VP and VL, project to the middle layers of overlaping parts
of cortex. It is not known whether this is an isolated exception, or
indicates a frequent pattern
s Several problems complicate this issue. One is that when very
precise tracer experiments are carried out, it sometimes seems that the
part of the thalamus projecting to a particular cortical area does not
exactly coincide with a thalamic nucleus, and may even cross the
boundary between two nuclei . Moreover, many
papers report on connections without specifying the laminar pattern
of cortical synapses. The real issue, it seems to me, is not whether the
cortical areas and the thalamic nuclei correspond one-to-one, because
further studies may suggest subdividing both areas and nuclei, but
how topographic are the specific, reciprocal projections. In other
words, one seeks corresponding parts of the cortex and thalamus
between which these projections give a continuous map in both
directions between the cortical surface and a set of 'rods' or 'columns'
in the thalamus . It may turn out that, at
least in primates, both the cortex and the thalamus are divisible into
pieces such that the specific projections set up a one-to-one corre-
spondence between them consisting of such topographic projections,
or this may fail in various ways
interneurons in the thalamus, the total lack of connec-
tions between nuclei within the thalamus or of any
intra-thalamic axonal collaterals and the analysis of
single-cell recordings all suggest that the thalamus does
little or no computation by itself. But if it is merely a
relay station, a) why do even association areas of the
cortex receive thalamic input and b) why does the
cortex reciprocate with a massive projection of fibres
back to the thalamus? Both of these are biologically
very expensive and even if they were built because of
some phylogenetic quirk, they would decrease in size
through selection if they weren't essential.
Stepping back from details for a minute, one can
argue like this: phylogenetically, the association areas of
cortex (those not closely connected to input or output
circuits) developed by apparently replicating the struc-
tures and functionality inherited from the more primi-
tive areas out of which more primitive brains were
made. I want to ignore the motor end of the system for
the time being, and concentrate on the sensory end. The
original sensory cortex clearly acted as some kind of
pattern analyzer taking its input from the thalamus, via
layer IV. Assuming that evolution did not modify this
plan, this suggests that other cortex also analyzes in
some way the data presented to it in layer IV. If so,
then the data in the corresponding nucleus of the
thalamus will be that area of cortex's view of the world:
it will carry a signal which will be sent to layer IV of
cortex and analyzed as though this was the signal that
some new sophisticated sense could deliver. The nuclei
of the thalamus, from this view, are pseudo-sense or-
gans with different views of the world, to be analyzed
by the cortex. Each area of cortex is like a homunculus
which has a certain narrow view of the world, in which
it tries to remember patterns, recognizing familiar ones
and lumping similar ones into categories.
In the 'higher' sensory areas this would mean that
the thalamus sends them not the raw sensory data but
a processed version of the input in which noise and
irrelevant stuff have been dropped, and the interesting
features are marked as such. For instance, in vision, a
higher level representation might record a code for
'grass' in place of a whole area of intricately textured
detail, producing a kind of cartoon version of the
stimulus. 9 The psychological experiments of Bransford
et al. , which demonstrate that what we remem-
ber about a sentence is often what we thought or
assumed was there, rather than what was really there,
are consistent with the proposal that higher areas of the
brain process a kind of rational reconstruction of the
world rather than the raw data.
Still higher sensory areas, especially multi-modal
areas integrating data from many senses, should process
quite abstract data structures as their view of the world.
The sort of structure I have in mind is a sort of
geometrical net, with nodes corresponding to various
9 By the metaphor of cartoon, we mean a data structure which is no
longer a pixel-by-pixel record, but which is simplified to a list of
areas, annotated by their features and boundaries
objects or parts of objects, and with links expressing the
geometrical relationship between them (e.g. 'to the left
of', 'a part of'). This sort of structure was first pro-
posed by Minsky and was elaborated by Win-
ston and Marr (his so-called 3-D model)
and has been investigated from a 'neural net' point of
view in .
4 Active blackboards
But why, then, should there be a recurrent pathway
from the cortex to the thalamus? For higher areas, this
pathway seems to be the principal way to excite the
corresponding nuclei in the thalamus. The cortical area,
then, receives its primary, layer IV input, its 'view' of
the world as we have argued, from a thalamic nucleus
which it is exciting. Note that these recurrent pathways
were apparently copied from those present in the pri-
mary sensory pathways of simpler brains. Thus the
visual signal goes from the retina to the lateral genicu-
late nucleus, or LGN, of the thalamus, and from there
to the cortex. But the LGN =~ V1 pathway is returned
by an equally massive projection V1 =~ LGN which is
certainly not needed for supplying the visual signal. Is
there some computational device which not only functions
as input to be read by the computer but on which the
computer also writes?
A key idea in early AI work on speech perception
 
as well as the psychological model embodied in 'Pande-
monium' , is that of the blackboard. When several
sources of expertise, e.g. several different constraints,
must be brought to bear on a problem, it is natural to
try to carry out the computation in parallel, in indepen-
dent streams, one devoted to working out the conse-
quences of each source of expertise. These modules
must, however, coordinate their work and the simplest
way to do this is to have a common blackboard visible
to each module, on which they write from time to time
their suggestions or conclusions. Similarly, if some con-
straint or algorithm must be applied multiple times, it is
natural to keep the running result on a blackboard, and
the computational module must simply keep checking
the blackboard and make small modifications to imple-
ment local constraints, or repeat some algorithm until
satisfied with the result.
My proposal is that the thalamus is something like
a blackboard. To use the thalamus as a blackboard
means that the cortex must write on as well as read
from this blackboard. Thus the thalamo-cortical fibers
convey to the cortex the current picture of those aspects
of the world with which that area of the cortex is
concerned, distributing this data via their axonal ar-
borizations locally in the cortex. The cortico-thalamic
fibers convey to the thalamus proposed additions and
revisions to this picture arrived at by many computa-
tions carried out in the cortex, which are integrated in
the thalamus via the dendritic arbors of the thalamic
Think of the cortex as containing multiple experts
with deep understanding of specific patterns and con-
straints usually present in the world: each expert makes
guesses based on its knowledge and, while many of
these guesses are compatible and presumably correct,
some contradict others and decisions between them
must be made. It is these decisions which I suggest are
made by a kind of voting, taking place in the summa-
tion of stimuli in the dendrites of the thalamic cells, l~
The need and the techniques for such 'data fusion' in
the case of vision, have been extensively studied in the
recent monograph of Clark and Yuille , and I am
proposing that the thalamus implements something like
the algorithms that they propose. Note that the thala-
mus not only integrates its multiple cortical inputs with
each other, but also with whatever sub-cortical input,
like sensory data, this nucleus receives.
But there are several ways in which the blackboard
metaphor may be misleading. For one thing, a black-
board in a computer or in a Professor's office is a
passive structure on which you merely write for com-
munication: I have proposed that the thalamus plays an
active role in synthesizing the results of calculations by
various expert pattern recognizing modules in the cor-
tex. Another major difference is that the computer's
and the Professor's blackboard will store ideas indefin-
itely until erased. But the brain is a volatile computa-
tional structure, always reacting to new stimuli and its
blackboards would get cluttered and unreadable unless
they erased themselves. In other words, the current
calculations of the brain must usually be completed
within tens or hundreds of milliseconds or they become
irrelevant, and the blackboard for such work must be
actively refreshed by the senses or by cortical stimulus
or it will fade. Thus the thalamus does not sustain its
activity by itself, but can only project back to the cortex
its integration of the data being sent down to it right
now. When the brain wants to tuck some idea away for
anything from minutes to years, it would not be a good
idea to use these thalamic blackboards which are con-
tinuously bombarded with new ideas. These memory
functions are accomplished by a different route and
apparently require a complex interaction with non-
neocortical areas: the hippocampus and the entorhinal
cortex. Because of these differences, it seems better to
call the thalamus an active blackboard, i.e. a blackboard
which is volatile and continually presents the latest
ideas, synthesized from multiple cortical sources.
Although thalamic activity normally disappears as
soon as the neurons fire, there are indications that the
thalamus has some mechanisms for maintaining traces
of its activity over something like 100 ms. This idea
comes from an analysis of the effect of calcium channels
and has been linked with the possibility that the RE
thalamus may play a major role in keeping the atten-
10 These calculations may also involve the interneurons in the thala-
mus, e.g. using microcircuits involving 3-way dendro-dendritic
synapses with these interneurons. Because these interneurons are
inhibitory, they also allow cortical cells to cast negative votes, i.e. to
inhibit some thalamic cells
tion of an area of cortex focussed on some complex of
ideas on a shorter time scale . In other words, the RE thalamus might have a
role not merely in gating but in sustaining cortical
attention. The mechanisms for such an effect are still
very speculative.
In the context of the blackboard metaphor, one can
differentiate the role of the specific and the diffuse
projections of the thalamus on the cortex. The specific
projections are the ones I've been talking about so far:
the link between each computational area of the cortex
and the active blackboard which it reads and writes on.
On the other hand, the diffuse projections from nuclei
with specific connections to one cortical area can in-
form other areas of the cortex working on related
sensory problems of what is the current hypothesis on
this blackboard. For instance, blackboards in tla~ pul-
vinar complex of the thalamus containing the optical
flow field (data on the movement of the visual stimulus
across the retina, thought to be computed in visual area
MT) should be visible to areas concerned with figure/
ground separation (possibly areas V2 and V4), so that
motion clues can be used to distinguish figure and
ground. This coordination might also be achieved by
direct cortico-cortical pathways, so the brain seems to
have two paths for coordinating different areas with
overlapping concerns: through diffuse connections to
the same nucleus of the thalamus or through cortico-
cortical pathways.
Is the thalamus big enough to play such a role? An
estimate which is often cited puts the ratio by weight or
volume of the thalamus to the cortex at 20/0.11 I am
suggesting that the cortex contains multiple indepen-
dent 'experts' which analyze different aspects of each
area's data and that their results are merely integrated
in the thalamus. Moreover, I will propose in the second
part of this paper that one of the computational bur-
dens of the cortex is that it must translate its data into
forms readable to both higher and lower areas, while
the thalamus need only store the data in the coded form
usable to the given area. Thus a size ratio of 50:1
doesn't seem unreasonable for such a function.
5 Harth's theory
Ideas of the kind expressed in Sect. 4 can be found in the
work of Luria who drew attention strongly to the
parallel structures in the cortex and the thalamus and
reciprocal connections between the two which occur on
every level. But he did not invoke the specific computa-
tional metaphor of a blackboard. As far as I know, the
only person to do so is Erich Harth, who developed that
he called the Alopex theory of the interaction between
the LGN, the visual area V1 and higher visual areas. In
his popular book "Windows on the Mind" , he expresses his theory like this:
11 e.g. 10 cubic cm. for the thalamus (bilaterally) to 500 cubic cm. for
the grey matter of the cortex, or very roughly 2 million cells per
nucleus in the thalamus to 100 million in an average cortical area
"Recall that the part of thalamus that is concerned with vision, the
LGN, preserves some of the character of the retina: activity is
distributed over sheets of neurons which mirror the pattern of light
falling on the retina. It is possible that corticofugal messages weave
similar patterns on this inner retina, as Wolf Singer has called it.
This is suggested by the fact that the fibres coming back from the
cortex are about as numerous as those going in the opposite
directions, and have the same spatial distribution over the sheet of
neurons in the relay nucleus. Also there is evidence that the
returning messages are feature specific; that is, they can enhance,
select, and perhaps mimic sensory patterns. Another nit of evidence
is the finding that in cats, activity in the LGN is heightened during
REM sleep in which we are supposed to dream. Moreover, this
activity was found to be similar in character to that evoked by real
visual input.
I would like to suggest an extension of Singer's concept of an
'internal retina" to what I called an 'internal sketchpad: The idea
is that sensory patterns are laid down in the LGN by sensory input,
but similar patterns may also be sketched there by higher centers.
The LGN is a possible location for such a process, but certainly not
the only place where this may occur. ""
Harth, with various coworkers, has gone much
further and given a precise algorithm which they pro-
pose as a model of how the cortical feedback to the
LGN might be computed. I quote from the abstract to
his Science article :
"The mammalian visual system has a hierarchic structure with
extensive reciprocal connections. A model is proposed in which the
feedback pathways serve to modify afferent sensory stimuli in ways
that enhance and complete sensory input patterns, suppress irrele-
vant features, and generate quasi-sensory patterns when afferent
stimulation is weak or absent. Such inversion of sensory coding and
feature extraction can be achieved by optimization processes in
which the scalar responses derived from high level neural analyzers
are used as cost functions to modify the filter properties of more
peripheral sensory relays. An optimization algorithm, Alopex,
which is used in the model, is readily implemented with known
neural circuitry."
This sketchpad hypothesis of Harth is similar to
mine, but the Alopex theory goes much further in
proposing a specific algorithm. I am suggesting more
simply that the different parts of the cortex have many
different computations to do and that the thalamus has
an essential but relatively passive role, in integrating the
reconstructions, schemes, ideas, etc. of each area and
broadcasting them to this and other areas of the cortex.
But in contrast to the Alopex theory, I am not propos-
ing that the feedback loop between thalamus and cortex
is part of any specific pattern recognition computation
and, indeed, I want to ascribe to cortico-cortical loops
versions of some of the computations Harth is inter-
ested in. These ideas will be developed in the second
part of this paper.
6 The thalamus and the cerebellum
Now what is the role of the thalamus for the primary
motor area, Brodmann's area 4? In all higher mammals,
Area 4 is an easily distinguishable architectonic area
which received no direct sensory input, but is responsi-
ble for initiating movement on the lowest, muscle-by-
muscle, level. The evolution of mammals shows a clear
progression in which motor control is shifted increas-
ingly to the cortex and specifically to Area 4 which is
the origin of a direct projection from cortex to motor
neurons in the spinal cord. 12 This connection, the pyra-
midal tract, is set up by giant pyramidal cells (the cells
of Betz) in layer V which control the muscles, with only
a single synaptic relay in the spine. Whoever has his
hand on the throttle, is in control and this pathway is
clearly crucial in shifting control to the cortex, away
from the more primitive sub-cortical motor systems,
which are demoted to deal only with involuntary ac-
tions and simple requirements like balance. 13
In addition, some of the axons of the pyramidal
tract terminate in the brain stem, in the red nucleus,
from which they project to a new section of the cerebel-
lum, the neo-cerebellum consisting of the deep lying
dentate nucleus and the lateral zones on the surface of
the cerebellum. The output of the dentate nucleus
projects primarily not to the brain stem or spine but up
to the thalamus, to the nucleus VLp, and thence to the
motor area.
Here is our scenario of what these new structures
are doing. The cortex, through complex integrated ac-
tions of all lobes, 'decides' to make a certain movement.
This command winds up in the motor area, which does
two things: it writes the motor command on its black-
board VLp, and it sends it off down the pyramidal
tract. Apparently this message can be either imperative
or tentative. The imperative mode is reserved for com-
mands which brook no delay and which should be done
instantly, even if awkwardly: these take about 7 ms
from motor area activity to muscle response . Most commands get caught at the red nucleus,
and in the local spinal circuits and don't start muscle
action immediately. In fact, experimental recordings
show delays of around 100 ms between pyramidal tract
activity and muscle response. 14
The cerebellum meanwhile analyzes this motor
command and does what it has done in all vertebrates:
it modifies and specifies in detail what combination of
forces for what periods of time in which muscle groups
best carry out this command. Then the cerebellum
writes this prescription on VLp, for the motor area to
12 Area 6, the pre-motor area, also projects directly to the cord via
the pyramidal tract. The hierarchy of motor areas will be discussed in
the second part of this paper
~3 It would be nice to be able to say not merely that mammals are
unique in having a massive cortex directly controlling their muscles
via the pyramidal tract, but also that mutations creating the pyrami-
dal tract distinguish mammals from reptiles. In fact, the homologies
between cortical structures in mammals and other structures in rep-
tiles are complex, and, by one theory, part of the mammalian cortex
evolved from the reptilian dorsal striatum which does have a motor
output, albeit with relays in the brainstem
14 An extensive series of papers by Sasaki and Gemba have recorded the difference in field potentials between layer
I and layer VI in area 4 during the performance of trained move-
ments. They interpret surface negative, depth positive potentials as
due to currents in the apical dendrites of superficial pyramidal cells
and the opposite potential as due to currents in deep pyramidal cells,
such as the Betz cells. The latter typically start up about 100 ms
before the muscle cells fire. Single cell recordings due to show roughly the same delay
read. This allows the cortex to use the carefully learned
muscle programs expressed in the synaptic weights of
the cerebellum. In the next few milliseconds, the com-
mands sent down the pyramidal tract strengthen or are
somehow modulated to say, now do it, and a polished
movement is executed. Of course, more primitive parts
of the cerebellum will also monitor the on-going move-
ment and modify it by more direct paths, which supple-
ment the cortico-spinal path. In all of this, VLp is
playing the role of a low-level motor blackboard, in
which projected and on-going movements are encoded
in terms of specific forces to be exerted by specific
muscle groups. Although the cerebellar input to VLp
will be more informative in terms of what forces will
accomplish the required movement most efficiently and
smoothly, the cortex has available to it more highly
processed sensory data that may lead to modifying the
specifications for the movement. The blackboard VLp
will integrate these needs.
Luria has a quite
similar analysis of these circuits, though he doesn't use
the word blackboard of course:
"The principle of feedback is applied quite differently in the
activity of that part of the cortex responsible for the organization,
programming and execution of voluntary motor activity, for in this
realm it becomes the main source of information on the effects of
the movements and actions performed. The physiological role of the
motor cortex essentially consists of matching the "'assigned pro-
gram" of a motor act, formed mainly on the basis of the analytical
and integrative cortical activity of the posterior divisions of the
hemispheres, with the actual course of its performance, i.e. in
detecting signals of success and signals of error (agreement or
disagreement between the program and the performance) and in
making the required corrections at the right time in the course of
the actions. In view of what has been said, it will be apparent that
both the centrifugal and centripetal (responsible for feedback)
chains of relays of impulses, connecting the motor cortex to the
subcortical formations, are included in the extrapyramidal system's
of the brain, which are known to be of essential importance to the
coordination of voluntary movement. "'
The hypothesis that Area 4 and VLp perform incre-
mental calculations converging step by step to the
precise muscular act to be performed is consistent with
the startling results of Georgopoulos et al. from
single cell recordings in Area 4. He found not only that
the pattern of excitation in Area 4 at the time of an arm
movement correlated closely with the direction of arm
movement in each repetition of his experiment, but that
in the 100 ms period before arm movement, the pattern
of excitation in Area 4 built up in a definite sequence
which can be interpreted as forming mental images of
arm movements intermediate between reaching straight
ahead and reaching in the direction now desired. It was
exactly as if the required muscular commands were
being computed in stages, starting from simpler ones
for which a template was known and making incremen-
tal modifications, using the VLp as blackboard to
record the current proposed arm movement.
A specific prediction that I would like to make is
that, like the auditory areas, the low level motor black-
boards must have a certain amount of temporal buffer-
ing. If the data structure for Area 4 is the sequence of
muscular commands over the next second or so, then,
assuming the animal's current plan is not interrupted,
there should be a correlation between neuronal activity
in Area 4 at a given time and the action taken after
moderate time lags, as well as the action taken immedi-
ately afterwards. The temporal buffering could be done
geometrically with different strips of neurons, or it
could be done by a subtler in-place coding (see Sect. 9).
7 The thalamus and attention
The most widely discussed alternative suggestion about
the function of the thalamus is that, in addition to
relaying data, the thalamus gates it in some way. For
example, it may be used in focussing attention on some
part of the stimulus, or blanking out other parts of the
stimulus (e.g. retinal input during a saccade). This
theory was developed at length by Crick , corre-
lating it with Treisman's experiments suggesting the
mind had an internal 'spotlight of attention' that could
be moved around the visual field without actually mov-
ing the eye . In particular, he suggests
that the position of the RE thalamus, smack in the
middle of the pathway to the cortex, makes it the
logical candidate for implementing a focus of attention.
The exact mechanism he proposes is rather subtle,
involving an unusual property of thalamic neurons,
related to calcium channels which cause 'low threshold
spikes' , and has been dis-
puted by others . Nonethe-
less, the idea that the RE thalamus in some way gates
the flow of data from the thalamus to the cortex is very
plausible, given its location and is quite compatible
with the thalamus being a blackboard.
What seems most implausible to me in the theory
that gating and attention are the primary uses of the
cortico-thalamic projection, is why the need to gate this
flow of data would require such a massive projection, at
least as big as the thalamo-cortical projection. Bit for
bit, it would seem that transmission of data requires
more bandwidth than the selection of part of the data.
Moreover, this theory ignores the fact that the cortex
needs to write most of this data on the non-sensory
nuclei of the thalamus before it can read it, and the
data doesn't automatically stay around, i.e. the thala-
mus doesn't have loops so that it can maintain a state
of excitation. Why go to all this trouble to send data
down to the thalamus, as well as sending the gating
signals, so that a subset of this data will echo back?
This operation makes more sense if, at each stage in a
calculation, writing and reading from the thalamus
both have roles, as they would if it was serving as a
blackboard, synthesizing the cortical results via the
dendritic arbors of the thalamic neurons, and distribut-
ing them back to the local cortical area via the spread
of the thalamo-cortical axons.
Let's look at some numbers to bring this home.
Unfortunately, quantitative neurobiology is not in
vogue and most papers avoid estimating the numbers of
neurons and axons in the structures and pathways
discussed. However, for the LGN, Sherman and Koch's
article in gives some figures for the
so-called A-laminae of the LGN in the cat. There are
two pathways between the retina and the cortex: the X
pathway (homologous to the P pathway in primates)
concerned with shape and color, and the Y pathway
(homologous to the M pathway) concerned with mo-
tion. The X pathway has 90,000 axons from the retina
to the LGN, which synapse on some 175,000 relay cells,
while the Y pathway has 10,000 axons synapsing on
125,000 relay cells (all figures should be considered as
+20% or so). The cortico-geniculate pathway, on the
other hand, contains 4,000,000 axons synapsing on the
X and Y relay cells in the A-lamina (how many on each
is not known). Thus the cortical input to the LGN is
about 40 times bigger than the retinal input, and 13
times bigger than the reciprocal LGN to cortex path-
way. Even allowing largely for multiple synapses of the
retinal axons, they estimate that only 10-20% of the
synapses on the LGN cells arise from retinal axons,
while 80-90% arise from cortical axons . I suggest that the only way to
make sense of these figures is that most of the data in
the LGN is calculated not directly from the retinal
input, but via one or more passes through the geniculo-
cortical loop, this data representing the visual input
with considerable image processing added (see Sect. 8).
The attention theory has also been proposed by
Ojemann . Ojemann has
carried out experiments stimulating varous thalamic
nuclei in awake humans in the course of operations in
which various subcortical structures are being surgically
destroyed. He proposes that the thalamus is responsible
for a 'specific alerting response'. Specifically, he ob-
serves that suitable thalamic stimulation can/) improve
verbal memory if given at the time of presentation of
the item to be remembered and ii) increase rate of
response and number of errors if given at the time of
recall. Moreover, such stimulation can also cause per-
severvation, both on the first syllable of a word being
pronounced, or on an earlier response which is not
correct for the next task. Let me point out, however,
that these results are also compatible with the black-
board role for the thalamus: if the thalamus is a black-
board, stimulating it could have the effect (a) of
highlighting one of the data items represented on it,
resulting in better memory for the item, and (b) of
hindering the power of cortico-thalamic pathways to
revise and update the data in the thalamus appropri-
ately, causing persevervation and the other types of
error Ojemann observes.
8 Possible tests
This proposal admits some straightforward experimen-
tal tests. The most unambiguous corroboration would
be to demonstrate an effect of the cortico-thalamic
projection on the LGN. If the LGN serves as a black-
board, its state should be determined not merely by
retinal stimulation, but by the ongoing analysis of this
stimulation by the corresponding area of the cortex, V1
or Brodmann's Area 17. Both the LGN and V1 have
two classes of cells: fast-responding ones concerned
with motion (called Y in cats and M in primates) and
slower, sustained-response cells concerned with rela-
tively static shapes (called X in cats and P in primates).
One simple class of LGN neurons of the second type
are the black-white center-surround opponent cells,
which respond in a sustained way to the difference of
the amount of light in a roughly circular central field
minus that in a roughly circular annulus around it (or
vice versa). Now for these cells, V1 seems concerned
with using this data to find edges and lines in the retinal
image, computing their orientation, and how far they
continue straight (as in the responses of so-called end-
stopped cells).
In the real world, this is a non-trivial operation
because of noise, shading, texture, etc. What I predict,
therefore, is that over some cycle of maybe 50 millisec-
onds, the picture held by the LGN will improve, noise
being removed, edges and lines being sharpened, filled
in for instance where the veins on the retina cross them.
Part of the image is, of course, changing, and the
motion system concerned with this should be making its
own kind of improvements to the LGN responses. But
for the relatively static parts of the retinal image, i.e.
objects which are still when the eye is still, or objects
being tracked when the eye is in tracking mode, I would
conjecture that the sustained response cells alter their
rate of firing in this 50 ms window to mimic what
would happen if the retinal signal were improved, much
like the image processing which astronomers perform
on satellite images. To test this, the first requirement is
not to use the extremely simple stimuli typical of these
experiments: bars, dots, sine-waves, etc. but more real-
istic abstractions of real world data: bars with white or
other noise superimposed, edges with small gaps, etc.
Secondly, the firing of the LGN neurons in the response
period should not be averaged, but counted separately
in each 5 or 10 ms interval following the stimulus. For
an example, see Fig. 4, where I conjecture that the
response to the bar with blurry spot will start out less
than that to the whole bar, but build up, when cortical
feedback kicks in, to the same as the response to the
A more speculative proposal is that the increase in
the number of X-relay cells in the LGN versus the
number of axons of X-ganglion cells in the retina is due
to the need, for stereo fusion, of constructing shifted
versions of the raw input. In other words, the cortex
seeks to compare the signal from the left and right
retinas. Because of the geometry of stereo vision, these
often match up closely after a horizontal shift (whose
size is a function of the distance to the viewed surface
and the vergence of the two eyes), and the proposal is
that such a shift may be physically realized in the
responses of some of the LGN cells during the process
of fusion of the images from the two eyes. To test this,
one need only present image pairs to two paralyzed eyes
with varying degrees of disparity, and observe the time
course of response of LGN X-relay cells: the possibility
 . Therefore, I
propose that neurons in Pli will record boundaries
between objects in a scene, no matter how they are
marked (or obscured) in the raw image. Moreover, the
areas of a scene which are part of a single object must
somehow be marked as such in order that the shape of
the object can be analyzed, leading to its identification.
This is an operation called 'coloring' by Ullman ,
without which the regions corresponding to individual
objects cannot be dealt with as units, One plausible
conjecture is that the responses of some neurons will be
locked on to particular objects, so that, when the scene
is shifted in front of the eyes, the neuron will fire so
long as its receptive field overlaps (or is contained in)
the visible surface of the object and will drop off as
soon as the region moves away.
Fig. 4. Stimulus for test of LGN response
is that their receptive fields will sometimes shift to
achieve better registration of the two images.
Another area in which we may test our theory of
active blackboards is by examining the responses of
thalamic cells which are not principally driven by sub-
cortical input. These cells receive most of their input
from the cortex and I would propose that their re-
sponses will indicate clearly what that area of cortex is
concerned with. A good example is the inferior pulvinar
nucleus which is reciprocally and specifically (i.e.
synapsing in layer IV or deep III) connected to visual
area V2. A conjecture is that while V1 is concerned with
identifying small pieces of edges, their orientation and
motion and possibly curvature, V2 is assembling this
data into a global picture of the scene. More specifi-
cally, I mean tracing long edges, finding regions of
coherent color and texture and deducing from this a
segmentation of the scene into individual objects. In
psychology, this includes what is called figure-ground
separation and it involves crucially the principles of
Gestalt psychology. Accomplishing this segregation
properly involves integrating the data from stereo vi-
sion (because individual objects have continuous dis-
parities without jumps) and from motion (because
individual objects move coherently). Neurophysiologi-
cal data suggests that V2 does at least some of this
15 As Terry Deacon pointed out to me, the rate of phoneme produc-
tion is not necessarily the rate at which new data appears in the
cortex. Although speech is described by linguists as a sequence of
phonemes, in the sound itself the phonemes overlap, i.e. the time
intervals in which each phoneme affects the sound overlap. If subcor-
tical structures extract features which encode the clues for all the
overlapping phonemes at each instant, then new data appears in the
cortex roughly with each new syllable, not each new phoneme. This
suggests new data every 100-150 ms
9 Temporal sequencing
Some of the thalamic active blackboards deal with
relatively static information and some deal with rapidly
changing information, that is only relevant for less than
lOOms say. Thus higher level conclusions, about the
geometry of your immediate surround and the objects
and the people there, will change only slowly, provided
nothing is in rapid motion. But data about a speech
signal is superceded by the next phoneme with 50-
lOOms or so. 15 For those blackboards dealing with
rapidly evolu
data whose temporal pattern is essen-
tial for its classification, such as the lower level auditory
and motor blackboards, it is essential to maintain a
certain amount of temporal buffering: i.e. to keep at
any instant the description of the input over some fixed
period up to the present. Such a prediction should be
easy to test. There are several ways to set up such a
buffer: e.g. a) write the new signal cyclically into a
family of neurons, b) write the latest data always in the
same place but shift earlier data along some line, or c)
write the data on top of itself with some 'in-place'
coding. Another possibility is that d) the thalamic-corti-
cal loop itself is employed in doing this buffering, so
that aspects of the time-delayed signal are fed back by
cortico-thalamic fibres and recur once or several times
in thalamic activity. In cases a), b) and d), careful
measurement of the time lags between stimulus and
neuron response in primary or secondary auditory cor-
tex, or in the medial geniculate nucleus, MGN, of the
thalamus should reveal such buffering, especially if
multi-neuron recordings are made. In all cases, there
should be some correlation between activity in auditory
cortex at a given time and the stimulus presented some
hundreds of milliseconds earlier.
Moreover, the Y/M-cells in the visual pathway deal
with motion, and their signal is also often evolving
rapidly. In fact, an obstacle to the blackboard hypothe-
sis that is often raised is how the LGN can be used as
a blackboard when the visual signal is changing so fast.
Now the brain has evolved a special tracking mode of
eye motion precisely to keep a uniformly moving object
nearly stationary on the retina, but this usually
works for only one object at a time and motion may
not be uniform, nor the object rigid. I'd like to propose
that this is exactly why, in the Y/M-pathway, there is
such a large increase in number of LGN cells to num-
ber of retinal cells (estimated at 12 : 1, see Sect. 7). The
extra LGN cells are available for temporal buffering,
storing the motion history during a single fixation of
the eye. Making a more precise prediction requires a
specific hypothesis of how temporal buffering is done:
hopefully the same mechanism is used by mammals in
the visual, auditory and motor domains, but I don't
want to make a guess.