IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 34, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015
The Multimodal Brain Tumor Image
Segmentation Benchmark (BRATS)
Bjoern H. Menze*, Andras Jakab, Stefan Bauer, Jayashree Kalpathy-Cramer, Keyvan Farahani, Justin Kirby,
Yuliya Burren, Nicole Porz, Johannes Slotboom, Roland Wiest, Levente Lanczi, Elizabeth Gerstner,
Marc-André Weber, Tal Arbel, Brian B. Avants, Nicholas Ayache, Patricia Buendia, D. Louis Collins,
Nicolas Cordier, Jason J. Corso, Antonio Criminisi, Tilak Das, Hervé Delingette, Çağatay Demiralp,
Christopher R. Durst, Michel Dojat, Senan Doyle, Joana Festa, Florence Forbes, Ezequiel Geremia,
Ben Glocker, Polina Golland, Xiaotao Guo, Andac Hamamci, Khan M. Iftekharuddin, Raj Jena,
Nigel M. John, Ender Konukoglu, Danial Lashkari, José António Mariz, Raphael Meier, Sérgio Pereira,
Doina Precup, Stephen J. Price, Tammy Riklin Raviv, Syed M. S. Reza, Michael Ryan, Duygu Sarikaya,
Lawrence Schwartz, Hoo-Chang Shin, Jamie Shotton, Carlos A. Silva, Nuno Sousa, Nagesh K. Subbanna,
Gabor Szekely, Thomas J. Taylor, Owen M. Thomas, Nicholas J. Tustison, Gozde Unal, Flor Vasseur,
Max Wintermark, Dong Hye Ye, Liang Zhao, Binsheng Zhao, Darko Zikic, Marcel Prastawa,
Mauricio Reyes, and Koen Van Leemput
Abstract—In this paper we report the set-up and results of
the Multimodal Brain Tumor Image Segmentation Benchmark
(BRATS) organized in conjunction with the MICCAI 2012 and
2013 conferences. Twenty state-of-the-art tumor segmentation
algorithms were applied to a set of 65 multi-contrast MR scans of
low- and high-grade glioma patients—manually annotated by up
to four raters—and to 65 comparable scans generated using tumor
image simulation software. Quantitative evaluations revealed considerable disagreement between the human raters in segmenting
various tumor sub-regions (Dice scores in the range 74%–85%),
illustrating the difﬁculty of this task. We found that different
algorithms worked best for different sub-regions (reaching performance comparable to human inter-rater variability), but that
no single algorithm ranked in the top for all sub-regions simultaneously. Fusing several good algorithms using a hierarchical
majority vote yielded segmentations that consistently ranked
above all individual algorithms, indicating remaining opportunities for further methodological improvements. The BRATS image
data and manual annotations continue to be publicly available
through an online evaluation system as an ongoing benchmarking
Index Terms—MRI, Brain, Oncology/tumor, Image segmentation, Benchmark.
I. INTRODUCTION
LIOMAS are the most frequent primary brain tumors in
adults, presumably originating from glial cells and in-
ﬁltrating the surrounding tissues . Despite considerable advances in glioma research, patient diagnosis remains poor. The
clinical population with the more aggressive form of the disease,
classiﬁed as high-grade gliomas, have a median survival rate of
Manuscript received July 04, 2014; accepted September 01, 2014. Date of
publication December 04, 2014; date of current version September 29, 2015.
B. H. Menze, A. Jakab, S. Bauer, J. Kalpathy-Cramer, K. Farahani, J. Kirby, Y.
Burren, N. Porz, J. Slotboom, R. Wiest, L. Lanczi, E. Gerstner, M.-A. Weber,
M. Prastawa, M. Reyes, and K. Van Leemput co-organized the benchmark;
all others contributed results of their algorithms as indicated in the appendix.
M. Reyes and K. Van Leemput contributed equally. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
Due to space constraints, funding information and author afﬁliations for this
work appear in the acknowledgement section.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TMI.2014.2377694
two years or less and require immediate treatment , . The
slower growing low-grade variants, such as low-grade astrocytomas or oligodendrogliomas, come with a life expectancy of
several years so aggressive treatment is often delayed as long as
possible. For both groups, intensive neuroimaging protocols are
used before and after treatment to evaluate the progression of the
disease and the success of a chosen treatment strategy. In current
clinical routine, as well as in clinical studies, the resulting images are evaluated either based on qualitative criteria only (indicating, for example, the presence of characteristic hyper-intense
tissue appearance in contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MRI), or
by relying on such rudimentary quantitative measures as the
largest diameter visible from axial images of the lesion , .
By replacing the current basic assessments with highly
accurate and reproducible measurements of the relevant tumor
substructures, image processing routines that can automatically
analyze brain tumor scans would be of enormous potential value
for improved diagnosis, treatment planning, and follow-up
of individual patients. However, developing automated brain
tumor segmentation techniques is technically challenging,
because lesion areas are only deﬁned through intensity changes
that are relative to surrounding normal tissue, and even manual
segmentations by expert raters show signiﬁcant variations when
intensity gradients between adjacent structures are smooth
or obscured by partial voluming or bias ﬁeld artifacts. Furthermore, tumor structures vary considerably across patients
in terms of size, extension, and localization, prohibiting the
use of strong priors on shape and location that are important
components in the segmentation of many other anatomical
structures. Moreover, the so-called mass effect induced by the
growing lesion may displace normal brain tissues, as do resection cavities that are present after treatment, thereby limiting
the reliability of spatial prior knowledge for the healthy part
of the brain. Finally, a large variety of imaging modalities can
be used for mapping tumor-induced tissue changes, including
T2 and FLAIR MRI (highlighting differences in tissue water
relaxational properties), post-Gadolinium T1 MRI (showing
pathological intratumoral take-up of contrast agents), perfusion
and diffusion MRI (local water diffusion and blood ﬂow), and
0278-0062 © 2014 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/
redistribution requires IEEE permission. See for more information.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 34, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015
MRSI (relative concentrations of selected metabolites), among
others. Each of these modalities provides different types of
biological information, and therefore poses somewhat different
information processing tasks.
Because of its high clinical relevance and its challenging
nature, the problem of computational brain tumor segmentation
has attracted considerable attention during the past 20 years,
resulting in a wealth of different algorithms for automated,
semi-automated, and interactive segmentation of tumor structures (see and for good reviews). Virtually all of these
methods, however, were validated on relatively small private
datasets with varying metrics for performance quantiﬁcation,
making objective comparisons between methods highly challenging. Exacerbating this problem is the fact that different
combinations of imaging modalities are often used in validation
studies, and that there is no consistency in the tumor sub-compartments that are considered. As a consequence, it remains
difﬁcult to judge which image segmentation strategies may be
worthwhile to pursue in clinical practice and research; what
exactly the performance is of the best computer algorithms
available today; and how well current automated algorithms
perform in comparison with groups of human expert raters.
In order to gauge the current state-of-the-art in automated
brain tumor segmentation and compare between different
methods, we organized in 2012 and 2013 a Multimodal Brain
Tumor Image Segmentation Benchmark (BRATS) challenge
in conjunction with the international conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Interventions
(MICCAI). For this purpose, we prepared and made available
a unique dataset of MR scans of low- and high-grade glioma
patients with repeat manual tumor delineations by several
human experts, as well as realistically generated synthetic
brain tumor datasets for which the ground truth segmentation
is known. Each of 20 different tumor segmentation algorithms
was optimized by their respective developers on a subset of
this particular dataset, and subsequently run on the remaining
images to test performance against the (hidden) manual delineations by the expert raters. In this paper we report the set-up
and the results of this BRATS benchmark effort. We also describe the BRATS reference dataset and online validation tools,
which we make publicly available as an ongoing benchmarking
resource for future community efforts.
The paper is organized as follows. We brieﬂy review the
current state-of-the-art in automated tumor segmentation, and
survey benchmark efforts in other biomedical image interpretation tasks, in Section II. We then describe the BRATS
set-up and data, the manual annotation of tumor structures, and
the evaluation process in Section III. Finally, we report and
discuss the results of our comparisons in Sections IV and V,
respectively. Section VI concludes the paper.
II. PRIOR WORK
Algorithms for Brain Tumor Segmentation
The number of clinical studies involving brain tumor quantiﬁcation based on medical images has increased signiﬁcantly
over the past decades. Around a quarter of such studies relies on
automated methods for tumor volumetry (Fig. 1). Most of the
Fig. 1. Results of PubMed searches for brain tumor (glioma) imaging (red),
tumor quantiﬁcation using image segmentation (blue), and automated tumor
segmentation (green). While the tumor imaging literature has seen a nearly
linear increase over the last 30 years, the number of publications involving
tumor segmentation has grown more than linearly since 5–10 years. Around
25% of such publications refer to “automated” tumor segmentation.
existing algorithms for brain tumor analysis focus on the segmentation of glial tumor, as recently reviewed in , . Comparatively few methods deal with less frequent tumors such as
meningioma – or speciﬁc glioma subtypes .
Methodologically,
state-of-the-art
algorithms
tumor segmentation are based on techniques originally developed for other structures or pathologies, most notably for
automated white matter lesion segmentation that has reached
considerable accuracy . While many technologies have
been tested for their applicability to brain tumor detection
and segmentation—e.g., algorithms from image retrieval as
an early example —we can categorize most current tumor
segmentation methods into one of two broad families. In the
so-called generative probabilistic methods, explicit models of
anatomy and appearance are combined to obtain automated
segmentations, which offers the advantage that domain-speciﬁc
prior knowledge can easily be incorporated. Discriminative
approaches, on the other hand, directly learn the relationship
between image intensities and segmentation labels without any
domain knowledge, concentrating instead on speciﬁc (local)
image features that appear relevant for the tumor segmentation
Generative models make use of detailed prior information
about the appearance and spatial distribution of the different
tissue types. They often exhibit good generalization to unseen
images, and represent the state-of-the-art for many brain tissue
segmentation tasks – . Encoding prior knowledge for a
lesion, however, is difﬁcult. Tumors may be modeled as outliers relative to the expected shape , or image signal
of healthy tissues , which is similar to approaches
for other brain lesions, such as Multiple Sklerosis , .
In , for instance, a criterion for detecting outliers is used
MENZE et al.: THE MULTIMODAL BRAIN TUMOR IMAGE SEGMENTATION BENCHMARK (BRATS)
to generate a tumor prior in a subsequent expectation-maximizations segmentation which treats tumor as an additional
tissue class. Alternatively, the spatial prior for the tumor can be
derived from the appearance of tumor-speciﬁc “bio-markers”
 , , or from using tumor growth models to infer the most
likely localization of tumor structures for a given set of patient
images . All these models rely on registration for accurately
aligning images and spatial priors, which is often problematic
in the presence of large lesions or resection cavities. In order
to overcome this difﬁculty, both joint registration and tumor
segmentation , and joint registration and estimation
of tumor displacement have been studied. A limitation of
generative models is the signiﬁcant effort required for transforming an arbitrary semantic interpretation of the image, for
example, the set of expected tumor substructures a radiologist
would like to have mapped in the image, into appropriate probabilistic models.
Discriminative models directly learn from (manually) annotated training images the characteristic differences in the
appearance of lesions and other tissues. In order to be robust against imaging artifacts and intensity and shape variations, they typically require substantial amounts of training
data – . As a ﬁrst step, these methods typically extract
dense, voxel-wise features from anatomical maps , 
calculating, for example, local intensity differences – ,
or intensity distributions from the wider spatial context of the
individual voxel , , . As a second step, these features are then fed into classiﬁcation algorithms such as support
vector machines or decision trees that learn boundaries between classes in the high-dimensional feature space,
and return the desired tumor classiﬁcation maps when applied
to new data. One drawback of this approach is that, because of
the explicit dependency on intensity features, segmentation is
restricted to images acquired with the exact same imaging protocol as the one used for the training data. Even then, careful
intensity calibration remains a crucial part of discriminative
segmentation methods in general – , and tumor segmentation is no exception to this rule.
A possible direction that avoids the calibration issues of discriminative approaches, as well as the limitations of generative models, is the development of joint generative-discriminative methods. These techniques use a generative method in
a pre-processing step to generate stable input for a subsequent
discriminative model that can be trained to predict more complex class labels , .
Most generative and discriminative segmentation approaches
exploit spatial regularity, often with extensions along the
temporal dimension for longitudinal tasks – . Local regularity of tissue labels can be encoded via boundary modeling
for both generative , and discriminative models ,
 , , , , potentially enforcing non-local shape
constraints . Markov random ﬁeld (MRF) priors encourage
similarity among neighboring labels in the generative context
 , , . Similarly, conditional random ﬁelds (CRFs)
help enforce—or prohibit—the adjacency of speciﬁc labels and,
hence, impose constraints considering the wider spatial context
of voxels , . While all these segmentation models
act locally, more or less at the voxel level, other approaches
consider prior knowledge about the relative location of tumor
structures in a more global fashion. They learn, for example, the
neighborhood relationships between such structures as edema,
Gadolinium-enhancing tumor structures, or necrotic parts of
the tumor through hierarchical models of super-voxel clusters
 , , or by relating image patterns with phenomenological
tumor growth models adapted to patient scans .
While each of the discussed algorithms was compared empirically against an expert segmentation by its authors, it is dif-
ﬁcult to draw conclusions about the relative performance of
different methods. This is because datasets and pre-processing
steps differ between studies, the image modalities considered,
the annotated tumor structures, and the used evaluation scores
all vary widely as well (Table I).
Image Processing Benchmarks
Benchmarks that compare how well different learning algorithms perform in speciﬁc tasks have gained a prominent role
in the machine learning community. In recent years, the idea of
benchmarking has also gained popularity in the ﬁeld of medical image analysis. Such benchmarks, sometimes referred to as
“challenges,” all share the common characteristic that different
groups optimize their own methods on a training dataset provided by the organizers, and then apply them in a structured way
to a common, independent test dataset. This situation is different
from many published comparisons, where one group applies
different techniques to a dataset of their choice, which hampers
a fair assessment as this group may not be equally knowledgeable about each method and invest more effort in optimizing
some algorithms than others (see ).
Once benchmarks have been established, their test dataset
often becomes a new standard in the ﬁeld on how to evaluate future progress in the speciﬁc image processing task being tested.
The annotation and evaluation protocols also may remain the
same even when new data are added (to overcome the risk of
over-ﬁtting this one particular dataset that may take place after
a while), or when related benchmarks are initiated. A key component in benchmarking is an online tool for automatically evaluating segmentations submitted by individual groups , as
this allows the labels of the test set never to be made public.
This helps ensure that any reported results are not inﬂuenced by
unintentional overtraining of the method being tested, and that
they are therefore truly representative of the method's segmentation performance in practice.
Recent examples of community benchmarks dealing with
medical image segmentation and annotation include algorithms
for artery centerline extraction , , vessel segmentation
and stenosis grading , liver segmentation , , detection of microaneurysms in digital color fundus photographs
 , and extraction of airways from CT scans . Rather few
community-wide efforts have focused on segmentation algorithms applied to images of the brain (a current example deals
with brain extraction (“masking”) ), although many of the
validation frameworks that are used to compare different segmenters and segmentation algorithms, such as STAPLE ,
 , have been developed for applications in brain imaging, or
even brain tumor segmentation .
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 34, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015
DATA SETS, MR IMAGE MODALITIES, EVALUATION SCORES, AND EVEN TUMOR TYPES USED FOR SELF-REPORTED PERFORMANCES IN THE BRAIN
TUMOR IMAGE SEGMENTATION LITERATURE DIFFER WIDELY. SHOWN IS A SELECTION OF ALGORITHMS DISCUSSED HERE AND IN . TUMOR
TYPE IS DEFINED AS G—GLIOMA (UNSPECIFIED), HG—HIGH-GRADE GLIOMA, LG—LOW-GRADE GLIOMA, M—MENINGIOMA; “NA” INDICATES
THAT NO INFORMATION IS REPORTED. WHEN AVAILABLE THE NUMBER OF TRAINING AND TESTING DATASETS IS REPORTED, ALONG WITH THE
TESTING MECHANISM: TT—SEPARATE TRAINING AND TESTING DATASETS, CV—CROSS-VALIDATION
III. SET-UP OF THE BRATS BENCHMARK
The BRATS benchmark was organized as two satellite challenge workshops in conjunction with the MICCAI 2012 and
2013 conferences. Here we describe the set-up of both challenges with the participating teams, the imaging data and the
manual annotation process, as well as the validation procedures
and online tools for comparing the different algorithms. The
BRATS online tools continue to accept new submissions, allowing new groups to download the training and test data and
submit their segmentations for automatic ranking with respect
to all previous submissions.1 A common entry page to both
benchmarks, as well as to the latest BRATS-related initiatives
is www.braintumorsegmentation.org.2
A. The MICCAI 2012 and 2013 Benchmark Challenges
The ﬁrst benchmark was organized on October 1, 2012 in
Nice, France, in a workshop held as part of the MICCAI 2012
conference. During Spring 2012, participants were solicited
through private e-mails as well as public e-mail lists and
the MICCAI workshop announcements. Participants had to
register with one of the online systems (cf. Section III-F) and
could download annotated training data. They were asked to
submit a four page summary of their algorithm, also reporting
a cross-validated training error. Submissions were reviewed
1challenge.kitware.com/midas/folder/102, www.virtualskeleton.ch/
2Available online: www.braintumorsegmentation.org
by the organizers and a ﬁnal group of twelve participants were
invited to contribute to the challenge. The training data the participants obtained in order to tune their algorithms consisted of
multi-contrast MR scans of 10 low- and 20 high-grade glioma
patients that had been manually annotated with two tumor labels (“edema” and “core,” cf. Section III-D) by a trained human
expert. The training data also contained simulated images for
25 high-grade and 25 low-grade glioma subjects with the same
two “ground truth” labels. In a subsequent “on-site challenge”
at the MICCAI workshop, the teams were given a 12 h time
period to evaluate previously unseen test images. The test
images consisted of 11 high- and 4 low-grade real cases, as well
as 10 high- and 5 low-grade simulated images. The resulting
segmentations were then uploaded by each team to the online
tools, which automatically computed performance scores for
the two tumor structures. Of the twelve groups that participated
in the benchmark, six submitted their results in time during
the on-site challenge, and one group submitted their results
shortly afterwards (Subbanna). During the plenary discussions
it became apparent that using only two basic tumor classes
was insufﬁcient as the “core” label contained substructures
with very different appearances in the different modalities. We
therefore had all the training data re-annotated with four tumor
labels, reﬁning the initially rather broad “core” class by labels
for necrotic, cystic and enhancing substructures. We asked
all twelve workshop participants to update their algorithms to
consider these new labels and to submit their segmentation
MENZE et al.: THE MULTIMODAL BRAIN TUMOR IMAGE SEGMENTATION BENCHMARK (BRATS)
OVERVIEW OF THE ALGORITHMS EMPLOYED IN 2012 AND 2013. FOR A FULL DESCRIPTION PLEASE REFER TO THE APPENDIX AND THE WORKSHOP
PROCEEDINGS AVAILABLE ONLINE (SEE SECTION III-A). THREE NON-AUTOMATIC ALGORITHMS REQUIRED A MANUAL INITIALIZATION
results—on the same test data—to our evaluation platform in
an “off-site” evaluation about six months after the event in
Nice, and ten of them submitted updated results (Table II).
The second benchmark was organized on September 22, 2013
in Nagoya, Japan in conjunction with MICCAI 2013. Participants had to register with the online systems and were asked
to describe their algorithm and report training scores during
the summer, resulting in ten teams submitting short papers, all
of which were invited to participate. The training data for the
benchmark was identical to the real training data of the 2012
benchmark. No synthetic cases were evaluated in 2013, and
therefore no synthetic training data was provided. The participating groups were asked to also submit results for the 2012
test dataset (with the updated labels) as well as to 10 new test
datasets to the online system about four weeks before the event
in Nagoya as part of an “off-site” leaderboard evaluation. The
“on-site challenge” at the MICCAI 2013 workshop proceeded
in a similar fashion to the 2012 edition: the participating teams
were provided with 10 high-grade cases, which were previously
unseen test images not included in the 2012 challenge, and were
given a 12 h time period to upload their results for evaluation. Out of the ten groups participating in 2013 (Table II),
seven groups submitted their results during the on-site challenge; the remaining three submitted their results shortly afterwards (Buendia, Guo, Taylor).
Altogether, we report three different test results from the two
events: one summarizing the on-site 2012 evaluation with two
tumor labels for a test set with 15 real cases (11 high-grade,
four low-grade) and 15 synthetically generated images (10 highgrade, ﬁve low-grade); one summarizing the on-site 2013 evaluation with four tumor labels on a fresh set of 10 new real cases
(all high-grade); and one from the off-site tests which ranks all
20 participating groups from both years, based on the 2012 real
test data with the updated four labels. Our emphasis is on the
last of the three tests.
B. Tumor Segmentation Algorithms Tested
Table II contains an overview of the methods used by the
participating groups in both challenges. In 2012, four out of
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 34, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015
the twelve participants used generative models, one was a generative-discriminative approach, and ﬁve were discriminative;
seven used some spatially regularizing model component. Two
methods required manual initialization. The two automated segmentation methods that topped the list of competitors during
the on-site challenge of the ﬁrst benchmark used a discriminative probabilistic approach relying on a random forest classiﬁer,
boosting the popularity of this approach in the second year. As
a result, in 2013 participants employed one generative model,
one discriminative-generative model, and eight discriminative
models out of which a total of four used random forests as the
central learning algorithm; seven had a processing step that enforced spatial regularization. One method required manual initialization. A detailed description of each method is available in
the workshop proceedings,3 as well as in the Appendix/Online
Supporting Information.
C. Image Datasets
Clinical Image Data: The clinical image data consists of 65
multi-contrast MR scans from glioma patients, out of which
14 have been acquired from low-grade (histological diagnosis:
astrocytomas or oligoastrocytomas) and 51 from high-grade
(anaplastic astrocytomas and glioblastoma multiforme tumors)
glioma patients. The images represent a mix of pre- and
post-therapy brain scans, with two volumes showing resections.
They were acquired at four different centers—Bern University,
Debrecen University, Heidelberg University, and Massachusetts General Hospital—over the course of several years, using
MR scanners from different vendors and with different ﬁeld
strengths (1.5T and 3T) and implementations of the imaging
sequences (e.g., 2D or 3D). The image datasets used in the
study all share the following four MRI contrasts (Fig. 2).
1) T1: T1-weighted, native image, sagittal or axial 2D acquisitions, with 1–6 mm slice thickness.
T1-weighted,
contrast-enhanced
(Gadolinium)
image, with 3D acquisition and 1 mm isotropic voxel size
for most patients.
3) T2: T2-weighted image, axial 2D acquisition, with 2–6 mm
slice thickness.
4) FLAIR: T2-weighted FLAIR image, axial, coronal, or
sagittal 2D acquisitions, 2–6 mm slice thickness.
To homogenize these data we co-registered each subject's image
volumes rigidly to the T1c MRI, which had the highest spatial
resolution in most cases, and resampled all images to 1 mm
isotropic resolution in a standardized axial orientation with a
linear interpolator. We used a rigid registration model with the
mutual information similarity metric as it is implemented in ITK
 (“VersorRigid3DTransform” with “MattesMutualInformation” similarity metric and three multi-resolution levels). No attempt was made to put the individual patients in a common reference space. All images were skull stripped to guarantee
anomymization of the patients.
Synthetic Image Data: The synthetic data of the BRATS 2012
challenge consisted of simulated images for 35 high-grade and
3BRATS 2013: hal.inria.fr/hal-00912934; BRATS 2012: hal.inria.fr/hal-
30 low-grade gliomas that exhibit comparable tissue contrast
properties and segmentation challenges as the clinical dataset
(Fig. 2, last row). The same image modalities as for the real
data were simulated, with similar 1 mm resolution. The images
were generated using the TumorSim software,4 a cross-platform
simulation tool that combines physical and statistical models
to generate synthetic ground truth and synthesized MR images
with tumor and edema . It models inﬁltrating edema adjacent to tumors, local distortion of healthy tissue, and central contrast enhancement using the tumor growth model of Clatz et al.
 , combined with a routine for synthesizing texture similar
to that of real MR images. We parameterized the algorithm according to the parameters proposed in , and applied it to
anatomical maps of healthy subjects from the BrainWeb simulator , . We synthesized image volumes and degraded
them with different noise levels and intensity inhomogeneities,
using Gaussian noise and polynomial bias ﬁelds with random
coefﬁcients.
D. Expert Annotation of Tumor Structures
While the simulated images came with “ground truth”
information about the localization of the different tumor structures, the clinical images required manual annotations. We
deﬁned four types of intra-tumoral structures, namely “edema,”
“non-enhancing (solid) core,” “necrotic (or ﬂuid-ﬁlled) core,”
and “non-enhancing core.” These tumor substructures meet
speciﬁc radiological criteria and serve as identiﬁers for similarly-looking regions to be recognized through algorithms
processing image information rather than offering a biological
interpretation of the annotated image patterns. For example,
“non-enhancing core” labels may also comprise normal enhancing vessel structures that are close to the tumor core, and
“edema” may result from cytotoxic or vasogenic processes of
the tumor, or from previous therapeutical interventions.
Tumor Structures and Annotation Protocol: We used the following protocol for annotating the different visual structures,
where present, for both low- and high-grade cases (illustrated
in Fig. 3).
1) The “edema” was segmented primarily from T2 images.
FLAIR was used to cross-check the extension of the edema
and discriminate it against ventricles and other ﬂuid-ﬁlled
structures. The initial “edema” segmentation in T2 and
FLAIR contained the core structures that were then relabeled in subsequent steps [Fig. 3(A)].
2) As an aid to the segmentation of the other three tumor substructures, the so-called gross tumor core—including both
enhancing and non-enhancing structures—was ﬁrst segmented by evaluating hyper-intensities in T1c (for highgrade cases) together with the inhomogenous component
of the hyper-intense lesion visible in T1 and the hypo-intense regions visible in T1 [Fig. 3(B)].
3) The “enhancing core” of the tumor was subsequently segmented by thresholding T1c intensities within the resulting
gross tumor core, including the Gadolinium enhancing
tumor rim and excluding the necrotic center and vessels.
4www.nitrc.org/projects/tumorsim
MENZE et al.: THE MULTIMODAL BRAIN TUMOR IMAGE SEGMENTATION BENCHMARK (BRATS)
Fig. 2. Examples from the BRATS training data, with tumor regions as inferred from the annotations of individual experts (blue lines) and consensus segmentation
(magenta lines). Each row shows two cases of high-grade tumor (rows 1–4), low-grade tumor (rows 5–6), or synthetic cases (last row). Images vary between axial,
sagittal, and transversal views, showing for each case: FLAIR with outlines of the whole tumor region (left); T2 with outlines of the core region (center); T1c with
outlines of the active tumor region if present (right). Best viewed when zooming into the electronic version of the manuscript.
The appropriate intensity threshold was determined visually on a case-by-case basis [Fig. 3(C)].
4) The “necrotic (or ﬂuid-ﬁlled) core” was deﬁned as the
tortuous, low intensity necrotic structures within the enhancing rim visible in T1c. The same label was also used
for the very rare instances of hemorrhages in the BRATS
data [Fig. 3(C)].
5) Finally, the “non-enhancing (solid) core” structures were
deﬁned as the remaining part of the gross tumor core, i.e.,
after subtraction of the “enhancing core” and the “necrotic
(or ﬂuid-ﬁlled) core” structures [Fig. 3(D)].
Following this protocol, the MRI scans were annotated by a
trained team of radiologists and altogether seven radiographers
in Bern, Debrecen and Boston. They outlined structures in
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 34, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015
Fig. 3. Manual annotation through expert raters. Shown are image patches with the tumor structures that are annotated in the different modalities (top left) and
the ﬁnal labels for the whole dataset (right). Image patches show from left to right: the whole tumor visible in FLAIR (A), the tumor core visible in T2 (B), the
enhancing tumor structures visible in T1c (blue), surrounding the cystic/necrotic components of the core (green) (C). Segmentations are combined to generate the
ﬁnal labels of the tumor structures (D): edema (yellow), non-enhancing solid core (red), necrotic/cystic core (green), enhancing core(blue).
every third axial slice, interpolated the segmentation using morphological operators (region growing), and visually inspected
the results in order to perform further manual corrections, if
necessary. All segmentations were performed using the 3D
slicer software5, taking about 60 min per subject. As mentioned previously, the tumor labels used initially in the BRATS
2012 challenge contained only two classes for both high- and
low-grade glioma cases: “edema,” which was deﬁned similarly
as the edema class above, and “core” representing the three
core classes. The simulated data used in the 2012 challenge
also had ground truth labels only for “edema” and “core.”
Consensus Labels: In order to deal with ambiguities in individual tumor structure deﬁnitions, especially in inﬁltrative tumors for which clear boundaries are hard to deﬁne, we had all
5www.slicer.org
subjects annotated by several experts, and subsequently fused
the results to obtain a single consensus segmentation for each
subject. The 30 training cases were labeled by four different
raters, and the test set from 2012 was annotated by three. The
additional testing cases from 2013 were annotated by one rater.
For the data sets with multiple annotations we fused the resulting label maps by assuming increasing “severity” of the disease from edema to non-enhancing (solid) core to necrotic (or
ﬂuid-ﬁlled) core to enhancing core, using a hierarchical majority
voting scheme that assigns a voxel to the highest class to which
at least half of the raters agree on (Algorithm 1). To illustrate
this rule: a voxel that has been labeled as edema, edema, non-enhancing core, and necrotic core by the four annotators would be
assigned to non-enhancing core structure as this is the most serious label that 50% of the experts agree on.
We chose this hierarchical majority vote to include prior
knowledge about the structure and the ranking of the labels.
A direct application of other multi-class fusion schemes that
do not consider relations between the class labels, such as the
STAPLE algorithm , lead to implausible fusion results
where, for example, edema and normal voxels formed regions
that were surrounded by “core” structures.
E. Evaluation Metrics and Ranking
Tumor Regions Used for Validation: The tumor structures
represent the visual information of the images, and we provided the participants with the corresponding multi-class labels to train their algorithms. For evaluating the performance of
the segmentation algorithms, however, we grouped the different
structures into three mutually inclusive tumor regions that better
represent the clinical application tasks, for example, in tumor
volumetry. We obtain
1) the “whole” tumor region (including all four tumor structures),
2) the tumor “core” region (including all tumor structures except “edema”),
3) and the “active” tumor region (only containing the “enhancing core” structures that are unique to high-grade
MENZE et al.: THE MULTIMODAL BRAIN TUMOR IMAGE SEGMENTATION BENCHMARK (BRATS)
Fig. 4. Regions used for calculating Dice score, sensitivity, speciﬁcity, and robust Hausdorff score. Region
is the true lesion area (outline blue),
remaining normal area.
is the area that is predicted to be lesion by—for example—an algorithm (outlined red), and
is predicted to be normal.
some overlap with
in the right lateral part of the lesion, corresponding to the
area referred to as
in the deﬁnition of the Dice score (Eq. III.E).
Examples of all three regions are shown in Fig. 2. By evaluating multiple binary segmentation tasks, we also avoid the
problem of specifying misclassiﬁcation costs for trading false
assignments in between, for example, edema and necrotic core
structures or enhancing core and normal tissue, which cannot
easily be solved in a global manner.
Performance Scores: For each of the three tumor regions we
obtained a binary map with algorithmic predictions
and the experts' consensus truth
, and we calculated
the well-known Dice score
is the logical AND operator,
is the size of the set (i.e.,
the number of voxels belonging to it), and
the set of voxels where
, respectively (Fig. 4).
The Dice score normalizes the number of true positives to the
average size of the two segmented areas. It is identical to the F
score (the harmonic mean of the precision recall curve) and can
be transformed monotonously to the Jaccard score.
We also calculated the so-called sensitivity (true positive rate)
and speciﬁcity (true negative rate)
represent voxels where
respectively.
Dice score, sensitivity, and speciﬁcity are measures of
voxel-wise overlap of the segmented regions. A different class
of scores evaluates the distance between segmentation boundaries, i.e., the surface distance. A prominent example is the
Hausdorff distance calculating for all points
on the surface
of a given volume
the shortest least-squares distance
on the surface
of the other given volume
, and vice versa, ﬁnally returning the maximum value over
Returning the maximum over all surface distances, however,
makes the Hausdorff measure very susceptible to small outlying subregions in either
. In our evaluation of the
“active tumor” region, for example, both
may consist of multiple small areas or nonconvex structures with high
surface-to-area ratio. In the evaluation of the “whole tumor,”
predictions with few false positive regions—that do not substantially affect the overall quality of the segmentation as they
could be removed with an appropriate postprocessing—might
also have a drastic impact on the overall Hausdorff score. To
this end we used a robust version of the Hausdorff measure—reporting not the maximal surface distance between
the 95% quantile of it.
Signiﬁcance Tests: In order to compare the performance of
different methods across a set of images, we performed two
types of signiﬁcance tests on the distribution of their Dice
scores. For the ﬁrst test we identiﬁed the algorithm that performed best in terms of average Dice score for a given task, i.e.,
for the whole tumor region, tumor core region, or active tumor
region. We then compared the distribution of the Dice scores
of this “best” algorithm with the corresponding distributions
of all other algorithms. In particular, we used a nonparametric
Cox-Wilcoxon test, testing for signiﬁcant differences at a
5% signiﬁcance level, and recorded which of the alternative
methods could not be distinguished from the “best” method
In the same way we also compared the distribution of the
inter-rater Dice scores, obtained by pooling the Dice scores
across each pair of human raters and across subjects—with
each subject contributing six scores if there are four raters, and
three scores if there are three raters—to the distribution of the
Dice scores calculated for each algorithm in a comparison with
the consensus segmentation. We then recorded whenever the
distribution of an algorithm could not be distinguished from
the inter-rater distribution this way. We note that our inter-rater
score somewhat overestimates variability as it is calculated
from two manual annotations that may both be very eccentric. In the same way a comparison between a rater and the
consensus label may somewhat underestimates variability, as
the same manual annotations had contributed to the consensus
label it now is compared against.
F. Online Evaluation Platforms
A central element of the BRATS benchmark is its online
evaluation tool. We used two different platforms: the Virtual
Skeleton Database (VSD), hosted at the University of Bern, and
the Multimedia Digital Archiving System (MIDAS), hosted
at Kitware . On both systems participants can download
annotated training and “blinded” test data, and upload their
segmentations for the test cases. Each system automatically
evaluates the performance of the uploaded label maps, and
makes detailed—case by case—results available to the participant. Average scores for the different subgroups are also
reported online, as well as a ranked comparison with previous
results submitted for the same test sets.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 34, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015
Fig. 5. Dice scores of inter-rater variation (top left), and variation around the “fused” consensus label (top right). Shown are results for the “whole” tumor region
(including all four tumor structures), the tumor “core” region (including enhancing, non-enhancing core, and necrotic structures), and the “active” tumor region
(that features the T1c enhancing structures). Black boxplots show training data (30 cases); gray boxes show results for the test data (15 cases). Scores for “active”
tumor region are calculated for high-grade cases only (15/11 cases). Boxes report quartiles including the median; whiskers and dots indicate outliers (some of
which are below 0.5 Dice); and triangles report mean values. Table at the bottom shows quantitative values for the training and test datasets, including scores for
low- and high-grade cases (LG/HG) separately; here “std” denotes standard deviation, and “mad” denotes median absolute deviance.
The VSD6 provides an online repository system tailored to
the needs of the medical research community. In addition to
storing and exchanging medical image datasets, the VSD provides generic tools to process the most common image format
types, includes a statistical shape modeling framework and an
ontology-based searching capability. The hosted data is accessible to the community and collaborative research efforts. In addition, the VSD can be used to evaluate the submissions of competitors during and after a segmentation challenge. The BRATS
data is publicly available at the VSD, allowing any team around
the world to develop and test novel brain tumor segmentation
algorithms. Ground truth segmentation ﬁles for the BRATS test
data are hosted on the VSD but their download is protected
through appropriate ﬁle permissions. The users upload their segmentation results through a web-interface, review the uploaded
segmentation and then choose to start an automatic evaluation
process. The VSD automatically identiﬁes the ground truth corresponding to the uploaded segmentations. The evaluation of the
different label overlap measures used to evaluate the quality of
the segmentation (such as Dice scores) runs in the background
and takes less than one minute per segmentation. Individual and
overall results of the evaluation are automatically published on
the VSD webpage and can be downloaded as a CSV ﬁle for further statistical analysis. Currently, the VSD has evaluated more
segmentations and recorded over 100 registered
BRATS users. We used it to host both the training and test data,
and to perform the evaluations of the on-site challenges. Up-to-
6www.virtualskeleton.ch
date ranking is available at the VSD for researchers to continuously monitor new developments and streamline improvements.
MIDAS7 is an open source toolkit that is designed to manage
grand challenges. The toolkit contains a collection of server,
client, and stand-alone tools for data archiving, analysis, and
access. This system was used in parallel with VSD for hosting
the BRATS training and test data in 2012, as well as managing
submissions from participants and providing ﬁnal scores using
a collection of metrics. It has not been used any more for the
2013 BRATS challenge.
The software that generates the comparison metrics between
ground truth and user submissions in both VSD and MIDAS is
available as the open source COVALIC (Comparison and Validation of Image Computing) toolkit.8
IV. RESULTS
In a ﬁrst step we evaluate the variability between the segmentations of our experts in order to quantify the difﬁculty of
the different segmentation tasks. Results of this evaluation also
serve as a baseline we can use to compare our algorithms against
in a second step. As combining several segmentations may potentially lead to consensus labels that are of higher quality than
the individual segmentations, we perform an experiment that
applies the hierarchical fusion algorithm to the automatic segmentations as a ﬁnal step.
7www.midasplatform.org
8github.com/InsightSoftwareConsortium/covalic
MENZE et al.: THE MULTIMODAL BRAIN TUMOR IMAGE SEGMENTATION BENCHMARK (BRATS)
Fig. 6. On-site test results of the 2012 challenge (top left and right) and the 2013 challenge (bottom left), reporting average Dice scores. Test data for 2012 included
both real and synthetic images, with a mix of low- and high-grade cases (LG/HG): 11/4 HG/LG cases for the real images and 10/5 HG/LG cases for the synthetic
scans. All datasets from the 2012 on-site challenge featured “whole” and “core” region labels only. On-site test set for 2013 consisted of 10 real HG cases with
four-class annotations, of which “whole,” “core,” “active” regions were evaluated (see text). Best results for each task are underlined. Top performing algorithms
of the on-site challenge were Hamamci, Zikic, and Bauer in 2012; and Tustison, Meier, and Reza in 2013.
A. Inter-Rater Variability of Manual Segmentations
Fig. 5 analyzes the inter-rater variability in the four-label
manual segmentations of the training scans (30 cases, four
different raters), as well as of the ﬁnal off-site test scans (15
cases, three raters). The results for the training and test datasets
are overall very similar, although the inter-rater variability is
a bit higher (lower Dice scores) in the test set, indicating that
images in our training dataset were slightly easier to segment
(Fig. 5, plots at the top). The scores obtained by comparing
individual raters against the consensus segmentation provides
an estimate of an upper limit for the performance of any algorithmic segmentation, indicating that segmenting the whole
tumor region for both low- and high-grade and the tumor core
region for high-grade is comparatively easy, while identifying
the “core” in low-grade glioma and delineating the enhancing
structures for high-grade cases is considerably more difﬁcult
(Fig. 5, table at the bottom). The comparison between an individual rater and the consensus segmentation, however, may
be somewhat overly optimistic with respect to the upper limit
of accuracy that can be obtained on the given datasets, as the
consensus label is generated using the rater's segmentation it
is compared against. So we use the inter-rater variation as
an unbiased proxy that we compare with the algorithmic segmentations in the remainder. This sets the bar that has to be
passed by an algorithm to Dice scores in the high 80% for
the whole tumor region (median 87%), to scores in the high
80% for “core” region (median 94% for high-grade, median
82% for low-grade), and to average scores in the high 70%
for “active” tumor region (median 77%) (Fig. 5, table at the
We note that on all datasets and in all three segmentation tasks
the dispersion of the Dice score distributions is quite high, with
standard deviations of 10% and more in particular for the most
difﬁcult tasks (tumor core in low-grade patients, active core in
high-grade patients), underlining the relevance of comparing
the distributions rather than comparing summary statistics such
as the mean or the median and, for example, ranking measures
B. Performance of Individual Algorithms
On-Site Evaluation: Results from the on-site evaluations are
reported in Fig. 6. Synthetic images were only evaluated in
the 2012 challenge, and the winning algorithms on these images were developed by Bauer, Zikic, and Hamamci (Fig. 6,
top right). The same methods also ranked top on the real data
in the same year (Fig. 6, top left), performing particularly well
for whole tumor and core segmentation. Here, Hamamci required some user interaction for an optimal initialization, while
the methods by Bauer and Zikic were fully automatic. In the
2013 on-site challenge, the winning algorithms were those by
Tustison, Meier, and Reza, with Tustison performing best in all
three segmentation tasks (Fig. 6, bottom left).
Overall, the performance scores from the on-site test in
2013 were higher than those in the previous off-site leaderboard evaluation (compare Fig. 7, top with Fig. 6, bottom
left). As the off-site test data contained the test cases from
the previous year, one may argue that the images chosen for
the 2013 on-site evaluation were somewhat easier to segment
than the on-site test images in the previous—and one should
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 34, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015
Fig. 7. Average Dice scores from the “off-site” test, for all algorithms submitted during BRATS 2012 and 2013. The table at the top reports average Dice scores
for “whole” lesion, tumor “core” region, and “active” core region, both for the low-grade (LG) and high-grade (HG) subsets combined and considered separately.
Algorithms with the best average Dice score for the given task are underlined; those indicated in bold have a Dice score distribution on the test cases that is similar
to the best (see also Fig. 8). “Best Combination” is the upper limit of the individual algorithmic segmentations (see text), “Fused_4” reports exemplary results when
pooling results from Subbanna, Zhao (I), Menze (D), and Hamamci (see text). Reported average computation times per case are in minutes; an indication regarding
CPU or Cluster based implementation is also provided. Plots at the bottom show the sensitivities and speciﬁcities of the corresponding algorithms. Colors encode
the corresponding values of the different algorithms; written names have only approximate locations.
be cautious about a direct comparison of on-site results from
the two challenges.
Off-Site Evaluation:
Results on the off-site evaluation
(Figs. 7 and 8) allow us to compare algorithms from both
challenges, and also to consider results from algorithms that
did not converge within the given time limit of the on-site
evaluation (e.g., Menze, Geremia, Riklin Raviv). We performed
signiﬁcance tests on the Dice score to identify which algorithms
performed best or similar to the best one for each segmentation
task (Fig. 7). We also performed signiﬁcance tests on the Dice
scores to identify which algorithms had a performance that is
similar to the inter-rater variation that are indicated by stars on
top of the box plots in Fig. 8. For “whole” tumor segmentation,
Zhao (I) was the best method, followed by Menze (D), which
performed the best on low-grade cases; Zhao (I), Menze (D),
Tustison, and Doyle report results with Dice scores that were
similar to the inter-rater variation. For tumor “core” segmentation, Subbanna performed best, followed by Zhao (I) that
MENZE et al.: THE MULTIMODAL BRAIN TUMOR IMAGE SEGMENTATION BENCHMARK (BRATS)
Fig. 8. Dispersion of Dice and Hausdorff scores from the “off-site” test for the individual algorithms (color coded), and various fused algorithmic segmentations
(gray), shown together with the expert results taken from Fig. 5 (also shown in gray). Boxplots show quartile ranges of the scores on the test datasets; whiskers and
dots indicate outliers. Black squares indicate the mean score (for Dice also shown in the table of Fig. 7), which were used here to rank the methods. Also shown
are results from four “Fused” algorithmic segmentations (see text for details), and the performance of the “Best Combination” as the upper limit of individual
algorithmic performance. Methods with a star on top of the boxplot have Dice scores as high or higher than those from inter-rater variation. Hausdorff distances
are reported on a logarithmic scale.
was best on low-grade cases; only Subbanna has Dice scores
similar to the inter-rater scores. For “active” core segmentation
Festa performs best; with the spread of the Dice scores being
rather high for the “active” tumor segmentation task, we ﬁnd a
high number of algorithms (Festa, Hamamci, Subbanna, Riklin
Raviv, Menze (D), Tustison) to have Dice scores that do not
differ signiﬁcantly from those recorded for the inter-rater variation. Sensitivity and speciﬁcity varied considerably between
methods (Fig. 7, bottom).
Using the Hausdorff distance metric we observe a ranking
that is overall very similar (Fig. 7, boxes on the right), suggesting that the Dice scores indicate the general algorithmic performances sufﬁciently well. Inspecting segmentations of the one
method that is an exception to this rule (Festa), we ﬁnd it to
segment the active region of the tumor very well for most volumes, but also to miss all voxels in the active region of three
volumes (apparently removed from a very strong spatial regularization), with low Dice scores and Hausdorff distances of
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 34, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015
more than 50 mm. Averaged over all patients, this still leads to
a very good Dice score, but the mean Hausdorff distance is unfavourably dominated by the three segmentations that failed.
C. Performance of Fused Algorithms
An Upper Limit of Algorithmic Performance: One can fuse
algorithmic segmentations by identifying—for each test scan
and each of the three segmentation tasks—the best segmentation generated by any of the given algorithms. This set of “optimal” segmentations (referred to as “Best Combination” in the
remainder) has an average Dice score of about 90% for the
“whole” tumor region, about 80% for the tumor “core” region,
and about 70% for the “active” tumor region (Fig. 7, top), surpassing the scores obtained for inter-rater variation (Fig. 8).
However, since fusing segmentations this way cannot be performed without actually knowing the ground truth, these values
can only serve as a theoretical upper limit for the tumor segmentation algorithms being evaluated. The average Dice score
of the algorithm performing best on the given task are about
10% below these numbers.
Hierarchical Majority Vote: In order to obtain a mechanism
for fusing algorithmic segmentations in more practical settings, we ﬁrst ranked the available algorithms according to
their average Dice score across all cases and all three segmentation tasks, and then selected the best half. While this
procedure guaranteed that we used meaningful segmentations
for the subsequent pooling, we note that the resulting set included algorithms that performed well in one or two tasks,
but performed clearly below average in the third one. Once
the 10 best algorithms were identiﬁed this way, we sampled
random subsets of 4, 6, and 8 of those algorithms, and fused
them using the same hierarchical majority voting scheme
as for combining expert annotations (Section III-D). We repeated this sampling and pooling procedure ten times. The
results are shown in Fig. 8 (labeled “Fused_4,” “Fused_6,”
and “Fused_8”), together with the pooled results for the full
set of the 10 segmentations (named “Fused_10”). Exemplary
segmentations for a Fused_4 sample are shown in Fig. 9—in
this case, pooling the results from Subbanna, Zhao (I), Menze
(D), and Hamamci. The corresponding Dice scores are reported in the table in Fig. 7.
We found that results obtained by pooling four or more algorithms always outperformed those of the best individual algorithm for the given segmentation task. The hierarchical majority voting reduces the number of segmentations with poor
Dice scores, leading to very robust predictions. It provides segmentations that are comparable to or better than the inter-rater
Dice score, and it reaches the hypothetical limit of the “Best
Combination” of case-wise algorithmic segmentations for all
three tasks (Fig. 8).
V. DISCUSSION
A. Overall Segmentation Performance
The synthetic data was segmented very well by most algorithms, reaching Dice scores on the synthetic data that were
much higher than those for similar real cases (Fig. 6, top left),
even surpassing the inter-rater accuracies. As the synthetic
datasets have a high variability in tumor shape and location, but
are less variable in intensity and less artifact-loaded than the
real images, these results suggest that the algorithms used are
capable of dealing well with variability in shape and location of
the tumor segments, provided intensities can be calibrated in a
reproducible fashion. As intensity-calibration of magnetic resonance images remains a challenging problem, a more explicit
use of tumor shape information may still help to improve the
performance, for example from simulated tumor shapes 
or simulations that are adapted to the geometry of the given
patients .
On the real data some of the automated methods reached
performances similar to the inter-rater variation. The rather
low scores for inter-rater variability (Dice scores in the range
74%–85%) indicate that the segmentation problem was difﬁcult
even for expert human raters. In general, most algorithms
were capable of segmenting the “whole” region tumor quite
well, with some algorithms reaching Dice scores of 80% and
more (Zhao (I) has 82%). Segmenting the tumor “core” region
worked surprisingly well for high-grade gliomas, and reasonably well for low-grade cases—considering the absence of
enhancements in T1c that guide segmentations for high-grade
tumors—with Dice scores in the high 60% (Subbanna has
70%). Segmenting small isolated areas of the “active” region
in high-grade gliomas was the most difﬁcult task, with the top
algorithms reaching Dice scores in the high 50% (Festa has
61%). Hausdorff distances of the best algorithms are around
5–10 mm for the “whole” and the “active” tumor region, and
about 20 mm for the tumor “core” region.
B. The Best Algorithm and Caveats
This benchmark cannot answer the question of what algorithm is overall “best” for glioma segmentation. We found that
no single algorithm among the ones tested ranked in the top
ﬁve for all three subtasks, although Hamamci, Subbanna, Menze
(D), and Zhao (I) did so for two tasks (Fig. 8; considering Dice
score). The results by Guo, Menze (D), Subbanna, Tustison, and
Zhao (I) were comparable in all three tasks to those of the best
method for respective task (indicated in bold in Fig. 7). Menze
(D), Zhao (I), and Riklin Raviv led the ranking of the Hausdorff
scores for two of the subtasks, and followed Hamamci and Subbanna for the third one.
Among the BRATS 2012 methods, we note that only
Hamamci and Geremia performed comparably in the “off-site”
and the “on-site” challenges, while the other algorithms performed signiﬁcantly better in the “off-site” test than in the
previous “on-site” evaluation. Several factors may have led
to this discrepancy. Some of the groups had difﬁculties in
submitting viable results during the “on-site” challenge and
resolved them only for the “off-site” evaluation (Menze, Riklin
Raviv). Others used algorithms during the “off-site” challenge
that were signiﬁcantly updated and reworked after the 2012
event (Subbanna, Shin). All 2012 participants had to adapt their
algorithms to the new four-class labels and, if discriminative
learning methods were used, to retrain their algorithms which
also may have contributed to ﬂuctuations in performance.
MENZE et al.: THE MULTIMODAL BRAIN TUMOR IMAGE SEGMENTATION BENCHMARK (BRATS)
Fig. 9. Examples from the test data set, with consensus expert annotations (yellow) and consensus of four algorithmic labels overlaid (magenta). Blue lines indicate
the individual segmentations of four different algorithms (Menze (D), Subbanna, Zhao (I), Hamamci). Each row shows two cases of high-grade tumor (rows 1–5)
and low-grade tumor (rows 6–7). Three images are shown for each case: FLAIR (left), T2 (center), and T1c (right). Annotated are outlines of the whole tumor
(shown in FLAIR), of the core region (shown in T2), and of active tumor region (shown in T1c, if applicable). Views vary between patients with axial, sagittal
and transversal intersections with the tumor center. Note that clinical low-grade cases show image changes that have been interpreted by some of the experts as
enhancements in T1c.
Finally, we cannot rule out that some cross-checking between
results of updated algorithms and available test images may
have taken place in between the 2012 workshop and the 2013
“off-site” test.
There is another limitation regarding the direct comparison
of “off-site” results between the 2012 and the 2013 workshop
participants, as the test setting was inadvertently stricter for
the latter group. In particular, the 2012 participants had several
months to work with the test images and improve scores before the “off-site” evaluation took place—which, they were informed, would be used in a ﬁnal ranking. In contrast, the 2013
groups were permitted access to those data only four weeks be-
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 34, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015
fore their competition and were not aware that these images
would be used for a broad comparison. It is therefore worth
pointing out, once again, the algorithms that performed best on
the on-site tests: these were the methods by Bauer, Zikic, and
Hamamci in 2012, and Tustison's method in 2013.
C. “Winning” Algorithmic Properties
A majority of the top ranking algorithms relied on a discriminative learning approach, where low-level image features were
generated in a ﬁrst step, and a discriminative classiﬁer was
applied in a second step, transforming local features into class
probabilities with MRF regularization to produce the ﬁnal set
of segmentations. Both Zikic and Menze (D) used the output
of a generative model as input to a discriminative classiﬁer in
order to increase the robustness of intensity features. However,
also other approaches that only used image intensities and
standard normalization algorithms such as N4ITK did
surprisingly well. The spatial processing by Zhao (I), which
considers information about tumor structure at a regional
“super-voxel” level, did exceptionally well for “whole” tumor
and tumor “core.” One may expect that performing such a
non-local spatial regularization might also improve results of
other methods. Most algorithms ranking in the lower half of
the list used rather basic image features and did not employ
a spatial regularization strategy, featuring small false positive
outliers that decreased Dice score and increased the average
Hausdorff distance.
Given the excellent results by the semi-automatic methods
from Hamamci and Guo (and those by Riklin Raviv for the active tumor region), and because tumor segmentations will typically be looked at in the context of a clinical workﬂow anyway,
it may be beneﬁcial to take advantage of some user interaction,
either in an initialization or in a postprocessing phase. In light
of the clear beneﬁt of fusing multiple automatic segmentations,
demonstrated in Section IV-C, user interaction may also prove
helpful in selecting the best segmentation maps for subsequent
The required computation time varied signiﬁcantly among
the participating algorithms, ranging from a few minutes to several hours. We observed that most of the computational burden
related to feature detection and image registration sub-tasks.
In addition, it was observed that a good understanding of the
image resolution and amount of image subsampling can lead to
a good trade-off between speed improvements and segmentation quality.
D. Fusing Automatic Segmentations
We note that fusing segmentations from different algorithms
always performed better than the best individual algorithm
applied to the same task. This observation aligns well with
a common concept from ensemble learning, when a set of
predictors that are unbiased but with high variability in the
individual prediction, improve when their predictions are
pooled . In that case, averaging over multiple predictors
reduces variance and, hence, reduces the prediction error.
Subselecting only the best few segmentations, i.e., those with
the least bias (or average misclassiﬁcation) further improves
results. In general there are two extrema: variance is maximal
for single observations and minimal after fusing many, while
bias is minimal for the one top-ranking algorithm and maximal
when including a large number of (also lesser) predictions.
For many applications, an optimum is reached in between
these two extrema, depending on the bias and variance of the
predictors that are fused. Optimizing the ensemble prediction
by balancing variability reduction (fuse many predictors) and
bias removal (fuse a few selected only) can be done on a test set
representing the overall population, or for the individual image
volume when partial annotation is available—for example
from the limited user interaction mentioned above. Statistical
methods that estimate and weight the performance of individual
contributions—for example, based on appropriate multi-class
extensions of STAPLE and related probabilistic models
 , —may also be used to trade bias and variance in an
optimal fashion.
E. Limitations of the BRATS Benchmark
When designing the BRATS study, we made several choices
that may have impacted the results and that could potentially
have been improved. For example, we decided to homogenize
the data by co-registering and reformatting each subject's image
volumes using rigid registration and linear interpolation, as described in Section III-C. Although the registration itself was
found to work well (as it was always between images acquired
from the same subject and in the same acquisition session), it
may have been advisable to use a more advanced interpolation
method, because the image resolution differed signiﬁcantly between sequences, patients, and centers. Furthermore, in order to
build a consensus segmentation from multiple manual annotations, we devised a simple fusion rule that explicitly respects
the known spatial and—with respect to the evolution of the disease—temporal relations between the tumor substructures, as
more advanced fusion schemes were found to yield implausible
results. These choices can certainly be criticized; however, we
believe the major challenge for the segmentation algorithms was
ultimately not interpolation or label fusion details, but rather
the large spatial and structural variability of the tumors in the
BRATS dataset, as well as the variability in image intensities
arising from differences in imaging equipment and acquisition
protocols.
Although we were able to identify several overall “winning”
algorithmic properties (discussed in Section V-C), one general
limitation of image analysis benchmarks is that it is often dif-
ﬁcult to explain why a particular algorithm does well or—even
more difﬁcult—why it does not do well. This is because even the
best algorithmic pipeline will fail if just one element is badly
parameterized or implemented. Detecting such failures would
require a meticulous study of each element of every processing
pipeline—for a learning-based approach, for example, of the intensity normalization, the feature extraction, the classiﬁcation
algorithm, and the spatial regularization. Unfortunately, while
this type of analysis is extremely valuable, it requires a careful
experimental design that cannot easily be pursued post hoc on a
heterogeneous set of algorithms contributed by different parties
in a competitive benchmark such as BRATS.
MENZE et al.: THE MULTIMODAL BRAIN TUMOR IMAGE SEGMENTATION BENCHMARK (BRATS)
Another limitation of the current study, which is also shared
by other benchmarks, pertains to the selection of an appropriate
overall evaluation metric that can be used to explicitly rank all
competing algorithms. Although we reported separate results
for sensitivity, speciﬁcity, and Hausdorff distance, we based our
overall ﬁnal ranking in different tumor regions on average Dice
scores. As demonstrated by the results of the Festa method in
“active tumor” segmentation, however, the exact choice of evaluation metric does sometimes affect the ranking results, as different metrics are sensitive to different types of segmentation
Although the number of images included in the BRATS
benchmark was large, the ranking of the segmentation algorithms reported here may still have been impacted by the high
variability in brain tumors. As such, it will be desirable to
further increase the number of training and test cases in future
brain tumor segmentation benchmarks.
We wish to point out that all the individual segmentation
results by all participants are publicly available,9 so that groups
interested in brain tumor segmentation can perform their own
internal evaluation, focusing speciﬁcally on what they consider
most important. Looking at individual segmentations can also
help understand better the advantages and drawbacks of the
different algorithms under comparison, and we would strongly
encourage taking advantage of this possibility. It is worth
pointing out that the individual rater's manual segmentations of
the training data are also available,10 so that groups that do not
trust the consensus labels we provide, can generate their own
training labels using a fusion method of their choice.
F. Lessons Learned
There are lessons that we learned from organizing BRATS
2012 and 2013 that may also be relevant for future benchmark
organizers confronted with complex and expensive annotation
tasks. First, it may be recommended to generate multiple annotations for the test data—rather than for the training set as
we did here—as this is where the comparisons between experts and algorithms take place. Many algorithms will be able
to overcome slight inconsistencies or errors in the training data
that are present when only a single rater labels each case. At
the same time, most algorithms will beneﬁt from having larger
training datasets and, hence, can be improved by annotating
larger amounts of data even if this comes at the price of fewer
annotations per image volume.
Second, while it may be useful to make unprocessed data
available as well, we strongly recommend providing participants with maximally homogenized datasets—i.e., image
volumes that are co-registered, interpolated to a standard
resolution and normalized with respect to default intensity distributions—in order to ease participation, maximize the number
of participants, and facilitate comparisons of the segmentation
methods independently of preprocessing issues.
9www.virtualskeleton.ch/BRATS/StaticResults2013
10www.virtualskeleton.ch/
BRATS 2013
“BRATS 2013 Individual Observer Ground-truth Data”
G. Future Work
Given that many of the algorithms that participated in this
study offered good glioma segmentation quality, it would seem
valuable to have their software implementations more easily
accessible. Right now, only an implementation of Bauer and
Meier's method is freely available,11 and Tustison's code12 The
online MIDAS and VSD platforms that we used for BRATS may
be extended to not only host and distribute data, but also to host
and distribute such algorithms. Making the top algorithms available through appropriate infrastructures and interfaces—for example as developed for the VISCERAL benchmark13 , or as
used in the commercial NITRC Amazon cloud service14—may
help to make thoroughly benchmarked algorithms available to
the wider clinical research community.
Since our results indicate that current automated glioma segmentation methods only reach the level of consensus-rater variation in the “whole” tumor case (Fig. 8), continued algorithmic
development seems warranted. Other tumor substructures may
also be relevant with respect to diagnosis and prognosis, and
a more reﬁned tumor model—with more than the four classes
used in this study—may be helpful, in particular when additional image modalities are integrated into the evaluation. Finally, in clinical routine the change of tumor structures over time
is often of primary relevance, something the current BRATS
study did not address. Evaluating the accuracy of automated
routines in longitudinal settings including both pre- and postoperative images, are important directions for future work along
with further algorithmic developments.
VI. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
In this paper we presented the BRATS brain tumor segmentation benchmark. We generated the largest public dataset
available for this task and evaluated a large number of
state-of-the-art brain tumor segmentation methods. Our results
indicate that, while brain tumor segmentation is difﬁcult even
for human raters, currently available algorithms can reach Dice
scores of over 80% for whole tumor segmentation. Segmenting
the tumor core region, and especially the active core region
in high-grade gliomas, proved more challenging, with Dice
scores reaching 70% and 60%, respectively. Of the algorithms
tested, no single method performed best for all tumor regions
considered. However, the errors of the best algorithms for each
individual region fell within human inter-rater variability.
An important observation in this study is that fusing different
segmenters boosts performance signiﬁcantly. Decisions obtained by applying a hierarchical majority vote to ﬁxed groups
of algorithmic segmentations performed consistently, for every
single segmentation task, better than the best individual segmentation algorithm. This suggests that, in addition to pushing
the limits of individual tumor segmentation algorithms, future
gains (and ultimately clinical implementations) may also be
obtained by investigating how to implement and fuse several
11www.nitrc.org/projects/bratumia 
12github.com/ntustison/BRATS2013
13www.visceral.eu
14www.nitrc.org/ce-marketplace
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 34, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015
different algorithms, either by majority vote or by other fusion
strategies.
CONTRIBUTIONS
B. H. Menze, A. Jakab, S. Bauer, M. Reyes, M. Prastawa,
and K. Van Leemput organized BRATS 2012. B. H. Menze, M.
Reyes, J. Kalpathy-Cramer, J. Kirby, and K. Farahani organized
BRATS 2013. A. Jakab and B. H. Menze deﬁned the annotation
protocol. A. Jakab, Y. Burren, N. Porz, J. Slotboom, R. Wiest,
L. Lanczi, and M.-A. Weber acquired and annotated the clinical images. M. Prastawa generated the synthetic images. M.
Prastawa and S. Bauer pre-processed the images. M. Prastawa
implemented the evaluation scripts. S. Bauer, M. Reyes, and M.
Prastawa adapted and maintained the online evaluation tools.
All other authors contributed results of their tumor segmentation algorithms as indicated in the Appendix. B. H. Menze analyzed the data. B. H. Menze and K. Van Leemput wrote the
manuscript. B. H. Menze wrote the ﬁrst draft.
Here we reproduce a short summary of each algorithm used in
BRATS 2012 and BRATS 2013, provided by its authors. A more
detailed description of each method is available in the workshop
proceedings.15
BAUER, WIEST AND REYES : SEGMENTATION OF
BRAIN TUMOR IMAGES BASED ON INTEGRATED HIERARCHICAL
CLASSIFICATION AND REGULARIZATION
Algorithm and Data: We are proposing a fully automatic
method for brain tumor segmentation, which is based on classi-
ﬁcation with integrated hierarchical regularization . It subcategorizes healthy tissues into CSF, WM, GM and pathologic
tissues into necrotic, active, non-enhancing and edema compartment. The general idea is based on a previous approach presented in . After pre-processing (denoising, bias-ﬁeld correction, rescaling and histogram matching) , the segmentation task is modeled as an energy minimization problem in a
conditional random ﬁeld (CRF) formulation. The energy consists of the sum of the singleton potentials in the ﬁrst term and
the pairwise potentials in the second term of (1). The expression
is minimized using in a hierarchical way
The singleton potentials
are computed according to
(2), where
is the label output from a classiﬁer,
is the feature
vector and
is the Kronecker- function
We use a decision forest as a classiﬁer , which has the advantage of being able to handle multi-class problems and providing a probabilistic output . The probabilistic output is
used for the weighting factor
in (2), in order to control the degree of spatial regularization. A 44-dimensional feature vector is used for the classiﬁer, which combines the inten-
15BRATS 2013: hal.inria.fr/hal-00912934; BRATS 2012: hal.inria.fr/hal-
sities in each modality with the ﬁrst-order textures (mean, variance, skewness, kurtosis, energy, entropy) computed from local
patches, statistics of intensity gradients in a local neighborhood
and symmetry features across the mid-sagittal plane. The pairwise potentials
account for the spatial regularization. In (3)
is a weighting function, which depends
on the voxel spacing in each dimension. The term
penalizes different labels of adjacent voxels, while the intensity term
regulates the degree
of smoothing based on the local intensity variation, where PCD
is a pseudo-Chebyshev distance and
is a generalized mean intensity.
allows us to incorporate prior knowledge by
penalizing different tissue adjacencies individually
Computation time for one dataset ranges from 4 to 12 min depending on the size of the images, most of the time is needed by
the decision forest classiﬁer.
Training and Testing: The classiﬁer was trained using 5-fold
cross-validation on the training dataset, with separate training
for high- and low-grade as well as synthetic and patient data.
The parameters of the algorithm were chosen empirically. We
also compared the proposed approach to our previous method
 which used SVMs as a classiﬁer instead of decision forests
and which had a less sophisticated regularization. With the new
method, the computation time could be reduced by more than
a factor of two and the accuracy was signiﬁcantly improved.
However, we still discovered difﬁculties with datasets that were
very different from the training data, which hints at some problems of the supervised algorithm with generalization.
BUENDIA, TAYLOR, RYAN AND JOHN : A GROUPING
ARTIFICIAL IMMUNE NETWORK FOR SEGMENTATION OF
TUMOR IMAGES
Algorithm and Data: GAIN+ is an enhanced version of the
original Grouping Artiﬁcial Immune Network that was developed for fully automated MRI brain segmentation. The model
captures the main concepts by which the immune system recognizes pathogens and models the process in a numerical form.
GAIN+ was adapted to support a variable number of input patterns for training and segmentation of tumors in MRI brain images. The model was demonstrated to operate with multi-spectral MR data with an increase in accuracy compared to the single
spectrum case. The new input patterns include, in any combination, voxel intensities from 2D or 3D blocks or shapes of varying
sizes customized to each MRI sequence (T1, T2, FLAIR, etc.),
and also include feature and textural patterns such as mean and
variance of selected block sizes, slice or radial distance, co-occurrence matrices, among others. Due to the representation of
the voxel intensities as multi-bit values, it can be shown that
not every bit carries the same entropy. That is, each bit does
not contribute equally to the ﬁnal interpretation of the data. The
GAIN algorithm makes use of this fact to increase the speed
of its operation. Bits are grouped into groups of size 2 bits. A
MENZE et al.: THE MULTIMODAL BRAIN TUMOR IMAGE SEGMENTATION BENCHMARK (BRATS)
new grouping approach was implemented based on the location of each bit within the input pattern, and the signiﬁcance
of the input features. Higher priority was given to higher order
bits and overall to voxels at closer distance to the center voxel.
This grouping approach runs in just a few seconds and the same
grouping ﬁle can be used for all cases. Training takes an average
of 1.3 min per input byte, thus, for example, an input pattern
of 16 bytes takes an average of 21 min of training. Segmentation with post-processing of one case takes 20 s for the same
input size. The preprocessing pipeline was designed to remove
noise and inhomogeneities due to MR scanner bias ﬁelds, and
match each spectrum's intensity histogram to the volumes used
for training. Several post-processing options were added to the
program, such as ﬁnding and extracting connected components,
and performing dilation and erosion on those components.
Training and Testing: The original GAIN method was designed to train on a single case, and although GAIN+ has been
adapted to train on multiple images, single case training performed best. We performed 20-fold cross validation on the real
high-grade BRATS 2013 training set. GAIN+ performance was
evaluated with the four BRATS 2013 labels: 1) Necrosis, 2)
Edema, 3) Non-Enhancing tumor, and 4) Enhancing Tumor. In
this case, GAIN+ was run with an input pattern of 16 bytes:
voxels. The segmented images were uploaded to the BRATS 2013 Virtual Skeleton web
site. The evaluation was done for three different tumor sub-compartments: 1) Region 1: Complete tumor (labels
for patient data), Dice: 0.73, 2) Region 2: Tumor core (labels
for patient data), Dice: 0.61, 3) Region 3: Enhancing
tumor (label 4 for patient data), Dice: 0.64.
CORDIER, MENZE, DELINGETTE AND AYACHE :
PATCH-BASED SEGMENTATION OF BRAIN TISSUES
Algorithm and Data: We describe a fully automated approach inspired by the human brain labelling method described
in , and similar to multi-atlas label propagation methods
 – . A database of multi-channel local patches is ﬁrst
built from a set of training pathological cases. Then, given a
test case, similar multi-channel patches are retrieved in the
patch database, along with the corresponding labels. Finally, a
classiﬁcation map for the test case is inferred as a combination
of the retrieved labels during a label fusion step – .
To decrease the computation time, images are sub-sampled
to 2-mm isotropic resolution . A candidate tumor mask
is deﬁned by thresholding (50% percentile) a denoised 
-weighted FLAIR image. Since the patch retrieval is driven
by a sum-of-squared-differences (SSD), a global intensity
alignment is applied to the mean image intensity restricted
to the candidate tumor mask. Training images are cropped
along the Z-axis to focus on training patches surrounding the
Image features are the concatenation of 3
3 intensity patches extracted from four MR channels. Given a
multi-channel patch query, the ﬁve nearest-neighbor patches
are retrieved within each training patch database, each of which
contributes to a weighted voting. We use exponential weights,
based on patch similarity , , ; the decay parameter
depends on the test case, and is set to the maximum of SSD
between every voxel in the test case and every ﬁrst-neighbor
training patch. For each label, the weighted voting results in a
probability-like map. Since the label regions are interlocked,
label maps are hierarchically computed: ﬁrst, complete tumor
is distinguished from healthy tissues; then tumor core from
edema; ﬁnally enhancing tumor from the rest of the core.
At each step, weighted votes are rebalanced based on label
frequencies, in order to penalize labels which would be more
often picked if the patch retrieval were blind.
As post-processing, at most the two biggest connected components of the complete tumor are kept, the second one being
kept only if its volume is greater than 20% of the volume of the
ﬁrst one. Classiﬁcation maps are up-sampled to 1-mm isotropic
resolution, and one iteration of Iterated Conditional Modes
 smooths the result. On average, the segmentation total
computation time is 20 min times the number of training cases.
Training and Testing: The most important parameters are
manually set and consist of the patch size and the number of
training cases. A range of values for the number of retrieved
nearest-neighbor patches were tested, and the segmentation results were almost not affected. For the training data, the labelling is performed in a leave-one-out scheme, while for the
test data, every relevant training case is used. Real cases are
processed separately from simulated cases. For real low-grade
test cases, the training dataset includes both high- and low-grade
cases, while for real high-grade test cases, the training dataset
only includes high-grade cases.
The algorithm shows a few shortcomings which would require the following steps to be reﬁned.
• The necrotic core is sometimes partially missed by the
candidate tumor mask. Tumour detection could either be
skipped at the expense of higher computational burden, or
be more sensitive by using the
-weighted image in addition to the FLAIR image.
• For enhancing tumors, thin parts are often missed by the
algorithm. This is visible on the probability maps and may
be due to the sub-sampling step.
• Tumor voxels can be misclassiﬁed as healthy tissues
or edema, usually if the necrotic core is similar to the
cerebrospinal ﬂuid on the FLAIR channel. Enforcing the
convexity of tumor connected components helps but the
contours of the tumor compartments are not matched as
closely. The regularization would be more relevant during
the label fusion.
• Shape criteria could help discard false positives in the occipital lobe and the cerebellum.
DOYLE, VASSEUR, DOJAT AND FORBES : FULLY
AUTOMATIC BRAIN TUMOR SEGMENTATION FROM MULTIPLE
MR SEQUENCES USING HIDDEN MARKOV FIELDS AND
VARIATIONAL EM
Algorithm and Data: We propose an adaptive scheme for
brain tumor segmentation using multiple MR sequences. Our
approach is fully automatic and requires no training. The model
parameters are instead estimated using a variational EM algorithm with MRF constraints and the inclusion of a priori probabilistic maps to provide a stable parameter trajectory during
optimization.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 34, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015
We build on the standard hidden Markov ﬁeld model by considering a more general formulation that is able to encode more
complex interactions than the standard Potts model. In particular, we encode the possibility that certain tissue combinations
in the neighborhood are penalized more than others, whereas the
standard Potts model penalizes dissimilar neighboring classes
equally, regardless of the tissues they represent.
A solution to the model is found using the Expectation Maximization (EM) framework combined with variational approximation for tractability in the presence of Markov dependencies. In particular, we consider the so-called mean ﬁeld principle that provides a deterministic way to deal with intractable
Markov Random Field (MRF) models and has proven to
perform well in a number of applications.
We adopt a data model comprising of ﬁve normal tissue
classes; white matter, grey matter, ventricular CSF, extraventricular CSF, and other. The glioma is modeled by a further
four classes representing the diseased tissue state; edema,
non-enhancing, enhancing and necrotic. In the absence of
sufﬁcient data to robustly and accurately estimate a full free
interaction matrix
with the number of classes
constraints are imposed on the
. The four glioma classes
are considered a single structure, whose interaction with the
normal tissue classes is not dependant on the speciﬁc glioma
tissue state. Parameters are estimated using the variational EM
algorithm, which provides a tractable solution for non trivial
Markov models.
The deformable transform that describes the mapping between the International Consortium for Brain Mapping (ICBM)
template and the data space is found using tools provided by the
Insight Segmentation and Registration Toolkit (ITK). The transform is used to register the probabilistic tissue atlases to the MR
sequences. An initial 5-class segmentation is performed, and the
tumor region of interest (ROI) is detected by a simple morphological method comparing the segmentation result and the ﬁve
tissue atlases. The prior probabilistic tissue atlas and the tumor
ROI are incorporated a priori in the ﬁnal segmentation algorithm via the singleton potential parameter in the MRF.
The computation time is 30 min per patient, giving an average
Dice coefﬁcient for high-grade and low-grade complete tumor
volume of 0.84 and 0.81, respectively.
Training and Testing: The algorithm was tested on real-patient data from the BRATS 2012 and 2013 dataset. No training
was performed; the initial labeling was random, and all model
parameters were estimated iteratively.
FESTA, PEREIRA, MARIZ, SOUSA AND SILVA
 : AUTOMATIC BRAIN TUMOR SEGMENTATION
OF MULTI-SEQUENCE MR IMAGES USING RANDOM
DECISION FORESTS
Algorithm and Data:
The proposed algorithm is fully
automated and uses all available MRI sequences. Three preprocessing steps were performed. The ﬁrst aims for the bias ﬁeld
correction, with N4ITK method . The second normalizes
the intensity scale of each sequence to a chosen reference,
by histogram matching using ITK . Finally, since some
FLAIR images were already limited to the volume of interest,
all sequences from each subject were cropped to have the same
brain volume. A random decision forest is used to classify
each brain voxel, based on several features extracted from the
training data. The main parameters in a decision forest are the
number of trees and their depth, set to 50 and 25, respectively.
Due to computational limitations, a maximum of
per training subject were sampled. Half of these points are
background and the other half are tumor and edema. The feature
set includes: 1) MR sequences intensities and the difference
between each two sequences; 2) neighborhood information
with the mean, sum, median and intensity range of 3D cubic
neighborhoods with edges of 3, 9, and 19 mm, centered in each
voxel, from all MR sequences and the differences between sequences; 3) context information as the difference between each
voxel and the mean value of 3
3 mm cubes, centered 3
mm from the voxel in six directions (two per axis), from all sequences; 4) texture information in all MR sequences, including
edge density and local binary partition (signal and magnitude)
extracted from 3
3 mm neighborhoods, and the Laws
texture features extracted from 2D 3
3 neighborhoods,
in all three dimensions. Finally, a post processing step was
performed assuming that very small isolated 3D regions, with
less than seven voxels (value found empirically), of one label
type should not exist. The total execution time is about 30 min
for each test subject, mainly due to the features extraction,
using the programming language Python on a computer with
an Intel processor (i7-3930k, 3.2 GHz).
Training and Testing:
Three datasets were available:
“Training” (with corresponding ground truth), “LeaderBoard”
and “Challenge.” The training step was done using all real
data from the Training dataset, from both grades to increase
the representation of some labels (like non-enhancing). The
testing step was performed with all datasets. Leave-one-out
cross-validation was used for the Training dataset. The features
set, as well as the hyperparameters for the decision forest, were
found using leave-one-out cross-validation of the Training
dataset. To segment high-grade tumors, all images (used in
training and testing stages) were normalized to a high-grade
reference. Similarly, images were normalized to a low-grade
reference when segmenting these tumors. The critical part of
the proposed algorithm is the normalization, which inﬂuences
the whole pipeline, especially with intensity related features
used in a supervised classiﬁer. A basic characterization of
texture was used in the proposed algorithm and it seems to
be helpful in the distinction of different tumor tissues. With a
better texture characterization, it is expected to achieve further
improvement in the segmentation of brain tumors.
GEREMIA, MENZE AND AYACHE : SPATIAL DECISION
FORESTS FOR GLIOMA SEGMENTATION IN MULTI-CHANNEL
Medical imaging protocols produce large amounts of
multi-modal volumetric images. The large size of the produced datasets contributes to the success of machine learning
methods. These methods automatically learn from the data how
to perform challenging task such as, for instance, semantic
annotation. Although being a tremendous asset in theory,
MENZE et al.: THE MULTIMODAL BRAIN TUMOR IMAGE SEGMENTATION BENCHMARK (BRATS)
very large datasets are down-sampled to ensure tractability of
the learning process. Moreover, the informative data is often
submerged in overwhelming amounts of redundant data. Thus,
most state of the art methods need to parse large amounts of
uninformative data before reaching valuable data.
We present the “Spatially Adaptive Random Forests”
(SARFs) to overcome these issues in the context of volumetric medical images. SARFs automatically learn how to
efﬁciently target valuable data. It avoids parsing and processing
redundant data while focusing its computational power on
critical image regions. We demonstrate its power to address
multi-class glioma annotation in multi-modal brain MRIs.
SARF builds on three cutting-edge methods: 1) discriminative random forests, 2) an efﬁcient multi-scale 3D image
representation, and 3) structured labelling. Random forests
demonstrated outstanding segmentation results in the context
of brain lesion segmentation in MRIs and multi-organ segmentation in full body CT scans. Although real-time performance
can be achieved during testing, training the forest is still time
consuming due to the large amount of data that it needs to
In order to speed up training and testing, SARF relies on an
efﬁcient hierarchical representation of image volumes. The hierarchical representation is obtained by recursively applying an
extended version of the SLIC algorithm to handle volumetric
multi-modal images. The ﬁnal result consists in a coarse to ﬁne
super-voxel hierarchical partition of the images similar to (cite
bouman et al.).
Rather than merging the segmentations obtained from the different scales of the image, SARF iteratively reﬁnes the segmentation. This is made possible by carefully extrapolating the
voxel-based ground truth to coarser scales. Additionally, SARF
provides the ability of reasoning on semantically close classes
by combining them in an hierarchical way (cite structured labelling). The resulting semantic tree together with the supervoxel hierarchy are powerful tools to efﬁciently parse and annotate the image volumes.
SARF makes use of these tools by integrating them into the
random forest framework. During training, it learns the optimal
image spatial sampling associated to the segmentation task.
During testing, the algorithm quickly handles the background
and focuses on challenging image regions to reﬁne the segmentation. These properties were demonstrated together with
promising results in the context of multi-class glioma segmentation in multi-modal brain MRIs.
GUO, SCHWARTZ AND ZHAO : SEMI-AUTOMATIC
SEGMENTATION OF MULTIMODAL BRAIN TUMOR USING
ACTIVE CONTOURS
In this paper, we present a semi-automatic segmentation
method for multimodal brain tumors. It requires only that a user
manually draw a region of interest (ROI) roughly surrounding
the tumor on a single image. The algorithm combines the image
analysis techniques of region and edge-based active con-tours
and level set approach, and has the advantages of easy initialization, quick segmentation, and efﬁcient modiﬁcation. The
Fig. 10. Maximum diameter line drawn by the user to initialize the algorithm
for CE-T1 (a), T2 (b), and Flair (c) modalities and the corresponding outputs, for
a sample high-grade case. Manual labels overlayed on T1 for a sample slice (d).
typical run-time for each case in the training dataset can be
within 1 min.
HAMAMCI AND UNAL : MULTIMODAL BRAIN
TUMOR SEGMENTATION USING THE “TUMOR-CUT” METHOD
Algorithm and Data:
As described in detail in the
“Tumor-cut” article , the semi-automatic tumor segmentation method by Hamamci and Unal speciﬁcally targets the
gross tumor volume (GTV) and the necrotic regions of the
brain tumors on contrast enhanced T1-weighted MR images,
requiring an initialization by drawing a line through the maximum diameter of the tumor as in the “Response Evaluation
Criteria In Solid Tumors” (RECIST) guidelines . For the
BRATS challenge, the method was extended to multi-modal
MRI to include also the labels for edema and non-enhanced
regions. Hamamci and Unal's approach to fuse different MR
modalities is to apply the original tumor-cut method to each
channel seperately and then combine the segmented volumes by
basic set operations based on the type of the modality. For each
channel, a segmentation is initialized by drawing the maximum
observable diameter of the tumor and performed independently
(see Fig. 10). For FLAIR images, whole hyper-intense region is
segmented as FLAIR volume
and for T2 images only the
core abnormality is segmented as T2 volume
. Tumor core
is segmented on contrast enhanced T1 MRI
followed by
the application of the necrotic segmentation method to segment
the necrotic regions within the tumor core
low-grade cases,
are set to empty, because the
tumors were not enhanced by the application of the contrast
agent. Non-contrast enhanced T1 MR images were used neither
for high- nor low-grade cases. For FLAIR segmentation, only
the weight of the regularizer in the energy term for the level-set
evolution is tuned to allow resulting tumor surfaces to have
higher curvatures. Label for each class is determined by the
following operations:
For each case, user interaction takes about 1–2 min and typical run time is around 10–30 min, depending on the size of
the tumor, using a CPU. However, the parallel nature of the algorithm allows GPU implementation, which would reduce the
processing time signiﬁcantly.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 34, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015
Training and Testing: We observed that in one case only,
we segmented an abnormal structure, which was not labeled
as tumor by the experts. Although, this resulted a zero overlap
score for the particular case, in fact, to allow user to choose what
to segment is an advantage of the semi-automatic approach. In
general, the T2 results did not provide useful information, as
only a small portion of the tumors consist of the non-enhancing
region and the segmentation results were not accurate due to
the low contrast between tumor core and edema. The approach
of Hamamci and Unal's algorithm was to apply their original
algorithm independently to each modality. A combined algorithm that considers the multidimensional information from all
available modalities have the potential to improve the results
MEIER, BAUER, SLOTBOOM, WIEST AND REYES :
APPEARANCE- AND CONTEXT-SENSITIVE FEATURES FOR BRAIN
TUMOR SEGMENTATION
Algorithm and Data: In our approach, we regard image segmentation as a supervised classiﬁcation problem. The present
method is an improved version of the one proposed by Bauer et
al. in and can be subdivided into three main parts: a feature extraction yielding a voxel-wise feature vector, a classiﬁcation step and a subsequent spatial regularization. Moreover,
we preprocess the multimodal image data which encompasses
noise-reduction, bias-ﬁeld correction and intensity normalization.
The major difference to is that for every voxel we extract a 257-dimensional feature vector composed of appearancesensitive (multimodal intensities and intensity differences, ﬁrstorder textures and gradient textures) and context-sensitive features (atlas-normalized coordinates, multiscale symmetry features and multi-/monomodal ray features). As a classiﬁer we
employ a classiﬁcation forest. The predicted class label is de-
ﬁned according to the MAP-rule applied on the posterior probability output from the classiﬁcation forest. The implementation of the classiﬁcation forest is based on the Sherwood library
 . The regularization is conducted in a hierarchical manner
as proposed in . It is realized as an energy minimization
problem of a conditional random ﬁeld, which is deﬁned on a
grid graph representing the image. The probabilistic output of
the classiﬁcation forest is further used to deﬁne the unary potentials, which model the afﬁliation of a voxel to a possible tissue
class. Pairwise potentials model the coherence between neighboring voxels and are used to incorporate tissue dependencies
and to account for anisotropic voxel dimensions. For solving
the energy minimization problem we relied on the Fast-PD algorithm proposed in .
Our method is fully automatic with a testing time of 2–12 min
per subject depending on the size of the image volume, where
the feature extraction consumes most of the time.
Training and Testing: Relevant parameters of the classiﬁcation forest (depth, number of candidate weak learners
and thresholds per node) are set according to a gridsearch.
The model is trained either on high-grade or low-grade cases
only. For preliminary results and training phase before the
competition the method has been evaluated on the high-grade
or low-grade cases of the BRATS2013 training set using 5-fold
cross validation.
We observed that depending on the image data false positives
in the infratentorial part of the brain might appear. Moreover, the
discrimination between edema and non-enhancing tumor seems
to be the most challenging one. We plan to employ additional
image features to overcome these problems and to further improve the current accuracy.
MENZE, VAN LEEMPUT, LASHKARI, WEBER, AYACHE AND
GOLLAND : SEGMENTING GLIOMA IN MULTI-MODAL
IMAGES USING A GENERATIVE MODEL FOR BRAIN LESION
SEGMENTATION
We evaluate a fully automated method for channel-speciﬁc
tumor segmentation in multi-dimensional images proposed
by us in that extends the general “EM segmention” algorithm for situations when speciﬁc spatial structures cannot be
described sufﬁciently through population priors. The method
represents a tumor appearance model for multi-dimensional
sequences that provides channel-speciﬁc segmentation of the
tumor. Its generative model shares information about the spatial
location of the lesion among channels while making full use
of the highly speciﬁc multi-modal signal of the healthy tissue
classes for segmenting normal tissues in the brain. In addition
to tissue types, the model includes a latent variable for each
voxel encoding the probability of observing tumor at that voxel,
based on the ideas from , .
• Approach amends physiological tissue atlas with personalized lesion prior.
• During segmentation information on tumor localization is
traded between modalities via latent prior. Results in an
individual segmentation in every modality.
• Outperforms both univariate and multivariate EM segmentation and is capable of considering channel-speciﬁc constraint on hypo- or hypo intensity of the lesion with respect
to the intensities of normal tissues in the same image.
To initialize our algorithm we segment the volume into the
three healthy and an outlier class using a freely available implementation of the EM segmentation with bias correction .
Outliers are deﬁned as being more than three standard deviations away from the centroid of any of the three normal tissue
classes. We apply our algorithm to the bias ﬁeld corrected volumes returned from this EM segmenter and initialize intensity
parameters with values estimated in the initial segmentation. We
initialize the latent atlas
to 0.7 time the local prior for the presence of gray or white matter. For a semantic interpretation that is
in line with the class deﬁnitions of the segmentation challenge,
Channels-speciﬁc segmentations returned by our algorithm are
transformed to Edema and Core classes. We label voxels that
show tumor speciﬁc changes in the T2 channel as edema, and
voxels that show hyper-intense tumor speciﬁc changes as tumor
core. A discriminative classiﬁer ﬁlters all tumor segments removing those that are most likely to be false positives, primarily evaluating shape and location of the tumor regions returned from the generative model.
MENZE et al.: THE MULTIMODAL BRAIN TUMOR IMAGE SEGMENTATION BENCHMARK (BRATS)
MENZE, GEREMIA, AYACHE AND SZEKELY :
SEGMENTING GLIOMA IN MULTI-MODAL IMAGES USING A
GENERATIVE-DISCRIMINATIVE MODEL FOR BRAIN LESION
SEGMENTATION
The present discriminative model (described above)
returns probability maps for the healthy tissues, and probability
maps for the presences of characteristic hypo- or hyper-intense
changes in each of the image volumes. While this provides
highly speciﬁc information about different pathophysiological
processes induced by the tumor, the analysis of the multimodal
image sequence may still require to highlight speciﬁc structures
of the lesion—such as edema, the location of the active or
necrotic core of the tumor, “hot spots” of modiﬁed angiogenesis
or metabolism—that cannot directly be associated with any of
these basic parameter maps returned. As a consequence, we
propose to use the probabilistic output of the generative model,
together with few structural features that are derived from the
same probabilistic maps, as input to a classiﬁer modeling the
posterior of the desired pixel classes. In this we follow the
approach proposed by that prove useful for identifying
white matter lesion in multiple input volumes. The building
blocks of this discriminative approach are the input features,
the parametrization of the random forest classiﬁer used, and the
ﬁnal post-processing routines.
The approach combines advantageous properties from both
types of learning algorithms: First, it extracts tumor related
image features in a robust fashion that is invariant to relative intensity changes by relying on a generative model encoding prior
knowledge on expected physiology and pathophysiological
changes. Second, it transforms image features extracted from
the generative model—representing tumor probabilities in the
different image channels—to an arbitrary image representation
desired by the human interpreter through an efﬁcient classiﬁcation method that is capable of dealing with high-dimensional
input data and that returns the desired class probabilities. In the
following, we shortly describe the generative model from ,
and input features and additional regularization methods used
similar to our earlier discriminative model from .
As input feature describing the image in voxel
we use the
probabilities
tissue classes
use the tumor probability
for each channel
image intensities after calibrating them
with a global factor that has been estimated from gray and white
matter tissue
. From these data we derive two types of
features: the “long range features” that calculate differences of
local image intensities for all three types of input features (
), and a distance feature that calculates the geodesic distance of each voxel
to characteristic tumor areas. We choose
random forests as our discriminative model as it uses labeled
samples as input and returns class probabilities. For the normal
classes (that are not available from the manual annotation of the
challenge dataset) we infer the maximum a posterior estimates
of the generative model and use them as label during training.
Random forests learn many decision trees from bootstrapped
samples of the training data, and at each split in the tree they only
evaluate a random subspaces to ﬁnd the best split. To minimize
Fig. 11. Generic ﬂow diagram of the proposed method.
correlation in the training data, and also to speed up training,
we draw no more 2000 samples from each of the
in each of the 25 dataset. We train an ensemble with 300 randomized decision trees, and choose a subspace dimensionality
of 10. We use the random forest implementation from Breiman
and Cutler. To improve segmentation, we use a Markov random
ﬁeld (MRF) imposing a smoothness constraint on the class labels. We optimize the function imposing costs when assigning
different labels in a six neighborhood on the cross-validated predictions on the training data.
REZA AND IFTEKHARUDDIN : MULTI-CLASS
ABNORMAL BRAIN TISSUE SEGMENTATION USING
TEXTURE FEATURES
Algorithm and Data: In this work, we propose fully automated multi-class abnormal brain tissue segmentation in
multimodality brain MRI. Fig. 11 shows a generic ﬂow diagram for our algorithm pipeline. Since BRATS-2013 dataset is
already skull stripped and co-registered; the ﬁrst step involves
preprocessing of 2D MRI slices extracted from 3D volume
for each patient. Intensity normalization and inhomogeneity
correction are used as pre-processing steps. Then two primary sets of features are extracted from each preprocessed
image. The ﬁrst set includes non-local features such as pixel
intensities
and differences of intensities
represents global characteristics of brain tissues. To characterize the tumor surface variation, we employ our novel texture
features such as fractal PTPSA , and mBm as well
as classical textons as the second set of features. After
extraction, all features are fused in a classical Random Forest
 classiﬁer. Once the labels are predicted simultaneously,
we obtain a 3D volume image per patient for online evaluation.
Training and Testing: We performed 3-fold cross validation
on training dataset to tune the parameters. Extensive experiments suggests employing all tumor samples and randomly selected equal number of non-tumor samples for training the RF
classiﬁer yields good training results. For a single patient it takes
about an hour and half to complete the whole process as shown
in Fig. 11 while 3-fold cross-validation takes only about 15 min.
The most time consuming parts are preprocessing and feature
extraction which are done ofﬂine. All results in this work are
obtained using MATLAB 2011a on windows 64 bit 2.26 GHz
Intel Xeon processor, with 12 GB RAM. We process HG and LG
patients separately for both Leader Board and Challenge testing
phases. There are a few leader board cases that show low scores.
Our observation suggests that if the tumor tissue intensities are
below the mean intensity of the image, the necrosis tissues are
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 34, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015
misclassiﬁed as non-tumor. Data redundancy in the samples and
covariance among the features usually lower the classiﬁer performance. In summary, our extensive experimental results with
BRATS data conﬁrm the efﬁcacy of our texture-based methods
for multi-class abnormal brain tissue segmentation.
RIKLIN RAVIV, VAN LEEMPUT AND MENZE
 : MULTI-MODAL BRAIN TUMOR SEGMENTATION
VIA LATENT ATLASES
The work is based on a generative approach for patient-speciﬁc segmentation of brain tumors across different MR
modalities much in the spirit of , . The segmentation
problem is solved via a statistically driven level-set framework.
Speciﬁcally, image partitioning into regions of interest (tumor
parts) and healthy brain parts are obtained via the joint evolution of four level-sets functions determined by the images gray
level-distributions and a smoothness term. Manual initialization
based on a few mouse clicks to determine the approximate
tumor center and extent was used.
SHIN : HYBRID CLUSTERING AND LOGISTIC
REGRESSION FOR MULTI-MODAL BRAIN TUMOR
SEGMENTATION
Unsupervised learning approaches have potential for applications in medical image processing, as previously discussed
 – . Additionally, the approach can be extended readily
to a previously unseen dataset avoiding the issues of overﬁtting
that can occur in supervised learning methods, where overﬁtting
has a larger inﬂuence in tumor segmentation when tumors have
very heterogeneous characteristics. Unsupervised learning approaches were applied 1) in for the previous two-class segmentation challenge, and 2) in to detect multiple organs
from a dataset where a few roughly labeled samples were available. These methods however were not directly applicable when
the format of this challenge was changed to classify four-class
The four-class segmentation problem was therefore approached
with a supervised learning algorithm, used previously in ,
to segment the tumor-cores, trained with logistic regression.
Four-dimensional patches (3
3 volume-patch
channels) were used with second-order polynomial features as described in , as opposed to the three-dimensional patches
2-D image-patch
temporal-dimension) used
previously in to identify organs (but not for segmentation). This was because the dataset for this challenge was carefully registered with little motion, compared to the abdominal
scans in where the registration over the 40 volumes along
the time-course was difﬁcult as the region is usually affected by
breathing motion. Deep neural networks with up to six layers
were tried as well, pre-training the hidden-layers with stackedautoencoder feature learning and subsequently ﬁne-tuning them
with the labeled samples in the training dataset. Neural network
model was not used for the challenge however, because the improvement of classiﬁcation accuracy was small
relatively to the higher complexity compared to the logistic regression model.
Each channel of volumes was normalized separately, to try
to learn the relation between the multi-channel intensity values,
and to avoid any biases in the image intensities in different
scans. The same type of classiﬁer was used to classify all labels
including the not-of-interest label (label:0), where they were
trained only on the patient-dataset which has four-class labels,
and applied to synthetic data which has only two labels. Two
cross-validations were performed for the parameter adaptation,
and no additional post-processing steps were applied to the
patch-wise classiﬁcation. It took about 5–10 min to segment a
volume depending on the size of the whole head in the volume,
as the classiﬁer scans through all the non-zero entities.
The segmentation result is reasonably good, especially considering that only patch-wise classiﬁcation was performed for the
segmentation without any post-processing step, with a single
(type of) classiﬁer being used to segment all tumor classes
and data-types (patient/synthetic). This demonstrates the application of a classiﬁcation model applied to the segmentation
of coarsely labeled tumors. Combining any post-processing
steps might provide an immediate improvement on the ﬁnal
segmentation result, while application of unsupervised methods
could be studied in the future for this four-class segmentation,
e.g., segmenting label: x-vs-rest for all labels individually
but similarly to . Extending the classiﬁcation model to a
structured prediction model is an interesting avenue for future
work for this model, while using a whole volume as an input
to deep convolutional neural networks might be worth
investigating for the application of neural network models.
SUBBANNA, PRECUP, COLLINS AND ARBEL :
HIERARCHICAL PROBABILISTIC GABOR AND MRF
SEGMENTATION OF BRAIN TUMOURS IN MRI VOLUMES
The off-site classiﬁcation results were produced by a fully
automated hierarchical probabilistic framework for segmenting
brain tumours from multispectral human brain MRIs using multiwindow Gabor ﬁlters and an adapted Markov Random Field
(MRF) framework .
Image pre-processing involves bias ﬁeld correction using
N3 , intra-subject multispectral volume registration ,
non-uniformity correction , and intensity normalization The algorithm consists of two stages. At the ﬁrst
stage, the goal is to coarsely segment tumors (and associated
sub-classes) from surrounding healthy tissues using texture
features. During training, specialized Gabor functions are
developed to optimally separate tumors from surrounding
healthy tissues based on combined-space coefﬁcients of tumors
in multispectral brain MRIs . A Bayesian classiﬁcation
framework is designed such that models for tumour/non-tumors
are built during training, based on the combined space Gabor
decomposition. During testing, a Bayesian classiﬁer results in
tumour/non-tumor probabilities and coarse tumor boundaries
around regions with high tumor probabilities. Prior probabilities for healthy brain tissues are obtained by registering a
healthy tissue prior atlas to regions outside tumor boundaries
 The coarse boundaries are reﬁned at the voxel level
through a modiﬁed MRF framework that carefully separates
MENZE et al.: THE MULTIMODAL BRAIN TUMOR IMAGE SEGMENTATION BENCHMARK (BRATS)
different tumor subclasses from each other and from healthy
tissues. This customized MRF differs from standard MRFs in
that it is not simply a smoothing operator on priors. In addition
to taking voxel intensities and class labels into account, it also
models intensity differences between neighboring voxels in the
likelihood model and considers transition probabilities between
neighboring voxel classes. The second inference stage is shown
to resolve local inhomogeneities and impose a smoothing constraint, while maintaining appropriate boundaries as supported
by local intensity difference observations.
The method was trained and tested on the updated MICCAI
2012 BRATS Database, which included four tumor subclasses:
necrotic core, edema, solid tumor, and enhanced tumor. The
algorithm was trained and tested on clinical volumes, including
low-grade and high-grade tumors. Classiﬁers were built separately for all categories. No other datasets were used for training
or tuning. Online segmentation statistics (e.g., Dice overlap
metrics) were provided. For training cases, the method was
tested in a leave-one-out fashion. After training, the algorithm
was tested on all test cases. On I7 Dell Optiplex machines, the
training took a day, due to both convolution and simulated annealing algorithms used. Each volume took 70 min to classify,
due to time consuming convolutions with different Gabor ﬁlters. For tumor core segmentation, the technique outperformed
the top methods by about 30% in the clinical test cases in terms
of Dice statistics, and had comparable performance with the
highest performing methods in terms of segmentation of other
tumour regions (in all statistics) for both training and test cases.
In terms of shortcomings, the classiﬁer is currently heavily
dependent on the normalization step performing adequately,
which caused a problem in at least one HG test case. In addition, should the classiﬁer at the ﬁrst stage fail to ﬁnd tumours
altogether, the second stage has difﬁculty recovering, as seen
in an LG and HG case.
TAYLOR, JOHN, BUENDIA AND RYAN : MAP-REDUCE
ENABLED HIDDEN MARKOV MODELS FOR HIGH THROUGHPUT
MULTIMODAL BRAIN TUMOR SEGMENTATION
We have developed a novel Map-Reduce enabled extension
to hidden Markov models (HMMs) to enable high-throughput
training and segmentation of tumors and edema in multimodal
magnetic resonance images of the brain.
Preprocessing and Training: Preprocessing prepares the
input MR spectra, T1, T1 with Gadolinium contrast-enhanced
(T1C), T2, and FLAIR, for segmentation. The preprocessing
pipeline has been designed to remove spatial inhomogeneities
due to patient movement, remove image artifacts (skull, eyes)
not related to the segmentation problem, remove inhomogeneities due to MR scanner bias ﬁelds, and match each
spectrum's intensity histogram to the volumes used for training.
Training the HMM (Fig. 12) involves extracting a feature vector
for each voxel in the source case. We extract intensity voxels
from FLAIR, T1, T1C, and T2 MR spectra. Neighboring voxels
are added to the feature vector. The corresponding truth labels
for the voxel neighborhood in the feature vector is utilized for
supervised training of the HMM. Extending the HMM model to
Fig. 12. Left: Training the HMM model. Center: MapReduce model for HMMbased brain tumor segmentation. Right: Applying the HMM model for segmentation.
Map-Reduce (Fig. 12) involved adapting the HMM supervised
learning algorithm to incrementally update based on individual
feature vectors and coding a Mapper to perform feature extraction. In our current case, a single Mapper handles a single
training case, extracting all of the feature vectors for the case
and providing the vectors to the Reducer. The Reducer collects
the feature vectors from all of the Mappers and incrementally
updates the HMM model as new feature vectors are produced.
A ﬁnal Controller normalizes the probabilities in the HMM
(initial, transition, emission) and stores the HMM to a ﬁle. The
HMM was trained with the BRATS 2013 high-grade training
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 34, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015
Segmentation and Results:
Segmenting with the HMM
(Fig. 3) involves extracting the feature vector for each voxel in
the target case in the same manner as HMM training.Voxels from
FLAIR, T1, T1C, and T2 in a neighborhood around the voxel
of interest are organized into the feature vector and provided to
the trained HMM model. The HMM model produces a predicted
label for the feature vector. Postprocessing involved ﬁltering
out small objects and applying dilation and erosion operations
on each segmented class. Our method has been evaluated on the
BRATS2013 challenge dataset for high-grade glioma cases. We
achieve an mean accuracy (Dice score) of [59.5]% for edema and
[65.6]% for tumor in the real cases. The Map-Reduce enabled
HMM is able to train on all cases simultaneously, performing
220% faster on an 8-node cluster than on a single node. Segmentation of a single patient case takes less than 1 min.
Limitations with the current algorithm include lack of support for spatial features, neighborhood-based textural features,
and utilization of atlas-based priors, which have been shown to
improve segmentation accuracy. We are currently working on a
Decision Forest based extension to the HMM-Map Reduce algorithm to incorporate these features.
TUSTISON, WINTERMARK, DURST AND AVANTS :
ANTS AND ÁRBOLES
Description: Given the success of random forest (RF)-based
approaches in the BRATS 2012 challenge, we employed RFs
to produce a completely automated, multi-modality brain segmentation framework. However, differences from related work
include an expanded feature image set, concatenated RF modeling, and an open source implementation16 heavily dependent
on the Advanced Normalization Tools (ANTs)17 repository including its R packaging (ANTsR).18 It is the latter open source
aspect of our work which signiﬁcantly motivated our participation in BRATS 2013 as it provides a reproducible and publicly
available framework for performing such an important task in
neuroimaging .
Algorithm and Data: The workﬂow for estimating tumorbased labeling from multi-modal images involves the following
1) Symmetric multivariate template construction using
the data described in .
2) Image preprocessing:
• Windowing intensities (quantiles [0.01, 0.99]);
• N4 bias correction ;
• Rescaling intensity range to .
3) Stage 1 (GMM) processing:
• generation of feature images;
• construction of the Stage 1 RF model and probability
4) Stage 2 processing:
• generation of single-modality MAP-MRF images using
the Stage 1 RF probability images as spatial priors;
• construction of the Stage 2 RF model and labelings.
16github.com/ntustison/BRATS2013
17stnava.github.io/ANTs
18stnava.github.io/ANTsR
5) Reﬁnement of Stage 2 labelings using a heuristically-derived binary morphological processing protocol.
We used the following feature images:
• Per modality (FLAIR, T1, T1C, T2)
— First-order neighborhood statistical images: mean, variance, skewness, and entropy. Neighborhood radius
— GMM (stage 1) and MAP-MRF (stage 2) posteriors:
CSF, gray matter, white matter, necrosis, edema, nonenhancing tumor and enhancing tumor (or a subset for
the simulated data).
— GMM (stage 1) and MAP-MRF (stage 2) connected
component geometry features: distance to tumor core
label, volume, volume to surface area ratio, eccentricity,
and elongation.
— Template-based: symmetric template difference and
contralateral difference with Gaussian smoothing (
• Miscellaneous: normalized Euclidean distance based on
cerebral mask, log Jacobian image, and (T1C - T1) difference image.
Prior cluster centers for speciﬁc tissue types learned from
training data are used in the ﬁrst stage to construct multiple
GMM-based feature images . The resulting spatial priors
derived from application of the RF model for the ﬁrst stage were
used as input to an iterative
-tissue N4
Atropos MAP-MRF
segmentation protocol. These are used to create modiﬁed feature images for the second stage. ANTs registration is also
used to produce three sets of feature images: the log Jacobian
image, intensity differences between each modality of each subject and the corresponding symmetric template, and contralateral differences.
All processing was performed using the computational
cluster at the University of Virginia.19 Timing measures
(single-threaded) included
1.5 h per subject for feature image
creation with the bulk of time devoted to spatial normalization
with the symmetric template. Model construction required
2 h with prediction taking approximately 15 min per subject.
Training and Testing: Training was performed separately for
both real and simulated data and high-grade versus low-grade
tumor assessment resulting in four RF modeling/prediction
pathways. Training was limited to the 80 evaluation datasets
provided by the organizers with evaluation employing a
leave-one-out strategy for each of the four groupings.
ZHAO AND CORSO : BRAIN TUMOR SEGMENTATION
WITH MRF ON SUPERVOXELS
Algorithm and Data: For each MRI case, we ﬁrst perform
over-segmentation, which results in a set of supervoxels. We
then solve the voxel labeling problem directly on the supervoxels constraining all voxels within one supervoxel to have the
same label.
Consider a Markov random ﬁeld deﬁned over the supervoxels
. A labeling
assigns a label
to each supervoxel P,
, necrosis, edema,
19www.uvacse.virginia.edu
MENZE et al.: THE MULTIMODAL BRAIN TUMOR IMAGE SEGMENTATION BENCHMARK (BRATS)
non-enhancing tumor, enhancing tumor, cerebrospinal ﬂuid and
background (white matter and gray matter), respectively. The
energy function
is the set of supervoxels and
is the set of adjacent
supervoxels, captures the cost of a certain labeling
ﬁne the data term as
is the node class likelihood estimated by a
Gaussian mixture model and
denotes the feature of voxel ,
the intensities of
of four channels. We deﬁne the smoothness
term to capture the edge presence along the common boundary
of the two supervoxels
are two nonnegative parameter, and
is the neighborhood of
is deﬁned as
is a voxel, such that
are symmetric about .
Finally, we solve the supervoxel labeling energy minimization problem using graph cuts – .
The computing time is about 20 min for each case with
Matlab an Intel Core i7-3770K, 3.50 GHz processor and 16 GB
memory system. The most time consuming part is over-segmentation and computing
Because we use intensities directly as the feature, we compute
the standard scores to put the data in the same scale.
Training and Testing: We made a two-fold cross-validation
on high-grade and low-grade cases, respectively. We learn individual classiﬁers for the high-grade set and the low-grade set
with the same algorithm. As most other supervised methods
using intensities as the feature, the accuracy of our method depends on the standardization of intensities. Hence, our method
may fail if the case has different distribution with other cases.
In some cases, our method fails because the data is not good
enough. For example, in some cases, extraction is not good
enough to remove the whole skull (we did not try to make a
better extraction), and in some other cases, we do not have the
whole image on FLAIR channel. But our method also fails on
some good cases.
To overcome this problem, we could make a rough segmentation ﬁrst, get the normal part of the case (white matter, gray
matter, CSF), and make the intensity standardization only with
the normal part. We are working on such a method and may use
it in BRATS 2013 if it works.
ZHAO, SARIKAYA AND CORSO : AUTOMATIC BRAIN
TUMOR SEGMENTATION WITH MRF ON SUPERVOXELS
Algorithm and Data: We normalize the data and estimate the
likelihood of pixels by the registration of a 3D joint histogram.
We ﬁrst perform over-segmentation on each case, resulting in
a set of supervoxels. We then solve the voxel labeling problem
directly on the supervoxels with Markov random ﬁeld. This algorithm do not need manual input.
Pre-Processing: For each channel of each MRI case, we ﬁrst
denoise with SUSAN ; then we compute the standardized
z-scores (zero mean and unit covariance) to put the data in the
same scale, which are the feature vectors we use.
Oversegmentation of the Image With Supervoxels: In order to
obtain supervoxels of MRI scan images, we use SLIC 3D 
which generates supervoxels by clustering voxels based on their
color similarity and proximity in the image volume. RegionSize
and regularizer, the two parameters of SLIC, are 10 and 0.1,
respectively.
Segmentation With Graph Cuts on a Markov Random Field:
Consider a Markov random ﬁeld deﬁned over the supervoxels
with A labeling
is the set of adjacent supervoxels. We deﬁne the
data term as
is the node class likelihood estimated by histogram
based method and
denotes the feature of voxel . two supervoxels:
is the neighborhood of .
is deﬁned as
is a voxel, such that
are symmetric about .
Finally, we solve the labeling energy minimization problem
using graph cuts .
In this step, the key parameters
0.5 and 15, respectively.
A. Histogram Based Likelihood Estimation
Given a testing image
and a labeled training image
, we estimate the likelihood
for each voxel
with Algorithm 2.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 34, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015
We then integrate information from each training image as
Running Time: The running time is about
each case, where
is the number of cases of training data.
The most consuming part is 3D registration of histograms.
This depends on the size of the histogram and the method for
registration.
Training and Testing: We learned individual classiﬁers for
each of the four sub-problems. For each sub-problem, we use
a 2-fold cross validation for the parameters
smoothness term of MRF, however, we set
manually. We only use the training data from the BRATS
challenge.
Shortcomings: The performance of the over-segmentation
limits the accuracy of our method. To overcome this, we
could make a voxel level labeling in the supervoxels along the
boundary, after the supervoxel labeling.
ZIKIC, GLOCKER, KONUKOGLU, SHOTTON, CRIMINISI,
YE, DEMIRALP, THOMAS, DAS, JENA, AND PRICE :
CONTEXT-SENSITIVE CLASSIFICATION FORESTS FOR
SEGMENTATION OF BRAIN TUMOR TISSUES
Description: This submission is based on a classiﬁcation
forest, which is used such as to produce context-sensitive
predictions. The method is based on our work focusing on
high-grade glioma , with further technical details available
in . The context sensitivity arises from two components
in the framework. The ﬁrst one is that the forest does not
operate only on the original input images, but also on initial
patient-speciﬁc probabilities
for each tissue class
probabilities are computed at test time for each patient as
the posterior probability
on the likelihood
of the multi-channel intensity
are estimated based on
the training dataset—the likelihood by a Gaussian mixture
model, and the prior as a normalized empirical histogram.
While the initial probabilities often give reasonable rough
estimates, they are noisy and erroneous, due to use of local
intensity information only. Presenting the initial estimates
to the forest as additional input has the effect of removing
the noise and correcting some misclassiﬁcations. The second
context-inducing component is the use of context-sensitive
features for the forest (similar to , ), which capture
intensity characteristics around the point of interest. Due to the
regularizing effect of the context-sensitive forest, we did not
ﬁnd it necessary to use an explicit energy-based regularization.
We use the following preprocessing. For each patient, all
scans are afﬁnely aligned to the T1 contrast scan. We perform
inhomogeneity correction with . Instead of the standard
histogram equalization, we multiply the intensities in each
scan, such that the mean value equals 1000.
Our approach is fully automatic. The segmentation takes 1–2
min per scan (excluding pre-processing). The training of one
tree takes ca. 20 min on a single PC. The key parameters of
the method are the number of trees per forest and the maximal
tree depth. We use forests with 100 trees with maximal depth
of 20 for all challenge submissions (except the 2-class training
data, where 40 trees per forest were used). An analysis of the
parameter settings can be found in .
Method and parameter tuning were performed by a leaveone-out cross-validation on the initial BRATS 2-class training
data. The same settings were then used for all submissions.
We learn individual classiﬁers for the four sub-tasks (real/
high, real/low, sim/high, sim/low). Since we did not perform
a cross-validation to modify any parameters for the 4-class
setting, the error reported in the system for 4-class training is
based on a classiﬁer trained on all images, which explains the
high score.
The largest potential for improvement seems to be to attempt
to achieve better results for outlier patients with very low accuracy (cf. ). This might be done by using more training data,
or by taking into account further information, e.g., whether the
scan is pre or post surgery.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by the NIH NCRR (P41-
RR14075), the NIH NIBIB (R01EB013565), the Academy
(ComBrain),
Foundation
 ,
League, the Swiss Institute for Computer Assisted Surgery
(SICAS), the NIH NIBIB NAMIC (U54-EB005149), the
NIH NCRR NAC (P41-RR13218), the NIH NIBIB NAC
(P41-EB-015902), the NIH NCI (R15CA115464), the European Research Council through the ERC Advanced Grant
MedYMA 2011-291080 (on Biophysical Modeling and Analysis of Dynamic Medical Images), the FCT and COMPETE
(FCOM-01-0124-FEDER-022674), the MICAT Project , the
European Union Seventh Framework Programme under grant
agreement no. 600841, the Swiss NSF project Computer Aided
and Image Guided Medical Interventions (NCCR CO-ME),
the Technische Universität München—Institute for Advanced
Study (funded by the German Excellence Initiative and the
European Union Seventh Framework Programme under Grant
agreement 291763), the Marie Curie COFUND program of the
MENZE et al.: THE MULTIMODAL BRAIN TUMOR IMAGE SEGMENTATION BENCHMARK (BRATS)
European Union (Rudolf Mössbauer Tenure-Track Professorship to BHM).
*B. H. Menze is with the Institute for Advanced Study and Department of
Computer Science, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany, and
with the Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH, Zürich, Switzerland, and with the
Asclepios Project, Inria, Sophia-Antipolis, France, and also with the Computer
Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA.
A. Jakab is with the Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH, Zürich, Switzerland,
and also with the University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary
S. Bauer is with the Institute for Surgical Technology and Biomechanics,
University of Bern, Switzerland, and also with the Support Center for Advanced
Neuroimaging (SCAN), Institute for Diagnostic and Interventional Neuroradiology, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, Switzerland.
J. Kalpathy-Cramer is with the Department of Radiology, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston MA, USA.
K. Farahani and J. Kirby are with the Cancer Imaging Program, National
Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda MD, USA.
R. Wiest, Y. Burren, N. Porz and J. Slotboom are with the Support Center for
Advanced Neuroimaging (SCAN), Institute for Diagnostic and Interventional
Neuroradiology, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, Switzerland.
L. Lanczi is with University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary. E. Gerstner
is with the Department of Neuro-oncology, Massachusetts General Hosptial,
Harvard Medical School, Boston MA, USA.
B. Glocker is with BioMedIA Group, Imperial College, London, U.K.
T. Arbel and N. K. Subbanna are with the Centre for Intelligent Machines,
McGill University, Canada
B. B. Avants is with the Penn Image Computing and Science Lab, Department of Radiology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia PA, USA.
N. Ayache, N. Cordier, H. Delingette, and E. Geremia are with the Asclepios
Project, INRIA, Sophia-Antipolis, France.
P. Buendia, M. Ryan, and T. J. Taylor are with the INFOTECH Soft, Inc.,
Miami FL, USA.
D. L. Collins is with the McConnell Brain Imaging Centre, McGill University, Canada.
J. J. Corso, D. Sarikaya, and L. Zhao are with the Computer Science and
Engineering, SUNY, Buffalo NY, USA.
A. Criminisi, J. Shotton, and D. Zikic are with Microsoft Research, Cambridge, U.K.
T. Das, R. Jena, S. J. Price, and O. M. Thomas are with the Cambridge
University Hospitals, Cambridge, U.K.
C. Demiralp is with the Computer Science Department, Stanford University,
Stanford CA, USA.
S. Doyle, F. Vasseur, M. Dojat, and F. Forbes are with the INRIA
Rhône-Alpes, Grenoble, France, and also with the INSERM, U836, Grenoble,
C. R. Durst, N. J. Tustison, and M. Wintermark are with the Department
of Radiology and Medical Imaging, University of Virginia, Charlottesville VA
J. Festa, S. Pereira, and C. A. Silva are with the Department of Electronics,
University Minho, Portugal.
P. Golland and D. Lashkari are with the Computer Science and Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge MA
X. Guo, L. Schwartz, B. Zhao are with Department of Radiology, Columbia
University, New York, NY USA.
A. Hamamci and G. Unal are with the Faculty of Engineering and Natural
Sciences, Sabanci University, Istanbul, Turkey.
K. M. Iftekharuddin and S. M. S. Reza are with the Vision Lab, Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Old Dominion University, Norfolk,
N. M. John is with INFOTECH Soft, Inc., Miami, FL USA, and also with
the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Miami,
Coral Gables FL USA.
E. Konukoglu is with Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical
Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston
J. A. Mariz and N. Sousa are with the Life and Health Science Research
Institute (ICVS), School of Health Sciences, University of Minho, Braga, Portugal, and also with the ICVS/3B's—PT Government Associate Laboratory,
Braga/Guimaraes, Portugal.
R. Meier and M. Reyes are with the Institute for Surgical Technology and
Biomechanics, University of Bern, 3014 Bern, Switzerland.
D. Precup is with the School of Computer Science, McGill University,
Canada. and also with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department,
Ben-Gurion University, Beer-Sheva, Israel.
H.-C. Shin is from Sutton, U.K.
G. Szekely is with the Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH, Zürich, Switzerland.
M.-A. Weber is with Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, University
Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany.
D. H. Ye is with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department,
Purdue University, USA.
M. Prastawa is with the GE Global Research, Niskayuna NY, USA.
K. Van Leemput is with the Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02129 USA, and with the
Technical University of Denmark, Denmark, and also with Aalto University,