Vol.:(0123456789)
Minds and Machines 31:165–191
 
GENERAL ARTICLE
Algorithmic Fairness in Mortgage Lending: from Absolute
Conditions to Relational Trade‑offs
Michelle Seng Ah Lee1   · Luciano Floridi2
Received: 23 March 2020 / Accepted: 5 June 2020 / Published online: 9 June 2020
© The Author(s) 2020
To address the rising concern that algorithmic decision-making may reinforce discriminatory biases, researchers have proposed many notions of fairness and corresponding mathematical formalizations. Each of these notions is often presented as
a one-size-fits-all, absolute condition; however, in reality, the practical and ethical
trade-offs are unavoidable and more complex. We introduce a new approach that
considers fairness—not as a binary, absolute mathematical condition—but rather,
as a relational notion in comparison to alternative decisionmaking processes. Using
US mortgage lending as an example use case, we discuss the ethical foundations of
each definition of fairness and demonstrate that our proposed methodology more
closely captures the ethical trade-offs of the decision-maker, as well as forcing a
more explicit representation of which values and objectives are prioritised.
Keywords  Algorithmic fairness · Mortgage discrimination · Fairness trade-offs ·
Machine learning · Technology ethics
1  Introduction
Algorithms are increasingly being used to make important decisions to improve efficiency, reduce costs, and enhance personalisation of products and services. Despite
these opportunities, the hesitation around implementing algorithms can be attributed
to the risk that the algorithms may systematically reinforce past discriminatory practices, favouring some groups over others on the basis of race and gender and thereby
exacerbating societal inequalities. While human decision-making and rules-based
* Michelle Seng Ah Lee
 
Luciano Floridi
 
Department of Computer Science and Technology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
Oxford Internet Institute, University of Oxford and Alan Turing Institute, Oxford, UK
M. S. A. Lee, L. Floridi
processes are prone to their own unfair biases and inaccurate predictions, algorithms
have been subject to higher scrutiny due to their limited transparency and their scalability. A decision based on an algorithm is less transparent or explainable than a
rules-based process (e.g. if X, then Y). Whereas a human decision-maker with the
same cognitive biases may vary his or her decisions, an algorithmic decision based
on a bias is capable of perpetuating discrimination at-scale.
Credit risk evaluation is a highly regulated domain area in the United States and
has not yet widely adopted algorithmic decision-making. New financial technology
companies have started to push the boundaries by using non-traditional data such
as location, payment, and social media to predict credit risk . Even
in mortgage lending, scholars have begun to consider whether machine learning
(ML) algorithms can lead to more accurate predictions of default and whether there
is an increase in financial inclusion of those who would not have received a loan
under a simpler decision-making process . There has been a body
of established literature on how access to credit is crucial to promoting economic
growth, and exclusion from this financial access can trap individuals in poverty
without the possibility of upward mobility . Unequal access
to credit based on race and gender cripples the previously disadvantaged groups and
widens the gap in welfare.
To ensure that algorithmic predictions are “fair,” scholars have introduced numerous definitions to formalise fairness as a mathematical condition, such as equal
odds, positive predictive parity, and counterfactual fairness . This has led to attempts at differentiating
between them, such as the tutorial on “21 Definitions of Fairness and their Politics” and the article “Fairness Definitions Explained” . Others have launched technical implementations of the definitions to
produce reports on whether an algorithm passes or fails each test, such as the Aequitas tool by UChicago . The abundance of fairness definitions
has obfuscated which definition is most suitable for each use case. It is difficult to
interpret the outcomes of the various fairness tests, given that many of them are
mathematically incompatible . This is especially true in mortgage lending, where there has been a documented history of discrimination against
black borrowers. Moreover, the drivers of default on a mortgage are not well understood because various borrower and macroeconomic features, many of which are
not measured, can contribute to this outcome. These factors preclude the ability to
mathematically disentangle the proxies of default risk from proxies of race to equalise the algorithms’ predictions for black and white borrowers.
We use the complex sources of discrimination shown in mortgage lending literature as an indicative example to discuss the limitations of existing approaches
to fairness at measuring racial discrimination. The US mortgage data are used to
demonstrate a new methodology that views fairness as a trade-off of objectives—not
as an absolute mathematical condition—but in relation to an alternative decisionmaking process.
This article is organised into four sections. Section  1 discusses the complex
sources of discrimination in mortgage lending, and Sect.  2 introduces the data
and algorithms used in this article. Section 3 demonstrates some of the contextual
Algorithmic Fairness in Mortgage Lending: from Absolute…
limitations of existing definitions of fairness. Section 4 proposes a new methodology
of trade-offs between objectives.
Overall, we to show that existing approaches to fairness do not sufficiently capture the challenge of racial discrimination in mortgage lending and propose a new
methodology that focuses on relational trade-offs rather than absolute mathematical conditions. The US mortgage lending data are used as an example case study
to bring to life some of the contextual complexities. It is important to note that it is
not the purpose of this article to attempt to draw any empirical conclusions about
the presence of discrimination in mortgage lending decisions. This is not possible
with the limitations of the public data set, and past studies reviewed in Chapter 1
have already addressed this research question. The main contribution of this article
is to build on the past literature on fairness as an absolute notion to propose a new
conversation on fairness as trade-offs specific to each context. The current proliferation of fairness definitions is confounding the debate by presenting fairness as a
generalised, one-size-fits-all, and absolute goal. Without appropriate translation of
the prediction disparity into tangible outcomes, the pass/fail fairness tests do not
provide sufficient clarity on which algorithm is the best suited for a decision. This
article fills this gap by introducing a methodology that views fairness as a relative
notion and quantifies the contextual trade-offs, such that it provides the decisionmaker with clear, concrete ways in which each algorithm meets his or her objectives.
2  Discrimination in Mortgage Lending
2.1  Legal Framework for Discrimination
To contextualise the analysis of US mortgage lending data, we will focus our discussion on the US legal framework. The Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA)
requires collection and disclosure of individual-level data for lenders, including race
and gender, which allows for greater transparency, accountability, and academic
scrutiny in a domain with a history of contentious discriminatory practices. Economists have consistently shown the presence of racial discrimination in various US
mortgage markets , with the exception of a few who argue that
any inequality in outcome is driven by differences in default risk .
The controversy around what constitutes unfair lending arises in part because
some economists’ definitions are narrower than the legal definition of discrimination . There are two concepts in legal literature: disparate treatment and
disparate impact. Recently, there has been a shift in focus from disparate treatment
to disparate impact in legal decisions. According to the US Supreme Court decision
Texas Department of Housing and Community Affairs v. the Inclusive Communities
Project, disparate impact is illegal under the Fair Housing Act regardless of intent
 .
Disparate treatment can be sub-divided into taste-based discrimination and statistical discrimination. The former is the exercise of prejudicial tastes, sometimes forfeiting profit. The latter derives from using the applicant’s group (e.g. race) to estimate the credit-worthiness, given the expected difference in statistical distribution of
M. S. A. Lee, L. Floridi
credit-worthiness between groups. Disparate impact goes beyond the intent to discriminate and focuses on the outcome: any policy or practice that puts one protected
group at a disproportionate disadvantage is discriminatory.
In anti-discrimination philosophy, Cass Sunstein writes, “without good reason,
social and legal structures should not turn differences that are both highly visible
and irrelevant from the moral point of view into systematic social disadvantages”
[emphasis added] . He leaves room for reasonable justification for
outcome disparity, which is reflected in the US legal precedent: the “business necessity clause” in the US that provides an exception when the process is “an appropriate
means of ensuring that disparate-impact liability is properly limited” . In this
case, FHA loan type can be considered both a proxy for race and a proxy for default
risk. This challenge is exacerbated by the increase in use of non-traditional proxies of risk, e.g. social media and location data. Algorithms can discover patterns
in data that predict the desired outcome “that are really just preexisting patterns of
exclusion and inequality,” which cannot be resolved computationally . Finally, often “fairness” presumes that there is a ground truth in each
person’s risk. However, existing data often represent imperfect information on each
individual’s risk.
2.2  Sources of Discriminatory Bias
Lenders experience information asymmetry and are limited by the data collected in
estimating default risk of mortgage applicants. This section will show the complex
ways in which this risk may be over-estimated or underestimated, demonstrating the
need for an approach that is more conscious of the contextual sources of unfair bias.
2.2.1  Over‑Estimation of Minority Risk
There are three sources of bias that can over-estimate minority default risk: selection
bias, disparate treatment, and self-perpetuation of the selection bias. First, there is
documented discrimination preceding any data record: in the selection of the institution’s service area, in their advertising and marketing strategy . The
limited outreach in high-minority neighbourhoods reduces the likelihood of their
application, resulting in selection bias, in which borrowers with certain characteristics are over-represented in the data. The second source of bias is active disparate treatment, which includes both taste-based discrimination—exercise of prejudicial tastes, sometimes forfeiting profit—and statistical discrimination—the use of
the applicant’s group (e.g. race) to estimate credit-worthiness. Disparate treatment
against black borrowers has been demonstrated in a number of paired audit studies,
Algorithmic Fairness in Mortgage Lending: from Absolute…
in which individuals with comparable profiles but different racial backgrounds
inquire about a mortgage and record the advised loan amount, terms, and likelihood
of approval. A study in Chicago found that black applicants on average were quoted
lower loan amounts and receive less information and assistance in applying for a
mortgage . Finally, the problem of selection bias is exacerbated by
the self-perpetuation of the discrimination in the subsequent application stages. As
loans by black applicants are denied at a higher rate, the counterfactual of whether
or not they would have defaulted had their application been approved is not measured and thus unknown.
Given the resulting limitation on the data set’s external validity, lenders relying
on the data set as the ground truth risk over-estimating the risk of black borrowers
and lending only to applications similar to past successes (i.e. fully repaid loans). It
is in the lender’s financial interest to expand the volume of credit-worthy borrowers.
Building the algorithm on the flawed data set necessarily would produce both discriminatory and sub-optimal result.
2.2.2  Under‑Estimation of Minority Risk
Disparate impact goes beyond the intent to discriminate and focuses on the outcome:
any policy or practice that puts one protected group at a disproportionate disadvantage is discriminatory unless it is “consistent with business necessity” . While this is open to interpretation, several regression studies demonstrated
that black borrowers have lower approval rates for mortgage than white Americans,
which cannot be explained by other legitimate loan or borrower characteristics.
Even after controlling for a comprehensive list of all default risk, default cost, and
loan characteristics, a prominent study by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston found
that black and Hispanic borrowers are 8% more likely to be denied a loan than non-
Hispanic white borrowers . Given this disparity cannot be otherwise attributed to a business reason, it would be considered illegal.
Some scholars have argued that higher denial rates may simply be reflecting the
higher risk: because black borrowers’ default rates are higher on average than those
of white borrowers with similar features, the lenders are not discriminating based on
taste . However, this is narrower than the legal definition, as
disparate impact is illegal regardless of the motivation. These studies have also been
widely critiqued, as it is difficult to control for all possible drivers of default, and
the difference in means does not indicate an inherent difference in credit-worthiness
attributable to race .
Could the default risk be higher for black borrowers? Some have attempted to
attribute the difference to the risk derived from financial behaviour and racial differences in wealth and asset preferences. This has been refuted, as when controlling
for income and education level, the racial disparities in saving behaviour disappears
between white and black Americans . However, it is possible to imagine there could be a difference in risk due to social and historical prejudice in related
markets, which may impact credit-worthiness in an unmeasurable and unpredictable
manner. For example, if discrimination in the job market makes minority incomes
more unstable (e.g. more likely to be laid off in a restructuring), race could be the
M. S. A. Lee, L. Floridi
only possible proxy to measure this risk, which would be higher for black borrowers.
While selection bias and disparate treatment may lead a lender to overestimate the
risk of minority borrowers, market inequalities may underestimate the risk.
This structural and systematic discrimination is likely to manifest itself in the
seemingly “legitimate” features that are used to measure the borrower’s likelihood
of repayment. It would be myopic to view the potentially higher black default risk in
isolation from the intersectional discrimination faced by those already marginalised
in society and the interconnectivity of gender and racial discrimination . Indeed, mortgage discrimination based on gender and familial status may vary by the applicant’s race .
If lenders believe that the true risk is, in fact, lower for black borrowers than
can be predicted by the data set, they should actively market to and lend to more
black borrowers, expanding its customer base to minorities that are credit-worthy
but under-represented in the data set. This may reduce the reported precision of the
algorithm in the short-term, but with more information collected on these loans, the
data would move to more closely reflect their true risk. As for the risk underestimation, better proxies should be measured to estimate the unknowns, e.g. income
volatility, which may be correlated to race on aggregate but may vary within racial
groups. This points to two incentives for the lender: (1) increase in market share and
(2) more precise prediction of default risk.
2.3  Impact of Algorithms
While racial discrimination in lending has been studied for at least the past century,
there has been a more recent increase in implementation of machine learning algorithms to predict credit risk and a corresponding increase in scrutiny on whether or
not the predictions are fair. For the purpose of this article, algorithms are defined as
a process or procedures that extracts patterns from data. Algorithms discussed in
this article for mortgage lending are supervised machine learning models that use
past examples to predict an outcome. This excludes rules-based processes, such as
a scorecard, which follow a set of explicit rules pre-set by a human decision-maker
(e.g. if income > X and if loan amount < y, then approve). Algorithms can be both
fairer and more accurate than humans or rules-based processes ; however, the widespread discomfort with the use of algorithms to make decisions derives from the tension between the opportunity to more accurately predict
default and the risk of systematically reinforcing existing biases in the data, worsening inequalities at an unprecedented scale. In particular, machine learning algorithms may, without explicitly knowing an applicant’s race, be capable of triangulating racial information from a combination of the applicant and loan’s features.
Algorithms can discover patterns in data that predict the desired outcome “that
are really just preexisting patterns of exclusion and inequality,” which cannot be
resolved computationally .
While ML and non-traditional data are not currently used in the heavily regulated US mortgage lending market, recent literature has focused on whether ML
could benefit both the lenders and the potential borrowers by providing more precise
Algorithmic Fairness in Mortgage Lending: from Absolute…
default predictions. Fuster et al., for example, find that using more complex algorithms (random forest) results in an increase in loans for both white applicants and
racial minorities .
The introduction of algorithmic decision-making has revived the debate on what
it means to unfairly discriminate based on race. Human decisionmaking can be
affected by subconscious biases that are challenging to track, and policies and processes can have unexpected impact on minority groups. By contrast, algorithms are
inherently auditable in their predictions, and the testing of algorithms to see whether
they achieve the desired outcome provides an opportunity for researchers and policy-makers to define and formalise what it means to make a fair decision.
3  Methodology
3.1  Data
It is not within the scope of this paper to perform any empirical analyses on the presence of discrimination in mortgage lending decisions. There is insufficient information in the public data set to draw such conclusions. A sample is drawn from the US
mortgage lending data set to bring the analysis to life.
The data used are collected under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA)
from all lenders above a size threshold that are active in metropolitan areas (estimated to cover 90% of first-lien mortgage originations in the United States). Note
that the data set does not include the final outcome of the loan, i.e. whether or not
the individual defaulted on the loan, which is only available within the Federal
Reserve, and certain pieces of information, e.g. credit scores, are also undisclosed.
While this would limit the internal validity of any analysis assessing the drivers of
loan approval, as described above, this should not preclude the demonstration of
methodologies. The following steps were taken to facilitate the analysis:
• HMDA data from 2011 are used. Since the borrowers in 2011 experienced an
overall increase in house prices, any default risk is likely specific to the borrower
rather than reflective of a macroeconomic shock ;
• The features ‘race’ and ‘ethnicity’ are combined to distinguish between non-Hispanic White applicants and Hispanic White applicants;
• Only black and non-Hispanic White borrowers’ loan data are selected, and other
race and ethnicities are removed. Past mortgage studies have shown the greatest disparity in approval rates and treatment
between these two groups;
M. S. A. Lee, L. Floridi
• Loan records with missing data are removed, given they are from exceptional
situations only. Data points are missing for income1 and location2 in 3.2% of the
data set; and
• 50,000 accepted loans and 50,000 denied loans are randomly sampled without
replacement to avoid issues arising from the data imbalance and to facilitate the
interpretation of accuracy metrics. The true approval rate is 75.6% in the full data
set; however, a representative sample is not needed, as it is not the aim to draw
any empirical conclusions about the drivers of approval. The full data set has
92.9% white vs. black, while the sampled data has 90.7% white vs. black.
3.2  Algorithms
The objective of the lender is to predict whether the loan would be accepted or
denied. Five algorithms with varying mathematical approaches and complexity were
• Logistic regression (LR) with no regularisation
• K-nearest neighbours classification (KNN), with K = 5
• Classification and regression tree (CART)
• Gaussian Naïve Bayes (NB)
• Random forest (RF)
The goal of this article is not to provide a complete survey of algorithms to predict default, but rather, to use several algorithms to provide an indicative result to
demonstrate the practicality of a methodology. While this is far from a comprehensive list of algorithms, these five were selected to represent the most variations in
mathematical models to compare. CART was selected as a logic-based algorithm
with strong interpretability, and RF added an ensemble learning method constructing multiple decision trees through bootstrap aggregation (bagging) to reduce overfitting to the training data. Logistic regression was chosen as another interpretable
algorithm but with linear decision boundaries. K-nearest neighbours classification
is an unsupervised method relying on distance metric. The Naïve Bayes represents
a statistical approach with an explicit underlying probability model. These represent
the largest variation of mathematical approaches out of some of the most commonly
used classification algorithms .
All predictors in the feature set (Appendix) were used, with the exception of race,
sex, and minority population of the census tract area. In the US, the Equal Credit
1  Income is not recorded: (1) when an institution does not consider applicant’s income in the credit decision, (2) the application is for a multifamily dwelling, (3) the applicant is not a natural person (e.g. a
business), or (4) the loan was purchased by an institution (Source: https​://www.ffiec​.gov/hmda/gloss​ary.
2  Property address is not reported: (1) if the property address is unknown, (2) if the property is not
located in a Metropolitan Statistical Area or Division in which the institution has an office, (3) if loan is
to a small business, or (4) when the property is located in a county with a population of 30,000 or less
(Source: https​://files​.consu​merfi​nance​.gov/f/20151​1_cfpb_hmda-repor​ting-not-appli​cable​.pdf).
Algorithmic Fairness in Mortgage Lending: from Absolute…
Opportunity Act (ECOA) of 1974 prohibits credit discrimination on the basis of
race, and this would preclude lenders from including these features in the decisionmaking process. Legally, lenders are required to make lending decisions “as if they
had no information about the applicant’s race, regardless of whether race is or is not
a good proxy for risk factors not easily observed by a lender” . There
are important studies showing that the inclusion of these features may result in both
fairer and more accurate outcomes , which will be addressed
in the Sect. 4.4. With tenfold cross validation, the accuracy and standard deviation
are shown in Fig. 1.
4  Limitations of Existing Fairness Literature
To address the increasing concern that algorithms may reinforce unfair biases in the
data, scholars have introduced dozens of different notion of fairness in the past few
years. This sudden inundation of definitions prompted some researchers to attempt
to disentangle the nuanced differences between them, such as the tutorial on “21
Definitions of Fairness and their Politics” and the article “Fairness Definitions Explained” . However, they only focus on
the mathematical formalisation of each definition without addressing the broader
practical and ethical implications. Given the considerable disagreement among people’s perception of what “fairness” entails , the absolute
representation of fairness oversimplifies the measurement of unfair discrimination.
This section categorises fairness definitions into four broad groups and discusses
Fig. 1   Algorithm comparison in predicting loan approval
M. S. A. Lee, L. Floridi
their approach, ethical grounding, and limitations in the context of mortgage
4.1  Ex Post Fairness
Aligned to the legal rulings that focus on disparate impact, an ex post approach
appraises fairness based on the final outcome only, rather than intent or expectation
at the time of decision-making.
4.1.1  Group Fairness
Group fairness, or demographic parity, is a population-level metric that requires
equal proportion of outcome independent of race. This can be in absolute numbers
(in HMDA data, if 1000 black and 1000 white applicants’ loans are approved) or in
proportion to the population (e.g. of 9350 black and 90,650 white applicants, 935
black and 9065 white applicants’ loans are approved). Formally, with ̂Y as the predicted outcome and A as a binary protected attribute:
With 29% approval rate for black borrowers and 52% approval rate for white borrowers, the data set is in clear violation of the group fairness metric. It is important
to highlight that in the US, the definition of disparate impact is a variation of group
fairness. The US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) imposed a
rule that the selection rate of the protected group (black borrowers) should be at
least 80% of the selection rate of the other group (white borrowers) . Given the lenders in this sample data set have approved 52% of loans by
white applicants and 29% of loans by black applicants, the black-to-white approval
ratio is 55.8%, which is below the 80% threshold and therefore classed as having
disparate impact. Feldman et al. have formalised the approach to identifying
disparate impact, but their methodology for pre-processing the data to remove the
bias has shown instability in performance of the technique .
This rather arbitrary threshold mandates equal outcome irrespective of relative
credit-worthiness or differences in financial abilities, which is fundamentally at odds
with the attempt to make the best prediction of default risk. When there are features that are causally and strongly associated with outcome (e.g. income) but also
strongly correlated to protected group membership (e.g. race/gender), this criterion
would actively attempt to correct an existing bias, even if it results in reverse discrimination and loss in accuracy in predicting risk.
4.1.2  Equalisation of Evaluation Metrics
Equalisation of error metrics represent the notion of equality in opportunity, in
contrast to equal outcome (group fairness). Each of these attempts to formalise the
belief that the predictive accuracy should not vary between racial groups.
P( ̂Y|A = 0) = P( ̂Y|A = 1)
Algorithmic Fairness in Mortgage Lending: from Absolute…
The lender would select a metric based on the error that matters the most. The
False Positives (FP) represent lost opportunity (predicted default, but would have
repaid), and the False Negatives (FN) represent lost revenue (predicted repayment,
but defaulted). Note that in the mortgage lending use case, the True Positive (TP)
and False Positive (FP) rates are unknown. If the borrower is predicted to default,
the loan would likely be denied. This problem persists in other domains: the potential performance of an individual who was not hired and the recidivism risk of a
criminal who was not granted bail are both unknown.3
First, the following are the error rates used in the metrics, with the examples from
mortgage lending provided in the Confusion Matrix in Table 1:
• True Positive Rate (TPR) = TP/(TP + FN)
• True Negative Rate (TNR) = TN/(FP + TN)
• False Positive Rate (FPR) = FP/(FP + TN) = 1 − TNR
• False Negative Rate (FNR) = FN/(FN + TP) = 1 − TPR
• Positive Predictive Value (PPV) = TP/(TP + FP)
Some of the most commonly cited fairness definitions in this category include:
• Equal opportunity/false negative error rate balance Equal
FNR. Among applicants who are credit-worthy and would have repaid their
loans, both black and white applicants should have similar rate of their loans
being approved;
• False positive error rate balance/predictive equality :
Equal FPR. Among applicants who would default, both black and white applicants should have similar rate of their loans being denied;
Table 1   Confusion matrix
predicted default
predicted repay
total predicted defaulters predicted non-defaulters
3  Selection bias limits the lender’s ability to calculate these metrics. To counteract this, some scholars
 have used a credit scoring data and defined FN, for example, as the probability
of someone with a good credit score being incorrectly being assigned a bad credit score. While this does
not reflect the decision-making process in lending, as credit scores would have been provided by a third
party (Fair Isaac Corporation—FICO credit scores), it is a useful circumvention of the missing information.
M. S. A. Lee, L. Floridi
• Equal odds Equal TPR and FPR, meeting both of the above
conditions;
• Positive predictive parity Equal PPV. Among credit-worthy applicants, the probability of predicting repayment is the same regardless of
• Positive class balance : both credit-worthy white and
black applicants who repay their loans have an equal average probability score;
• Negative class balance both white and black defaulters
have an equal average probability score.
Below are the results, with a heatmap of the within-column values.
4.1.3  Fairness Impossibility
The higher disparity represents a more flagrant violation of the mathematical condition. Consider the logistic regression (LR) and random forest (RF) models. Fuster
et al. found, using the full HMDA 2011 data, that RF returned greater outcome disparity between black and white loan applicants than LR . This is
mostly supported in Fig. 2, as RF has higher disparity in error rates for all metrics
except PPP. PPP condition is violated if the probability of predicting repayment (and
thus loan approval) is unequal between white and black applicants who would have
repaid the loan.
This is as expected, given that equalised odds and PPP are mathematically incompatible for the proof). In addition, it has been proven
impossible to simultaneously satisfy group fairness, negative class balance, and
positive class balance . While the trade-offs between other
combinations of definitions have not been formally tested, it is clear that no model
would meet all the conditions.
Existing attempts at operationalising fairness tests, such as AI 360 Fairness by
IBM and Aequitas Project by UChicago ,
produce reports with pass/fail results of a combination of the above metrics by using
an error threshold (e.g. parity of less than 10%). Without consideration of how the
disparity translates into the use case, the thresholds set are rather arbitrary.
Fig. 2   Heatmap table: results of fairness tests (% difference)
Algorithmic Fairness in Mortgage Lending: from Absolute…
Given that many of these metrics are mathematically incompatible, it is difficult
to interpret the trade-offs between the fairness conditions. Is a 30 percentage point
decrease in positive predictive parity (LR to RF) preferable to a 15 percentage point
decrease in negative class balance (RF to LR)? It is difficult to derive meaning from
these absolute conditions of fairness.
4.1.4  Proxies of Race and Proxies of Risk
Scholars have recently attempted to map some of these metrics to the moral and
ethical philosophical frameworks to aid in the metric selection process. However, Heidari et al. make a critical assumption that there
exists a clear delineation between features that are “irrelevant,” e.g. race, and those
that can be controlled by the individual. The mortgage market does not exist in a
vacuum; while potential borrowers can improve their credit-worthiness to a certain
extent, e.g. by building employable skills and establishing a responsible payment
history, it is difficult to isolate the features from discrimination in related markets,
historical inequalities, and the impact of their personal history. It is challenging to
imbue each definition with ethical values when the definitions do not meet the core
assumptions of the moral reasoning .
4.1.5  Existing Structural Bias
One key limitation of these fairness metrics is that they fail to address discrimination
already in the data . In another piece of work on “fairness impossibility,” Friedler et al. point out that each fairness metric requires different assumptions
about the gap between the observed space (features) vs. the construct space (unobservable variables). They conclude from their analysis that “if there is structural
bias in the decision pipeline, no [group fairness] mechanism can guarantee fairness”
 . This is supported in a critique of existing classification parity
metrics, in which the authors conclude that “to the extent that error metrics differ
across groups, that tells us more about the shapes of the risk distributions than about
the quality of decisions” . In mortgage lending, with
documented structural discrimination, these group-level metrics fail to address the
bias already embedded in the data. This problem is shared by the ex ante fairness
definitions .
4.2  Ex Ante Fairness
Some scholars have introduced metrics to disaggregate fairness, which test for each
individual prediction. This is practical for live and continuous decisionmaking, as it
returns whether a single decision is fair at that point in time.
M. S. A. Lee, L. Floridi
4.2.1  Individual Fairness
Various measures of individual fairness have been introduced, in which similar individuals should receive similar outcomes . Formally, for similar
individuals i and j:
The challenge of this approach is: how to define “similarity” that is independent
of race . Given minority borrowers were more often encouraged
to consider FHA loans, which are considered to be substantially more expensive to
finance , while the type of loan is an important consideration in
the probability of default, it is also a partial proxy for race. When the predictive
features are also influenced by protected features, designation of a measurement of
“similarity” cannot be independent of those protected features. Some scholars have
attempted to incorporate active corrections for racial inequality into metrics of similarity , but this depends heavily on the assumption that the inequality due to racial discrimination can be isolated from other sources of inequality.
4.2.2  Counterfactual Fairness
Counterfactual fairness condition is whether the loan decision is the same in the actual
world as it would be in a counterfactual world in which the individual belonged to a
different racial group . This metric posits that given a causal model
(U, V, F) with a set of observable variables V, a set of latent background variables U
not caused by V, and a set of functions F, the counterfactual of belonging to a protected
class is independent of the outcome. Where X represents the remaining attributes, A
represents the binary protected attribute, Y is the actual outcome, and ̂Y is the predicted
outcome, formally:
While this provides an elegant abstraction of the algorithm, the causal mechanisms
of a default on a mortgage is not well understood. It is also difficult to isolate the impact
of one’s race on the risk of default from the remaining loan and borrower features. In
this particular use case, pre-defining a causal model is especially challenging.
4.3  Limitations in Existing Approaches to Fairness
Existing approaches to fairness impose an absolute mathematical condition, whether
comparing outcomes between groups, similar individuals, or group error rates. They do
not account for bias embedded in the data. While these metrics are useful in quantifying the disparity, they are agnostic to the context. They have limited interpretability of
outcomes specific to each use case and are challenging to set up when the proxy for
outcome is intertwined with the proxy for race. Moreover, they only focus on the risk
for the minority group without an eye to the potential benefits of the algorithm.
̂Y(X(i), A(i)
) ≈̂Y(X(j), A(j)
P( ̂YA←a(U) = y|X = x, A = a) = P
̂YA←a0(U) = y|||X = x, A = a0 )
Algorithmic Fairness in Mortgage Lending: from Absolute…
Rather than evaluating fairness against an absolute target (e.g. outcome disparity of
0), a decision-maker may consider fairness as a relative notion, shifting the focus from
the quantification of unfairness against a formula to how the algorithm performs in
comparison to other possible algorithms. If the goal is to select the best possible algorithm, the fairness metrics may not fully embody what is “best.” In reality, a decisionmaker has several competing objectives.
While it may be impossible to remove all bias, it is possible to build an algorithm
that is fairer and more accurate than the alternative. A new approach is required that
builds on the previous fairness definitions but leverages the context-dependency of the
data available and the relational nature of whether a decision is fair. This would provide
more holistic and tangible information to the lender.
5  Proposal of Trade‑off Analysis
This section will propose an alternative approach that can address the contextual
complexity and provides a more precise proxy for what represents the “best” algorithm for the decision-maker. This provides information that cannot be derived from
the fairness analysis by assessing an algorithm’s effectiveness in achieving concrete
objectives specific to the domain area. This section will demonstrate this methodology using the US mortgage lending data set.
5.1  Operationalisation of Variables
Two of a lender’s objectives that also intersect with public interest are discussed:
increasing financial inclusion and lowering denial rate of black borrowers. An
increase in access to credit represents the lender’s growth in market share, as well
as being a global development goal due to its importance for the economy and for
individuals’ upward mobility . This is affected by the accuracy of the algorithm in predicting default (i.e.
potential revenue loss). The impact on racial minorities is important to consider to
comply with regulatory requirements, to manage reputational and ethical risks, and
to mitigate the racial bias embedded in the data.
5.1.1  Financial Inclusion
In order to estimate the impact of an algorithm on financial inclusion, the following
assumptions are made:
Assumption 1  HMDA data represent the perfect model. In other words, the loans
accepted by the HMDA lenders were repaid in full, and the loans denied would have
defaulted. Note that in reality, we would not know whether those who are denied a
loan would have defaulted; however, this information is not used in this analysis (see
definition of negative impact on minorities in Sect. 4.1.2).
M. S. A. Lee, L. Floridi
Assumption 2  There is one hypothetical lender. The HMDA data represent a multitude of US-based lenders, but this analysis will focus on a lender-level analysis.
Future work can assess the impact on a market-level in a multi-player model.
Assumption 3  The lender has a capital limit of $1 billion and gives out loans
through the following process:
1. The lender uses an algorithm to predict whether or not the loan will default;
2. The lender sorts the loans by the highest probability of repayment; and
3. The lender accepts the loans with most certain repayments until the capital limit
has been reached.
Assumption 4  The loans are either fully paid or will default, i.e. the lender gets the
full amount back, or none. This simplifies the expected return calculation by ignoring the differential interest rates and partial payments.
Assumption 5  The lender aims to maximise the expected value of the loan, which
is the accuracy of the algorithm × the loan amount. In other words, if the accuracy
of the algorithm is 60% in predicting default, and the loan is for $1 million, then
the expected value is $600,000 given there is a 60% chance of full repayment vs.
Assumption 6  There is no differentiation in terms, conditions, and interest rates
between racial groups. Different rates can be used to pricediscriminate, resulting in
unequal distribution of the benefits of financial inclusion. While this is an important
consideration for future studies, this analysis will only consider the aggregate-level
financial inclusion.
With the above assumptions, financial inclusion can be roughly estimated with
the expected value of the loans, which, when maximised, represents the lender’s
ability to give out more loans. A total expected value of $600 million represents
4000 loans of $150,000 (the median loan value in the data set).
This is a rough definition from a single lender’s perspective. While the multifaceted macroeconomic definition and measurement of financial inclusion have
been contentious, the primary objective for building an inclusive financial system
is to minimise the percentage of individuals involuntarily excluded from the market due to imperfect markets, including incomplete/imperfect information . The reduction of portfolio risk with more complete information on each
loan’s credit-worthiness can be viewed as reducing this asymmetry and improving
efficiency. Future work may revisit this definition to expand beyond the lender-level
to a market-level and focus on the improved access specifically for low-income and
high-risk applicants.
Algorithmic Fairness in Mortgage Lending: from Absolute…
5.1.2  Negative Impact on Minorities
Moving away from what is fair, what is the comparative adverse impact on black
mortgage applicants for each algorithm? This will be measured simply as the percentage of black applicants who were denied a loan under the algorithm, which is
the number of denied loans by black applicants/total number of black applicants.
Note this does not consider whether those who were denied a loan would have
defaulted. Alternative objectives may be constructed from the fairness metrics, e.g.
black-white outcome disparity (group fairness). To demonstrate this as a supplement
to the fairness metrics, we will use this raw measure of impact on potential black
borrowers.
5.2  Trade‑off Analysis
With the variables operationalised as per above, Fig. 3 shows a chart of financial
inclusion vs. negative impact on minorities. The baseline represents the outcome
at 50% accuracy (random chance) in predicting default. The error bars around each
expected value corresponds to the standard deviation in the accuracy of the algorithm in a tenfold cross-validation.
Note that the ordering of the expected value of the loans coincides with the
algorithms’ accuracies. Some algorithms are better at predicting the loan outcome than others, yet the existing fairness metrics overlook the opportunities and
customer benefit provided by a more accurate predictor, which needs to be considered in any evaluation of an algorithm. If the true relationship between default
and the input features were linear, a linear model would return the best accuracy.
However, given that defaulting on a loan is a complex phenomenon to model with
an unknown combination of potential causal factors, it is reasonable to expect that
its prediction will be better modelled by more complex (non-linear) algorithms.
Fig. 3   Trade-off: financial inclusion vs. negative impact on minorities
M. S. A. Lee, L. Floridi
Also note that overall (e.g. KNN, LR, RF), negative impact on black applicants
increases with higher algorithm accuracy. In other words, the increase in the
aggregate benefit (financial inclusion) tends to be at the expense of the welfare of
the minority and disadvantaged group. There is one notable exception: NB has a
much higher denial rates of black applicants than RF, even though its accuracy is
lower. This could suggest that NB may be overfitting to the proxies of race. This
aligns with the finding of Fuster et al. using the HMDA 2011 data: in a lending
system using random forest, the “losers” who would have received a loan under a
logistic regression algorithm who no longer qualify are predominantly from racial
minority groups, especially black .
Random forest is better in absolute terms (in both financial inclusion and impact
on minorities) than Naïve Bayes. Random Forest has 10.7 lower percentage points in
denial rates for black applicants. Given the median loan value is $150,000, moving
from NB to RF results in 368 new medianvalue loans totalling $55.27 million. The
decision is more ambiguous between CART and LR. While CART is more accurate
and results in greater financial inclusion (equivalent of $15.6 million of loans, or
103 median-value loans), CART results in a 3.8 percentage points increase in denial
rates for black loan applicants compared to LR.
This analysis reveals and quantifies the concrete stakes for the decisionmaker,
which provides additional information to the absolute fairness tests. It would enable
the lender to select the algorithm that best reflects its values and its risk appetite. Of
course, not all competing objectives can be quantified; regulatory/legal requirements
and explainability of algorithms should all also be considered. For example, RF may
be deemed unacceptable due to the relative challenge in interpretability compared
to LR. This gap may be narrowing, however, as important progress has been made
in recent years in developing model-agnostic techniques to explain machine learning algorithms’ predictions in human-readable formats . While these methods are not without their challenges in bridging the
gap between real-life and machinelearning objectives , they could be
used to help interrogate the drivers of each individual prediction regardless of model
complexity.
One of the benefits of this methodology is its flexibility. The axes can be adapted
to the domain area and the decision-maker’s interests. In other use cases, e.g. hiring or insurance pricing, the trade-off curve would look very different. Other algorithms—whether rules-based process or a stochastic model—can also be mapped on
this trade-off chart.
5.3  Proxies of Race
Why would some algorithms affect black applicants more than others? Fuster et al.
have shown that some machine learning algorithms are able to triangulate race from
other variables and features in the model, reinforcing this racial bias . This phenomenon is termed “proxy discrimination” .
Algorithmic Fairness in Mortgage Lending: from Absolute…
When a logistic regression algorithm is run to predict race instead of loan outcome with the same set of features, all features are statistically significant in their
associations with race except for: FSA/RHS-guaranteed loan type, owner occupancy
status, and property type. The following features are associated with the applicant’s
race being black: having a lower income and a lower loan amount and being from
a census tract area with low median family income, smaller number of 1–4 family
units and owner-occupied units, larger population size, and a lower tract-to-MSA/
MD income. Of the categorical features, one feature with especially high regression
coefficient is the FHA-insured loan type.
With all other categorical features set as the baseline and given the data set’s
median values for each of the continuous features, the probability of the applicant’s
race being black if his loan type is FHA-insured is 36.16%. Otherwise, the probability that he/she is black is 19.38%—a 16.78 percentage point difference. This supports the finding from the paired audit study that black applicants
tend to be referred to the more expensive FHA-insured loans.
Loan type is also statistically significant in a logistic regression to predict
loan outcome, with FHA-insured loan type being negatively associated with loan
approval probability. Therefore, having an FHA-insured loan type is both a proxy for
risk (given the higher cost) and a proxy for race. Given the statistical significance of
these features, it is clear that the applicant’s race can be inferred to a certain extent
from their combination.
This discredits the existing “fairness through unawareness” approach of lenders , which attempts to argue that non-inclusion of protected features
implies fair treatment. Some have suggested removing the proxies as well as the protected characteristics . The attempt to “repair” the proxies through
pre-processing the data to remove the racial bias has been shown to be impractical and ineffective when the predictors are correlated to the protected characteristic; even strong covariates are often legitimate factors for decisions . There is no simple mathematical solution to unfairness; the proxy
dependencies must be addressed on the systemic level . In the
case of mortgages, lenders must review their policy on why an FHA-insured loan
type may be suggested over others and how this may affect the racial distribution of
loan types.
In addition, recall that one of the key limitations of both ex post and ex ante fairness metrics is their inability to account for discrimination embedded in the data
 . Given that the proxy for risk cannot be separated from the proxies
for race, individual fairness metrics would be challenging to set up. With the proof
of past discrimination embedded in the data through the marketing, paired audit, and
regression studies, mortgage lending fairness also cannot be evaluated through simple disparity in error rates. Having a perfect counterfactual would be desirable, as it
would disentangle the complex dependencies between covariates if we had the true
underlying causal directed acylic graph. However, this is challenging to achieve in
predicting default. For this use case, the trade-off-driven approach is more appropriate than the fairness metrics.
M. S. A. Lee, L. Floridi
5.4  Triangulation of Applicant’s Race
If race can, in fact, be triangulated through the remaining loan and borrower characteristics, this implies: (1) the inclusion of race in the algorithm would likely not
make a difference in the algorithm’s accuracy, and (2) the extent to which the accuracy changes with the inclusion of race depends on the algorithm’s ability to triangulate this information. To test this, we included the race in the features to predict
loan outcome and re-ran each of the algorithms. With δij as accuracy of algorithm j
on sample i with race, the changes due to inclusion of race are plotted in Fig. 4.
Two-sample paired t-tests were run on the accuracies before and after the inclusion of race, given they are from the sample cross-validation samples with an added
predictor. The results are below with * next to those that are statistically significant
at a 5% level:
• LR: t-statistic = 1.71, p-value = 0.12
• KNN: t-statistic = 0.56, p-value = 0.59
• CART: t-statistic = 2.41, p-value = 0.040*
• NB: t-statistic = − 6.22, p-value = 0.00015*
• RF: t-statistic = 4.04, p-value = 0.0029*
There is minimal difference in most algorithms’ accuracies. NB and KNN’s accuracies are, in fact, worsened by the inclusion of race, but only NB’s change is statistically significant. Inclusion of race in CART, LR, and RF positively affect the
accuracy in predicting the loan outcome, with the results of CART and RF being
statistically significant. NB results may be unstable given that its assumption that the
predictor variables are independent is violated, and including race in the feature set
results in the algorithms over-fitting to race. RF is better at handling feature dependencies and avoiding over-fitting through its bootstrapping methods , and its robustness to redundant information may explain this result.
Fig. 4   Change in algorithm accuracy after inclusion of race
Algorithmic Fairness in Mortgage Lending: from Absolute…
If, in fact, racial information is embedded in the other features, can algorithms
predict race? Each algorithm was run to predict race based on the given features,
rather than loan outcome. Given the imbalance in the race, instead of accuracy metrics, the performance of the algorithms would be best evaluated by the Receiver
Operating Characteristic (ROC) and its Area Under the Curve, which measure the
True Positive Rate and the False
Positive rate of the algorithms The ROC curves are plotted in Fig. 5. The ideal
ROC curve hugs the upper left corner of the chart, with AUC close to 1. The red
dotted line can be interpreted as random chance. In this particular data sample, it
appears that RF, KNN and NB have relatively higher AUC than LR and CART,
showing that they are better performers in predicting race with the given set of features. Further study is required to understand what types of mathematical models are
better able to predict protected characteristics and the corresponding impact on the
Given these outcomes, it is reasonable that the trade-off curve does not shift much
with the inclusion of race. Figure 6 shows the impact of adding race on the trade-off
curve. While it does tend to increase the denial rates of black applicants, the difference is small compared to the impact of algorithm selection.
The applicant’s race can be triangulated from the remaining features, highlighting
the importance of algorithm selection, which has a greater impact on the trade-off
between objectives than the inclusion of race as a predictor. The indicative results
show that some algorithms are better at triangulating race than others, which should
be explored in future studies to help inform the role of model type on the trade-offs.
Fig. 5   ROC curves of each algorithm to predict race
M. S. A. Lee, L. Floridi
In summary, the trade-off can be set up by: (1) defining and quantifying the realworld objectives into measurements, (2) building algorithms and computing relevant
metrics, (3) identifying potential proxies of protected characteristics to interrogate
whether their inclusion in the model is justifiable, and (4) selecting the algorithm
that best reflect the prioritisation of competing objectives.
Overall, the trade-off analysis reveals concrete and measurable impact of selecting an algorithm in relation to the alternatives. Given the ability of algorithms to
triangulate race from other features, the current standard approach of excluding race
is shown to be ineffective. The disentanglement of proxies for race and proxies for
loan outcome, as demonstrated through the analysis of FHA-insured loan types,
challenges the assumptions of the existing absolute fairness metrics. When there are
multiple competing objectives, this approach can provide actionable information to
the lender on which algorithm best meets them.
5.5  Limitations and Future Work
This article aimed to demonstrate the trade-off methodology within the scope of
one case study: racial bias in US mortgage lending. The analysis was limited by
the data set, which did not provide the full set of information required to mimic
the decision-making process of a lender. With additional information on default outcome, terms and conditions of the loans, credit history, profitability of the loan, etc.,
a more empirically meaningful assessment would be possible of the algorithms and
their effectiveness in meeting the lender’s goals. Despite the incomplete data, the
methodology demonstrated that it is possible to expose an interpretable and domainspecific outcome in selecting a decision-making model. The assumptions made in
the operationalisation of variables to compensate for the missing information are
mutable and removable.
Fig. 6   Trade-off with and without race
Algorithmic Fairness in Mortgage Lending: from Absolute…
This paper only begins to unravel the possibilities of the relativistic tradeoff technique, in contrast to the existing approaches to fairness in literature. Some of the
areas for future exploration include:
The change in trade-off curve based on different joint distributions between race
and default: It would be interesting to visualise the changes in the trade-offs depending
on the amount of outcome disparity between black and white borrowers in the data set.
The degree to which the increase in aggregate benefit is at the expense of the protected
group is likely related to the joint distribution between the predicted outcome and race.
Addition of other algorithm types: It is important to better understand what mathematical set-up leads an algorithm to be more affected by bias in the data. In addition,
algorithms that are post-processed to calibrate the predictions, while critiqued in their
appropriateness and efficacy , can be added to the
trade-off analysis to examine how they impact the denial rates and financial inclusion.
Generalisation to other domain areas, e.g. pricing, hiring, and criminal recidivism:
Depending on the different competing objectives in other domain areas, the variables
may change in the trade-off analysis. For example, two of the objectives in a hiring
algorithm may be increase in diversity (i.e. percentage of minority groups hired) and
an increase in performance metrics of the team. While the technique may be generalisable to other case studies, it would be useful to identify the nuances in the differences
in underlying data sets, ethical considerations, and legal and regulatory precedents.
Generalisation to other local markets While this analysis is limited to the US
context, further work should contextualise the methodology to local regional contexts, including any documented history of discriminatory practices against legally
protected groups and competing priorities in market.
Multi-player model Only one lender’s perspective was considered; regulators
and policy-makers would be interested in the market-level analysis in which all the
lenders’ decisions are aggregated. While it was assumed that the lender has the sole
authority to decide on which algorithm is the most appropriate, this may be limited
by the perspectives of customers and of the market regulators. To understand the
policy implications, multiple stakeholders’ objectives must be considered.
6  Conclusion
The one-size-fits-all, binary, and axiomatic approaches to fairness are insufficient in
addressing the complexities of racial discrimination in mortgage lending. We aimed
to introduce and demonstrate a new methodology that addresses the limitations of
existing approaches to defining fairness in algorithmic decision-making. The new
analysis views fairness in relation to alternatives, attempting to build a model that
best reflects the values of a decision-maker in the face of inevitable trade-offs.
There has been a massive proliferation of fairness definitions with only minor
variations, without a corresponding unpacking of the nuances in the assumptions
and ethical values embedded in the choice of each definition. Given the “fairness
impossibility” of many of the formalisations, despite the importance of identifying
the most suitable definition for a use case, the focus on defining fairness in a generalisable mathematical formula renders the results of the tests difficult to interpret.
M. S. A. Lee, L. Floridi
To clarify what is at stake, an approach more attentive to the complexities of the use
case could complement the fairness tests by providing more concrete information to
the decisionmaker.
We introduced a new methodology that views fairness—not as an absolute
mathematical condition—but as a trade-off between competing objectives in relation to alternatives. The goal of the decision-maker is to build an algorithm that
is better on multiple dimensions in relation to any existing process or model. By
mapping the trade-off between financial inclusion and impact on black borrowers,
a lender has access to tangible and explainable justification for selecting one algorithm over another. This can inform regulators and policy-makers on the lender’s
decision-making process and the plausible alternatives that were explored, enabling them to make concrete recommendations on what is an acceptable level of
risk in meeting each objective. While this analysis was limited to five algorithms,
any model, from rules-based credit score cards to neural networks to ensemble
models, can be added to the trade-off curve. The process can also be adapted to
decisions in other domains, such as hiring, pricing, and criminal recidivism.
The controversy of discriminatory mortgage lending predates the introduction
of algorithms for credit risk evaluation, but the latter has more recently sparked a
debate on how to formalise fairness as a mathematical condition for algorithms to
satisfy in its predictions. A key risk of algorithms is that it may reinforce existing
biases in the data, system, and society and exacerbate racial inequality. However,
algorithms are not necessarily more discriminatory than existing processes. If
implemented with caution, its auditability presents an opportunity for the market,
lenders, and customers to consider all available options within real-world constraints and define what they want from a fair system.
Funding  No funding was received for this research.
Availability of Data and Materials  Data publicly available at https​://www.consu​merfi​nance​.gov/data-resea​
rch/hmda/histo​ric-data/.
Compliance with Ethical Standards
Conflict of interest  Michelle Seng Ah Lee is employed part-time at Deloitte LLP as a Manager in Risk
Analytics. Luciano Floridi holds the following positions: Chair of the Advisory Board on Tech Ethics
within APPG on Data Analytics, UK Government. Chair of the Ethics Committee of the Machine Intelligence Garage project, Digital Catapult, UK Innovation Programme. Chair of the Data Ethics Group, The
Alan Turing Institute. Member of the UK ICO’s Technology Advisory panel. Member of the board of the
Centre for Data Ethics and Innovation. Member of the World Economic Forum’s Council on the Future
of Technology, Values, and Policy. Member of the Council of Europe’s Expert Committee on human
rights dimensions of automated data processing and different forms of artificial intelligence (MSI-AUT),
Ministers’ Steering Committee on Media and Information Society (CDMSI). Member responsible for the
Science Panel of the Commitment to Privacy and Trust in Internet of Things security (ComPaTrioTS)
Research Hub (a project funded by the British Government to work on cyber security, designing in trust,
privacy, security and resilience associated with the Internet of Things).
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons
Algorithmic Fairness in Mortgage Lending: from Absolute…
licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit 
Table of features in HMDA data, found in: https​://www.ffiec​.gov/hmdar​awdat​a/
FORMA​TS/2011H​MDACo​deShe​et.pdf (see Table 2).
Table 2   Features
Categorical
female, male, unknown, not applicable
Categorical
White, black/African American, African Indian/
Alaskan Native, Asian, Native Hawaiian/
Pacific Islander, unknown
Categorical
Hispanic, non-Hispanic
Categorical
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, Dept
of Housing and Urban Development, Federal
deposit insurance corporation, Federal
Reserve System, National Credit Union
Administration, Office of the Comptroller of
the currency
Owner occupancy
Categorical
Owner-occupied, not owner-occupied, not
applicable
Property type
Categorical
Manufactured housing, one-to-four family
Loan purpose
Categorical
Home improvement, Home purchase, Refinancing, Conventional
Categorical
Conventional, FHA insured, FSA RHS guaranteed, VA guaranteed
Loan amount
Population
Total population in the census tract
Minority population
%: percentage of minority population to total
population for tract
FFIEC median family come
In-numeric
USD Median family income in dollars for
the MSA/MD in which the tract is located
(adjusted annually by FFIEC)
Tract to MSA/MD median numeric family income
percentage
% of tract median family income compared to
MSA/MD median family income
Number of owner occupied numeric units
Number of dwellings, including individual condominiums, that are lived in by the owner
Number of 1- to 4-family numeric units
Dwellings that are built to house fewer than 5
M. S. A. Lee, L. Floridi