Item-Based Top-N Recommendation Algorithms
Technical Report
Department of Computer Science
and Engineering
University of Minnesota
4-192 EECS Building
200 Union Street SE
Minneapolis, MN 55455-0159 USA
Item-Based Top-N Recommendation Algorithms
Mukund Deshpande and George Karypis
January 20, 2003
Item-Based Top-N Recommendation Algorithms∗
Mukund Deshpande and George Karypis
University of Minnesota, Department of Computer Science
Minneapolis, MN 55455
{deshpand, }
The explosive growth of the world-wide-web and the emergence of e-commerce has led to the development of
recommender systems—a personalized information ﬁltering technology used to identify a set of N items that will
be of interest to a certain user. User-based collaborative ﬁltering is the most successful technology for building
recommender systems to date, and is extensively used in many commercial recommender systems. Unfortunately, the
computational complexity of these methods grows linearly with the number of customers that in typical commercial
applications can grow to be several millions. To address these scalability concerns item-based recommendation
techniques have been developed that analyze the user-item matrix to identify relations between the different items,
and use these relations to compute the list of recommendations.
In this paper we present one such class of item-based recommendation algorithms that ﬁrst determine the similarities between the various items and then used them to identify the set of items to be recommended. The key steps
in this class of algorithms are (i) the method used to compute the similarity between the items, and (ii) the method
used to combine these similarities in order to compute the similarity between a basket of items and a candidate recommender item. Our experimental evaluation on nine real datasets show that the proposed item-based algorithms are
up to two orders of magnitude faster than the traditional user-neighborhood based recommender systems and provide
recommendations with comparable or better quality.
∗This work was supported by NSF CCR-9972519, EIA-9986042, ACI-9982274, ACI-0133464, and by Army High Performance Computing
Research Center contract number DAAH04-95-C-0008. Related papers are available via WWW at URL: 
Introduction
The explosive growth of the world-wide-web and the emergence of e-commerce has led to the development of recommender systems . Recommender systems is a personalized information ﬁltering technology, used to either predict
whether a particular user will like a particular item (prediction problem), or to identify a set of N items that will be of
interest to a certain user (top-N recommendation problem). In recent years, recommender systems have been used in a
number of different applications , such as recommending products a customer will most
likely buy movies, TV programs, or music a user will ﬁnd enjoyable, identifying web-pages that will be of interest, or
even suggesting alternate ways of searching for information.
Various approaches for recommender systems have been developed that utilize either demographic, content, or
historical information . Collaborative Filtering (CF), is probably the most successful and widely
used techniques for building recommender systems . For each user, CF-based recommender systems use
historical information to identify a neighborhood of people that in the past have exhibited similar behavior (e.g.,
accessed the same type of information, purchased a similar set of products, liked/disliked a similar set of movies) and
then analyze this neighborhood to identify new pieces of information that will be liked by the user. We will refer to
this class of approaches as user-based recommendation algorithms.
Despite their success, CF-based recommender systems have two major limitations. The ﬁrst is related to sparsity
and the second is related to scalability . In many recommender systems, the amount of historical information for
each user and for each item is often quite limited. As a result, CF-based recommender systems cannot accurately
compute the neighborhood and identify the items to recommend–leading to poor recommendations. To address this
problem, a variety of techniques that use either dimensionality reduction or content-based software agents to
automatically generate ratings have been developed that increase the density of the datasets.
Unfortunately, nearest neighbor algorithms require computations that grows linearly with the number of users and
items. With millions of users and items, existing CF-based recommender systems suffer serious scalability problems.
One way of reducing the complexity of the nearest-neighbor computations is to cluster the users and then to either limit
the nearest-neighbor search among the users that belong to the nearest cluster or use the cluster centroids to derive
the recommendations . These approaches, even though they can signiﬁcantly speed up the recommendation
engine, they tend to decrease the quality of the recommendations. An alternate approach is to build recommendation
models that are based on the items. In these approaches, the historical information is analyzed to identify relations
between the items such that the purchase of an item (or a set of items) often leads to the purchase of another item
(or a set of items) . These approaches, since they use the pre-computed model, can quickly recommend a set of items, and have been shown to produce recommendation results that in some cases are comparable to
traditional, neighborhood-based CF recommender systems. We will refer to this class of approaches as item-based
recommendation algorithms.
In this paper we present one such class of model-based top-N recommendation algorithms. These algorithms ﬁrst
determine the similarities between the various items and then use them to identify the set of items to be recommended.
The key steps in this class of algorithms are (i) the method used to compute the similarity between the items, and
(ii) the method used to combine these similarities in order to compute the similarity between a basket of items and a
candidate recommender item. In particular, we present two different methods of computing the item-to-item similarity.
The ﬁrst method models the items as vectors in the user space, and uses the cosine measure to measure the similarity.
The second method computes the item-to-item similarities using a technique inspired by the conditional probability
between two items, extended so that it can differentiate between users with varying amounts of historical information
as well as differentiate between frequently and infrequently purchased items. We present a method of combining these
similarities that accounts for item-neighborhoods of different density, that can incorrectly bias the overall recommendation. Finally, we present a class of higher-order item-based algorithms that obtain the ﬁnal recommendations by
exploiting relations between sets of items. We experimentally evaluate our algorithms on two classes of datasets. The
ﬁrst class consisted of nine real datasets arising in various applications, whereas the second class consisted of 36 different datasets that were synthetically generated. Our experiments show that the item-to-item based algorithms are up
to two orders of magnitude faster than the traditional user-neighborhood based recommender system while achieving
comparable or substantially higher quality.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents an overview of the traditional user-based top-N
recommendation algorithms and provides a survey of various item-based algorithms. Sections 3 and 4 describe the
various phases and algorithms used in our ﬁrst- and higher-order item-based top-N recommendation system. Section 5
provides the experimental evaluation of the various parameters of the proposed algorithms and compares it against the
user-based algorithms. Finally, Section 6 provides some concluding remarks and an outline of the future research.
Background, Motivation, and Related Research
In the last ﬁve years several collaborative ﬁltering/recommender systems have been developed in the academic as well
as commercial domain. Recommender system is one of the few data mining techniques that is widely used in the
real world and is available in several commercial products. The term collaborative ﬁltering was ﬁrst coined about a
decade ago in , where it was used to describe an email ﬁltering system called Tapestry. Tapestry was designed
to ﬁlter emails received via mailing list and newsgroup postings; each user could annotate (write a comment) email
messages, these annotations were shared among a group of users. A user could ﬁlter email messages by writing
queries on these annotations. Though Tapestry allowed an individual user to beneﬁt from annotations made by other
users, hence the name collaborative ﬁltering, the system was not automated and required an individual user to write
complicated queries. The ﬁrst system to generate automated recommendations was the GroupLens system ,
it provided users with personalized recommendations on use-net postings. The recommendations for each individual
were obtained by identifying a neighborhood of similar users and recommending the articles that this group of users
found useful. An excellent survey of different recommender systems for various applications can be found in .
User-Based Collaborating Filtering
User-based collaborative ﬁltering is the most successful technology for building recommender systems to date, and is
extensively used in many commercial recommender systems. These schemes rely on the fact that each person belongs
to a larger group of similarly-behaving individuals. Consequently, items (i.e., products) frequently purchased by the
various members of the group can be used to form the basis of the recommended items. A detailed survey of different
user-based algorithms and a comparison of their performance can be found in .
Let R be an n ×m user-item matrix containing historical purchasing information of n customers on m items. In this
matrix, ri, j is one if the ith customer has purchased the jth item, and zero otherwise. Let U be the set of items that
have already been purchased by the customer for which we want to compute the top-N recommendations. We will
refer to this customer as the active customer and in order to simplify the presentation we will assume that the active
customer does not belong to the n customers stored in matrix R. User-based CF recommender systems compute the
top-N recommended items for that customer as follows.
First they identify the k most similar customers in the database. This is often done by modeling the customers
and items with the vector-space model, widely used for information retrieval . In this model each of the
n customers as well as the active customer is treated as a vector in the m-dimensional item space, and the similarity
between the active and the existing customers is measured by computing the cosine between these vectors. Once this
set of the k most similar customers have been discovered, their corresponding rows in R are aggregated to identify
the set C of items purchased by the group as well as their frequency. Using this set, user-based CF techniques then
recommend the N most frequent items in C that are not already in U (i.e., the active user has not already purchased).
Note that the frequency of the items in the set C can be computed by either just counting the actual occurrence
frequency or by ﬁrst normalizing each row of R to be of the same length (i.e., ||ri,∗||2 = 1). This latter normalization
gives less emphasis to items purchased by customers that are frequent buyers and leads to somewhat better results.
Despite the popularity of user-based CF recommender systems, they have a number of limitations related to scalability and real-time performance. The computational complexity of these methods grows linearly with the number of
customers that in typical commercial applications can grow to be several millions. Furthermore, even though the useritem matrix is sparse, the user-to-user similarity matrix is quite dense. This is because, even a few frequently purchased
items can lead to dense user-to-user similarities. Moreover, real-time top-N recommendations based on the current
basket of items, utilized by many e-commerce sites, cannot take advantage of pre-computed user-to-user similarities.
Finally, even though the throughput of user-based recommendation engines can be increased by increasing the number
of servers running the recommendation engine, they cannot decrease the latency of each top-N recommendation that
is critical for near real-time performance.
Item-Based Collaborating Filtering
To address the scalability concerns of user-based recommendation algorithms, item-based recommendation techniques
(also known as model-based) have been developed. These approaches analyze the user-item matrix to identify relations
between the different items, and then use these relations to compute the list of top-N recommendations. The key
motivation behind these schemes is that a customer will more likely purchase items that are similar or related to the
items that he/she has already purchased. Since these schemes do not need to identify the neighborhood of similar
customers when a recommendation is requested, they lead to much faster recommendation engines. A number of
different schemes have been proposed to compute the relations between the different items based on either probabilistic
approaches or more traditional item-to-item correlations.
One of the ﬁrst item based recommender system was developed by Billus et al . In this system the recommendation task was thought of as a classiﬁcation problem, in which the goal was to classify the items purchased by an
individual user into two classes like (user likes the item) and dislike (user dislikes the item). A classiﬁcation model was
built for each individual user where the items purchased by the user were thought of as the examples and the users as
the attributes; the attribute value was decided based on if the corresponding user liked/disliked the item. To reduce the
dimensionality a singular value decomposition (SVD) of user-item matrix was obtained. The neural network technique
was used for building the classiﬁcation model. The prediction on an item were obtained by constructing an example
that item and feeding it to the classiﬁer. The authors report considerable improvement over the traditional user-based
algorithms. Though this approach is quite powerful it requires building and maintaining a neural network model for
each individual user in the database, which might not be scalable to large databases.
In , Breese et al. present two item-based algorithms for computing both, predictions and top-N recommendations. The ﬁrst algorithm follows a probabilistic approach in which the users are clustered and the conditional
probability distribution of different items in the cluster is estimated. The probability that the active user belongs to a
particular cluster given the basket of items can be estimated from the clustering solution and the probability distribution
of items in the cluster. The clustering solution for this technique is estimated using the expectation maximization (EM)
principle. The second algorithm is based on Bayesian network models where each item in the database is modeled as
a node having states corresponding to the rating of that item. The learning problem consists of building a network on
these nodes such that each node has a set of parent nodes that are the best predictors for its rating. The paper contains
a detailed comparison of these two item based approaches with the user based approaches. The Bayesian networks
model outperformed the clustering model as well as the user based approaches. In proposes a recommendation
algorithm that uses dependency network instead of Bayesian networks. Though the accuracy of dependency networks
is inferior to Bayesian networks they are more efﬁcient to learn, and have a smaller memory footprint.
Agrawal et al present a graph based recommendation algorithm where the users are represented as nodes of
the graph and the edges between the nodes indicate the degree of similarity between the users. The recommendations
for a user are computed by traversing nearby nodes in a graph. The graph representation of the model allows it capture
transitive relations which cannot be captured by nearest neighbor algorithms, the authors report better performance
than the user based models. Sarwar et al present an item based recommendation algorithm speciﬁcally for computing predictions of items. The predictions are computed by computing similarities between two item vectors in the
user-item matrix. The paper discusses three similarity measures, and two techniques for aggregating predictions. The
authors report an considerable improvement in performance over the user-based algorithms.
A number of different item-based approaches have been developed that use association rules. In association
rules are used for obtaining top-N recommendations. Given a basket of items, for an active user, the association rules
are ordered based on similarity of the items making up the rule and the items in the basket. The recommendations are
computing by choosing the items present in the consequent of the top ranked association rules. The similarity between
a rule and active user’s basket is deﬁned as the product of the conﬁdence of the rule and the Euclidean distance
between items in the antecedent of association rule and the items in the user’s basket. This approach is compared
with dependency networks based recommendation algorithm described . The author further extends this approach
by ﬁrst clustering the items and then discovering association rules on these item clusters. The association rule based
algorithm outperforms the recommender system based on dependency networks , however the cosine based item
similarity technique outperforms the association rule based scheme. Lin et al propose a similar approach using
association rules, in their approach they ensure that association rules corresponding to all items in the database are
discovered. Mobasher et al also use association rules to recommend webpages to a user based on the pages visited
by that user.
Item-Based top-N Recommendation Algorithms
In this section we present a class of item-based top-N recommendation algorithms that use item-to-item similarity
to compute the relations between the items. During the model building phase, for each item j, the k most similar
items { j1, j2, . . . , jk} are computed, and their corresponding similarities {s j1, s j2, . . . , s jk} are recorded. Now, for each
customer that has purchased a set (i.e., basket) U of items, this information is used to compute the top-N recommended
items as follows. First, we identify the set C of candidate recommended items by taking the union of the k most similar
items for each item j ∈U, and removing from the union any items that are already in U. Then, for each item c ∈C
we compute its similarity to the set U as the sum of the similarities between all the items j ∈U and c, using only the
k most similar items of j. Finally, the items in C are sorted in non-increasing order with respect to that similarity, and
the ﬁrst N items are selected as the top-N recommended set.
Item Similarity
The critical step in the proposed item-based recommendation algorithm is the method used to determine the similarity between the items. In the rest of this section we describe two different classes of similarity algorithms that we
developed. One is derived from the vector-space model and the other is derived from probabilistic methods.
Cosine-Based Similarity
One way of computing the similarity between two items is to treat each item as a vector in the space of customers and
use the cosine measure between these vectors as a measure of similarity. Formally, if R is the n × m user-item matrix,
then the similarity between two items v and u is deﬁned as the cosine of the n dimensional vectors corresponding to
the vth and uth column of matrix R. The cosine between these vectors is given by
sim(v, u) = cos(⃗v, ⃗u) =
||⃗v||2||⃗u||2
where ‘·’ denotes the vector dot-product operation.
From Equation 1 we can see that the similarity between two items will be high if each customer that purchases
one of the items also purchases the other item as well. Furthermore, one of the important feature of the cosine-based
similarity is that it takes into account the purchasing frequency of the different items (achieved by the denominator in
Equation 1). As a result, frequently purchased items will tend to be similar to other frequently purchased items and
not to infrequent purchased items, and vice versa. This is important as it tends to eliminate obvious recommendations,
i.e., recommendations of very frequent items, as these items will tend to be recommended only if other frequently
purchased items are in the current basket of items.
As it was the case with the user-based recommendation algorithms, the rows of R can either correspond to the
original binary purchase information, or it can be scaled so that each row is of unit length (or any other norm), so that
to differentiate between customers that buy a small or a large number of items. Depending on how the customers are
represented, the cosine-based item similarity will be different. In the ﬁrst case, for any pair of items, each customer
will be treated equally, whereas in the second case, more importance will be given to customers that have purchased
fewer items. The motivation for the second scheme is that co-purchasing information for customers that have bought
few items tends to be more reliable than co-purchasing information for customers that buy many items, as the ﬁrst
group tends to represent consumers that are focused in certain product areas.
Conditional Probability-Based Similarity
An alternate way of computing the similarity between each pair of items v and u is to use a measure that is based
on the conditional probability of purchasing one of the items given that the other items has already been purchased.
In particular, the conditional probability of purchasing u given that v has already been purchased P(u|v), is nothing
more than the number of customers that purchase both items v and u divided by the total number of customers that
purchased u, i.e.,
P(u|v) = Freq(uv)
where Freq(X) is the number of customers that have purchased the items in the set X. Note that in general P(u|v) ̸=
P(v|u), i.e., using this as a measure of similarity leads to asymmetric relations.
One of the limitations of using conditional probabilities as a measure of similarity, is that each item v, will tend to
have high conditional probabilities to items that are being purchased frequently. That is, quite often P(u|v) is high, as
a result of the fact that u occurs very frequently and not because v and u tend to occur together. This problem has been
recognized earlier by researchers in information retrieval as well as recommendation systems . One
way of correcting this problem is to divide P(u|v) with a quantity that depends on the occurrence frequency of item
u. Two different methods have been proposed for achieving this. The ﬁrst one inspired from the inverse-document
frequency scaling performed in information retrieval systems, multiplies P(u|v) by −log2(P(u)) , whereas the
other one divides P(u|v) by P(u) .
Our experiments have shown that this scaling greatly affects the performance of the recommender system; furthermore, the optimal scaling degree is problem dependent. For these reasons, we use the following formula to compute
the similarity between two items:
sim(v, u) =
Freq(v) × (Freq(u))α ,
where α is a parameter that takes a value between 0 and 1. Note that when α = 0, Equation 2 becomes identical to
P(u|v), whereas if α = 1, it becomes similar (up to a scaling factor) to the formulation in which P(u|v) is divided by
One of the limitations of using Equation 2 is that it provides no mechanism by which to discriminate between
customers who purchase many items and customers who purchase few items. As discussed in Section 3.1.1, customers
that buy fewer items may be more reliable indicators when determining the similarity between items. For this reason
we have extended the similarity measure of Equation 2 in the following way. First we normalize each row of matrix R
to be of unit length. Then we deﬁne the similarity between items v and u as:
sim(v, u) =
∀i:ri,v >0
Freq(v) × (Freq(u))α .
The only difference between Equation 3 and Equation 2 is that instead of using the co-occurrence frequency we use the
sum of the corresponding non-zero entries of the uth column in the user-item matrix. Since the rows are normalized to
be of unit length, customers that have purchased more items will tend to contribute less to the overall similarity; thus,
giving emphasis to the purchasing decisions of the customers that have bought fewer items.
Similarity Normalization
Recall from Section 3 that given a basket of items U, the item-based top-N recommendation algorithm determines the
items to be recommended by computing the similarity of each item not in U to all the items in U and selecting the N
most similar items as the recommended set. The similarity between the set U and an item v ̸∈U is determined by
adding the similarities between each item u ∈U and v (if v is in the k most similar items of u).
One of the potential drawbacks of this approach is that the raw similarity between each item u and its k most similar
items may be signiﬁcantly different. That is, the item neighborhoods are of different density. This is especially true for
items that are purchased somewhat infrequently, since a moderate overlap with other infrequently purchased items can
lead to relatively high similarity values. Consequently, these items can exert strong inﬂuence in the selection of the
top-N items, sometimes leading to wrong recommendations. For this reason, instead of using the actual similarities
computed by the various methods described in Section 3.1, for each item u we ﬁrst normalize the similarities so that
they add-up to one. As the experiments presented in Section 5 show, this often lead to dramatic improvements in
top-N recommendation quality.
Computational Complexity
The computational complexity of the item-based top-N recommendation algorithm depends on the amount of time
required to build the model (i.e., for each item identify the other k most similar items) and the amount required to
compute the recommendation using this model.
During the model building phase we need to compute the similarity between each item v to all the other items and
then select the k most similar items. The upper bound on the complexity of this step is O(m2n), as we need to compute
m(m−1) similarities, each potentially requiring n operations. However, that actual complexity is signiﬁcantly smaller,
because the resulting item-to-item similarity matrix is extremely sparse. In our datasets, the item-to-item similarity
matrix was in general more than 99% sparse. The reason for these sparsity levels is that each customer purchases a
relatively small number of items, and the items they purchased tend to be clustered. Consequently, by using sparse
data structures to store R, and computing the similarities only between pairs of items that are purchased by at least
one customer we can substantially reduce the computational complexity.
Finally, the amount required to compute the top-N recommendations for a given basket U is given by O(k|U|),
because we need to access the k most similar items for each of the items in U, and identify the overall N most similar
Higher-Order Item-Based top-N Recommendation Algorithms
Our discussion so far has been focused on item-based top-N recommendation algorithms in which the recommendations were computed by taking into account relations between pairs of items, i.e., for each item in the active user’s
basket, similar items were determined and these similar items were aggregated to obtained the desired top-N recommendations. These schemes effectively ignore the presence of other items in the active user’s basket while computing
the k most similar items for each item. Even though this allows such schemes to be computationally efﬁcient, they can
potentially lead to suboptimal recommendations in cases in which the joint distribution of a set of items is different
from the distributions of the individual items in the set.
To solve this problem we developed item-based top-N recommendation schemes that use all combinations of items
(i.e., itemsets) up to a particular size l when determining the set of items to be recommended to a user. This is done
by extending the approach described in Section 3 as follows. During the model building phase for each combination
of items {q1, q2, . . . , qr} up to size l (i.e., r ≤l), the k most similar items { j1, j2, . . . , jk} are computed and their
corresponding similarities {s j1, s j2, . . . , s jk} are recorded. Now, for each customer that has purchased a set of items
U, we ﬁrst, identify the set C of candidate recommended items by taking the union of the k most similar items for
all itemsets of U up to size l (i.e., {q1, q2, . . . , qr} with qi ∈U and r ≤l), and removing from the union any items
that are already in U. Then, for each item c ∈C using the pre-computed k highest itemset-item similarities, we
compute its similarity as the sum of the similarities between all the itemsets of U up to size l and c. Finally, the items
in C are sorted in non-increasing order with respect to that similarity, and the ﬁrst N items are selected as the top-N
recommended set.
Essentially, in this approach, during model building instead of determining the k most similar items only for each
individual item, we do so for all possible itemsets up to a particular size l. During the recommendation time, we
combine these sets of k item-neighborhoods not just for individual items, but for all itemsets up to size l that are
present in the active user’s basket. We will refer to the parameter l as the order of the item-based model, and we will
refer to this class of item-based top-N recommendation algorithms as the interpolated higher-order models. Note
that when l = 1, the above scheme becomes identical to the one described in Section 3 and for this reason we will
sometimes refer to it as the ﬁrst-order model. Note that the name interpolated was motivated by the interpolated
Markov models used in DNA sequence analysis and is used to indicate that the ﬁnal predictions are computed by
combining models that use itemsets of different size (i.e., the ﬁnal solution is an interpolation of predictions computed
by models that use one, two, . . ., up to l itemsets).
Itemset-Item Similarity
As it was the case with the ﬁrst-order model, the key step in the proposed higher-order item-based top-N recommendation algorithm is the method used to determine the similarity between an itemset and the various items of the
dataset. In our scheme these similarities are computed by using relative straightforward extensions of the cosine- and
conditional-probability-based approaches described in Section 3.1.
Speciﬁcally, the similarity between an itemset {q1, q2, . . . , qr} and an other item u is computed as follows. In the
case of the cosine-based approach, we ﬁrst construct an n-element vector ⃗v such that
if at least one of the ⃗q j(i) = 0 for j = 1, 2, . . . ,r,
|| ⃗q j||2 ,
otherwise.
Essentially, ⃗v is the sum of the individual unit-length normalized item-vectors of the items in the itemset with the
added constraint that if a particular row of the matrix does not contain all r items will be set to zero. Using this vector,
the cosine similarity between the itemset represented by ⃗v and the item u is computed using Equation 1. In the case
of the conditional-probability-based approach, the similarity is computed using an approach similar to Equation 3 as
sim({q1, q2, . . . , qr}, u) =
∀i:ri,q j >0,forj=1,2,...,r
Freq({q1, q2, . . . , qr}) × (Freq(u))α .
Note that Freq({q1, q2, . . . , qr}) is the number of rows in the matrix that contain all the items in the set. Also, since
the rows of the user-item matrix R have been normalized to be of unit length, ri,q1 = ri,q2 = · · · = ri,qr .
Practical Considerations
Unfortunately, the higher-order item-based models described in the previous section are not computationally feasible
because the model parameters that we need to compute and store (i.e., the k most similar items of the various itemsets)
grows exponentially with the order of the model. Moreover, for most datasets, the occurrence frequency of many
of these itemsets will be either zero or very small making it impossible to accurately estimate the k most similar
items for each itemset. For this reason, our higher-order algorithms do not compute and store the itemset-to-item
similarities for all itemsets, but only for those itemsets that occur a sufﬁciently large number of times in the user-item
matrix R. In particular, using the notion of frequent itemsets developed by the data mining community, we use
computationally efﬁcient algorithms to ﬁnd all frequent itemsets up to size l that occur in σ% of the
rows (i.e., transactions), and compute the k most similar other items only for these frequent itemsets. Note that the
threshold σ is commonly referred to as the minimum support constraint.
This frequent-itemset based approach solves the issues associated with computational complexity, but introduces
two new problems. First, we need to develop a method that can be used to select the value of the minimum support
constraint. A high value will result in a higher-order scheme that uses very few itemsets, whereas a low value may
lead to an exponentially large number of itemsets. Unfortunately, there are no good ways to a priori select the value
of support, and may require extensive experimentation to obtain a good balance between computational efﬁciency and
top-N recommendation quality.
Second, since our higher-order models now contain information only about a small subset of the possible itemsets,
there may be a number of itemsets that can be constructed from the items present in the active user’s basket U that are
not present in the model. One solution to this problem may be to just ignore those itemsets while computing top-N
recommendations. Such an approach is similar in spirit to some of the association rule-based top-N recommendation
algorithms that are described in the related research section (Section 2) that have been shown to actually perform worse
 than the ﬁrst-order item-based schemes described in Section 3. One of the reasons why such an approach may not
be advisable is that if we consider the contributions that each item in U makes in determining the top-N recommended
items, items that appear in frequent itemsets will tend to contribute more that items that do not. This is because, for
example, an item that is present in a size-two and a size-three frequent itemset, will have been used to determine the k
most similar items of three different contributors to the ﬁnal result (i.e., the k-most similar lists of the item itself and its
size-two and size-three itemsets). However, an item that is not present to any frequent itemset, it will only contribute
once to the ﬁnal result. This creates an asymmetry on how the different items of a user’s basket are used, that can lead
to relatively poor top-N recommendation performance.
For this reason, while computing the top-N recommendations for an active user we do not ignore any infrequent
itemsets that it contains, but use information from the ﬁrst-order model to derive an approximation of its k most similar
items. This is done as follows. For each infrequent itemset {u, v, w} that is derived from U, our algorithm treats it
as a new basket, and computes a top-k recommendation using the information from the ﬁrst-order model (i.e., the k
most similar items of each item). The weights associated with these top-k recommended items are scaled to be of unit
length (for the same reasons discussed in Section 3.2) and are used as the k-most similar items for that itemset. Thus,
using such an approach our algorithm does not discriminate between items that are present in frequent itemsets and
items that are not, while still maintaining the computational advantages of building higher-order models based only on
frequent itemsets.
Experimental Results
In this section we experimentally evaluate the performance of the item-based top-N recommendation algorithms and
compare it against the performance of the user-based top-N recommendation algorithms. All experiments were performed on a Intel Xeon based workstation running at 1.7GHz, 1GBytes of memory, and Linux-based operating system.
Experimental Design and Metrics
The goal of our experiments was to evaluate the quality and performance of the top-N recommendations provided
by the various recommender algorithms. In order to evaluate the quality of the top-N recommendations we split
each of the datasets into a training and test set, by randomly selecting one of the non-zero entries of each row to
be part of the test set, and used the remaining entries for training1. Then for each customer/user we obtained the
top-N recommendations by using the items present in the training set as the basket for that customer/user. In the
case of the item-based algorithms, the top-N recommendation were computed using only the training set to build
the item similarity models. Similarly, in the case of the user-based algorithms, the nearest neighbors and top-N
recommendations were computed only using the training set.
The quality was measured by looking at the number of hits and their position within the top-N items that were
recommended by a particular scheme. The number of hits is the number of items in the test set that were also present
in the top-N recommended items returned for each customer/user. We computed two quality measures that we will
refer to them as the recall and uninterpolated precision. Both of these measures were motivated by similar measures
used to evaluate information retrieval systems , but were modiﬁed to be applicable within the context of top-N
recommendation algorithms.
If n is the total number of customers/users, the recall of the recommendation algorithm was computed as:
= Number of hits
A recall value of 1.0 indicates that the algorithm was able to always recommend the hidden item, whereas a recall
value of 0.0 indicates that the algorithm was not able to recommend any of the hidden items. One limitation of the
recall measure is that it treats all hits equally regardless of where they appear in the list of the top-N recommended
items. That is, a hit that occurs in the ﬁrst position is treated equally with a hit that occurs in the nth position. This
limitation is addressed by the uninterpolated precision measure that rewards each hit based on where it occurred in the
top-N list. If N is the number of items that are recommended, and h is the number of hits that occurred at positions
p1, p2, . . . , ph within the top-N lists (i.e., 1 ≤pi ≤N), then the uninterpolated precision or UIP for short is equal to
That is, hits that occur earlier in the top-N lists are weighted higher than hits that occur later in the list. The highest
value of UIP is equal to the recall and occurs when all the hits occur in the ﬁrst position, whereas the lowest value of
the UIP is equal to Recall/N when all the hits occur in the last position in the list of the top-N recommendations.
In order to ensure that our results were statistically accurate, for each of the experiments we performed ten different
1Our datasets were such that each row had at least two non-zero entries.
runs, each time using a different random partitioning into training and test. The results reported in the rest of this
section are the averages over these ten trials. Finally, in all of experiments we used N = 10, as the number of items
top be recommended by the top-N recommendation algorithms.
Evaluation on Real Datasets
We evaluated the performance of the different top-N recommendation algorithms using nine different datasets whose
characteristics are shown in Table 1. For each user-item matrix R, the columns labeled “No. Rows”, “No. Columns”,
and “No. of Non-Zeros” show the number of customers/users, number of items, and total number of transactions,
respectively. Finally, the column labeled “Density” shows the percentage of non-zero entries in the user-item matrix,
and the column labeled “Avg. Basket Size” shows that average number of items in each transaction.
No. Columns
No. NonZeros
Avg. Basket Size
Table1: The characteristics of the various datasets used in evaluating the top-N recommendation algorithms.
The catalog1, catalog2, and catalog3 datasets correspond to the catalog purchasing transactions of two major mailorder catalog retailer. Note that catalog1 and catalog3 correspond to the same set of transactions, but they differ
on what constitutes an item. The items of the catalog3 dataset correspond to individual SKU numbers, whereas the
items of the catalog1 dataset correspond to the top-level product categories, that is, a particular non-zero entry in
the user-item matrix is a transaction indicating that a particular user has purchased an item from a particular product
category. The ecommerce dataset corresponds to web-based purchasing transactions of an e-commerce site. The ccard
dataset corresponds to the store-branded credit card purchasing transactions of a major department store. The skills
dataset corresponds to the IT-related skills that are present in the resumes of various individuals and were obtained
from a major online job portal. The msweb dataset corresponds to web-pages that were accessed by different users at
Microsoft’s website and was obtained from the machine learning datasets available at UCI . For the purpose of
our experiments we used only the web-accessed that deﬁne the training set. Finally, the em and ml datasets correspond
to movie ratings and were obtained from the EachMovie and the MovieLens research projects, respectively.
Note that in our experiments, we ignored the actual ratings in these two datasets.
Effect of Similarity Normalization
Our ﬁrst experiment was designed to evaluate the effect of the similarity normalization that is discussed in Section 3.2.
Table 2 shows the recall and UIP results achieved by four different item-based recommendation algorithms. Two of
them use the cosine as the similarity function whereas the other two use the conditional probability. The difference
between each pair of algorithms is that one does not normalize the similarities (those labeled “NoSNorm’) whereas the
other normalizes them (those labeled “SNorm”). For all four algorithms the rows of the matrix were normalized so that
they are of unit length, k (the number of nearest items to use in the model) was set to 20, and a value of α = 0.5 was
used for the schemes that are based on the conditional probability-based approach. In addition, all of these schemes
correspond to ﬁrst-order item-based models.
Top-10 Recall
Conditional Probability
SNorm/NoSNorm
SNorm/NoSNorm
Top-10 UIP
Conditional Probability
SNorm/NoSNorm
SNorm/NoSNorm
Table2: The effect of the similarity normalization on the recommendation quality achieved by the ﬁrst-order cosine- and conditionalprobability-based recommendation algorithms.
Looking at the results in Table 2, we can see that the algorithms that use similarity normalization achieve better
results (either in terms of recall or UIP) compared to their counterparts that do not. To facilitate these comparisons,
we computed the relative percentage improvements achieved by the schemes that use similarity normalization over
those that do not. These results are shown in the columns of Table 2 labeled “SNorm/NoSNorm”, and the average
improvement over all nine datasets is shown in the last row of each table. As we can see, the actual improvement is
dataset and algorithm dependent. In general, the relative improvements tend to be higher for the conditional probability
based scheme than the cosine-based scheme. The performance in terms of recall of the cosine-based scheme improves
by 0% to 3.35% with an average improvement of 2.07%, whereas the performance of the conditional probabilitybased scheme improves by 0% to 21.26% with an average improvement of 7.75%. Similar trends are observed when
comparing the performance of the various algorithms using the UIP measure. Due to this performance advantage, in
the rest of our experiments we will always use similarity normalization.
Effect of Row Normalization
The second experiment was designed to evaluate the effect of row-normalization so that customers that purchase
many items will weigh less during the item similarity calculations. Table 3 shows the recall and UIP achieved by
four different item-based recommendation algorithms. Two of them use the cosine as the similarity function whereas
the other two use the conditional probability. The difference between each pair of algorithms is that one does not
normalize the rows (those labeled “NoRNorm”) whereas the other normalizes them (those labeled “RNorm”). For all
experiments k was set to 20, and for the two conditional probability-based algorithms, a value of α = 0.5 was used.
In addition, all of these schemes correspond to ﬁrst-order item-based models.
From the results in Table 3 we can see that the row-normalized version performs in general better for most datasets
for both the cosine- and the conditional probability-based schemes. The only exception is the ccard dataset for which
the cosine-based scheme that does not use row normalization leads to substantially better results. Also, as it was
the case with the similarity normalization results shown in Section 5.2.1, the improvements of row-normalization are
Top-10 Recall
Conditional Probability
RNorm/NoRNorm
RNorm/NoRNorm
Top-10 UIP
Conditional Probability
RNorm/NoRNorm
RNorm/NoRNorm
Table3: The effect of row normalization on the recommendation quality achieved by the cosine- and conditional-probability-based
recommendation algorithms.
more pronounced for the conditional probability-based scheme. The average improvement in terms of recall for all
nine datasets is 0.65% for the cosine- and 2.94% for conditional probability-based scheme. Similar observations can
be made by looking at the UIP results as well. Because of the consistent improvements achieved in the majority of the
datasets, in the rest of our experiments we will always use row normalization.
Model Size Sensitivity
Recall from Section 3 the item-based recommendations are computed using a model that utilizes the k most similar
items for each one of the different items. To evaluate the sensitivity of the different algorithms on the value of k
we performed an experiment in which we let k take the values of 10, 20, 30, 40, and 50. The recommendation
performance in terms of recall and UIP for these experiments are shown in Table 4 for the cosine- and conditional
probability-based algorithms. For both classes of algorithms we used the ﬁrst-order models and in the case of the
conditional probability-based schemes the experiments were performed using a value of α = 0.5.
As we can see from these experiments, the overall recommendation accuracy of the item-based algorithms does
tend to improve as we increase the value of k. The only exception is the catalog2 dataset for which both the recall
and the UIP tend to consistently decrease as we increase k. Overall, the average recall for the cosine-based algorithm
incrementally improves by 1.6%, 0.0%, 0.0%, and 0.1% as we vary k from 10 to 50 items; whereas in the case of
the conditional probability-based algorithm the average incremental improvements in recall are 0.4%, 0.0%, 0.1%,
and 0.1%. Similar small improvements are achieved in terms of UIP as well. These results indicate that (i) even
for small values of k the item-based recommendation algorithms provide reasonably accurate recommendations; and
(ii) increasing the value of k does not lead to signiﬁcant improvements. This is particularly important since small
values of k lead to fast recommendation rates (i.e., low computational requirements) without materially affecting the
overall quality of the recommendations. Note that the diminishing incremental improvements achieved by increasing
the value of k is a direct consequence of the fact that we are only looking for 10 recommended items (i.e., N = 10).
As a result, once k is sufﬁciently large, to ensure that the various item-to-item lists have sufﬁcient common items, any
Top-10 Recall
Conditional Probability
Top-10 UIP
Conditional Probability
Table4: The recall and UIP as a function of the number of most similar items (k) used in computing the top-N recommendations
for the cosine- and conditional-probability-based recommendation algorithms.
further increases in k will not change the order of the top-N items.
Item Frequency Scaling Sensitivity
One of the parameters of the conditional probability-based top-N recommendation algorithm is the value of α used to
control the extend to which the similarity to frequently purchased/occurring items will be de-emphasized. To study
the sensitivity of the recommendation algorithm on this parameter we performed a sequence of experiments in which
we varied α from 0.0 to 1.0 in increments of 0.1. Table 5 shows the recall and UIP achieved on the various datasets for
the different values of α. For each dataset and recommendation algorithm combination, the highest value of recall and
UIP that were achieved over the different values of α is shown using a bold-faced font. Also, to facilitate comparisons,
the last row of each sub-table shows the recall and UIP achieved by the cosine-based scheme. Note that these results
were obtained using the ﬁrst-order item-based model and k = 20.
A number of interesting observations can be made by looking at the results shown in Table 5. For all datasets,
the value of α has a signiﬁcant impact on the recommendation quality, as different values of α lead to substantially
different values of recall and UIP. Despite this variability, for almost all datasets, if 0.3 ≤α ≤0.6, then the conditional
probability-based scheme achieves consistently good performance. Also note that as we increase the value of α, the
changes in the recall and UIP are fairly smooth, and follow a ∩-shaped curve. This suggests that the optimal value of
α can to be easily estimated for each particular dataset by hiding a portion of the training set and using it to ﬁnd the
value of α that leads to the highest recall or UIP. Moreover, since the values of α that lead to both the highest recall
or UIP values are consistent for most of the datasets, we can learn α that optimizes one of the two measures as it will
also lead to optimal or near-optimal performance with respect to the other measure.
A further study of the values of α that lead to the highest recall and UIP values and the properties of the various
datasets used in our experiment reveal another interesting trend. If we compare the highest recall value to the recall
value achieved for α = 0.0, we see that for catalog1, ccard, ecommerce, msweb, and catalog3, the highest value is
usually less than 3.2% better than that for α = 0.0. On the other hand, the improvement for skills, em, catalog2, and
ml ranges from 16% to 91%. Similar trends can be observed by focusing on the UIP measure. Thus, there is a well-
Top-10 Recall
Top-10 UIP
Table 5: The recall and UIP as a function of the item-frequency-based scaling achieved by the α parameter for conditionalprobability-based recommendation algorithms.
deﬁned group of datasets for which there is a clear beneﬁt in trying to optimize the value of α. Moreover, the datasets
for which we achieve signiﬁcant recall (or UIP) improvements are those datasets that according to the statistics shown
in Table 1 have some of the highest densities and the largest number of items per user.
The results in Table 5 also show how the cosine- and conditional probability-based schemes compare with each
other. From these results we can see that for all datasets and a wide range of α values the conditional probabilitybased algorithm leads to somewhat higher recalls than the cosine-based scheme. One the average, the conditional
probability-based scheme does 1.0%, 2.2%, 2.3%, and 0.2% better in terms of recall for α equal to 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, and
0.6, respectively. Furthermore, if we compare the results obtained for the optimal values of α, we can see that the
conditional probability-based algorithm does 5.7% and 5.4% better than the cosine-based scheme in terms of recall
and UIP, respectively.
Model Order Sensitivity
Our experiments so far focused on ﬁrst-order item-based top-N recommendation algorithms. However, as discussed
in Section 4, both the cosine- and the conditional probability-based schemes can be extended to higher order-models
by using frequent itemsets of different length and using an interpolating approach to combine the recommendations
performed by the different models. Table 6 shows the recall and the UIP results obtained by using such higher-order
interpolated models for both the cosine- and the conditional probability-based approaches. In particular, Table 6 shows
the results obtained by a ﬁrst-, second-, and third-order interpolated models. Note that the ﬁrst-order model results are
identical to those presented in the previous sections. One of the key parameter of higher-order models is the support
threshold (σ) that is used by the frequent pattern discovery algorithm to identify the frequent itemsets to be used in
the models. Depending on the density and the degree to which different items co-occur in the different datasets, we
used different values of the support threshold for each dataset. These values are shown in the ﬁrst column of Table 6
and were selected so that they lead to a reasonable number of frequent itemsets and that each frequent itemset has a
sufﬁciently large support to ensure the statistical signiﬁcance of the similarities that are computed between an itemset
and the remaining of the items. The actual number of frequent size-two and size-three frequent itemsets that were
discovered and used to build the interpolated second- and third-order model are shown in the columns labeled F2 and
F3, respectively. For all experiments k was set to 20, and for the conditional probability-based algorithms we used a
value of α = 0.5.
Top-10 Recall
Top-10 UIP
catalog1 (0.1%)
catalog2 (5.0%)
catalog3 (0.05%)
ccard (0.01%)
ecommerce (0.01%)
em (20.0%)
ml (10.0%)
msweb (0.1%)
skills (1.0%)
Table6: The recommendation quality as a function of the order of the model that is used.
As we can see from these results, in general, higher-order item-based models do not lead to any signiﬁcant improvements in either recall or UIP. For most datasets, the results obtained across the different schemes (i.e., 1st, 2nd,
and 3rd order models) are very similar or within less than 1% of each other. The only datasets for which higher-order
models, and the second-order model in particular, did somewhat better than the ﬁrst-order model are the skills, em, and
ml datasets. These results are shown in Table 6 using underlining and a bold-faced font. In particular, the second-order
model improved the recall in the above datasets by 1.8% to 3.2%, and the UIP by 3.3% to 6.3%. Also note that these
three datasets are also the ones that contain the most size-two and size-three frequent itemsets, suggesting that when
a particular dataset contains a sufﬁcient number of frequent itemsets, the higher-order models can improve the quality
of the top-N recommendations.
Comparison with the User-based Recommendation Algorithm
Finally, to compare the performance of our item-based recommendation algorithms with that achieved by user-based
algorithms we performed an experiment in which we computed the top-N recommendations using both the itembased and the user-based recommendation algorithms. These results are shown in Table 7 that shows the recall and
UIP achieved by different algorithms. The user-based recommendations were obtained using the algorithm described
in Section 2.1 with user-neighborhoodsof size 50, and unit length normalized rows. Furthermore, we used a similarityweighted approach to determine the frequency of each item, and we did not include neighbors that had an identical set
of items as the active item (as these neighbors do not contribute at all in the recommendation).
Table 7 includes three different sets of item-based results obtained with k = 20. The results labeled “Cosine”
correspond to the cosine-based results. The results labeled “CProb-α = 0.5” correspond to the conditional probabilitybased algorithm in which α was set to 0.5. The results labeled “CProb-α = Opt” correspond to the conditional
probability-based algorithm that uses for each dataset the value of α that achieved the highest performance in the
experiments discussed in Section 5.2.4. All the item-based results were obtained using the ﬁrst-order models. Finally,
Table 7 also includes the top-N recommendation quality achieved by the naive algorithm, labeled “Frequent”, that
recommends the N most frequent items not already present in the active user’s set of items.
From the results in Table 7 we can see that both the “Cosine” and the “CProb-α = 0.5” algorithms outperform the
user-based algorithm in four out of the nine datasets, whereas “CProb-α = Opt” outperforms the user-based scheme
in six our of the nine datasets. To facilitate the relative comparisons between the various schemes we computed the
relative percentage improvement achieved by the various item-based schemes over the user based schemes. These
results are shown in the columns labeled “Cos/User”, “CProb-α = 0.5/User”, and “CProb-α = Opt/User”. From
these results, we can see that on the average the cosine-based scheme does 1.18% and 4.24% worse than the user-based
Top-10 Recall
CProb-α = 0.5
CProb-α = Opt
CProb-α = 0.5/User
CProb-α = Opt/User
Top-10 UIP
CProb-α = 0.5
CProb-α = Opt
CProb-α = 0.5/User
CProb-α = Opt/User
Table 7: The quality of the recommendations obtained by the naive, the item-based, and the user-based recommendation algorithm.
scheme in terms of recall and UIP, respectively; the conditional probability-based scheme with α = 0.5 does 1.16%
better and 1.34% worse than the user-based scheme in terms of recall and UIP, respectively; whereas the conditional
probability-based scheme with the best choice for α does 4.59% and 1.09$ better than the user-based scheme in terms
of recall and UIP, respectively. In general, all three item-based schemes seem to do worse than the user-based scheme
for the denser datasets (e.g., skills, em, and ml), and do better for the sparser datasets (e.g., ccard, ecommerce, and
catalog3). Also the performance of the item-based schemes relative to the user-based scheme is somewhat worse when
measured in terms of UIP instead of recall. This suggests that in the case of user-based schemes the hidden items (i.e.,
hits) occur earlier in the list of top-N recommended items, even if in some cases the aggregate number hidden items
that were able to recommend (i.e., recall) is smaller than the total number recommended by the item-based schemes.
Finally, both the user- and item-based algorithms produce recommendations whose quality is substantially better than
the recommendations produced by the naive “Frequent” algorithm.
One of the advantages of the item-based algorithm is that it has much smaller computational requirements than the
user-based top-N recommendation algorithm. Table 8 shows the amount of time required by the two algorithms to
compute the top-N recommendations for each one of the nine datasets. The column labeled “ModelTime” shows the
amount of time required to build the item-based recommendation model (i.e., compute the k most similar items), the
columns labeled “RcmdTime” shows the amount of time required to compute all the recommendations for each one of
the dataset, and the columns labeled “RcmdRate” shows the rate at which the top-N recommendations were computed
in terms of recommendations/second. Note that our implementation of the user-based top-N recommendation algorithm takes advantage of the sparse user-item matrix, and uses inverted indices, in order to identify the nearest users
as quickly as possible. All the times in Table 8 are in seconds.
Looking at the results of Table 8 we can see that the recommendation rates achieved by the item-based algorithm
are 6 to 391 times higher than those achieved by the user-based algorithm. If we add the various “RcmdTime” for all
nine data sets we can see that the overall recommendation rate for the item-based algorithm is 56715 recommendations/second compared to only 930 recommendations/second achieved by the user-based algorithm. This translates to
one recommendation every 17µs for the item-based algorithm, versus 1075µs for the user-based algorithm. Also, as
User-based
Item-based
Table8: The computational requirements for computing the top-N recommendations for both the user- and item-based algorithms.
discussed in Section 3.3, the amount of time required to build the models for the item-based algorithm is quite small.
In particular, even accounting for the model building time, the item-based algorithm is still 2 to 240 times faster than
the user-based algorithm.
Evaluation on Synthetic Datasets
The performance of recommender systems is highly dependent on various characteristics of the dataset such as the
number of items, the number of users, its sparsity, and the behavioral variability of the various users in terms of
the items they buy/see. Furthermore, as the results in Section 5.2.6 have shown, the relative performance of various
top-N recommendation algorithms do not vary uniformly across different datasets, and it is quite likely that a particular scheme will outperform the rest for a particular dataset, whereas the same scheme might underperform when
the dataset characteristics are changed. This dataset-speciﬁc behavior of recommendation schemes makes it hard to
decide the recommendation scheme for a particular application. The goal of this section is to study the inﬂuence of
two key dataset characteristics, sparsity and user’s behavioral variability, on the performance of the recommendation
system and gain some insights as to which top-N recommendation algorithm is better suited depending on the characteristics of the dataset. We conduct this study on synthetically generated datasets as they provide us the ﬂexibility to
individually isolate a dataset characteristic and vary its value while keeping the other characteristics constant.
We make use of the IBM synthetic dataset generator , which is widely used to mimic the transactions in the
retailing environment. The dataset generator is based on the observation that people tend to make purchases in sets
of items. For example, if a user’s basket contains {pillow covers, sheets, comforter, milk, bread, eggs}, then it can be
thought of as made of two sets of items, the ﬁrst set consists of items {pillow covers, sheets, comforter} and the second
set is made of {milk, bread, eggs}. This set of items is referred as itemset. It is observed that the size of such itemsets
is clustered around a mean with a few large itemsets. Similarly, the size of the user’s basket is also clustered around a
mean with a few user’s making lots of purchases.
Description
IBM Symbol
Number of users
Number of items
Average size of user’s basket
15, 30, & 45
Average size of itemset
Number of itemsets
800, 1200, 1600, & 2000
Table9: Parameters taken by synthetic dataset generator
The IBM dataset generator ﬁrst creates a list of itemsets and then builds each user’s basket from these itemsets.
Some of the key parameters that are used by the generator to deﬁne the characteristic of the synthetic dataset are shown
in Table 9. The ﬁrst two parameters, n and m, determine the size of the dataset by identifying the number of customers
and the number of items (i.e., the n × m user-item matrix). The generator creates Nis itemsets whose size is governed
by a Poisson distribution having a mean of Sis. The items making up the itemset are chosen randomly with some care
take to ensure that there is some overlap in the different itemsets. After creating the itemsets to be used the dataset is
generated by creating a basket of items for each user. The size of the basket follows a Poisson distribution with mean
Su. Once the size is identiﬁed the basket is ﬁlled with itemsets, if an itemset does not ﬁt in the basket then it added to
the basket anyway in half the cases and moved to the next basket in the rest of the cases. To ensure that some itemsets
occur more frequently than the rest each itemset is assigned a weight and probability of an itemset being selected is
governed by that weight. The weights are assigned according to an exponential distribution with mean equal to one.
In addition, to create transactions with higher variability, the generator randomly changes some of the items in each
itemset as it is inserted into the transaction.
As stated earlier, in our study we evaluated the effect of the sparsity and the variability in the user’s behavior on
the overall performance of the various item- and user-based top-N recommendation algorithms. Toward this goal, we
generated 36 different datasets in which we ﬁxed n and m but we varied Su, Sis, and Nis. The range of values used
to generate the different datasets are shown in the last column of Table 9. We generated datasets of different sparsity
by increasing the average size of the user’s basket (Su) while keeping the other two parameters ﬁxed. Speciﬁcally,
we generated datasets in which each user contained 15, 30, and 45 items on the average. We generated datasets with
different user’s behavioral variability by varying the number of different itemsets (Nis) and their average size (Sis).
Assuming that Su and Sis is kept ﬁxed, by changing the number of different itemsets that can be packed to create
the various transactions, we can inﬂuence how many distinct user-groups exist in the dataset. This is because of
the following. As a result of the generation approach, the generator, on the average, will combine Su/Sis itemsets
randomly selected from the Nis itemsets to form a particular transaction. Thus, by increasing Nis we increase the
pool of possible combinations of Su/Sis itemsets and thus increase the variability (in terms of what items are included
in the user’s transactions) in the dataset. A somewhat different way of changing the variability of the dataset can be
performed by changing the average size of each itemset. In particular, if we ﬁx Su and Nis, then by increasing Sis
we decrease the number of possible itemset-combinations that can exist, since now, on the average, Su/Nis itemsets
will be included. However, because each such itemset is now larger, that affects, to some extent, the complexity of the
purchasing decision represented by that particular itemset.
Table 10 shows the recall and UIP achieved both by the user-based scheme and the ﬁrst- and second-order interpolated
item-based schemes that use either the cosine- or the conditional-probability-based similarity measure. The results for
the user-based scheme were obtained using exactly the same algorithm used in Section 5.2.6, whereas the item-based
results were obtained by using k = 20, and for each dataset we used the α value that resulted in the highest recall
value for the ﬁrst-order conditional-probability-based model. The speciﬁc values of α that were used are shown in the
column labeled “α”. Also, the second-order models were obtained by using a value of the support threshold of 0.01%
for Su = 15, 0.1% for Su = 30, and 0.5% for Su = 45. The number of frequent patterns that were discovered and
used in these models is shown in the column labeled “F2”.
The results of Table 10 provide a comprehensive comparison of the various algorithms under a wide-range of
dataset characteristics. In the rest of this section we provide an overview of some of the key trends that can be inferred
by comparing and analyzing these results.
First, the performance (either in terms of recall or UIP) of the various algorithms decreases as we increase the
number of itemsets (Nis) from 800 to 2000. This performance degradation was expected because as discussed in
Section 5.3, by increasing the number of itemsets used to generate the user-item matrix, we essentially increase the
different types of user-groups that exist in the dataset. Since, the overall size of the dataset (in terms of the number
Avg. Size of User’s Basket (Su) = 15, Sparsity = 1.4 %
Top-10 Recall (Sis = 4)
Top-10 UIP (Sis = 4)
Top-10 Recall (Sis = 6)
Top-10 UIP (Sis = 6)
Top-10 Recall (Sis = 8)
Top-10 UIP (Sis = 8)
Avg. Size of User’s Basket (Su) = 30, Sparsity = 2.8 %
Top-10 Recall (Sis = 4)
Top-10 UIP (Sis = 4)
Top-10 Recall (Sis = 6)
Top-10 UIP (Sis = 6)
Top-10 Recall (Sis = 8)
Top-10 UIP (Sis = 8)
Avg. Size of User’s Basket (Su) = 45, Sparsity = 4.2 %
Top-10 Recall (Sis = 4)
Top-10 UIP (Sis = 4)
Top-10 Recall (Sis = 6)
Top-10 UIP (Sis = 6)
Top-10 Recall (Sis = 8)
Top-10 UIP (Sis = 8)
Table10: Accuracy on different values of Su, Nis and Sis.
of users) remains ﬁxed, this makes the problem of learning accurate top-N recommendations for each user harder.
Second, as the sparsity decreases, that is Su increases from 15 to 45, the overall performance of the different schemes
decreases (assuming that Sis and Nis remains ﬁxed). We believe that this is also due to the fact that the inherent
variability in the dataset also increases, since each user now contains a larger number of itemsets.
Third, the performance of the various algorithms increases as we increase the average size of the itemsets (Sis) from
four to eight. This can be explain due to the decrease in the variability of the dataset as discussed earlier. However,
an interesting trend arises in terms of the performance of the user- and the ﬁrst-order item-based schemes. When Sis
is small, the item-based schemes consistently (and in some cases substantially) outperform the user-based scheme.
However, as Sis increases, the relative performance gap between these two classes of algorithms shrinks to the point at
which the user-based scheme outperforms the ﬁrst-order item-based schemes when Sis is eight and Nis is large . These result suggest that when there is relatively low variability and the behavior
of a user is manifested via long itemsets (e.g., purchasing patterns), user-based schemes are superior to ﬁrst-order itembased schemes. Note that the relative performance advantage of user- versus item-based schemes disappears when we
consider the second-order item-based schemes that always and substantially outperform the user-based scheme.
Fourth, comparing the various item-based schemes we can see that, as it was the case with the real datasets, the
conditional-probability-based approach consistently outperforms the cosine-based approach. Moreover, comparing
the values of α that lead to the best performance of the conditional-probability-based approach we notice a similar
trend as that described in Section 5.2.4, as larger α-values tend to work better for denser datasets. Finally, the results
of Table 10 illustrate, that for many datasets, the second-order item-based models provide a substantial performance
improvement. In many cases, the second-order models lead to improvements in the range of 50% to 80%.
Conclusions and Directions for Future Research
In this paper we presented and experimentally evaluated a class of model-based top-N recommendation algorithm
that uses item-to-item or itemset-to-item similarities to compute the recommendations. Our results showed that both
the conditional probability-based item similarity scheme and higher-order item-based models lead to recommender
systems that provide reasonably accurate recommendations that are comparable or better than those provided by traditional user-based CF techniques. Furthermore, the proposed algorithms are substantially faster; allowing real-time
recommendations independent of the size of the user-item matrix.
We believe that the top-N recommender algorithms presented in this paper can be improved by combining elements
from both the user- and item-based approaches. User-based approaches by dynamically computing a neighborhood of
similar users are better suited to provide truly personalized information. On the other hand, item-based approaches by
directly computing the similarity between items appear to compute more accurate recommendations. However, one
potential limitation of item-based approaches on very large user collections, is that the globally computed item-to-item
similarities may not be able to provide sufﬁciently degree of personalization (even when combined in the context of
basket-to-item similarity). In this case, an approach that ﬁrst identiﬁes a reasonably large neighborhood of similar
users and then using this subset to derive the item-based recommendation model may be able to combine the best of
both worlds and perform even better recommendations.