R)stering Literacy Learning
in Supportive Contexts
Annemarie Sullivan Palincsar and Laura Klenk
Young children with learning disabilities typically encounter difficulty with academic tasks
requiring intentional effort and effective use of metacognitive skills—qualities that competent
readers and writers possess. In response to these difficulties, special educators often modify literacy
instruction, isolating the "basic skills" of literacy (such as decoding and penmanship) from
meaningful reading and writing activities. Such instruction contributes to impoverished notions
of literacy and exacerbates problems of metacognition. The two research programs reported here
challenge the conventional literacy instruction provided to many young students with LD.
The programs are rooted in developmental and cognitive theory and research, as well as emergent
literacy theory. The social nature of learning is emphasized, with a focus on the role of the
teacher, the form of discourse, and the role of text in literacy instruction. Results show that
children with learning disabilities benefit from strategy instruction occurring within classroom
cultures that support collaborative discourse, the flexible application of comprehension strategies,
and appropriate, meaningful opportunities for reading and writing.
etaphors are powerful means
of describing what is, as well
as envisioning what is possible. Three metaphors provide the
foundation for this article: instruction
as scaffolding, learning as cognitive
bootstrapping, and classrooms as communities of inquiry. Specifically, we
are interested in the use of these metaphors to inform the literacy instruction
of young children who are experiencing school-related difficulty. In keeping with the theme of this special
series, the instruction that we will
describe has been informed by principles derived from cognitive, as well as
developmental, studies of learning.
We will describe two programs of research. While the first program was
specifically designed to enhance children's listening comprehension and
the second to enhance the acquisition
of written literacy, central to both programs is teaching children who are
having school-related difficulty to engage in intentional learning. We begin
with a discussion of the centrality of intentional learning to success in school.
Intentional Learning
Anyone who has spent time with
preschool children has no doubt witnessed the wonders of incidental learning, or learning that is the naturally
occurring product of the child's interaction with his or her environment. On
an excursion one gorgeous summer
day, 4-year-old Danielle observed a
row of sunflowers. Each sunflower in
the row was shorter than the one before it. "Why," she wondered aloud,
"are they different sizes?" Prompted
to think of flowers' various requirements for growth, Danielle named
water, dirt, and sunshine. "I think
they all have the same dirt, and I don't
think the water is making the difference. That's it!" she exclaimed, "the
first one got the most sun, it grew
tallest, and then it made shade on the
next one that made shade on the next
one that made shade on the next one
. . . " In many respects, the language,
conceptual understandings, social
skills, and motor skills (to cite a few examples) of young children are all acquired in the context of these everyday
occurrences and interactions. It is not
JOURNAL OF LEARNING DISABILITIES
VOLUME 25, NUMBER 4, APRIL 1992
PAGES 211-225, 229
JOURNAL OF LEARNING DISABILITIES
generally our expectation that young
children learn for the purpose of recalling or using information in systematic
ways. However, with the transition
into primary and then middle school,
there are new demands for children
to organize and structure their learning for the purpose of recalling what
has been learned and applying that information in the context of problemsolving activity. This transition has
been characterized as the shift from incidental to intentional learning .
Intentional learning, in contrast to
incidental learning, is an achievement
resulting from the learner's purposeful, effortful, self-regulated, and active
engagement. Intentional learning requires metacognitive knowledge, or
the awareness and ability to monitor
and control one's activity as a learner
 . It requires a repertoire of
strategies, or "constructions between
the child's representation of the problem (based on past understandings)
and the growing anticipation of possible actions as the child proceeds with
the task (new learning)" . And, it requires
motivation, propelled by a sense of
self-efficacy .
The demands of intentional learning
are especially intriguing when considering the learning profiles of students identified as learning disabled.
For example, we know from the longitudinal and cross-sectional studies
of Rourke , Calfee , and
Spreen that although children
identified as learning disabled did not
differ from their nonidentified peers on
assessments of cognitive ability when
they were 7 and 8 years of age, significant differences were found between
identified and nonidentified children
when they reached the age of 11 or 12.
These findings are particularly true on
verbal semantic measures. More specifically, the research conducted by
Ceci suggests that it is with purposive tasks that students identified as
learning disabled have particular difficulty. Metacognitive and strategy
deficits cannot be considered the sole
cause of learning difficulties ; however, investigations of the metacognitive knowledge and strategic activity of diverse
learners across a number of domains,
such as reading 
and composition , attest to the difficulties that young students with LD
experience in their quest to acquire
and/or display the strategic learning
behaviors that promote intentional
As a consequence of the problems
exhibited by children with learning difficulties on school-related tasks demanding intentional learning, a series
of instructional decisions is often made,
quite early in the child's school career,
that may serve to exacerbate his or her
problems. This phenomenon has been
referred to as "differential instruction"
 
and can be illustrated in the literacy domain. Children with LD frequently
have histories of poor decoding . Understandably, many
special/remedial
teachers choose to emphasize the instruction of word attack skills from
degraded texts, often at the expense
of comprehension instruction. Consequently, these children do not receive
the same instructional opportunities as
their normally achieving peers to learn
how to engage in the syntactic, semantic, and schematic analyses of text
that complement the use of graphophonemic analysis.
In addition, these children have less
opportunity to acquire the background
or content knowledge that promotes
intentional learning, including experience with and knowledge of various
text structures. Children with LD may
also have difficulty recalling and reproducing the letters of the alphabet. To
redress this situation, teachers may
limit students' experiences with writing to copying from the board and
word lists, and filling in work sheets,
precluding their opportunity to experience the communicative, informational, and creative uses of writing.
Finally, these instructional practices
are hypothesized to lead to impoverished understandings regarding the
nature of reading and writing, as children often define reading and writing
by school tasks. For example, some
children define reading as "saying the
words right and fast," and writing as
"printing the letters neatly and well
spaced." It is not difficult to imagine
ways in which these impoverished understandings regarding the nature and
demands of reading and writing can,
in turn, influence the cognitive activity
in which children engage, hence leading to problems with intentional learning. We will expand upon and illustrate the relationship between these
instructional decisions and the metacognitive and strategic knowledge of
students later in this article.
The ability to meet the cognitive and
metacognitive demands associated
with intentional learning depends on
the learner's motivation and beliefs.
Intentional learning is certainly facilitated to the extent that learners value
the goal toward which they are working, have appropriate expectations for
success in attaining this goal, and believe that the activity in which they
engage as learners is likely to influence
the outcome of their attempts. Negative orientations to learning have long
been implicated in children's schoolrelated difficulties and
have been the target of interventions
in which students not only are taught
how to engage in strategic activity,
but also are taught to change their
attributions for success and failure
 .
We have characterized students with
learning difficulties as having difficulty
with intentional learning accompanied
by impoverished understandings regarding the nature and demands of
learning, a limited repertoire of strategic approaches to learning, and negative motivational attributions and beliefs. It was this profile that prompted
the research programs that we will
describe next: reciprocal teaching, and
VOLUME 25, NUMBER 4, APRIL 1992
redefining the contexts of early literacy
* Reciprocal Teaching: Learning
Dialogues to Enhance
Text Comprehension
Reciprocal teaching (see Note 1)
refers to an instructional procedure
that takes place in a collaborative learning group and features guided practice
in the flexible application of four concrete strategies to the task of text comprehension: questioning, summarizing, clarifying, and predicting. The
teacher and group of students take
turns leading discussions regarding
the content of the text they are jointly
attempting to understand.
The text is read in segments, silently, as a read-along, or orally by the
teacher or a student, depending on the
decoding ability of the students. Following each segment, the dialogue
leader begins the discussion by asking
questions. While the students are encouraged to include in their questions
the main content of the text, they are
also encouraged to generate questions
reflective of wonderment that has been
provoked by the text. These questions
often become interesting predictions,
or springboards for further inquiry.
The other participants respond to these
questions, raise additional questions,
and, in the case of disagreement or
misunderstanding, reread the text. The
discussion leader then summarizes for
the purpose of identifying the gist of
the reading, as well as for synthesizing the reading and discussion. Once
again, there is discussion for the purpose of achieving consensus on the
summary. The third strategy, clarification, is used opportunistically for the
purpose of discussing ideas that are
ambiguous, have been misunderstood,
or are unfamiliar to the group members. Finally, the discussion leader
generates and solicits predictions
regarding upcoming content in the
text. The members base their predictions on their prior knowledge of the
topic, clues that are provided in the
text (e.g., subheadings, the structure
of the text, embedded questions in the
text), or issues that they hope the
author will address.
When reciprocal teaching is initiated,
there is considerable modeling on the
part of the teacher (generally through
the use of thinking aloud) regarding
the use of the strategies in the context of the dialogue. In addition, the
teacher provides the support necessary
to sustain each member's engagement
in the discussion. This support may be
in the form of instruction (e.g., "The
author gives us many details in this
paragraph after she states her main
point that. . ."), modeling (e.g., "The
author said earlier that there were
three primary causes of the westward
movement. We have read about two of
them and I would predict that we will
now read the third cause"), or prompting . They serve
to encourage the self-regulation and
self-monitoring that promote intentional learning . Of
course, there is nothing unique about
the strategies themselves. Historically,
the skills inherent in these strategies
have figured prominently in reading
curricula. What is unique is the context
in which these strategies are taught
during the reciprocal teaching dialogues.
The context in which these strategies
are learned is social, interactive, and
wholistic in nature . The design of this context
was influenced primarily by three theoretical principles prominent in the
work of Vygotsky . The first
principle is that the origins of all higher cognitive processes are first social,
that is, that mental functioning occurs
first between people in social interactions. Over time, what was experienced in the course of those interactions (e.g., dialogues) is internalized,
transformed, and made one's own.
The second principle is the "zone
of proximal development," which
Vygotsky used to characterize "the
distance between the actual developmental level as determined by independent problem solving and the level
of potential development as determined through problem solving under
adult guidance, or in collaboration
with more capable peers" (p. 86). Reciprocal teaching was designed to provide a zone of proximal development
in which students, with the assistance
of teachers and more knowledgeable
peers, take on increasingly greater
responsibility for an activity. The assistance provided the learner has been
compared to scaffolding, in that both
temporary and adjusted support is
provided, according to the needs of the
participants . Finally,
Vygotsky advocated that psychological
processes are acquired in contextualized, wholistic activity. Unlike reductionist approaches, in which cognitive
tasks are broken into component parts,
which are then practiced as isolated
and separate skills ,
Vygotsky urged that the integrity of
the activity be maintained so that the
learner engages in the whole enterprise. In the case of reciprocal teaching, the strategies are not broken into
component skills, nor are they practiced in isolation, out of the context of
reading for real purposes.
The majority of the research on reciprocal teaching has been conducted
in reading and listening comprehension instruction by general, remedial,
and special educators. Since 1981,
when the research program began,
nearly 300 middle school students and
400 first to third graders have participated in this research. The instruction
was designed principally for students
determined to be at risk for academic
JOURNAL OF LEARNING DISABILITIES
difficulty or already identified as
remedial or special education students.
Typically, the students in our research
fell below the 40th percentile on nationally normed measures of achievement. The students entering these
studies scored approximately 30% correct on independent measures of text
comprehension. Our criterion for success was the attainment of an independent score of 75% to 85% correct on
four out of five consecutively administered measures of comprehension,
assessing recall of text, ability to draw
inferences, ability to state the gist
of material read, and application of
knowledge acquired from the text to a
novel situation. Using this criterion,
approximately 80% of both the primary and middle school students were
judged successful, generally following
3 months of instruction. Furthermore,
these gains were observed to maintain
for up to 6 months to a year following
instruction .
In this article, for the purposes of illustrating the metaphors with which
we introduced this piece, and consistent with our focus on young children,
we will describe in some detail one
study of reciprocal teaching conducted
with first graders.
The Lessons
The participants in these lessons
were six first-grade teachers, each of
whom worked with a group of six students, five of whom were identified as
at-risk for academic difficulty, based on
teacher opinion and standardized and
informal measures of listening comprehension. For example, these children
typically scored below the 35th percentile on a standardized test of listening
comprehension—the Stanford Early
School Achievement Test .
For each teacher, there was also a
matched control group. The children
in the control group listened to the
same passages that were being used in
the discussions with the experimental
children, but responded only to questions regarding these passages, and
did not engage in discussions regarding their content.
In the typical reciprocal teaching research, the children worked with an
array of unrelated texts, drawn largely
from readers and trade magazines for
children. This selection of text provided little opportunity for the children
to acquire and use knowledge over
time. In addition, there was little cumulative reference across texts. In this
study, for the purposes of teaching
children how to acquire and achieve
ownership of new information at the
same time that they were learning how
to learn from text, the texts the children worked with covered simple science concepts related to animal survival themes, such as adaptation,
extinction, and the use of camouflage
and mimicry. These shared texts also
served to promote a learning community, as the groups explored these principles over time.
The study began with the administration of pretest measures designed to
assess comprehension as well as the
children's ability to recognize and use
the principles that were to be presented in the instructional passages.
The comprehension measure was administered by first reading a passage
to each child and then asking the child
to respond to a series of questions.
While the questions included measures
of recall and inference, they also included one question designed to test
the child's understanding of the theme
of the passage. These comprehension
measures were administered to the experimental and control children, not
only on a pre- and posttest basis, but
also throughout the intervention, generally on the following schedule: Following 2 days of dialogue on a theme,
the children were administered an assessment passage that concerned yet
another instantiation of the theme. Included in the assessments conducted
during the intervention were questions
designed to measure the child's ability to identify the analogy between the
subject of the assessment passage and
subjects that had been discussed in
class during the dialogues. For example, the assessment passage used in
conjunction with the intervention passages on the garden hunter and lady-'
bugs (within the theme of Natural Pest
Control) concerned the usefulness of
the praying mantis. To assess the students' understanding of the gist of the
passage, the teacher asked, "Why do
farmers and gardeners appreciate the
praying mantis?" To assess the children's ability to relate the analogous
information read in the assessment
passage with that presented in the instructional passage, the teacher asked,
"How is the praying mantis like the
lacewing that you learned about in
class?" The experimental and control
children attained 47% correct on those
comprehension assessments administered prior to the thematic dialogues.
Upon examination of those questions
that assessed the ability to identify the
theme of the passage, it was found that
the experimental students were successful only 29.2% of the time during
baseline. This compares with a mean
of 27.2% for the control students.
To assess the children's ability to
identify and use the analogy underlying the various topics, and to determine how this ability changed over the
course of the discussions, the teachers
presented the children with a classification task in which they were asked
to sort pictures that represented one of
two themes (e.g., protection against
enemies and adaptation/extinction).
The children were asked to sort the
pictures into two piles so that "the
ones that go together are in the same
pile" and to talk out loud as they
thought about which pile they would
put each picture into. In addition,
when the children were finished sorting, they were asked once again how
they had decided which pictures belonged together. This sorting task was
repeated three times until each theme
and its constituent subjects were
sorted. At the time of pretesting, 43%
of the sorting decisions made by the
experimental children were based on
the physical characteristics of the ob-
VOLUME 25, NUMBER 4, APRIL 1992
jects, while only 13% were made based
on the thematic similarities. The decisions of the control children were also
principally guided by physical characteristics (37% of the time), as they
sorted by theme only 14% of the time.
Following the administration of
these pretests, both the experimental
and control students participated in
three lessons designed to introduce
them to the concept of "similar/' at
both a concrete as well as an abstract
level. The experimental groups then
began their discussions. One passage
was read to the children each day, for
a total of 20 passages over 20 consecutive days of instruction. The basic format of reciprocal teaching dialogues
was used; the children and teacher
took turns leading the discussion in
which they questioned one another
about the content of a passage as it was
read in segments. In addition, with
each segment, the group summarized
the content, generated predictions
about upcoming text, and worked to
clarify ambiguous information. Because these children were not yet reading conventionally, the teachers read
the text aloud. This is an example of
"cognitive bootstrapping" , in the sense that although the
students do not yet have the skills
necessary to read text independently,
they are still provided opportunities to
learn from text, as well as about text.
The following transcript is provided
to illustrate the reciprocal teaching
procedure. The children were reading
about the snowshoe rabbit and it was
the 16th day of dialogue. The teacher
had just read a segment of text describing the season in which baby rabbits
are born and the ways in which the
mother rabbit cares for her babies.
Kam (the dialogue leader): When was
the babies born?
Teacher: That's a good question to
ask. Call on someone to answer that
Kam: Robby? Milly?
Milly: Summer.
Teacher: What would happen if the
babies were born in the winter? Let's
(Several children make a number of
responses, including: "The baby
would be very cold." "They would
need food." "They don't have no fur
when they are just born.")
Kam: I have another question. How
does she get the babies safe?
Kris: She hides them.
Kam: That's right, but something
else . . .
Teacher: There is something very unusual about how she hides them that
surprised me. I didn't know this.
Travis: They are all in a different
Teacher: Why do you think she does
Milly: Probably because I heard
another story and when they're babies
they usually eat each other or fight
with each other.
Teacher: That could be! And what
about when that lynx comes?
(Several children comment that that
would be the end of all1 the babies.)
Travis: If I was the mother, I would
hide mine, I would keep them all together.
Kris: If the babies are hidden and the
mom wants to go and look at them,
how can she remember where they
Teacher: Good question. Because she
does have to find them again. Why?
What does she bring them?
Milly: She needs to bring food. She
probably leaves a twig or something.
Teacher: Do you think she puts out a
twig like we mark a trail?
(Several children disagree and suggest
that she uses her sense of smell. One
child, recalling that the snowshoe rabbit is not all white in the winter, suggests that the mother might be able to
tell her babies apart by their coloring.)
Teacher: So we agree that the mother
rabbit uses her senses to find her
babies after she hides them. Kam, can
you summarize for us now?
Kam: The babies are born in the summer . . .
Teacher: The mother . . .
Kam: The mother hides the babies in
different places.
Teacher: And she visits them . . .
Kam: To bring them food.
Travis: She keeps them safe.
Teacher: Any predictions?
Milly: What she teaches her babies
. . . like how to hop.
Kris: They know how to hop already.
Teacher: Well, let's read and see.
When presenting the first passage
within each theme, the teacher was
urged to first determine whether or not
the children would, in the course of
their discussions, focus on the content
that represented the theme of that passage. If the children failed to do this,
then the teachers were encouraged to
make the theme of the passage explicit,
following the complete reading of it.
However, in subsequent passages related to the theme, the teachers were
asked to foster the children's recognition of the theme and information
across the texts read. The following
analogous dialogue segment illustrates
how this occurred in one group reading the passage on polar bears from the
theme Protection From Elements. This
is the fourth story that the children
have read in this theme; the previous
stories involved Eskimos, penguins,
and the hippopotamus.
The children were discussing the
first segment of the text informing
them where polar bears can be found.
The text made no mention of the other
subjects discussed in this theme, and
the information related to how the bear
protected itself from the harsh cold had
not yet been introduced. Nevertheless,
the children recognized similarities
between the information presented
thus far and information acquired in
earlier readings.
Missy (the dialogue leader): Where
do the polar bears live?
Teacher: That would be a good question to ask, wouldn't it?
Traver: They live in the snow.
Several children (in unison): Caves.
Traver: They live in a kind of cave.
Rodney: They live in Alaska like the
Eskimos do.
Traver: And the penguins.
Teacher: Good for you, you have just
pointed out something that is . . .
Traver (interrupting): They [in reference to the penguins] have an ice cave,
Rodney (interjecting an observation
that leaps across themes): And the
polar bear has fur, looks like quills [in
reference to an earlier passage about
porcupines] but it ain't quills.
Troy: [The fur] is a big glove like.
From here the children made predictions that the glove of the bear
could be compared to the layers of
clothing discussed when reading about
Outcomes of the Lessons
In discussing the outcomes of the
lessons, we will present the results of
the comprehension measures administered during and after the intervention, as well as the results of the
classification posttest. Recall that the
comprehension measures assessed
children's understanding of passages
that were thematically related but different from the passages about which
the discussions were held. During
baseline, both the experimental and
control students averaged 47% correct
on these assessments. The mean for
JOURNAL OF LEARNING DISABILITIES
the first 10 days of instruction (which
included discussions of three of the
themes) was 49.9% for the experimental groups and 37.7% for the control
groups. The mean for the second 10
days of instruction was 70.6% correct
for the experimental groups and 39.5%
for the control groups.
With regard to their ability to identify the gist of the assessment passages, following the first 10 days of
dialogues, the experimental children
were correctly identifying the theme of
the passage 45.5% of the time, while
the control students were doing so
only 14.9% of the time. Finally, the
mean for the second half of the intervention for the experimental group
was 63.9%, while for the control group
it was 10.5%.
On questions measuring the children's identification of the analogy
between the assessment passage and
an instructional passage used during
the dialogues, for the first half of the
instructional phase the experimental children achieved a mean score
of 53.1% while the control children
achieved a mean of 27%. For the second half of instruction, the experimental children achieved a mean of 76.6%
while the control children earned a
mean of 17.3%.
A second measure used to determine
the children's ability to recognize and
use the analogies inherent in both the
instructional examples and novel examples was the classification task. The
posttest classification task was administered by presenting pictures of the
animals presented during the intervention, one at a time. The children were
asked to recall information about each
subject (e.g., "This is a porcupine.
What do you remember about the porcupine?"). If the students mentioned
the theme (i.e., that porcupines have
quills that protect them from their
enemies), this response was acknowledged. If the child failed to mention
the theme, the interviewer commented, "Another interesting fact about the
porcupine is that it has spikes or quills
all over its body to protect itself from
its enemies." This procedure was repeated until piles were constituted for
each of the themes and the children
made decisions about the pile in which
each picture should be placed. Finally, the children were presented with
new exemplars, which they were once
again asked to place in a pile while explaining their decision. For example,
the yellow jacket was described as a
black and yellow flying insect that lives
in the United States and likes to eat
hookworms, which are harmful insects
that live on tobacco plants.
While the children in the control condition sorted principally by physical
characteristics and used thematic information only 14% of the time, the children in the reciprocal teaching groups
made 54% of their sorting decisions
based on thematic similarities and
based only 29% on physical traits. In
addition, when considering the sorting
of novel subjects (i.e., animals that had
not been presented in either the instructional or assessment passages),
the experimental children used underlying principles that they speculated
these animals shared, rather than
physical features, 20% more often than
did the children in the control condition.
In summary, children in the reciprocal teaching discussion groups indicated changes in their ability to understand text and identify the gist of the
passages read, as well as in their ability to recognize and apply the analogical information in the texts.
Reflections on the
Lessons and
Their Outcomes
In this section, we reflect on a few
features of the reciprocal teaching dialogues that illustrate the metaphors
we referred to earlier: teaching as scaffolding, learning as bootstrapping, and
classrooms as communities of inquiry.
These features include the form of discourse, the playfulness observed during the lessons, the role of the teacher,
and the role of the texts.
The Form of Discourse. The literature, particularly that generated by
sociolinguists and others studying
VOLUME 25, NUMBER 4, APRIL 1992
classroom interactions, offers many
illustrations as to the manner in which
true conversation among teachers and
children is thwarted. The culprits include the asymmetry of power and
knowledge between teacher and child
 , sociocultural
differences among children and teachers , and
organizational constraints in classrooms . These observations suggest that one important key
to the successful use of discourse in
classrooms is to determine ways in
which children can assume a voice and
teachers can impart a voice to them in
these dialogues.
Our examinations of the transcripts,
as well as interviews with the participating teachers, suggest that the discourse structure in these lessonsdefined principally by the use of the
four strategies (predicting, questioning, summarizing, and clarifying)—as
well as the turn-taking served these
very purposes and, hence, scaffolded
teacher/child discussion. The strategies
provided an entree for the students as
they engaged in their roles as discussion leaders. In addition, the strategies
provided a mechanism whereby the
students could collaborate. Finally,
they provided a clear focus for both
the teachers and the children in their
shared discussions.
Indications of this scaffolding include
the fact that both teachers and children
labeled the contributions they were
about to make to the conversation. For
example, on Day 2 of instruction, Ms.
Johnson announced to the students:
"All right. Listen as I make a summary/' In that same lesson, a child in
her group followed this pattern when
he interrupted the question he was
asking with the statement, "This is
my question." In addition, teachers
labeled children's contributions. For
example, on Day 3 a student asked the
teacher, "What's a suit of armor?" The
teacher's first response was, "Would
you like to have that clarified?" In
these first-grade groups, although the
labeling of the strategies dropped out
rather quickly (certainly by Day 5 for the
majority of the groups), the template
provided by the strategies continued to
be apparent; however, there was a shift
in the flexibility with which the strategies were used. Hence, if one were to
proceed through the transcripts, for
the initial days of instruction, questions were generally followed by summaries, followed by clarifications and
predictions. This, in fact, reflects the
order in which the teachers introduced
the use of the strategies.
Although it occurred at different
points in time during the intervention,
in each group there was a shift such
that the use of strategies came to be
driven by the content and the discourse
itself. It was at this point that the students began to interject predictions as
well as questions, even in the midst of
the teachers' oral reading. This shift
signaled the movement from ritualized
to principled and active use of the
strategies and dialogue .
Interestingly, this shift was experienced by both teachers and students.
For example, teachers who initially
read the segments of text with no
pauses were observed to look up from
the reading of the text at opportune
times (e.g., when they read information that confirmed the group's
predictions).
The strategies, then, provided a
means for the children to "try out"
their ideas; however, in addition, they
represented language in the form of
tools to be used, in a
public manner, to solve the problems
of understanding these texts and their
inherent themes. How the teachers induced children to use these strategies
as tools is equally important for understanding the outcomes of these discussions. This brings us to the feature of
playfulness in the dialogues.
Playfulness. Playfulness assumed
an important role in drawing students
into these discussions. For example,
Mrs. Mackey's group was about to listen to a story about the porcupine. She
began the dialogue:
Mrs. Mackey: Our first story is called
"The Porcupine." Now, we usually
predict from the title, don't we?" So,
obviously the story is going to be
about—what, Chris?
(One of the lessons one learns early on
in discussions with first graders is that
nothing is "obvious.")
Chris: A porcupine has a friend that's
a cactus and he has a girlfriend that's
another cactus.
This led to an array of predictions from
other members of the group that were
largely fantasies. We observed a considerable degree of tolerance across
teachers for these flights of fancy. Discussions with the teachers suggested
that such playfulness had an important
role in enticing young children to become engaged in the text as well as
with the strategies. How teachers responded to this playfulness differed.
On some occasions teachers provided
the children with information, for example, "Oh, what if I told you this was
a true story?" while on other occasions
the teacher would simply read the text
and allow the children to deduce such
things for themselves.
The Role of the Teacher. An additional feature that is useful in explaining the outcomes of reciprocal teaching instruction is the role of the teacher
supporting, or scaffolding, the students' engagement in the dialogues.
Griffin and Cole draw our attention to the fact that the support adults
provide in the zone of proximal development is not necessarily a matter of
amount but of kind. Indeed, our examinations of the transcripts revealed that
successful teachers called upon a broad
array of conversational devices and opportunities to support these young
children's discussions; even within
one lesson, and certainly across lessons, teachers were observed to use
cued elicitations, paraphrasing of children's contributions, choral responses,
framing of the children's responses,
selective use of praise, silence, and
more. In the classroom discourse literature, some of these devices assume a
negative connotation. For example,
cued elicitations and paraphrases are
JOURNAL OF LEARNING DISABILITIES
often associated with teacher control
and the masking, rather than bridging,
of student and teacher understanding
 . Our observations of students and teachers
engaged in dialogues, and our evaluations of the outcomes of those dialogues, suggest that each of these
devices assumes value (both negative
and positive) only when examined in
its complete context as defined by the
children, the history of the instruction,
and the text, to identify but a few of
these variables .
The Role of the Text. One important contrast between these lessons
and earlier reciprocal teaching dialogues was the use of the thematically
arranged texts. The fact that the children were working with shared texts
that constituted a usable, coherent,
and connected body of knowledge and
the fact that these texts became part of
a common knowledge base further
promoted a community of learners.
In summary, reciprocal teaching is
an instructional procedure that was
designed to supplement the ongoing
curriculum, particularly for the purpose of improving students' ability to
engage in intentional learning from
text. The focus of our most recent research continues to be intentional
learning within the literacy domain,
specifically within special education
classrooms. In the next section, we discuss ongoing research in which we are
collaborating with special education
teachers for the purpose of redefining
the literacy curriculum itself.
Redefining the Early Literacy
Curriculum of Special
Education Students
We began this phase of our research
by conducting observations in primary
grade special education classrooms
to determine both the demands as well
as the opportunities for intentional
learning in these settings (see Note 2).
The classrooms we were observing in
served children from ages 7 to 10. Each
student had been identified as learning disabled and/or emotionally impaired. The children represented a
heterogeneous group whose schoolrelated difficulties reflected an interaction among learner characteristics (for
example, physical and medical conditions), familial backgrounds (poverty,
single-parent homes), and school history (poor attendance). Seventy percent of the children were white and
30% were African-American.
With regard to literacy achievement,
at the beginning of the school year
most of the children recognized almost
all the letters of the alphabet. Half of
the children could read a few sight
words and were reading from a preprimer. The writing assessment indicated that several of the children could
write in sentences with some conventional spellings. A majority of the children used preconventional forms of
writing, such as random letter strings,
patterned letter strings, and invented
spellings. Several children refused to
do anything but copy environmental
As we observed and reflected with
the classroom teachers, these concerns
were raised: First, the children spent
most of their time working alone on
fairly low-level skills. They were mired
in materials that both children and
teachers found to be uninteresting and
largely irrelevant to their lives. They
seldom engaged in reading and writing of extended texts for the purpose
of achieving or conveying meaning.
The experiences the students did
have with reading and writing (i.e.,
reading directions to complete worksheet pages and copying board work)
led to impoverished understandings
regarding the nature of reading and
writing. For example, in our interviews one child explained that reading
was "a piece of paper—on a piece of
paper." The children suggested that
good readers "read fast and loud."
With regard to writing, one child explained that "good writers have strong
muscles so that they can do cursive."
Another suggested that the way to become a good writer was "to practice
and hope and hold your pencil right."
The children defined writing as "copying the morning news" and "doing
your five times each" (in reference to
their spelling list).
These impoverished understandings
of the nature and purposes of reading
and writing contributed to the children's depressed competence with
reading and writing activities, the
severity of which could not be explained exclusively in terms of the children's learning difficulties. Furthermore, of considerable concern to the
teachers was the fact that these children were alienated from literacy experiences. For example, one teacher
recognized the considerable routine
and "sameness" in his class, causing
him a degree of ambivalence. On the
one hand, he believed that the high
degree of structure and routine was essential to successful classroom management and learning. On the other
hand, he expressed his personal dissatisfaction with the tedium of the routine, even remarking, "Boredom is a
deadly enemy in this classroom."
We concluded from these observations and interviews that the occasions
for literacy learning were neither personally meaningful nor developmentally appropriate. This led us to shift
our emphasis from strategy instruction
to creating with the teachers a classroom culture that would support and
sustain meaningful, appropriate encounters with literacy. This culture, we
hypothesized, would provide the context in which strategy instruction for
intentional learning could take place.
Beginnings
We selected two instructional routines as springboards for introducing
a new context in these classrooms:
story time and handwriting. This instruction took place three times weekly over the course of the school year.
The students continued to receive
reading instruction, including phonics
instruction, in their standard reading
programs. We will first describe, in
general terms, the modifications we in-
VOLUME 25, NUMBER 4, APRIL 1992
troduced, followed by specific illustrations of these changes.
Traditionally, in these classrooms
story time was quiet time, with little
interaction occurring before, during,
or following the reading. The teacher
selected the stories, which covered an
array of topics and themes. Children
never wrote in preparation for or in
response to the story. Story time was
an isolated, special activity in the day,
and served as a rest period after the
noon recess. Handwriting, on the
other hand, consisted of copying from
the chalkboard sentences that the children and teachers had generated during "morning news," as well as completing work sheets that reinforced letter formation.
The initial modification introduced to
story time was the selection of themes
that would guide the choice of literature and provide topics for writing.
Whereas before there was little interaction during the reading of stories, we
now established multiple opportunities for children to engage in interactions before, during, and after story
reading. In keeping with the spirit of
cognitive bootstrapping, we gave the
children books and magazines and encouraged them to talk about what they
were learning from their emergent
readings of these texts, by, for example, using their background knowledge, discussion with peers, identifying their sight words, and employing
their sounding-out skills to figure out
what the text was about. The children
were receptive to these occasions, particularly to the opportunity to share
their preconventional readings of the
stories/articles from the "stage" of the
reader's chair.
As with the reading activity, we assumed that the children could write,
even though a number of them were
still unsure of the letter names and had
not yet acquired consistent phonemic
awareness. Scaffolding was essential
to introducing the children to writing.
First, we modeled the use of invented
spellings. That is, the teacher talked
aloud to the children while writing
about choices of letters, based on
sounds as well as known spellings.
Second, to ease the demands of topic
selection, we encouraged the use of
topics that were suggested by the literature themes and our discussions of
the readings. As the children wrote,
additional scaffolding was provided to
individual children by teachers who
held their words and sentences in
memory for them as they struggled to
match letters and sounds.
In contrast to the enthusiasm we witnessed in the emergent reading experiences, the novel writing experiences
met with a different response. Unlike
very young children, these children
knew that there are right and wrong
ways to spell words. Initially, there
was considerable resistance to the notion of using invented spellings. In
fact, there were tears and even a few
outright refusals when the children
first learned that there would be no
sentences on the board or books from
which to copy. One child, for example,
when first asked to generate her own
piece of text, slid a social studies book
out of the shelf under her desk top,
onto her lap, and copied the entire
table of contents. In time, however,
"spell it the way you hear it" became
a rallying cry as the children urged one
another along.
These apprehensions about invented
spellings were shared by the teachers,
who were concerned about additionally confusing a group of children
already prone to more than their share
of confusion. However, as the teachers
observed after several months of experimenting with the use of invented
spellings, "I think that, for the first
time, in the several years that I have
worked with some of these children,
they understand what a word is."
"They seem to better understand what
I mean when I keep saying, 'sound it
out' as they read."
Rationale Informing the
Redefinition of Literacy Contexts
As with reciprocal teaching, the rationale for the changes we introduced
came from cognitive and developmental theory, including research on developmental spelling and emergent literacy. We planned many instructional
opportunities in which learning could
occur in social and interactive ways,
ranging from paired readings and
reader's chair to peer writing conferences and author's chair. In addition,
we were particularly concerned with
the transition from a reductionist and
atomistic approach to literacy instruction to one in which the integrated
nature of reading and writing and the
uses of reading and writing for meaningful purposes were prominent.
We used the following characteristics
as a template for designing with the
teachers the lessons we would implement. First, we wanted the children
to experience four levels of literacy
(see Wells, Chang, & Maher, in press):
(1) performative, in reference to the
decoding and printing associated with
literacy; (2) functional literacy, or the
use of literacy for interpersonal exchange; (3) informational literacy, for
the communication of knowledge; and
(4) epistemic literacy, for creative, exploratory, and evaluative uses. We
planned experiences in which these
levels of literacy would be experienced
simultaneously to enrich the children's
conceptions of literacy and to provide
a broader range of reasons for wanting
to learn to read and write.
Second, we wanted to instruct, model, and guide students in the use of
specific thinking strategies that would
enable them to engage in these levels
of literacy. Third, we wanted to select
themes and topics that, in addition to
capturing the interest and attention of
the children, would provide occasions
for children to acquire, organize, and
use knowledge in and out of school
over time. In addition, influenced by
the research on developmental spelling and emergent literacy , we encouraged children to read and write "their
own way," accepting all preconventional forms of literacy as equally legitimate and meaningful. These emergent
JOURNAL OF LEARNING DISABILITIES
readings and writings become, as
Bookman described, "a window
to general cognitive development and
[serve] as a specific instance of cognitive/linguistic problem solving"
(p. 21). Finally, we wanted to plan occasions for the children to think and
collaborate with the teacher and with
one another in meaningful uses of
Illustrative Lessons
We have selected a few lessons to illustrate how this template translated
into actual lessons. These lessons took
place between January and April of
1991 in two special education classrooms, each of which had 11 children
meeting the characteristics that we
described previously. We have decided to focus on storytelling time to
illustrate the nature of the changes.
One story the children worked with
was entitled, "Franklin in the Dark"
 . (Franklin is
a turtle whose fear of dark places has
led him to imagine that his own shell
is inhabited by monsters, ghosts, and
other unsavory characters.) Each child
had been given a three-ring binder that
served as a personal journal in which
they would maintain their writings and
revisions. As a prelistening activity,
the children wrote journal entries
about the things they were afraid of—
or, in the case of 10-year-old boys who
claimed to be fearless, about the fears
of family members. After encouraging
the children to share their journal entries (an opportunity for reading selfgenerated text), the teacher introduced
the book. The children were asked to
identify the genre, with supporting
evidence, and to make predictions
about the story. An illustration on
the book cover, depicting a desolate
turtle dragging his shell behind him,
prompted the children to suggest that
this would be a make-believe story.
After generating a series of predictions, the children listened as the
teacher began to read. Unlike the passive listening we had observed in story
time prior to the intervention, the children actively participated, spontaneously demonstrating their knowledge
of story structure and their personal
constructions of meaning: "Franklin is
the name of the character." "His problem is he's afraid of the dark; that's my
problem too!" "He oughta get hisself
a night light." The student who made
this suggestion later reminded everyone, with considerable pride, that he
had predicted the author's solution.
As the teacher read the story, she
called the children's attention to the
story elements that they had been listening for in previous stories. She
revisited their predictions, but she also
called the children's attention to how
Franklin might be feeling as he journeyed the world over, discovering that
everyone he met had learned to deal
with fear of some kind. "How would
you feel if you were Franklin at this
point?" "How," she asked, "does the
author tell you that Franklin is surprised with what he is learning?" The
teacher invited the children to join her
in a second reading. The illustrations
and predictable text supported the children in their choral reading.
Following the reading, the teacher
introduced a writing activity by sharing her own fear of swimming, and by
inviting the children to help her think
of solutions to this problem. Then the
children were asked to write a response to the story of Franklin in their
journals. The response could be to
write about solutions to the fear they
had raised earlier, or to write a new
story in which they were the character seeking help with a fear.
In a future session, the children
shared their journal entries with their
classmates. The writing process continued as, with the assistance of the
teacher, the children edited their entries to substitute conventional spellings for interventions. Revisions were
completed at this mechanical level over
several months. The work of Fitzgerald
 and others suggests that this
is not unusual. We were anxious to
broaden the children's conceptions to
the idea level, but their teachers urged
that we hold off, as these children were
unaccustomed to sustained writing
during even one session. Asking them
to sustain their attention for the same
piece of writing over several days
seemed inappropriate. We respected
the teachers' opinions on this matter
and delayed the introduction of
"author's chair," a format in which the
children select one of several pieces in
their writing folders to share with their
classmates, to solicit comments for
revisions.
To further describe the nature of
scaffolding in these lessons, we will
describe how we introduced students
to the process of revision, taking them
beyond the mechanical level. As we
explored a variety of themes with the
students, none seemed as appealing as
those that dealt with people. Influenced by the topics the students chose
to discuss and write about, we settled
on themes related to friendship. This
meant that we would explore friendship through both the writing and the
reading that we did. Also, with this
theme we chose to focus more systematically on planning, organizing, and
revising one's writing. To facilitate
this, the teachers began by composing
a story with the children, first discussing some events they would possibly
like to write about, then listing all the
ideas they had for this story, and finally enlisting the children's help as they
transformed the ideas into text. The
children easily assumed ownership of
the story, choosing ideas from their list
and organizing these ideas into a story.
To foster a similar process of planning and organization among the students, we encouraged them to work in
triads before they began their writing,
to list—as the teacher had—ideas they
would like to weave into their stories,
and to help one another think of interesting ways to assemble those ideas.
Following this pattern, with the teacher initially modeling, and the students
planning collaboratively and then writing independently, the students were
asked to select one from several writings that they would like to revise to
make more interesting, exciting, or
complete. The teacher once again used
VOLUME 25, NUMBER 4, APRIL 1992
his writing and thought aloud, using
a form of self-questioning, about how
he might revise his writing. As the students began to get the gist of the teacher's activity, they added additional
questions about the teacher's writing
and suggested additional revisions.
To reinforce the concept of their
classrooms as communities of inquiry,
the students engaged in a variety of
joint projects. For example, they assembled a class book entitled "Our
School" for the purpose of informing
new students about life at their school.
They wrote a chapter about school
rules, took photos of their favorite people and places in the school, planned
and conducted interviews with significant people in the school, and wrote
about those people and places. During
a unit on whales, the students created
a mural depicting the things they both
wondered and learned about as they
read and listened to information about
whales from multiple sources, including books, newspapers, journals,
videotapes, and tape recordings.
Throughout our instruction, we
placed considerable emphasis on communicating to the children that they
were capable of learning from printeven though they were not yet conventional readers—by listening to text, and
studying the pictures from children's
nature magazines, trade books, and
newspaper articles.
These lessons represent only a modest beginning to our goal of introducing alternative conceptions of literacy learning that focus on making
sense of literacy, as well as our goal of
using literacy to make sense of the
world. Data have been collected via individual interviews with the students
in which we have assessed metalinguistic knowledge, attitudes toward
reading and writing and toward themselves as readers and writers, knowledge about reading and writing, and
reading and writing achievement. In
addition, lessons have been videotaped and field notes taken during
each lesson, documenting the exchanges between the teacher and children, as well as among targeted children. Because the data collection with
individual children is still in progress,
we will focus our discussion of outcomes on the field notes and children's
writings that we have collected on an
ongoing basis.
To date, we have seen a shift from
procedural to epistemic questioning,
an increase in the children's willingness to take risks with the content, a
more intense interest in learning to
read—particularly from self-generated
text—the use of unsolicited writing for
personal expression, and an interest in
sharing and displaying knowledge.
Further illustration of change has
been observed in the children's writ-
FIGURE 1. Ben's first attempt to "write his own way," demonstrating stable concept of "word.'
JOURNAL OF LEARNING DISABILITIES
ing. The sheer amount of their writing
has increased, and shifts have been observed from random and patterned letter strings to invented and conventional spellings, with the children
experimenting with vowels, consonant
blends, and digraphs. The children began writing complete thoughts, and
conventions such as spacing between
words emerged. The writings indicate
that the children's understanding of
print reflect the developmental progression observed among nonidentified
children given opportunities to write.
In Figures 1, 2, and 3 we present
three writing samples by one child,
Ben, a second grader. Ben's first attempt to "write his own way" was an
emotional and difficult event for this
youngster, as well as for us. Ben's
previous writing experiences had been
limited to copying from the chalkboard, and the task of producing original text overwhelmed him. He cried
silently as a researcher sat at his side,
encouraging him to "write what you
hear" in response to the story, Clifford
the Big Red Dog . Eventually, Ben drew an illustration of
Clifford riding on the back of a truck
and labeled his drawing, GilCISHe
(see Figure 1). He was unable to read
the label back, but indicated that the
writing was about Clifford. His use of
letter-name spelling demonstrates that
he did indeed have a stable concept of
"word" . One
month later, when the novelty of
writing his own way had begun to
wear off and Ben had gained some
confidence in his ability to compose
text, he demonstrated much greater
knowledge of spelling. This time he
wrote: IyAddobAdog zcanKtBks (I
want to be a dog. They can catch burglars) (see Figure 2). In this example,
we could see to a greater degree the influence of Ben's phonetic knowledge.
The strategy he is using is a systematic
process of matching letters to sounds
 . In the final example,
Ben's contribution to the class book
chapter on rules, he wrote:
Do your best every day
DODfit (Don't fight)
DODKS (Don't cuss)
VAoLrcK * * ,
I want to be a dog.
They can get burglars.
FIGURE 2. Student's writing sample demonstrating increased knowledge of spelling.
VOLUME 25, NUMBER 4, APRIL 1992
Bee GD Avre D (Be good every day)
Kown And STn (Come and sit down)
I LikHOMSk (I like Holmes School), (see
In this final example, we note that Ben
still shows some confusion with memory for letter shapes (he wrote w for m
in come, and the words in the cartoon
bubble are written from right to left).
Fitting letters neatly on the lines is
another concern, as seen in Ben's multiple attempts to cross ts and form capital Ds. He still does not hear some
medial consonant and vowel sounds
(dod for don't, and Ks for cuss). Despite
these confusions and limitations, however, Ben generated a much longer piece
of text with relative physical ease and
great enthusiasm for the opportunity to
contribute to the class book. We also
note growth in his spelling, which is
now transitional ,
as he uses both his phonetic knowledge to experiment with spelling (he
wrote a c and a k for cuss), and his memory for some conventional spellings.
In the next section we discuss our
reflections on these lessons. Although
for ease of presentation we are isolating the same features that we used
to guide our discussion of reciprocal
teaching, we recognize the highly interactive nature of these features.
Reflections on the Lessons
Forms of Discourse. At the outset
of this study, the discourse in the classrooms reflected the elicitation, response, and evaluation patterns so frequently documented in classroom discourse . In contrast, as
story time became more instructionally
purposeful, and as teachers allowed
opportunities for student input, the
changes observed in discourse were
observed at several levels.
While teachers still elicited student
involvement through questioning, the
types of questions generated by the
teachers changed from simple, literal
questions to questions that invited
multiple and diverse responses. This,
in turn, led to differences in the discourse patterns themselves, including
an increase in the children's responding, not only to the teacher, but also
to one another. In addition, evalua-
FIGURE 3. Despite some confusion and certain limitations, Ben was able to generate a long piece of text with relative
ease and enthusiasm.
JOURNAL OF LEARNING DISABILITIES
tions of responses were offered by the
students as well as the teachers.
In addition to changes in the nature
of elicited responses, we observed a
new phenomenon: the spontaneous
interjection of student comments. For
example, during story reading, students commented on events transpiring in the text and anticipated upcoming events. For example, during the
reading of the true story, Humphrey the
Lost Whale , the
students offered a stream of evaluations regarding the rescue attempts
that were being made, as well as their
personal opinions as to how they
might help Humphrey find his way
back to the San Francisco Bay. These
spontaneous interjections reveal ways
in which the children were actively
constructing meanings for the text and
monitoring their understanding of it.
Playfulness. We have commented
on the importance of playfulness in the
reciprocal teaching dialogues; a similar playfulness and enjoyment began
to figure in our activities with these
students. Much to our surprise, given
how difficult the writing activity was
for the initial months, writing became
a reliable source of enjoyment and engagement for many of these children.
In fact, there were a number of days
when the students proposed that we
include writing in lessons in which
there had been no plans to write.
There was some levity in the discussions, which bordered on hilarity
when the children read The Nice Walk
in the Jungle and
urged the boa constrictor to devour the
teacher. The role of humor in the classroom has received little attention,
leading Singer and Singer to
comment on the "Scroogian" ethic in
classrooms. The work of Bruner 
and Cazden , among others,
would suggest that there are rich affective, cognitive, and linguistic consequences for using play and humor in
instructional activity. One of the positive outcomes the teachers identified in
the reading and writing interactions
was the opportunity to use and learn
about the humor and interests of their
children. The joint reading and writings provided new mechanisms for
teacher-child interactions.
Role of the Teacher. Perhaps the
most striking adjustment the teachers
and students made in the course of this
research was to the participation structures that prevailed in their classrooms. Cazden defined the participation structure as "the rights and
obligations of participants with respect
to who can say what, when, and to
whom" (p. 437). These classrooms
were accustomed to traditional participation structures, in which the teacher
initiated and sustained most of the activity in the classroom. With the introduction of interactive reading and
writing activities, many novel participation structures were created. Adjusting to these new ways of interacting
was often a challenge. The teachers
felt the shift in "control" and were
anxious not to lose behavioral control
for the sake of a more equitable distribution of control for learning activity.
The use of the "routine" inherent in
peer conferencing and reader's and
author's chairs helped ease the adjustment. While the teachers still occasionally complain of "too much new" going on, there are no longer complaints
about boredom.
In this research, the role of the teacher shares many of the same characteristics observed in reciprocal teaching,
principally in terms of the teacher
modeling cognitive activity, making
visible the thinking processes useful to
reading and writing, and scaffolding
children's efforts to read and write.
The opportunity to meet regularly (at
least weekly) as a research team, as
well as the opportunity for the teachers
to meet with one another, has been essential to supporting the teachers in
these redefined roles as well as informing the research agenda itself.
Role of Text. For the children in
this study, text had formerly been
viewed as a tool with which to practice decoding skills. By mastering a
sequence of such skills, it was assumed
the children would become fluent oral
The role of text has expanded along
several dimensions throughout the
study. Trade books became the foundation of instructional materials. The
children were also given opportunities
to read from sources such as newspapers, children's magazines, commercially prepared charts, and posters.
The most important addition was that
of student-generated text, which appeared in original stories, responses to
literature, and student-created murals
and charts.
A second dimension that change occurred along was that of personal
choice. Children had opportunities to
select magazines and library books for
some lessons. Although choice of text
was not an option for all lessons, we
felt that such instances generated motivation for exploring text.
Evidence for another change in the
role of text stemmed from instances in
which students referred to previous
stories or discussions. The thematic
selection of text created opportunities
for students to access and use information read or discussed earlier for the
purposes of comparison and contrast,
as well as supporting predictions
regarding new text.
The single most important change
was that the children had opportunities for sustained engagement with
complete texts. We used multiple
copies of stories so that children could
follow along with text that was too
challenging for them to read on their
Our metaphors of teaching as scaffolding, learning as cognitive bootstrapping, and classrooms as communities of inquiry have guided our
collaboration with teachers to realize
enriched contexts for intentional literacy learning.
We have witnessed slow, gradual
changes in the culture of these special
VOLUME 25, NUMBER 4, APRIL 1992
education classrooms. These changes
emerge through lessons designed to
accommodate higher levels of discourse and opportunities for the children to become engaged as intentional
Our rationale for advocating strategy
instruction has matured, as well. We
no longer assume merely that strategies need to be taught to children in
the context of meaningful
events, but rather
deserve opportunities to reveal the
strategies they develop independently
as they generate their own text and
confront print in meaningful situations.
We are also reconceptualizing the
roles of the teacher and curriculum. As
children construct their own hypotheses about literacy and their own
strategies for literacy learning, teachers
need to assist them in refining, modifying, and adapting these strategies to
meet the demands of the many tasks
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Annemarie Sullivan Palincsar is an associate
professor in educational studies at the University of Michigan, where she prepares teachers
to work with heterogenous learners. She completed her PhD at the University of Illinois. She
conducts research on the literacy instruction of
young learners and the use of collaborative problem solving in science learning. Laura Klenk
is a doctoral student in educational studies in
reading and literacy at the University of Michigan. Her research interests include the application of emergent literacy theory to special needs
learners, case study research, and teacher preparation. Address: Annemarie Sullivan Palincsar,
1360 SEB, University of Michigan, 610 East
University, Ann Arbor, MI 48109.
1. The research reported regarding reciprocal teaching was supported, in part, by OSE
Grant No. G008400648 from the Department of Education. This research has profited greatly from the collaboration of Ann
Brown. This specific study could not have
been conducted without the skillful teaching and cooperation of Ann Carlson, Sue
Dalby, Sue Derber, Linda Hagerman, Linda
Johnson, and Dorothy Mackey, first-grade
teachers in Springfield, Illinois, as well as
their reading coordinator, Kathryn Ransom.
2. This research is part of a larger project
entitled, 'Transforming the Learning Disabled into Self-Regulated Learners: The
Development and Implementation of a Sustainable Early Literacy Curriculum," which
is funded by a grant from the Office of Special Education Programs (No. H023C90076).
This grant has been awarded to the first
author and Carol Sue Englert (co-principal
investigator), Taffy Raphael, and James
Gavelek. The authors are extremely grateful to the special education teachers participating in this research. We are also
indebted to Kathleen Hric, Eric Anderman,
and Amy Wilson, who so capably assisted
with data collection.