Grundlehren der
mathematischen Wissenschaften 258
A Series of Comprehensive Studies in Mathematics
M. Artin s. S. Chern J. L. Doob A. Grothendieck
E. Heinz F. Hirzebruch L. Hormander S. Mac Lane
W. Magnus C. C. Moore J. K. Moser M. Nagata
W. Schmidt D. S. Scott J. Tits
B. L. van der Waerden
Managing Editors
B. Eckmann
S. R. S. Varadhan
Joel Smoller
Shock Waves
and Reaction-Diffusion
With 162 Illustrations
Springer-Verlag
New Yark Heidelberg Berlin
Joel Smoller
Department of Mathematics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
AMS Subject Classifications : 3502, 35Q20, 73D05, 76L05
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Smoller, Joel.
Shock waves and reaction-diffusion equations.
1. Shock waves.
2. Differential equations, Partial.
© 1983 by Springer-Verlag New York Inc.
Softcover reprint of the hardcover 1st edition 1983
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be translated or reproduced in any form
without written permission from Springer-Verlag, 175 Fifth Avenue, New York,
New York 10010, U.S.A.
"With a Little Help From My Friends"
(John Lennon and Paul McCartney)
© 1967 Northern Songs Limited
All rights for the U.S.A., Mexico and the Phillipines controlled by Maden Music, Inc.,
c/o ATV Music Corp. Used by permission. All rights reserved.
Typeset by Composition House Ltd., Salisbury, England.
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
ISBN -13: 978-1-4684-0154-7
e-ISBN -13: 978-1-4684-0152-3
DOl: 10.1007/978-1-4684-0152-3
To Faye, Debbie, Alex"and Sally
Acknowledgment
I get by with a little help from my friends.
LENNON AND MCCARTNEY
Throughout my career, I have had the good fortune to be closely associated
with many very gifted mathematicians. I learned a great deal from each
of them; this book is really not much more than a compilation of what they
taught me.
First, I want to thank Louis Nirenberg for initially inspiring me and for
giving me an early opportunity to visit the Courant Institute. It was there
that I met Edward Conway, my friend and collaborator, who showed me the
mathematics of shock waves, and convinced me (with difficulty!) of the value
of difference schemes. Years later, he introduced me to the equations of
mathematical ecology, the study of which led to much fruitful joint research.
I must also thank Peter Lax, whose work has always interested me, for
inviting me to visit the Courant Institute once again. The second time at the
"Courant" I met my other good friend and collaborator, Charles Conley.
It was he who enthusiastically taught me so much deep and exciting mathematics. Among N (~1) other things, I learned from him the power and
beauty of topological methods in analysis. He has also generously shared with
me many of his brilliant insights. His ideas continue to influence my research
to the present day.
To Takaaki Nishida, lowe thanks for sharing his ideas with me, and for
actively collaborating with me on so many occasions.
Claude Bardos also deserves thanks for his willingness to discuss many of
his ideas, his constant encouragement, and for introducing me to the Paris
school of mathematics.
This book could not have been written were it not for the many able
students who attended my courses on differential equations at Michigan.
Their enthusiasm and hard work constantly served as a stimulation to me.
In particular, special thanks to are due to Bob Gardner, David Hoff,
Jeffrey Johnson, and Tai-Ping Liu, each of whom very quickly became my
collaborator and teacher.
To my colleagues at Michigan: Paul Federbush, Carl Simon, Al Taylor,
and especially to Jeff Rauch, Joe Ullman, and Ricky Wasserman, lowe
many thanks for so often giving me their time in order to help me get over
some rough spots.
Acknowledgment
Portions of this book are an outgrowth of lectures which I gave at the
following institutions: Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, Universite de
Paris, Orsay, University of Warwick, and the University of Wisconsin. I am
grateful to the mathematicians at these places for giving me the opportunity
to lecture.
Charles Conley, Edward Conway, Bob Gardner, David Hoff, Tai-Ping
Liu, Takaaki Nishida, Jeffrey Rauch, Blake Temple, and Peter Wolfe, each
read portions of the manuscript. I am grateful to all of them for their many
helpful suggestions.
Finally, I want to thank James Glimm for being a constant source of
inspiration and encouragement over the years.
I should like to take this opportunity to thank both the U.S. Airforce
Office of Scientific Research, and its mathematics director, Robert Buchel,
as well as the National Science Foundation and its applied mathematics
directors, Ettore Infante, and James Greenberg, for supporting my research.
... the progress of physics will to a large extent
depend on the progress of nonlinear mathematics, of methods to solve nonlinear equations
... and therefore we can learn by comparing
different nonlinear problems.
WERNER HEISENBERG
I undertook to write this book for two reasons. First, I wanted to make
easily available the basics of both the theory of hyperbolic conservation laws
and the theory of systems of reaction-diffusion equations, including the
generalized Morse theory as developed by C. Conley. These important
subjects seem difficult to learn since the results are scattered throughout the
research journals. 1 Second, I feel that there is a need to present the modern
methods and ideas in these fields to a wider audience than just mathematicians. Thus, the book has some rather sophisticated aspects to it, as well
as certain textbook aspects. The latter serve to explain, somewhat, the reason
that a book with the title Shock Waves and Reaction-Diffusion Equations has
the first nine chapters devoted to linear partial differential equations. More
precisely, I have found from my classroom experience that it is far easier to
grasp the subtleties of nonlinear partial differential equations after one has
an understanding of the basic notions in the linear theory.
This book is divided into four main parts: linear theory, reactiondiffusion equations, shock wave theory, and the Conley index, in that order.
Thus, the text begins with a discussion of ill-posed problems. The aim here
was to show that partial differential equations are not divorced from side
conditions; indeed specific side conditions are required for specific equations.
And in view of Lewy's example, which is presented in its entirety, no side
conditions can force solutions on some equations. We discuss an example of
a nonlinear scalar conservation law which has no global classical solution,
thereby foreshadowing the notion of "weak" solution. In Chapter 2 we
consider characteristics, an important notion which comes up widely in
nonlinear contexts. Chapter 3 deals with the simple one-dimensional wave
equation. Here is where we introduce the reader to the important ideas of
1 This is not quite true; there are some good survey articles on shock waves (e.g., [Lx 5]) but
these do not contain many proofs. Also in the theory of reaction-diffusion equations, there are
the books [Fi] and [Mu], but they both seem to me to be research monographs.
domains of dependence, energy integrals, and finite differences. The purpose
of the next chapter is to demonstrate the power, generality, and elegance of
energy integral methods. In the course of the development we present
several basic techniques for obtaining inequalities.
The next chapter is devoted to Holmgren's uniqueness theorem. We view
it in a modern context, where we can use it later to motivate Oleinik's
uniqueness theorems for conservation laws. In Chapter 6 we consider
general hyperbolic operators and show how energy integrals, together with
Fourier transform methods, are used to prove global existence theorems.
The uniqueness of these solutions is obtained via Holmgren's theorem.
Chapter 7 is devoted to the theory of distributions. The importance of this
subject for linear operators is, of course, well known. This author firmly
believes that the great advances in nonlinear partial differential equations
over the last twenty years could not have been made were it not for
distribution theory. The ideas of this discipline provided the conceptual
framework for studying partial differential equations in the context of weak
solutions. This "philosophy" carried over, rather easily, to many important
nonlinear equations. In Chapters 8 and 9 we study linear elliptic and
parabolic equations, respectively, and we prove the basic maximum
principles. We also describe the estimates of Schauder, as well as those of
Agmon, Douglis, and Nirenberg, which we need in later chapters. The
proofs of these important estimates are (happily) omitted since it is difficult to
improve upon the exposition given in Gilbarg-Trudinger [GT]. (We point
out here that the material in Chapters 1-9 can serve as an introductory
course in partial differential equations.)
A quick glance at the contents serves to explain the flavor of those topics
which form the major portion of the book. I have made a deliberate effort to
explain the main ideas in a coherent, readable manner, and in particular I
have avoided excess generality. To be specific, Chapter 10 contains a
discussion of how far one can go with the maximum principle for a scalar
nonlinear parabolic (or elliptic) equation. It is used to prove the basic
comparison and existence theorems; the latter done via the method of upper
and lower solutions. The text contains several carefully chosen examples
which are used both to illustrate the theorems and to prepare the way for
some later topics; e.g., bifurcation theory. The next chapter begins with a
development of the variational properties of the eigenvalues for a linear
second-order elliptic operator on a bounded domain in Rn. There follows a
careful discussion of linearized stability for a class of evolution equations
broad enough to include systems of reaction-diffusion equations. In
Chapter 12, we give a complete development of degree theory for operators
in Banach spaces of the form (Id. + compact). The discussion begins with the
finite-dimensional case, culminating with Brouwer's fixed point theorem.
This is applied to flows on Euclidean spaces; specifically, we give two
applications, one to flows on spheres and one to flows on tori. The
Leray-Schauder degree is then developed, and we illustrate its use in
nonlinear elliptic equations. The second half of this chapter is devoted to
Morse theory. Our goal is to re-interpret the Morse index in an intrinsic
topological way (using the stable manifold theorem), as the homotopy type
of a quotient space. This is done in preparation for Chapters 22 and 23,
where we consider Conley's extension of the Morse index. We give a proof
of Reeb's theorem on the characterization of spheres in terms of Morse
functions. The chapter ends with an appendix on algebraic topology where
homotopy theory, homology theory, and cohomology theory are discussed.
The goal was to make these important ideas accessible to analysts.
In Chapter 13, some of the standard bifurcation theorems are proved;
namely, those which come under the heading "bifurcation from a simple
eigenvalue." We then use degree theory to prove the bifurcation theorems of
both Krasnose1ski and Rabinowitz. Again, these theorems are illustrated by
applications to specific differential equations. In the final section we discuss,
with an example, another more global type of bifurcation which we term
"spontaneous" bifurcation. This is related back to earlier examples, and it is
also made use of in Chapter 24.
Chapter 14 may be considered the "high point" in this group. It is here
where the notion of an invariant region is defined, and all of the basic
theorems concerning it are proved. As a first application, we prove a
comparison theorem which allows us to obtain rather precise (but somewhat
coarse) qualitative statements on solutions. We then give a general theorem
on the asymptotic behavior of solutions. Thus, we isolate a parameter
which, when positive, implies that for large time, every solution gets close to
a spatially independent one; in particular, no bifurcation of nonconstant
steady-state solutions can occur. There follows a section which makes
quantitative the notion of an invariant region; the statement is that the flow
is gradient-like near the boundary of this region. This means that attracting
regions for the kinetic equations are also attracting regions for the full
system of reaction-diffusion equations, provided that the geometry of the
region under consideration is compatible with the diffusion matrix. In the
final section, these results are applied to the general Kolmogorov form of
the equations which describe the classical two-species ecological interactions, where now diffusion and spatial dependence are taken into account
One sees here how the standard ecological assumptions lead in a fairly direct
way to the mathematical conditions which we have considered.
In Chapter 15, we begin to discuss the theory of shock waves. This is a
notoriously difficult subject due to the many subtleties not usually
encountered in other areas of mathematics. The very fact that the entire
subject is concerned with discontinuous functions, means that many of the
modem mathematical techniques are virtually inapplicable. I have given
much effort in order to overcome these obstacles, by leading the reader
gently along, step by step. It is here where I have leaned most upon my
classroom experience. Thus, the development begins with a chapter
describing the basic phenomena: the formation of shock waves, the notion
of a weak solution and its consequences, the loss of uniqueness, the entropy
conditions, etc. These things are all explained with the aid of examples.
There follows next a chapter which gives a rather complete description of
the theory of a single conservation law: existence, uniqueness, and
asymptotic behavior of solutions. The existence proof follows Oleinik and is
done via the Lax-Friedrichs difference scheme. The reasons why I have
chosen this method over the several other ones available are discussed at the
beginning of the chapter; suffice it to say that it requires no sophisticated
background, and that the method of finite differences is, in principle,
capable of generalization to systems. The entrance into systems of
conservation laws, is made via a discussion of the Riemann problem for the
"p-system." Here it is possible to explain things geometrically, by actually
drawing the shock- and rarefaction-wave curves. We then develop the basic
properties of these waves, and following Lax, we solve the Riemann
problem for general systems. These ideas are applied in the next chapter to
the equations of gas dynamics, where we solve the Riemann problem for
arbitrary data, both analytically and geometrically. We prove Weyl's
entropy theorem, as well as von Neumann's shock-interaction theorem. The
next chapter, the Glimm Difference Scheme, is one of the most difficult ones
in the book (the others being Chapters 22 and 23 on the Conley index).
Glimm's theorem continues to be the most important result in conservation
laws, and it must be mastered by anyone seriously interested in this field. I
feel that the proof is not nearly as difficult as is commonly believed, and I
have tried hard to make it readable for the beginner.
The final chapter in this group is designed to give the reader a flavor of
some of the general results that are known for systems, the emphasis being
on systems of two equations. I have also given a proof of Oleinik's
uniqueness theorem for the p-system; her paper is available only in the
original Russian. Having been sufficiently "turned on" by the superb
lectures ofT. Nishida at Michigan , I was unable
to resist including a chapter on quasilinear parabolic systems. The main
result here is Kanel's existence proof for the isentropic gas dynamics
equations with viscosity.
With Chapter 22, I begin Part Four of the book. These last three chapters
deal mainly with the Conley index, together with its applications. Thus, the
first chapter opens with a long descriptive discussion in which the basic ideas
of the theory are explained; namely the concept of an isolated invariant set
and its index, together with their main properties. These are illustrated by an
easily understood example, in which things are worked out in detail and the
connections with the classical Morse index are noted. I have also included a
discussion of the so-called "Hopf bifurcation," from this point of view.
Although the sections which follow are independent of this one, I strongly
recommend that the reader not skim over it, but rather that he give it serious
thought. The remaining sections in this chapter contain all of the basic
definitions, together with proofs of the existence of an isolating block, and
the theorem that the index is independent of the block which contains it.
This is all done for flows, where the reader can "see" the geometrical and
topological constructions. I have also given some applications to differential
equations in Rn , as well as a proof of the "connecting orbit" theorem. In
Chapter 23, the theory is developed from a more general, more abstract point
of view, in a form suitable for applications to partial differential equations.
We define the notions of index pairs, and Morse decompositions of an
isolated invariant set. The concept of local flow is also introduced, again
with an eye towards the applications. We prove both the existence of index
pairs for Morse decompositions, as well as the well-definedness of the
Conley index. That is, we show that the index h(S) of an isolated invariant
set S, depends only on the homotopy class of the spaceNdNo, where (Nt>
No) is any index pair for S. This result immediately puts at our disposal the
algebraic invariants associated with the cohomology groups which form
exact sequences on the Morse decomposition of S. These are powerful tools
for computing indices, in addition to being of theoretical use. They lead, for
example, to an easy proof of the" generalized" Morse inequalities. We then
prove the continuation property of the Conley index, in a rather general
context. The final section serves both to illustrate some of the theorems, as
well as to derive additional results which will be used in the applications. We
point out that these two chapters monotonically increase in difficulty as one
proceeds. This is done by design in order to meet the needs of readers having
assorted degrees of mathematical maturity-one can proceed along as far as
his background will take him (and further, if he is willing to work hard!).
The last chapter contains a sample of the applications to travelling waves.
We first study the shock structure problem of the existence of an orbit
connecting two rest points, and in particular, we solve the shock structure
problem for magnetohydrodynamic shock waves having arbitrary strength.
We then prove the existence of a periodic travelling wave solution for the
Nagumo equations. An isolating neighborhood is constructed, and the
Conley index is explicitly computed, in order to demonstrate the different
topological techniques which are involved. We also show how to obtain the
desired information a different way by using an exact sequence of cohomology
groups in order to determine the nontriviality of the index. Next follows a
long section, where we apply the theory to reaction-diffusion equations, and
we use the Conley index together with some previously obtained (global)
bifurcation diagrams, to study the stability of steady-state solutions, and to
determine in some cases, the entire global picture of the solution set. The
chapter closes with a section in which we give some instability theorems for
nonconstant stationary solutions of the Neumann problem.
Each of the four sections in this book (in any order) is suitable for a onesemester graduate course. In particular, as we have remarked earlier, the
first section can be used for an introductory graduate-level course in partial
differential equations. The prerequisite for this is one of graduate-level
mathematics as given in the average American university.
List of Frequently Used Symbols
Basic Linear Theory
Ill-Posed Problems
§A. Some Examples
§B. Lewy's Example
Characteristics and Initial-Value Problems
The One-Dimensional Wave Equation
Uniqueness and Energy Integrals
Holmgren's Uniqueness Theorem
An Initial-Value Problem for a Hyperbolic Equation
Distribution Theory
§A. A Cursory View
§B. Fundamental Solutions
§C. Appendix
Second-Order Linear Elliptic Equations
§A. The Strong Maximum Principle
§B. A-Priori Estimates
§C. Existence of Solutions
§D. Elliptic Regularity
Second-Order Linear Parabolic Equations
§A. The Heat Equation
§B. Strong Maximum Principles
Reaction - Diffusion Equations
CHAPTER 10
Comparison Theorems and Monotonicity Methods
§A. Comparison Theorems for Nonlinear Equations
§B. Upper and Lower Solutions
§C. Applications
CHAPTER II
Linearization
§A. Spectral Theory for Self-Adjoint Operators
§B. Linearized Stability
§C. Appendix: The Krein-Rutman Theorem
CHAPTER 12
Topological Methods
§A. Degree Theory in R"
§B. The Leray-Schauder Degree
§C. An Introduction to Morse Theory
§D. A Rapid Course in Topology
CHAPTER 13
Bifurcation Theory
§A. The Implicit Function Theorem
§B. Stability of Bifurcating Solutions
§C. Some General Bifurcation Theorems
§D. Spontaneous Bifurcation; An Example
CHAPTER 14
Systems of Reaction-Diffusion Equations
§A. Local Existence of Solutions
§B. Invariant Regions
§C. A Comparison Theorem
§D. Decay to Spatially Homogeneous Solutions
§E. A Lyapunov Function for Contracting Rectangles
§F. Applications to the Equations of Mathematical Ecology
The Theory of Shock Waves
CHAPTER 15
Discontinuous Solutions of Conservation Laws
§A. Discontinuous Solutions
§B. Weak Solutions of Conservation Laws
§C. Evolutionary Systems
§D. The Shock Inequalities
§E. Irreversibility
CHAPTER 16
The Single Conservation Law
§A. Existence of an Entropy Solution
§B. Uniqueness of the Entropy Solution
§C. Asymptotic Behavior of the Entropy Solution
§D. The Riemann Problem for a Scalar Conservation Law
CHAPTER 17
The Riemann Problem for Systems of Conservation Laws
§A. The p-System
§B. Shocks and Simple Waves
§C. Solution of the General Riemann Problem
CHAPTER 18
Applications to Gas Dvnamics
§A. The Shock Inequalities
§B. The Riemann Problem in Gas Dynamics
§c. Interaction of Shock Waves
CHAPTER 19
The Glimm Difference Scheme
§A. The Interaction Estimate
§B. The Difference Approximation
§C. Convergence
CHAPTER 20
Riemann Invariants, Entropy, and Uniqueness
§A. Riemann Invariants
§B. A Concept of Entropy
§C. Solutions with" Big" Data
§D. Instability of Rarefaction Shocks
§E. Oleinik's Uniqueness Theorem
CHAPTER 21
Quasi-Linear Parabolic Systems
§A. Gradient Systems
§B. Artificial Viscosity
§C. Isentropic Gas Dynamics
The Conley Index
CHAPTER 22
The Conley Index
§A. An Impressionistic Overview
§B. Isolated Invariant Sets and Isolating Blocks
§C. The Homotopy Index
CHAPTER 23
Index Pairs and the Continuation Theorem
§A. Morse Decompositions and Index Pairs
§B. The Conley Index of an Isolated Invariant Set
§c. Continuation
§D. Some Further Remarks
CHAPTER 24
Travelling Waves
~A. The Structure of Weak Shock Waves
§B. The Structure of Magnetohydrodynamic Shock Waves
§c. Periodic Travelling Waves
§D. Stability of Steady-State Solutions
§E. Instability of Equilibrium Solutions of the Neumann Problem
§F. Appendix: A Criterion for Nondegeneracy