TGSum: Build Tweet Guided Multi-Document Summarization Dataset
Ziqiang Cao1
Chengyao Chen1
Wenjie Li1
Sujian Li2
Ming Zhou3
1Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
2Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Peking University, MOE, China
3Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
{cszqcao, cscchen, cswjli}@comp.polyu.edu.hk
 
{furu, mingzhou}@microsoft.com
The development of summarization research has been
signiﬁcantly hampered by the costly acquisition of reference summaries. This paper proposes an effective way
to automatically collect large scales of news-related
multi-document summaries with reference to social media’s reactions. We utilize two types of social labels
in tweets, i.e., hashtags and hyper-links. Hashtags are
used to cluster documents into different topic sets. Also,
a tweet with a hyper-link often highlights certain key
points of the corresponding document. We synthesize
a linked document cluster to form a reference summary which can cover most key points. To this aim,
we adopt the ROUGE metrics to measure the coverage ratio, and develop an Integer Linear Programming
solution to discover the sentence set reaching the upper bound of ROUGE. Since we allow summary sentences to be selected from both documents and highquality tweets, the generated reference summaries could
be abstractive. Both informativeness and readability of
the collected summaries are veriﬁed by manual judgment. In addition, we train a Support Vector Regression
summarizer on DUC generic multi-document summarization benchmarks. With the collected data as extra
training resource, the performance of the summarizer
improves a lot on all the test sets. We release this dataset
for further research1.
Introduction
The rapid growth of on-line digital content calls for efﬁcient automatic summarization systems. So far, the learningbased models have become the dominant summarization
approaches. Despite decades of research, the quality of a
machine generated summary is still far from satisfactory.
A big bottleneck of supervised summarizers is the lack
of human summaries used for training. For instance, the
generic multi-document summarization task aims to summarize a cluster of documents telling the same topic. In this
task, the most widely-used datasets are published by Document Understanding Conferences2 (DUC) in 01, 02 and
Copyright c⃝2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1 
2 
04. Totally, there are 139 document clusters with 376 human reference summaries. The limitation of labeled data
forces a learning-based summarization system to heavily
rely on well-designed features. Sometimes unsupervised approaches ) even outperform supervised ones.
Basically, there are two major factors restricting manual
annotation. On the one hand, summarization is an extremely
time consuming and labor-intensive process. Before writing a summary, annotators have to read and understand the
whole document(s). On the other hand, it is very subjective.
Even experts fail to reach a consensus. As a result, DUC has
to provide multiple reference summaries in order to have a
relatively objective evaluation. In this paper, we suggest an
effective way to automatically collect large-scales of news
multi-document summaries with reference to social media’s
reactions on Twitter. Previously, a series of NLP tasks have
tried to utilize the social annotations like followers , emoticons and responses etc. Here two kinds of common social labels, i.e.,
hyper-links and hashtags are leveraged for our purpose. A
hashtag in the news area often serves for the brief description of an event. For example, given “#BangkokBlast”, we
know the tweets with this hashtag all talk about the recent
terrorist attack in Bangkok. Therefore, it is a nice indicator
to cluster documents into the same topic. On the other hand,
we take advantage of linked tweets (i.e., tweets with hyperlinks) to generate the optimal reference summary for a document cluster. From our observation, linked tweets hold the
following properties:
• A large proportion of linked tweets can highlight key
points of related news;
• Tags such as “#” and “@” frequently appears in a linked
tweet, bringing a large amount of noise;
• Due to the length limitation, most tweets are shortened
and describe only one aspect of related documents.
The noise and incompleteness hamper a linked tweet to directly become a reference summary. Take the tweets in Table 1 as an example. This document describes how Greece’s
Crisis drowns the life of a sardine ﬁsherman. Since the local
ﬁsh industry owns the world ﬁrst robotic sardine processing line, Tweet 1 is interested in how it works. Tweet 2 and
3 both describe the key points of this paper, like “Greece”,
 
“ﬁsh industry” and “crisis”, but Tweet 2 can be used as the title while Tweet 3 tells author’s writing experience. Although
all the three tweets are able to indicate saliency, none of them
is appropriate to be a part of the summary. Tweet 1 is shortened, Tweet 2 is not a complete sentence, and Tweet 3 contains many tags.
(1) Software determines which are sardines and ...
how much they weigh
(2) A ﬁsh tale: How #GreeceCrisis drowned an industry and a way of life
(3) .@georgikantchev, @movingpicturetv, @vaniabturner and I look inside Greece’s ﬁsh industry and see
The Fisherman’s Lament – A Way of Life Drowned
by Greece’s Crisis ( 
Table 1: An example of the tweets linked to the same news.
URLs in tweets are elided for short.
Notably, sentences in the news documents are usually
well-written. Therefore, we do not directly treat linked
tweets as reference summaries. Instead, we select sentences
from both the document cluster and high-quality tweets to
form a reference summary which can cover most key points
in tweets. This practice has the following advantages. First,
the summary is far more readable than tweets and meanwhile provides a complete description of a news document
cluster. Second, the length of a reference summary is controllable. A similar idea is adopted by . They use the highlight and the ﬁrst news sentence to build the sentence compression pair. Also because
the highlights are usually not the complete sentences, they
utilize highlights to indicate which syntactical structures in
the original sentences can be removed. In TGSum, we introduce the most widely-used summary evaluation metrics
ROUGE to measure the coverage ratio of key
points, and develop an Integer Linear Programming (ILP)
solution to discover the sentence set which can reach the
ROUGE upper bound.
Within one month, TGSum collects 4658 linked tweets in
overall. Table 2 lists the basic information of TGSum and
compares it with DUC datasets. On average, a document
cluster in TGSum contains 23 tweets, ensuring to generate reference summaries in different generalization degrees.
In terms of the cluster number, our dataset has already exceeded the scale of DUC datasets, and it is still growing every day. Once the reference summaries are generated, we
conduct extensive experiments to verify the quality and effect of this dataset. About 30% summary sentences come
from linked tweets, indicating summaries in TGSum are abstractive in certain degree. Manual judgment demonstrates
that the majority of these summaries are informative and
readable. In addition, we train a Support Vector Regression
(SVR) summarizer on DUC generic multi-document summarization benchmarks. With the collected TGSum dataset
as the extra training resource, the performance of SVR summarizer improves a lot on all test sets.
The contributions of this paper are listed as follows:
1. We propose to collect multi-document news summaries
4658(tweets)
Table 2: Statistics of the summarization datasets.
with the help of social media’s reactions;
2. We develop an ILP solution to generate summaries reaching the upper bound of ROUGE;
3. We publish this dataset for further research.
TGSum Construction
This section explains how we build TGSum, i.e., a multidocument summarization dataset guided by tweets. There
are 4 main steps. The URL acquisition step catches proper
news URLs. These URLs are in turn used in the data collection step to extract the linked tweets and news documents. Afterwards, news documents are clustered based on
the hashtags embedded in tweets. Finally, for the news documents to be summarized, an Integer Linear Programming
(ILP) solution is developed to generate reference summaries
which cover as many key points provided in tweets as possible. Below is the detailed description of these steps.
URL Acquisition
At the beginning, we have tried to directly extract linked
tweets through searching trends on Twitter. However, most
trends are concerned with the entertainment circle, referring people to the picture or video pages. It is thereby not
appropriate for document summarization. Thus, we design
an alternative strategy which ﬁrstly discovers news URLs.
Speciﬁcally, through the Twitter search function, 74 active
news accounts like New York Times, Reuters and CNN who
have published tweets within a month are selected as seed
users. All the DUC news providers are included to ensure
the generated dataset is uniform with DUC. Next, by applying the Twitter user streaming API, we track all seed users’
tweets from August 13th to September 13th. Despite many
replications of news titles, these tweets provide the URLs of
hot news published by the corresponding news accounts. We
do not focus on a particular domain or type of news. From
observation, the collected pieces of news come from a wide
range of topics, including ﬁnance, politics, sports, disaster
and so on. This open-domain dataset gives us the chance to
learn summarization behavior in different genres.
Data Collection
Given a news URL, we collect its document as well as linked
tweets. The news content is retrieved with the open Python
package newspaper3. We just reserve the main body of a
document. Then we apply the Twitter term search API to
extract linked tweets, and conduct careful preprocessing as
• Discard retweets;
3 
• Delete non-English tokens in a tweet;
• Remove tweets which contains less than 5 tokens;
• Merge identical tweets.
At the end, we collect 13207 valid tweets from 4483 news
documents.
Cluster Formation
It is common that different newswires publish multiple versions of documents about the same news. These documents
are clustered together to present a more complete description
of an event. With regard to our dataset, hashtags provide a
simple and accurate way to achieve this goal. After removing general hashtags such as #ThisWeek and #ICYMI (i.e.,
In Case You Missed It), the hashtags related to news are usually the key phrases of the event. For instance, #GreeceCrisis
refers to the ﬁnancial crisis of Greece. When we further restrict to cluster documents in the same day, it is very likely
that the documents pointed by the same hashtag describe the
identical news. For a document attached to no hashtag, we
put it into an existing cluster if its TF cosine similarity with
the cluster exceeds a threshold, e.g., 0.5 as we set. After removing clusters which have less than 3 documents or less
than 8 linked tweets, we retain 1114 documents in 204 clusters.
Reference Generation
As mentioned above, most tweets are incomplete and contain noises, which are not suitably included in a summary
directly. Since the sentences in the original news documents
are usually well-written, we decide to “synthesize” reference summaries by selecting sentences from both news documents and high-quality tweets as long as they are good representatives of the news information. We expect the generated reference summaries could cover most key points
of tweets. Here we adopt ROUGE to measure the coverage ratio. Through the analysis of ROUGE, we develop an
ILP based solution to sentence selection, making sure the
generated reference summary reaching the upper bound of
Analysis of ROUGE Measurement
ROUGE counts the
overlapping units such as the n-grams, word sequences or
word pairs between the two pieces of text. Take the widelyused ROUGE-2 as an example. The coverage score between
a candidate summary and a linked tweet i is:
ROUGE −2i =
b Gaini(b)
b ntwti(b)
where b stands for a bi-gram, and ntwti(b) is the number of
bi-gram b in the ith linked tweet. Gaini(b) is the maximum
number of bi-gram co-occurring in the candidate summary
and linked tweet:
Gaini(b) = min{ntwti(b), ncnd(b)}
Given a linked tweet, its total bi-gram count is a ﬁxed value.
Therefore we can rewrite Eq. 1 to
ROUGE −2i = wb,twti
b Gaini(b)
where wb,twti =
b ntwti(b) could be regarded as the weight
for the linked tweet. For a set of linked tweets, ROUGE averages their scores.
ROUGE −2 = 1
i=1 (wtwti
b Gaini(b)),
Use z(s) ∈{0, 1} to indicate whether or not a sentence s
is selected in the candidate summary. We can represent the
maximization of ROUGE-2 under the length constraint L as
the following optimization function:
i=1(wb,twti
b min{ntwti(b), ncnd(b)}) (5)
s z(s) × ns(b)
s z(s) × |s| ≤L
z(s) ∈{0, 1},
where ns(b) is the frequency of b in sentence s. The meaning
of each constraint as follows:
Constraint 6 calculates the number of b in the current summary.
Constraint 7 satisﬁes the summary length limit.
Constraint 8 deﬁnes a binary variable z(s).
All the above formulas are linear expect the gain function.
Note the minimization problem can be computed as follows:
Gaini(b) ≤ntwti(b)
Gaini(b) ≤ncnd(b)
Gaini(b) = ntwti(b) || Gaini(b) = ncnd(b)
Constraints
min{ntwti(b), ncnd(b)}, while Constraint 11 can be
solved by the big M formula or indicator constraints4.
But there is a much simpler solution in this task. Since
the objective function is maximization of Gaini(b), this
constraint will be realized automatically. Finally, the whole
linear programming formulas are listed below:
i=1(wb,twti
b Gaini(b))
s z(s) × ns(b)
s z(s) × |s| ≤L
z(s) ∈{0, 1}
Gaini(b) ≤ntwti(b),
Gaini(b) ≤ncnd(b),
The work of also proposes an linear programming function for the maximization of ROUGE.
Based on the fact that min(a, x) = 0.5(−|x −a| + x + a),
they introduce auxiliary variables and convert the maximization of Eq. 1 into
b (ncnd(b) −Ci(b))
Ci(b) ≥ncnd(b) −ntwti(b),
Ci(b) ≥ntwti(b) −ncnd(b),
4 
wss?uid=swg21400084
where Ci(b) is an auxiliary variable equal to |ncnd(b) −
ntwti(b)| in the solution. However, they do not provide details to tackle the case of multiple measurements. Compared
with their approach, our model represents the gain function
without transformation, which greatly speeds up the solution
procedure. In the next section, we illustrate how to extend
the model to multiple ROUGE variants.
Extension to Multiple ROUGE Variants
The abovementioned approach generates the optimal summary for
ROUGE-2. Actually, other ROUGE variants such as
ROUGE-1 are also very useful . Our
preliminary experiments also show that only 49% bi-grams
in the linked tweets appear in the original documents, while
over 83% uni-grams can be found. Thus we attempt to generate reference summaries that optimize both ROUGE-2 and
ROUGE-1. We modify Objective Function 12 into
i=1 (wb,twti
b Gaini(b))
i=1 (wu,twti
u Gaini(u)),
where u stands for a uni-gram and λ ∈ is the trade-off
between ROUGE-2 and ROUGE-1. When λ comes close to
0 (e.g., 0.0001 in the experiment), we implement the effect
that the selected summary is the optimum of ROUGE-2 and
its ROUGE-1 is as large as possible.
Although ILP is NP-hard in general, considerable researches have produced a number of effective solution tools.
In this paper, we adopt the IBM CPLEX Optimizer5 which
is a high-performance mathematical programming solver.
To ensure the sentence-level readability, we choose
declarative sentences in the documents and tweets as candidate summary sentences, and then adopt Eq. 13 to generate
reference summaries. In line with DUC, we set the summary
length to 100 words.
Experiment
Firstly, we inspect the content of the collected linked tweets.
We check whether they really provide certain news key
points. Then, we analyze the quality of the generated summaries. Both automatic and manual evaluations are conducted. Finally, we design a supervised summarization
model to verify the effect of the TGSum dataset.
Linked Tweet Analysis
During the data collection, we ﬁnd that most linked tweets
are simply the extraction of news titles, but still each document can receive three unique linked tweets on average. We
categorize these unique tweets in accordance with the summarization task.
Extraction: The tweet is directly extracted from original
Compression: The same word sequence in a tweet can be
found in a document sentence (except extraction).
5 
optimization/cplex-optimizer/
Abstraction: Over 80% words of a tweet can be found in
the news document, and located in more than one sentence.
Other: The rest tweets. From our observation, most of them
are comments.
An example is provided for each tweet type in Table 3.
All the four tweets are from a news cluster describing
#BangkokBlast. We use bold font to indicate the words appearing in the news. It is noteworthy that the original document uses the word “believe” whereas the abstraction tweet
chooses its synonym “think”. The second and third tweets
are really salient and condensed, which demonstrates Twitter users are willing to summarize the documents. The proportions of different tweet types are shown in Fig. 1. Note
that our deﬁnition makes some abstraction tweets misclassiﬁed into the Other type. Thus the real abstraction tweets
should occupy a larger proportion. The direct extraction behavior (except title) in linked tweets seems to be rare. Users
prefer adding tags to raise social communication. In total,
over 70% of linked tweets are compression or abstraction,
which shows its potential applications in learning the summary sentence generation models. In the generated reference
summaries, we ﬁnd 30% sentences come from linked tweets.
Therefore TGSum provides the abstractive version of references to some extent.
Figure 1: Proportions of linked tweet types.
Quality of TGSum
ROUGE Evaluation
Now we verify the accuracy of our
ILP-based ROUGE upper bound generation algorithm. We
choose λ ∈0, 1, 0.0001, which means selecting sentences
according to ROUGE-2, ROUGE-1 and their combination.
We refer to the corresponding model summaries as UB-1,
UB-2 and UB-Combination respectively. As a contrast, we
design a baseline applying the greedy algorithm. It iteratively adds the sentence bringing the maximal ROUGE gain
into the summary. Likewise, the summaries generated according to ROUGE-1 and ROUGE-2 are called GA-1 and
GA-2. The ROUGE scores measured by linked tweets are
shown in Table 4. Obviously, the ILP solution achieves much
larger ROUGE scores than the greedy algorithm. Then we
compare three types of summaries derived from different
λ values. It is noted that both UB-2 and UB-Combination
reach the upper bound of ROUGE-2, but the ROUGE-1
score of UB-Combination is higher. We thereby include the
Extraction
Police have released a sketch of the main suspect
Police have released a sketch of the main suspect, a
man in a yellow T-shirt who was ﬁlmed by security cameras leaving a backpack at the shrine.
Compression
Suspect in Bangkok bombing is “an unnamed male foreigner,” according to an arrest warrant issued by a Thai
The chief suspect in the deadly bombing of Bangkok’s
popular Erawan Shrine is “an unnamed male foreigner,” according to an arrest warrant issued
Wednesday by a Thai court.
Abstraction
Taxi driver who thinks he picked up Bangkok bombing
suspect says man was calm, spoke unfamiliar language
on a phone.
A Thai motorbike taxi driver who believes he picked
up the suspect shortly after the blast also said he did not
seem to be Thai. ... who spoke an unfamiliar language
on his cell phone during the short ride ... ... he still appeared very calm...
Other(Comment)
Hmm, this face looks a bit familiar...
Table 3: Examples of different linked tweet types.
summaries generated by UB-Combination in TGSum as reference summaries.
UB-Combination
Table 4: ROUGE(%) comparison.
Manual Evaluation
We manually evaluate the sentence
quality in the generated reference summaries. Two metrics
are used, i.e., informativeness and readability. Since TG-
Sum serves for learning-based summarization models, we
do not consider the coherence of an entire summary. For
each metrics, a summary sentence is classiﬁed into three
levels, namely good, OK and bad. Linked tweets are also
evaluated for comparison. The results are presented in Table 5. As seen, most sentences in the reference summaries
are both informative and readable. The former owes to the
saliency of most linked tweets, while the candidate sentence
selection strategy brings the nice readability. Since a generated reference is the ROUGE upper bound measured by the
set of linked tweets, a small amount of noised tweets will be
excluded. Thus the number of unimportant sentences in reference summaries is much smaller than that in linked tweets.
A bad case we ﬁnd is the cluster about “#BBCBizQuiz”. All
the tweets are questions. As a result, the reference summary
fails to locate the salient sentences. With regard to readability, a large part of linked tweets are merely regarded as OK
because they are not the complete sentences at all. By contrast, sentences in reference summaries are usually formal
and readable. Quite a few summary sentences marked as OK
are due to the splitting errors. For instance, sometimes a section title is attached to a sentence. Meanwhile, a pronoun at
the beginning of a sentence brings the co-reference ambiguity problem.
Informativeness
Readability
Table 5: Manual evaluation of TGSum’s quality.
Effect of TGSum
To verify the effect of TGSum, we examine whether it can
be used to improve the performance of summarization systems on DUC benchmarks. We design a supervised Support Vector Regression (SVR) summarizer . To be concrete, each sentence in the training set is scored by ROUGE-2. Then we extract the features such as TF (the averaged TF scores of the sentence),
LENGTH (sentence length), and STOP-RATIO (the ratio
of stopwords), and train SVR to measure the saliency of
sentences. For testing, we follow the greedy algorithm to select salient sentences into a summary.
According to , the SVR summarizer
achieves competing performance against the best participates in DUC. It is a standard learning-based summarization
model, which is enough to emphasize the effect of training
data. We train this summarizer on different datasets and test
it on DUC. The ROUGE results are shown in Table 6. Here
“DUC” stands for DUC datasets except the testing year, and
“TWT REF” means the same documents as TGSum but directly use tweets as reference summaries. Seeing from this
table, ROUGE scores always enjoy a considerable increase
when adding TGSum as an extra training set. In addition,
even only given the TGSum dataset for training, the summarizer can still achieve comparable performance, especially
on DUC 02. Thus, the effect of TGSum references is similar to the manual annotations of DUC, although the former
is generated according to tweets automatically. In comparison to TGSum, directly using tweets as references does
not always improve the summarization performance. The
noise in tweets may misguide the model learning. For example, when treating tweets as references, the feature STOP-
RATIO holds extremely high positive weight. This improper
feature weight can be ascribed to the informal writing style
on Twitter, and it obviously fails to match the informativeness requirement.
Training set
DUC+TWT REF
DUC+TWT REF
DUC+TWT REF
Table 6: Summarization performance with different training
Related Work
Summarization with Twitter
Most summarization work on Twitter try to directly summarize tweets in a given topic. Due to the lack of reference
summaries, most researchers have to use unsupervised methods. detected important
phrases in tweets with a graph-based algorithm. But soon,
the authors developed a
simpler “Hybrid TF-IDF” method, which ranked tweet sentences using the TF-IDF scheme and produced even better
results. A more complicated work was reported by , which relied on Integer Linear Programming to extract sentences with most salient n-grams. It
is worth mentioning that this paper highlighted the use of
documents linked to the tweet set. The saliency was measured according to TF in the documents, and their experiments demonstrated that allowing summary sentences to be
selected from both tweets and documents achieved the best
performance. Recently, some papers simultaneously conducted single-document
and tweet summarization based on cross-media features.
The above researches focus on tweet summarization,
where documents provide additional features. There are a
limited number of papers about utilizing tweets to collect
summarization data. The only work we know is , who treated linked tweets as reference
summaries and attempted to apply extractive summarization techniques to generate them. They found that linked
tweets were informative but their writing quality was inferior to extracted sentences. This work is equivalent to our
practice which synthesizes reference summaries on the basis of linked tweets. Moreover, their dataset only has 100 English news documents and only suits single-document summarization. In contrast, we build a far larger dataset and apply it to multi-document summarization.
ILP for Summarization
Integer Linear Programming has been widely applied in
summarization because it can appropriately model item selection state. originally introduced ILP
in this area. He constructed summaries by maximizing the
importance of the selected sentences and minimizing their
pairwise similarity, which was the extension of a greedy approach called Maximum Marginal Relevance (MMR) . Given N sentences, his model
contains O(N 2) binary variables. Thus it is quite inefﬁcient when searching the optimal solution. Later, proposed to treat summarization as concept
coverage maximization, where redundancy was implicitly
measured by beneﬁting from including each concept only
once. They used bi-grams as the concept representation. The
same idea was followed by many researches . Recently, reported that syntactic and semantic concepts might also be helpful, and some papers such as combined sentence and concept selection process.
With heuristic rules, ILP can apply to compress or
even fuse .
Conclusion
This paper presents an effective way to automatically collect
large-scales of news multi-document summaries with reference to social media’s reactions. We use hashtags to cluster
documents into different topic sets, and then “synthesize”
reference summaries which are able to cover most important
key points embedded in the linked tweets within the cluster.
To measure the coverage ratio, we adopt ROUGE metrics
and develop an ILP solution to discover its upper bound.
Manual evaluation veriﬁes the informativeness and readability of the collected reference summaries. In addition, we
train a SVR summarizer on DUC generic multi-document
summarization benchmarks. With the collected data as extra
training resource, the performance of this summarizer improves signiﬁcantly on all test sets.
The current work focuses on generic multi-document
summarization. However, we believe our dataset can be used
in many other scenarios. On the one hand, the compression
type of linked tweets is an ideal source for learning sentence compression. On the other hand, we are interested in
adapting our dataset to update summarization by tracking
the same hashtag published on different dates.
Acknowledgments
The work described in this paper was supported by the grants
from the Research Grants Council of Hong Kong (PolyU
5202/12E and PolyU 152094/14E) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61272291, 61273278 and
61572049). The correspondence authors of this paper are
Wenjie Li and Sujian Li.