Effect of pulmonary tuberculosis on mortality in patients receiving
highly active antiretroviral therapy
INTRODUCTION
Pulmonary tuberculosis (PTB) is a leading cause of death among HIV-infected individuals in
sub-Saharan Africa and throughout the world . PTB is of particular concern in South Africa,
where an estimated 44% of new adult PTB cases arise among HIV-positive individuals .
Prior to the introduction of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART), PTB in HIV-positive
individuals was identified as a leading cause of death even among those receiving PTB
treatment . Access to HAART reduces both mortality and incidence of PTB .
Whether there are differences in prognosis between patients with PTB initiating HAART and
patients free of PTB when initiating HAART remains unresolved. Several studies have
identified PTB as a leading cause of death among people receiving HAART . A study
in Uganda found that among individuals receiving HAART, those who had prevalent or
incident PTB died at 4.7 times the rate of those without PTB, although the authors acknowledge
that the relationship was likely confounded by body mass index (BMI) and CD4 cell count
 . In contrast, a large study in Zambia reported no difference in mortality rates by PTB status
 , but these results may have been affected by the substantial numbers of patients lost to
follow-up (LTFU).
Controversy also remains over the effect of time between initiation of PTB treatment and
initiation of HAART on the risk of death. The South African National Comprehensive Care,
Management and Treatment Guidelines for HIV and AIDS recommend waiting two weeks to
two months to initiate HAART , because of concerns of drug-drug interactions, pill
burden, adherence, and immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS) . The WHO
suggests separately that while it may be safer to defer the initiation of HAART, concurrent
initiation of HAART and PTB treatment may be necessary in patients at high risk of death
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Daniel Westreich participated in the conception, data cleaning, analysis, and writing of this manuscript, and that I have seen and approve
the final version.
Patrick MacPhail. participated in the planning, data management and review of the drafts and that I have seen and approved the final
Annelies Van Rie participated in the conception, analysis, and writing of this manuscript, and that I have seen and approve the final
Babatyi Malope-Kgokong participated in the data management and review of drafts and that I have seen and approved the final version.
Prudence Ive participated in the setting up of the clinic, the initial data review and discussion of the topic and review of the draft and that
I have seen and approved the final version.
Dennis Rubel participated in the planning, data management and review of the drafts and that I have seen and approved the final version.
Ronan Boulmé participated as the director of the R&D team in the establishment and development of the data collection tool which is
owned by TherapyEdge Inc. and review of the drafts and that I have seen and approved the final version.
Joseph Eron participated in planning of the data analysis, data analysis, and writing of drafts, and that I have seen and approved the final
Ian Sanne contributed to this publication in the design of the proposed analysis, implementation of the data systems, review of the
publication and grant management of the funding allocated to this research.
COMPETING INTERESTS
DW received support from an unrestricted educational training grant from the UNC-GSK Center for Excellence in Pharmacoepidemiology
and Public Health, UNC School of Public Health. No other competing interests declared.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
AIDS. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 April 1.
 
AIDS. 2009 March 27; 23(6): 707–715. doi:10.1097/QAD.0b013e328325d115.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
In this study of the Themba Lethu Clinical Cohort, a large (>7500 patients) public treatment
site in Johannesburg, South Africa, we used robust methods (inverse probability of exposure
and censoring weighted marginal structural models to control for confounding and LTFU) to
comprehensively assess the impact of treatment for PTB at the time of HAART initiation on
subsequent all-cause mortality, both overall and by length of delay between initiation of PTB
treatment and initiation of HAART. In addition, we assessed the impact of the combined
presence of PTB and other risk factors for mortality on survival during HAART.
Study site, clinic procedures, data collection
The Themba Lethu Clinical Cohort is a prospective clinical cohort of adults initiating HAART
at the Helen Joseph Hospital in Johannesburg, South Africa. The program is funded by the
South African Government, Gauteng Province, PEPFAR, and USAID. Themba Lethu has
initiated over 10,000 patients on HAART since April 2004 and is the largest single clinic
providing HAART in South Africa, and one of the largest antiretroviral clinics in the world.
HAART-eligible patients attend educational and adherence sessions, and are assessed by a
physician prior to initiating treatment. The vast majority of patients in South Africa begin a
HAART regimen comprising stavudine, lamivudine, and either efavirenz or nevirapine.
After HAART initiation, patients are scheduled for monthly pharmacy visits and clinical visits
at month 4 and every 6 months thereafter and whenever needed clinically. Clinical and
laboratory (including CD4 count, viral load and hemoglobin) data are collected at all scheduled
visits, except for viral load which is not collected at baseline. All data were stored in the
TherapyEdge™ (TherapyEdge Inc., USA) database, and analyzed in SAS v9.1.3 (SAS
Institute, NC, USA).
South African patients with PTB typically receive two months of isoniazid, rifampicin,
pyramizade, and ethambutol followed by four months of isoniazid and rifampicin at
primary health care clinics (outside of Themba Lethu). Data on PTB treatment adherence was
therefore not available for the majority of patients. Date of PTB treatment initiation was
obtained using TB patient clinic card and patient self-report to ensure accuracy.
Study eligibility and definitions
Patients became eligible for this study upon initiation of HAART at Themba Lethu Clinic
between April 1 2004 and March 31 2007. The main exposure was prevalent, treated PTB
(hereafter, PTB) at the time of HAART initiation; the main outcome was all-cause mortality.
Individuals more than three months late for a scheduled clinic appointment and who could not
be located after three phone calls and a visit to the last known address were classified as LTFU.
These patients were censored midway between the last recorded and the next scheduled visit
or at the last recorded date of receipt of therapy.
Statistical analyses
Descriptive analyses were performed using chi-square tests to compare categorical variables,
t-tests to compare means, and Wilcoxon rank sum test to compare medians. We assessed the
proportional hazards assumption for PTB in univariate and multivariate analysis through visual
inspection of survival and log-log-survival curves, as well as Cox tests of continuous and
categorical time interactions.
Analysis 1 examined the effect of being on treatment for PTB at time of initiation of HAART
on all-cause mortality during follow-up. Analysis 2 examined the effect of time lag between
initiation of PTB treatment and initiation of HAART on subsequent mortality, where time lag
AIDS. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 April 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
was categorized by approximate quartile of duration of PTB treatment prior to initiation of
HAART: >120 days, 61-120 days, 31-60 days, and ≤30 days. We hypothesized that risk of
death from TB would increase with shorter lead-time due drug-drug interactions, nonadherence due to pill burden, and IRIS.
In both analyses we controlled for confounding by baseline factors and LTFU using inverse
probability of exposure and censoring weights . Analyses were implemented as discrete
time hazard models with one observation per person-month and time-updated covariates.
Models were evaluated using log-binomial generalized estimating equations, controlling for
within-individual correlation using an “independent” correlation matrix for robust standard
errors in the presence of repeated observations. Log-binomial regression was preferred to
logistic regression because the former directly estimates the hazard ratio (HR) rather than the
hazard odds ratio .
In both analyses, stabilized weights were estimated separately for exposure and censoring using
ordinary (Analysis 1) or polytomous logistic regression (Analysis 2). We considered the
following factors as predictors for both the weight and censoring models: gender, ethnicity,
employment status, age, history of antiretroviral therapy, history of PTB, baseline measures
of pregnancy, peripheral neuropathy, hemoglobin (adjusted for sex, pregnancy status, and
altitude), BMI, CD4 cell count, and WHO stage (IV or other), year of enrollment (measuring
years starting at baseline), prophylaxis with co-trimoxazole, and whether treatment was
initiated before or after October 2006 (when consultation fees of ranging between $2-$5 per
consultation were eliminated by the Department of Health). In addition, the time-varying
censoring model accounted for time-updated measures of hemoglobin, CD4 count, and BMI,
as well as for month of follow-up with both a linear month and cubic spline terms for
month of follow up with knots at the approximate 5th, 25th, 50th, 75th and 95th percentiles of
survival time .
We did not control for HAART adherence, successful virologic suppression, or initial HAART
regimen (nevirapine vs. efavirenz) because these factors either occur during follow-up or may
be affected by the exposure and therefore would be part of the causal mechanism of the
exposure on the outcome. Full descriptions of the components and validation of the stabilized
weight models for both exposure and censoring are given in the Appendix.
Sensitivity and secondary analyses
We performed six sensitivity analyses. To limit the potential effects of individuals dying
between initiation of PTB treatment and initiation of HAART (i.e., left-truncation), we
restricted PTB to cases who initiated HAART within 30 days of start of PTB treatment (S1)
and separately to cases who initiated PTB treatment 30 days before or after initiation of HAART
(S2). To assess the effect of PTB on early mortality, we restricted follow-up to the first four
months of HAART (S3). To determine the effect of the exposure among the exposed, we
calculated the weighted standardized mortality ratio for PTB (S4) . We used a traditional
proportional hazards regression approach (with adjustment rather than reweighting) (S5). To
ascertain the extent of bias due to LTFU, we examined the main effect estimate without
censoring weights (S6).
Additionally, we examined effect measure modification of PTB by key baseline risk factors
for mortality, including severe immunosuppression (CD4≤50 cells/mm3 or WHO stage IV
disease), malnutrition (underweight, BMI<18.5 kg/m2), and anemia.
AIDS. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 April 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Ethics approval
This study was approved by the human subjects review boards of the University of the
Witwatersrand and the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
There were 7,512 individuals included in this study, contributing a total of 106,795 personmonths to this analysis. Of these patients, 1,197 (15.9%) were being treated for PTB at the time
of HAART initiation. Individuals who had PTB at baseline were more likely to receive
nevirapine, to be male, unemployed, and underweight, and had more severe
immunosuppression (lower CD4 counts, more WHO stage IV) than those without PTB at
baseline (Table 1). The proportion of patients receiving co-trimoxazole prophylaxis was similar
between groups. The risk of death during follow-up was higher in individuals receiving PTB
treatment at time of HAART initiation than in individuals not receiving PTB treatment at
HAART initiation (6.2% vs. 3.6%, chi-square p<0.0001). Similar proportions of LTFU were
observed in the two populations (19.5% and 18.8% respectively, p=0.6150).
Of the 1,197 individuals with PTB at baseline, 254 (21.2%) had been receiving PTB treatment
for more than 120 days, 320 (26.7%) for 61-120 days, 289 (24.1%) for 31 to 60 days, and 334
(27.9%) for 30 days or less. Key differences in baseline characteristics by amount of lead-time
are summarized in Table 2. Patients with shorter lead time had more advanced disease,
including lower CD4 cell counts, hemoglobin, and BMI.
As there was no evidence of violation of the proportional hazards assumption (Figure 1a), we
summarized the effect of PTB at time of HAART initiation on mortality as a single estimate.
In the overall crude (unweighted and unadjusted) analysis (Table 3), individuals with PTB at
baseline were more likely to die during follow-up than those without PTB (crude HR for death
1.71; 95% CI 1.31-2.23). The crude HRs by lead time ranged from 1.34 for those with 60-120
days of lead-time, to 2.02 for those with ≤30 days of lead-time, but all 95% CIs were relatively
wide and there were no discernible trends by lead-time. Crude survival curves comparing
individuals with PTB to those without PTB are shown in Figure 1a.
In models which adjusted for confounding and LTFU using inverse probability of exposure
and censoring weights, the HR comparing risk of death in those with PTB to risk of death in
those without PTB at baseline was 1.06 (95% CI 0.75-1.49). Semi-parametric survival curves
adjusted for confounding (but not censoring) with inverse probability of exposure weights
 are shown in Figure 1b. The HRs in Figure 1 differ slightly from those presented in Table
3 because the figure required the use of weighted Cox proportional hazards models . The
results were similar when stratified by lead-time category, with adjusted HRs ranging from
0.89 to 1.28 and confidence intervals including the null (Table 3).
Results of sensitivity and secondary analyses
Analyses S1-S6 yielded estimates of effect similar to main analysis, and none yielded an
adjusted estimate of effect different from the null (Figure 2). The standard Cox proportional
hazards regression (S5) also yielded results similar to the main analysis.
When interaction terms were included in the model, we found several subpopulations in which
PTB appeared to increase risk of death. First, this analysis showed that the HR for PTB on
mortality among individuals who had CD4>50, BMI≥18.5, normal hemoglobin, and were not
in WHO stage IV was 1.70 (95% CI 0.83-3.49), suggesting a raised hazard due to PTB among
these otherwise relatively “healthy” individuals. Second, the estimates of the HR for PTB on
mortality for individuals who had both PTB and a BMI<18.5, and individuals who had both
PTB and CD4≤50 differed when interaction terms were considered. The HR for PTB and
AIDS. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 April 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
BMI<18.5 increased from 2.06 (95% 1.37-3.11) to 4.43 (95% CI 1.91-10.27) when interactions
were added to the model and likewise, the HR for PTB and CD4≤50 increased from 2.91 (95%
CI 1.95-4.37) to 4.01 (95% CI: 2.09-7.72). No such interactions were observed between PTB
and low hemoglobin or WHO stage IV disease. These results suggest a possible synergistic
effect of PTB with low BMI and low CD4.
DISCUSSION
In a large urban clinic providing HAART in South Africa, we have shown that treatment for
PTB at the time of HAART initiation does increase the risk of death during follow-up and also
that initiation of HAART soon after starting PTB treatment does not increase risk of death.
Our approach to the problem of LTFU makes it highly unlikely that these results can be
explained by differential, informative LTFU among PTB patients. Instead, the increased risk
seen in the unadjusted models is due to the fact that PTB patients are more likely than others
to have severe immunosuppression (low CD4 counts, WHO stage IV illness), low BMI, and
Our finding that shorter delay between initiation of PTB treatment and HAART does not
increase mortality contradicted our hypothesis that shorter delay would be associated with
increased mortality. This finding was reinforced by similar results when analysis was restricted
to those who started PTB within 30 days of HAART initiation (S1) or to the first four months
of HAART, the period in which the majority of deaths occur (S3). Taken together, these results
suggest strongly that starting HAART soon after initiation of PTB treatment is unlikely to
result in higher risk of death. While it is tempting to conclude that length of time between
initiation of PTB treatment and HAART has no effect on risk of death, our findings must be
interpreted cautiously in this respect. Patients in South Africa most often initiate PTB treatment
outside of HAART clinics, and may die before starting HAART (in analytic terms, they would
be left-truncated). The mortality attributable to PTB could therefore have been underestimated.
Consequently, our results must be interpreted conditionally - given that an individual who
initiated PTB treatment survived until initiating HAART, there was no effect of current PTB
treatment on mortality.
However, the size of this potential left-truncation bias is likely to be small. Preliminary results
from a recent randomized controlled trial of time between start of treatment for opportunistic
infection other than PTB and initiation of HAART suggested that deferring HAART may
increase risk of death or progression to AIDS ; as is suggested by universally low CD4
counts and high prevalence of WHO stage III and IV disease in this cohort, many patients in
our cohort initiate HAART with an acute opportunistic infection. Therefore, unless left
truncation due to PTB acted differently than left truncation due to other opportunistic
infections, then, it is unlikely that left truncation due to PTB would substantially bias these
results. Additionally, if left-truncation created substantial bias, we would expect individuals
with shorter lead-time (and thus, less time to become left-truncated) to be at higher overall risk
of death from PTB. We saw no trends in hazard of death with changing lead-time, nor did we
observe a significant effect of PTB on mortality among the patients with the shortest lead-time
Key risk factors for death after HAART initiation include advanced disease with severe
immunosuppression, poor nutritional status and anemia , conditions which are
more prevalent among PTB patients than non-PTB patients. The results of the secondary
(hypothesis-generating) analysis suggested that patients with both PTB and one of these key
risk factors (low BMI, low CD4 count), may be at increased risk of death in the setting of
concurrent treatment for PTB and HAART. Future investigators should rigorously test these
hypotheses.
AIDS. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 April 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Although a substantial number of people in this cohort became LTFU, rates of LTFU did not
differ between those with or without PTB and did not appear to be informative with regard to
the PTB-mortality relationship; the effect of PTB on mortality was very similar with or without
control for LTFU (see Figure 1b and analysis S6). This should increase our confidence in other
reports about the PTB-mortality relationship, e.g., Stringer et al. , which suffered from
high rates of LTFU but did not model the censoring process explicitly.
This study had several limitations. First, uncontrolled confounding can never be fully excluded
in observational cohort studies. Nevertheless, when compared to randomized trials,
observational cohort studies may have better generalizability to the population of interest
 ; thus, we believe that these results may be more applicable in practice to people receiving
HAART in urban South Africa and possibly throughout sub-Saharan Africa. Second, because
TB diagnosis and treatment occurred at primary health care clinics, we lacked culture and smear
microscopy results. This may have led to misclassification of the PTB status. However, even
if smear microscopy were available, the problem of misclassification would remain due to its
low sensitivity among HIV-positive individuals . Drug-resistance status was also not
available; the inclusion of drug-resistant PTB cases would likely raise the effect of PTB on
death and bias results away from the null. We were also unable to control for adherence to PTB
treatment.
In conclusion, this robust analysis of this large South African cohort strongly indicates that the
effect of treatment for PTB on mortality following initiation of HAART may be of limited or
no clinical importance and that initiation of HAART soon after start of PTB treatment does
not increase risk of death. These results complement other emerging evidence, including the
randomized trial results (mentioned above) arguing for a earlier initiation of HAART in patients
with opportunistic infections other than TB , reports suggesting that PTB-associated IRIS
is not as dangerous as previously thought , and evidence that virologic response can
be achieved in the presence of co-administration of rifampicin with efavirenz . While
only the results of an ongoing randomized controlled trial (ACTG 5221) can provide a
definitive answer to the question of optimal time of initiation of HAART in PTB patients, the
results of this study and other recent findings argue that the presence of PTB treatment should
not delay initiation of HAART.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Michele Jonsson Funk, PhD (University of North Carolina Department of Epidemiology) and
Jay Kaufman, PhD (University of North Carolina Department of Epidemiology) for their helpful comments on
statistical methodology throughout the preparation of this manuscript. They received no compensation for this
assistance.
We would like to thank all the staff at TLC for their unyielding efforts on behalf of the patients. We would like to
thank the patients of Themba Lethu Clinic for the trust they have placed in receiving treatment at the clinic.
FUNDING The clinical activities of the Helen Joseph Hospital are supported by the National and Gauteng Department
of Health and the United States President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) in a grant by USAID to Right
to Care and the Institution (674-A-00-08-00007-00).
The research activities of this publication are supported by the National Institute for Health in a grant from the NIAID,
DAIDS division (CIPRA IU19 AI53217-01, PEPFAR protocol #3 U19 AI 053217-04SI-R2C01). DW also received
support from an unrestricted educational training grant from the UNC-GSK Center for Excellence in
Pharmacoepidemiology and Public Health, UNC School of Public Health.
The funding sources had no involvement in the design or conduct of the study, in the collection, management, analysis,
or interpretation of the data, in the preparation, writing, review or approval of this manuscript, or in the decision to
submit this manuscript for publication.
AIDS. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 April 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript