Coarse-to-Fine Volumetric Prediction for Single-Image 3D Human Pose
Georgios Pavlakos1, Xiaowei Zhou1, Konstantinos G. Derpanis2, Kostas Daniilidis1
1 University of Pennsylvania
2 Ryerson University
This paper addresses the challenge of 3D human pose
estimation from a single color image. Despite the general
success of the end-to-end learning paradigm, top performing approaches employ a two-step solution consisting of a
Convolutional Network (ConvNet) for 2D joint localization
and a subsequent optimization step to recover 3D pose. In
this paper, we identify the representation of 3D pose as a
critical issue with current ConvNet approaches and make
two important contributions towards validating the value of
end-to-end learning for this task. First, we propose a ﬁne
discretization of the 3D space around the subject and train a
ConvNet to predict per voxel likelihoods for each joint. This
creates a natural representation for 3D pose and greatly improves performance over the direct regression of joint coordinates. Second, to further improve upon initial estimates,
we employ a coarse-to-ﬁne prediction scheme. This step addresses the large dimensionality increase and enables iterative reﬁnement and repeated processing of the image features. The proposed approach outperforms all state-of-theart methods on standard benchmarks achieving a relative
error reduction greater than 30% on average. Additionally,
we investigate using our volumetric representation in a related architecture which is suboptimal compared to our endto-end approach, but is of practical interest, since it enables
training when no image with corresponding 3D groundtruth
is available, and allows us to present compelling results for
in-the-wild images.
1. Introduction
Estimating the full-body 3D pose of a human from a single monocular image is an open challenge, which has garnered signiﬁcant attention since the early days of computer
vision .
Given its ill-posed nature, researchers have
generally approached 3D human pose estimation in simpliﬁed settings, such as assuming background subtraction
is feasible , relying on groundtruth 2D joint locations
to estimate 3D pose , employing additional camera views , and capitalizing on temporal consistency
to improve upon single frame predictions . This di-
Volumetric Output
Figure 1: Illustration of our volumetric representation for
3D human pose. We discretize the space around the subject
and use a ConvNet to predict per voxel likelihoods for each
joint from a single color image.
versity of assumptions and additional information sources
exempliﬁes the challenge presented by the task.
With the introduction of more powerful discriminative
approaches, such as Convolutional Networks (ConvNets),
many of these restrictive assumptions have been relaxed.
End-to-end learning approaches attempt to estimate 3D
pose directly from a single image by addressing it as coordinate regression , nearest neighbor between images and poses , or classiﬁcation over a set of pose
classes . Yet to date, these approaches have been outperformed by more traditional two-step pipelines, e.g., . In these cases, ConvNets are used only for 2D joint
localization and 3D poses are generated during a postprocessing optimization step. Combining accurate 2D joint
localization with strong and expressive 3D priors has been
proven to be very effective. In this work, we show that
ConvNets are able to provide much richer information than
simply 2D joint locations.
To fully exploit the potential of ConvNets in the context
of 3D human pose, we propose the following items, and justify them empirically. First, we cast 3D pose estimation as
a keypoint localization problem in a discretized 3D space.
Instead of directly regressing the coordinates of the joints
(e.g., ), we train a ConvNet to predict per voxel
likelihoods for each joint in this volume. This volumetric
representation, illustrated in Figure 1, is much more sensible for the 3D nature of our problem and improves learning.
 
Effectively, for every joint, the volumetric supervision provides the network with groundtruth for each voxel in the 3D
space. This provides much richer information than a set of
world coordinates. The empirical results also validate the
superiority of our proposed form of supervision.
Second, to deal with the increased dimensionality of the
volumetric representation, we propose a coarse-to-ﬁne prediction scheme. As demonstrated in the 2D pose case, intermediate supervision and iterative estimation are particularly
effective strategies . For our volumetric representation though, naively stacking an increasing number of
components and reﬁning the estimates is not an effective solution, as shown empirically. Instead, we gradually increase
the resolution of the supervision volume for the most challenging z-dimension (depth), during the processing. This
coarse-to-ﬁne supervision, illustrated schematically in Figure 2, allows for more accurate estimates after each step.
We empirically demonstrate the advantage of this practice
over naively stacking more components together.
Our proposed approach achieves state-of-the-art results
on standard benchmarks, outperforming both ConvNet-only
and hybrid approaches that post-process the 2D output of a
ConvNet. Additionally, we investigate using our volumetric representation within a related architecture that decouples 2D joint localization and 3D joint reconstruction. In
particular, we use two separate networks (the output of one
serves as the input to the other) and two non-corresponding
data sources, i.e., 2D labeled imagery to train the ﬁrst component and an independent 3D data source (e.g., MoCap) to
train the second one separately. While this architecture has
practical beneﬁts (e.g., predicting 3D pose for in-the-wild
images), we show empirically that it underperforms compared to our end-to-end approach when images with corresponding 3D groundtruth are available for training. This
ﬁnding further underlines the beneﬁt of predicting 3D pose
directly from an image, whenever this is possible, instead
of using 2D joint localization as an intermediate step.
In summary, we make the four following contributions:
• we are the ﬁrst to cast 3D human pose estimation as
a 3D keypoint localization problem in a voxel space
using the end-to-end learning paradigm;
• we propose a coarse-to-ﬁne prediction scheme to deal
with the large dimensionality of our representation and
enable iterative processing to realize further beneﬁts;
• our proposed approach achieves state-of-the-art results
on standard benchmarks, surpassing both ConvNetonly and hybrid approaches that employ ConvNets for
2D pose estimation, with a relative error reduction that
exceeds 30% on average;
• we show the practical use of our volumetric representation in cases when end-to-end training is not an option
and present compelling results on in-the-wild images.
2. Related work
The literature on 3D human pose estimation is vast with
approaches addressing the problem in a variety of settings.
Here, we survey works that are most relevant to ours with a
focus on ConvNet-based approaches; we refer the reader to
a recent survey for a more complete literature review.
The majority of recent ConvNet-only approaches cast 3D
pose estimation as a coordinate regression task, with the target output being the spatial x, y, z coordinates of the human
joints with respect to a known root joint, such as the pelvis.
Li and Chan pretrain their network with maps for 2D
joint classiﬁcation. Tekin et al. include a pretrained
autoencoder within the network to enforce structural constraints on the output. Ghezelghieh et al. employ viewpoint prediction as a side task to provide the network with
global joint conﬁguration information. Zhou et al. embed a kinematic model to guarantee the validity of the regressed pose. Park et al. concatenate the 2D joint predictions with image features to improve 3D joint localization. Tekin et al. include temporal information in the
joint predictions by extracting spatiotemporal features from
a sequence of frames. In contrast to all these approaches, we
adopt a volumetric representation of the human pose, and
regress the per voxel likelihood for each joint separately.
This proves to have signiﬁcant advantages for the network
performance and provides a richer output compared to the
low-dimensional vector of joint coordinates.
An alternative approach to the classical regression
paradigm is proposed by Li et al. . During training,
they learn a common embedding between color images and
3D poses. At test time, the test image is coupled with each
candidate pose and forwarded through the network; the input image is assigned the candidate pose with the maximum
network score. This is a form of nearest neighbor classiﬁcation which is highly inefﬁcient due to the requirement of
multiple forward network passes. On the other hand, Rogez and Schmid cast pose estimation as a classiﬁcation
problem. Given a predeﬁned set of pose classes, each image is assigned to the class with the highest score. This
guarantees a valid global pose prediction, but the approach
is constrained by the poses in the original classes and thus
returns only a rough pose estimate. In contrast to the inef-
ﬁcient nearest neighbor approach and the coarse classiﬁcation approach, our volume regression allows for much more
accurate 3D joint localization, while also being efﬁcient.
Despite the interest in end-to-end learning, ConvNetonly
approaches
underperform
ConvNet for the 2D localization of joints, and produce 3D
pose with a subsequent optimization step. Zhou et al. 
utilize a standard 2D pose ConvNet to localize the joints
and retrieve the 3D pose using an optimization scheme over
a sequence of monocular images. Similarly, Du et al. 
include height-maps of the human body to improve 2D joint
Figure 2: Illustration of our coarse-to-ﬁne volumetric approach for 3D human pose estimation from a single image. The input
is a single color image and the output is a dense 3D volume with separate per voxel likelihoods for each joint. The network
consists of multiple fully convolutional components , which are supervised in a coarse-to-ﬁne fashion, to deal with the
large dimensionality of our representation. 3D heatmaps are synthesized for supervision by increasing the resolution for the
most challenging z-dimension (depth) after each component. The dashed lines indicate that the intermediate heatmaps are
fused with image features to produce the input for the next fully convolutional component. For presentation simplicity, the
illustrated heatmaps correspond to the location of only one joint.
localization. Bogo et al. use the joints predicted by a
2D ConvNet and ﬁt a statistical body shape model to recover the full shape of the human body. In contrast, our
approach achieves state-of-the-art results with a single network. Furthermore, it provides a rich 3D output, amenable
to post-processing, such as pictorial structures optimization
to constrain limb lengths, or temporal ﬁltering.
Another issue that has been addressed in the context of
using ConvNets for 3D human pose is the scarcity of training data. Chen et al. use a graphics renderer to create
images with known groundtruth. Similarly, Ghezelghieh et
al. augment the training set with synthesized examples.
A collage approach is proposed by Rogez and Schmid ,
where parts from in-the-wild images are combined to create
additional images with known 3D poses. However, there
is no guarantee that the statistics of the synthetic examples match those of real images. To investigate the data
scarcity issue, we take inspiration from the 3D Interpreter
Network , which decouples the 3D pose estimation task
into 2D localization and 3D reconstruction within a single
ConvNet. In contrast, rather than using a predeﬁned linear
basis for 3D reconstruction, we predict 3D joint locations
directly with our volumetric representation. This demonstrates the practical use of our volumetric representation
even when end-to-end training is not an option.
Finally, while we do not compare explicitly with multiview pose estimation work (e.g., ), it is interesting to note that the representation of 3D human pose in
a discretized 3D space has also been previously adopted in
multi-view settings , where it was used to accommodate predictions from different viewpoints. For single
view pose estimation, it has been considered in the context
of random forests . This approach suffered from large
execution time (around three minutes), and required an additional reﬁnement step using a pictorial structures model.
In stark contrast, our network can provide complete volume
predictions with a single forward pass in a few milliseconds,
needs no additional reﬁnement (although it is still a possibility) to provide state-of-the-art results, and is integrated
within a coarse-to-ﬁne prediction scheme to deal with excessive dimensionality.
3. Technical approach
The following subsections summarize our technical approach. Section 3.1 describes the proposed volumetric representation for 3D human pose and discusses its merits.
Next, Section 3.2 describes our coarse-to-ﬁne prediction approach that addresses the high dimensional nature of our
output representation. Finally, Section 3.3 describes the use
of our volumetric representation within a related decoupled
architecture and discusses its relative merits compared to
our coarse-to-ﬁne volumetric prediction approach.
3.1. Volumetric representation for 3D human pose
The problem of 3D human pose estimation using
ConvNets has been primarily approached as a coordinate
regression problem. In this case, the target of the network
is a 3N-dimensional vector comprised of the concatenation
of the x, y, z coordinates of the N joints of the human body.
For training, an L2 regression loss is employed:
gt is the groundtruth and xn
pr is the predicted location for joint n. The location of each joint is expressed
globally, with respect to a root joint, or locally, with respect to its parent joint in the kinematic tree. The second
formulation has some beneﬁts, as discussed also by Li et
al. (e.g., easier to learn to predict small, local deviations), but still suffers from the fact that small errors can
easily propagate hierarchically to children joints of the kinematic tree. In general, despite its simplicity, the coordinate
regression approach makes the problem highly non-linear
and presents problems for the learning procedure. These
issues have previously been identiﬁed in the context of 2D
human pose .
To improve learning, we propose a volumetric representation for 3D human pose. The volume around the subject
is discretized uniformly in each dimension. For each joint
we create a volume of size w×h×d. Let pn
(i,j,k) denote the
predicted likelihood of joint n being in voxel (i, j, k). To
train this network, the supervision is also provided in volumetric form. The target for each joint is a volume with
a 3D Gaussian centered around the groundtruth position
gt = (x, y, z) of the joint in the 3D grid:
2πσ2 e−(x−i)2+(y−j)2+(z−k)2
where the value σ = 2 is used for our experiments. For
training, we use the mean squared error loss:
∥G(i,j,k)(xn
(i,j,k)∥2.
In theory, the output of the network is four dimensional,
i.e., (w × h × d × N), but in practice we organize it in
channels, thus our output is three dimensional, i.e., w ×h×
dN. The voxel with the maximum response in each 3D grid
is selected as the joint’s 3D location.
A major advantage of the volumetric representation is
that it casts the highly non-linear problem of direct 3D coordinate regression to a more manageable form of prediction
in a discretized space. In this case, the predictions do not
necessarily commit to a unique location for each joint, but
instead an estimate of the conﬁdence is provided for each
voxel. This makes it easier for the network to learn the target mapping. A similar argument has been previously put
forth in the 2D pose case, validating the beneﬁt of predicting
per pixel likelihoods instead of pixel coordinates .
In terms of the network architecture, an important beneﬁt
of the volumetric representation is that it enables the use
of a fully convolutional network for prediction. Here, we
adopt the hourglass design . This leads to less network
parameters than using fully connected layers for coordinate
regression or pose classiﬁcation. Finally, in terms of the
predicted output, besides being more accurate, our network
predictions in the form of dense 3D heatmaps are useful
for subsequent post-processing applications. For example,
structural constraints can be enforced with the use of a 3D
Pictorial Structures model, e.g., . Another option is
to use the dense predictions in a ﬁltering framework in cases
where multiple input frames are available.
3.2. Coarse-to-ﬁne prediction
A design choice that has been particularly effective in
the case of 2D human pose is the iterative processing of the
network output . Instead of using a single component with a single output, the network is forced to produce
predictions in multiple processing stages. These intermediate predictions are gradually reﬁned to produce more accurate estimates. Additionally, the use of intermediate supervision on the “earlier” outputs allows for a richer gradient
signal, which has been demonstrated empirically as an effective learning practice .
Inspired by the success of iterative reﬁnement in the
context of 2D pose, we also consider a gradual reﬁnement
scheme. Empirically, we found that naively stacking multiple components yielded diminishing returns because of
the large dimensionality of our representation. In fact, for
the highest 3D resolution of 64 × 64 × 64 with 16 joints,
we would need to estimate the likelihood for more that 4
million voxels. To deal with this curse of dimensionality,
we propose to use a coarse-to-ﬁne prediction scheme. In
particular, the ﬁrst steps are supervised with lower resolution targets for the (most challenging and technically unobserved) z-dimension. Precisely, we use targets of size
64 × 64 × d per joint, where d typically takes values from
the set {1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64}. An illustration of this supervision approach is given in Figure 2.
This strategy makes training more effective, and allows
us to beneﬁt from stacking multiple components together
without suffering from overﬁtting or dimensionality issues.
Intuitively, easier versions of the task are presented to the
network during the early stages of processing, and the complexity increases gradually. This postpones the harder decisions until the very end of the processing, when all the
available information has been processed and consolidated.
3.3. Decoupled architecture with volumetric target
To further show the versatility of the proposed volumetric representation, we also employ it in a scenario where
end-to-end training is not an option. This is usually the case
for in-the-wild images, where accurate, large-scale acquisition of 3D groundtruth is not feasible. Inspired by the 3D
Interpreter Network , we decouple 3D pose estimation
in two sequential steps consisting of predicting 2D keypoint
heatmaps, followed by an inference step of the 3D joint positions with our volumetric representation. The ﬁrst step
can be trained with 2D labeled in-the-wild imagery, while
the second step requires only 3D data (e.g., MoCap). Independently, each of these sources are abundantly available.
This training strategy is useful for practical scenarios,
and we present compelling results for in-the-wild images
(Sec. 4.6). However, it remains suboptimal compared to our
end-to-end approach when images with corresponding 3D
groundtruth are available for training. Figure 3 provides an
(a) Decoupled architecture
(b) Coarse-to-ﬁne architecture
Figure 3: Schematic comparison of a decoupled architecture versus our coarse-to-ﬁne architecture with intermediate supervision at the coarsest level (2D heatmaps). Blue
blocks indicate 3D heatmaps, while green blocks indicate
2D heatmaps. Decoupled architecture: The 2D heatmaps
are provided directly as input to the second part of the network, which effectively operates as a 2D-to-3D reconstruction component. Note, no image features are processed in
the second component, only information about 2D joint locations. Coarse-to-ﬁne architecture: We use 2D heatmaps
as intermediate supervision, which are then combined with
image features, effectively carrying information both from
the image and the 2D locations of the joints.
illustration of each architecture in a simpliﬁed setting with
two hourglasses. It can be seen that the decoupled case is
related to our course-to-ﬁne architecture when the resolution of the intermediate supervision is set to d = 1 resulting
in 2D heatmaps. A crucial difference between the two architectures is that our coarse-to-ﬁne approach combines the
produced 2D heatmaps with intermediate image features.
This way, the rest of the network can process information
both about the image and the 2D joint locations. On the
other hand, a decoupled network processes the 2D heatmaps
directly and attempts to reconstruct 3D locations without
further aid by image-based evidence. In cases where the
heatmaps are grossly erroneous, the 3D predictions can be
lead astray. In Sec. 4.4, we show empirically that when images with corresponding 3D groundtruth are available, our
coarse-to-ﬁne architecture outperforms the decoupled one.
4. Empirical evaluation
4.1. Datasets
We present extensive quantitative evaluation of our
coarse-to-ﬁne volumetric approach on three standard
benchmarks for 3D human pose:
Human3.6M ,
HumanEva-I and KTH Football II . Additionally,
qualitative results are presented on the MPII human pose
dataset , since no 3D groundtruth is available.
Human3.6M: It contains video of 11 subjects performing a variety of actions, such as “Walking”, “Sitting” and
“Phoning”. We follow the same evaluation protocol as prior
work . In particular, Subjects S1, S5, S6, S7 and
S8 were used for training, while subjects S9 and S11 were
used for testing. The original videos were downsampled
from 50fps to 10fps. We employed all camera views and
trained a single model for all actions, instead of training
action-speciﬁc models .
HumanEva-I: It is a smaller dataset compared to Human3.6M, with fewer subjects and actions. Following the
standard protocol , we evaluated on “Walking” and
“Jogging” from subjects S1, S2 and S3. The training sequences of these subjects and actions were used for training, and the corresponding validation sequences for testing.
As done with the Human3.6M evaluation, we train a single
model using the frames for all users and actions.
KTH Football II: The images are taken from a professional football match, and 3D groundtruth is provided only
for a very small number of them. The limited available
groundtruth is not very accurate, since it was generated by
combining manual 2D annotations from multiple views. In
this case, image-to-3D training is not a practical option.
Instead, we report results using our volumetric representation within the decoupled architecture described in Sec. 3.3.
More speciﬁcally, we train the ﬁrst network component (image to 2D heatmaps) using images from this dataset which
provide 2D groundtruth. For the second network component (2D heatmaps to 3D heatmaps), we use all the training
MoCap data from Human3.6M dataset. As others ,
we report results using “Sequence 1” from “Player 2” and
frames taken from “Camera 1”.
MPII: It is a large scale 2D pose dataset containing inthe-wild imagery. It provides 2D annotations but no 3D
groundtruth. Like KTH, direct image-to-3D training is not a
practical option with this dataset. Instead, we use the decoupled architecture with our volumetric representation. Since
we cannot quantify the performance here, we only provide
qualitative results.
4.2. Evaluation metrics
For Human3.6M, most approaches report the per joint
3D error, which is the average Euclidean distance of the
estimated joints to the groundtruth.
This is done after
aligning the root joints (here the pelvis) of the estimated
and groundtruth 3D pose. An alternative metric, which is
used by some methods to report results on Human3.6M and
HumanEva-I is the reconstruction error. It is deﬁned as the
per joint 3D error up to a similarity transformation. Effectively, the estimated 3D pose is aligned to the groundtruth
by the Procrustes method. Finally, for KTH the percentage
of the correctly estimated parts in 3D (3D PCP ) is reported. Again, the root joints (here we use the center of the
chest) are aligned to resolve the depth ambiguity.
4.3. Implementation details
In our volumetric space, the x-y grid is a uniform discretization within the 2D bounding box in the image and
the z grid is a uniform discretization in [−1, 1] (meters) centered at the root joint. This means that we predict the image
coordinates for each joint and its metric depth relative to the
root. Given the depth of the root joint we can recover the absolute depth for each joint and its metric coordinates in the
x-y dimensions. For the component analysis (Section 4.4)
we use the groundtruth depth of the root joint, while for the
comparison to other methods (Section 4.5) we estimate this
depth based on the average skeleton size of each dataset.
More details are provided in the supplementary material.
In terms of the architecture, the fully convolutional components of our network, illustrated in Figure 2, are based
on the hourglass design . We use the publicly available
code to faithfully replicate the architecture. Similarly, we
adopt the same training practices, employing rotation augmentation (±30o), scaling augmentation (0.75-1.25), leftright ﬂipping, and using rmsprop for optimization with the
batch size equal to 4 and the learning rate set to 2.5e−4.
Regarding training on individual datasets, for Human3.6M, the network models are trained from scratch,
typically for four epochs (approximately 310k iterations).
For HumanEva-I, the model is trained from scratch for 120
epochs (approximately 235k iterations), because of the signiﬁcantly smaller training set size. Finally, for the 2D joint
localization network on KTH, we use the publicly available
stacked hourglass model trained on MPII and ﬁne-tune
it for 20 epochs (approximately 30k iterations).
4.4. Component evaluation
To evaluate the components of our approach, we use Human3.6M to report results, since it is the most complete
available benchmark.
Volumetric representation: Our ﬁrst goal is to demonstrate that regression in a discretized space provides great
beneﬁt over coordinate regression. Both versions are implemented with the simplest setting of one hourglass. The
only difference between the architectures is that the network
for the volumetric predictions is fully convolutional, while
for coordinate regression we use a fully connected layer at
the end. The results are presented in Table 1. The error
of 112.41mm for coordinate regression is comparable to recent reported results with a coordinate regression target output . In comparison, a signiﬁcant decrease in
the error is observed, down to 85.82mm at the highest depth
resolution, by using the volumetric output target.
Coarse-to-ﬁne prediction: The next signiﬁcant improvement to our network is provided by iterative processing of
the image features. The naive way to achieve this is by
stacking together multiple hourglasses. This is helpful, but
Coordinate Regression
Volume Regression (d = 32)
Volume Regression (d = 64)
Coordinate versus volume regression on Human3.6M. The mean per joint error (mm) across all actions
and subjects in the test set are shown.
Naive Stacking
Coarse-to-Fine
L1 L2 L3 L4 Avg.
L1 L2 L3 L4 Avg.
64 64 64 64 75.06
Table 2: Comparison of the Naive Stacking (left) versus
Coarse-to-Fine (right) approaches on Human3.6M. The column Li denotes the z-dimension resolution for the supervision provided at the i-th hourglass component (empty if the
network has less than i components). We report mean per
joint errors (mm) following the standard protocol.
offers only diminishing returns, as is demonstrated in Table 2 (Naive stacking). Instead, our coarse-to-ﬁne supervision approach outperforms the naive one when we use two,
three, or four hourglasses (Table 2, Coarse-to-Fine). In fact,
our coarse-to-ﬁne version with two hourglasses (69.77mm
error) outperforms the naive stacking network with four
hourglasses (75.06mm error), despite using less than half
of the parameters compared to the deeper network.
Decoupled network with volumetric representation: We
investigate the use of a decoupled network combined with
our volumetric representation, as described in Sec. 3.3. Our
goal is to demonstrate the beneﬁt of predicting the 3D pose
directly from image features versus using 2D locations as
an intermediate representation. We refer back to Fig. 3 for a
schematic representation of the two relevant networks. We
train both networks end-to-end to evaluate the architecture
performance rather than the beneﬁt of end-to-end training.
(In fact we observed that training the two components of
the decoupled network independently leads to inferior performance.) Comparative results are provided in Table 3. We
present the average across all actions, as well as the six actions with the largest difference between the two networks.
Besides being more accurate for every action and on average, our coarse-to-ﬁne approach shows signiﬁcant improvement for more challenging actions, such as “Sitting” or “Sitting Down”. In these cases, 2D joint localization often fails
because of severe self-occlusions, providing the second subnetwork with inaccurate 2D heatmaps. Unless we process
Decoupled Coarse-to-Fine
SittingDown
WalkTogether
Table 3: Comparison of our coarse-to-ﬁne network using
2D heatmaps for intermediate supervision (Coarse-to-Fine)
versus a decoupled network with a volumetric representation (Decoupled). The reported results are for the six classes
of Human3.6M with the largest difference between the two
approaches, as well as the average across all actions.
Sanzari et al. Rogez et al. Bogo et al. Ours
Table 5: Quantitative comparison on Human3.6M among
approaches that report reconstruction error (mm). Baseline
numbers are taken from the respective papers.
image features as well, 3D localization is bound to fail. This
demonstrates the beneﬁt of using information directly from
the image for 3D localization versus decoupling the process.
4.5. Comparison with state-of-the-art
Human3.6M: We compare the performance of our approach with previously reported results on Human3.6M. Table 4 presents the mean per joint 3D error results. Note
that some previous works leverage a sequence
of frames for pose prediction rather than a single frame
as considered by our approach. Nonetheless, our network
achieves state-of-the-art results across the vast majority
of actions and outperforms all other methods on average.
Since some works use reconstruction error to report results,
we also evaluate using this metric in Table 5. Again, our
approach outperforms the other baselines by large margins.
HumanEva-I: Our empirical results for HumanEva-I are
presented in Table 6, along with reported results from stateof-the-art approaches. Similar to Human3.6M, our network
outperforms all other published approaches.
KTH Football II: We report results for our approach on this
dataset in Table 7, comparing with relevant methods. Note,
Tekin et al. use video for prediction instead of a single frame, while Burenius et al. is a multi-view method.
Despite this, we outperform the single view approaches and
we are competitive with the multi-view results.
4.6. Qualitative results
Figure 4 presents qualitative results for images taken
from the aforementioned datasets. Additionally, we demon-
Radwan et al. 75.1 99.8 93.8 79.2 89.8 99.4 89.5
Wang et al. 71.9 75.7 85.3 62.6 77.7 54.4 71.3
Simo-Serra et al. 65.1 48.6 73.5 74.2 46.6 32.2 56.7
Bo et al. 46.4 30.3 64.9 64.5 48.0 38.2 48.7
Kostrikov et al. 44.0 30.9 41.7 57.2 35.0 33.3 40.3
Yasin et al. 35.8 32.4 41.6 46.6 41.4 35.4 38.9
Ours 22.3 19.5 29.7 28.9 21.9 23.8 24.3
Table 6: Quantitative results on HumanEva-I. The numbers
are the mean reconstruction errors (mm). Baseline numbers
are taken from the respective papers.
Upper Arms
Lower Arms
Upper Legs
Lower Legs
Table 7: Quantitative results on KTH Football II. The numbers are the mean PCP scores (the higher the better). Baseline numbers are taken from the respective papers. We indicate how many cameras each approach uses, and highlight
the best performance for single view approaches.
strate 3D reconstructions on MPII which offers greater visual variety due to its in-the-wild nature. Despite the challenging poses present in the MPII examples, our volumetric
representation produces compelling 3D predictions.
5. Summary
Our paper addressed the challenging problem of 3D human pose estimation from a single color image. Departing
from recent ConvNet approaches, we cast the problem as
3D keypoint localization in a discretized space around the
subject. We integrated this volumetric representation with
a coarse-to-ﬁne supervision scheme to deal with the high
dimensionality and enable iterative processing. We demonstrated that our contributions were crucial to achieve stateof-the-art results on the standard benchmarks with a relative
error reduction greater than 30% on average. Furthermore,
we used our volumetric representation within a decoupled
architecture, making it of practical use for in-the-wild images even when end-to-end training is not feasible.
Project Page:
 
projects/volumetric
Acknowledgements: We gratefully appreciate support through the following grants: NSF-DGE-0966142 (IGERT), NSF-IIP-1439681 (I/UCRC),
NSF-IIS-1426840, ARL MAST-CTA W911NF-08-2-0004, ARL RCTA
W911NF-10-2-0016, ONR N00014-17-1-2093, an ONR STTR (Robotics
Research), NSERC Discovery, and the DARPA FLA program.
Directions Discussion
Greeting Phoning
LinKDE 
Li et al. 
Tekin et al. 
Zhou et al. 
Tekin et al. 
Ghezelghieh et al. 
Du et al. 
Park et al. 
Zhou et al. 
SittingDown Smoking Waiting WalkDog Walking WalkTogether Average
LinKDE 
Li et al. 
Tekin et al. 
Zhou et al. 
Tekin et al. 
Ghezelghieh et al. 
Du et al. 
Park et al. 
Zhou et al. 
Table 4: Quantitative comparison on Human3.6M. The numbers are the average 3D joint error (mm). Baseline numbers are
taken from the respective papers. Note, several approaches use video for prediction rather than a single frame .
Figure 4: Sample qualitative results for all the datasets used in the empirical evaluation. First row: Human3.6M. Second row:
HumanEva. Third row: KTH Football II. Fourth and ﬁfth row: MPII. For each image, the original viewpoint and a novel
viewpoint are shown. Red and green indicate left and right, respectively.