AutoAugment:
Learning Augmentation Strategies from Data
Ekin D. Cubuk ∗, Barret Zoph∗, Dandelion Man´e, Vijay Vasudevan, Quoc V. Le
Google Brain
Data augmentation is an effective technique for improving the accuracy of modern image classiﬁers. However, current data augmentation implementations are manually designed. In this paper, we describe a simple procedure called
AutoAugment to automatically search for improved data
augmentation policies. In our implementation, we have designed a search space where a policy consists of many subpolicies, one of which is randomly chosen for each image
in each mini-batch. A sub-policy consists of two operations, each operation being an image processing function
such as translation, rotation, or shearing, and the probabilities and magnitudes with which the functions are applied.
We use a search algorithm to ﬁnd the best policy such that
the neural network yields the highest validation accuracy
on a target dataset. Our method achieves state-of-the-art
accuracy on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, SVHN, and ImageNet
(without additional data). On ImageNet, we attain a Top-1
accuracy of 83.5% which is 0.4% better than the previous
record of 83.1%. On CIFAR-10, we achieve an error rate of
1.5%, which is 0.6% better than the previous state-of-theart. Augmentation policies we ﬁnd are transferable between
datasets. The policy learned on ImageNet transfers well to
achieve signiﬁcant improvements on other datasets, such as
Oxford Flowers, Caltech-101, Oxford-IIT Pets, FGVC Aircraft, and Stanford Cars.
1. Introduction
Deep neural nets are powerful machine learning systems
that tend to work well when trained on massive amounts
of data. Data augmentation is an effective technique to increase both the amount and diversity of data by randomly
“augmenting” it ; in the image domain, common
augmentations include translating the image by a few pixels, or ﬂipping the image horizontally. Intuitively, data augmentation is used to teach a model about invariances in the
data domain: classifying an object is often insensitive to
∗Equal contribution.
horizontal ﬂips or translation. Network architectures can
also be used to hardcode invariances: convolutional networks bake in translation invariance . However, using data augmentation to incorporate potential invariances can be easier than hardcoding invariances into the
model architecture directly.
Best published
Our results
Stanford Cars
Table 1. Error rates (%) from this paper compared to the best results so far on ﬁve datasets (Top-5 for ImageNet, Top-1 for the
others). Previous best result on Stanford Cars ﬁne-tuned weights
originally trained on a larger dataset , whereas we use a randomly initialized network. Previous best results on other datasets
only include models that were not trained on additional data, for
a single evaluation (without ensembling). See Tables 2,3, and 4
for more detailed comparison. GPU hours are estimated for an
NVIDIA Tesla P100.
Yet a large focus of the machine learning and computer
vision community has been to engineer better network architectures (e.g., ). Less
attention has been paid to ﬁnding better data augmentation
methods that incorporate more invariances. For instance,
on ImageNet, the data augmentation approach by , introduced in 2012, remains the standard with small changes.
Even when augmentation improvements have been found
for a particular dataset, they often do not transfer to other
datasets as effectively. For example, horizontal ﬂipping of
images during training is an effective data augmentation
method on CIFAR-10, but not on MNIST, due to the different symmetries present in these datasets. The need for
automatically learned data-augmentation has been raised recently as an important unsolved problem .
In this paper, we aim to automate the process of ﬁnding
an effective data augmentation policy for a target dataset.
In our implementation (Section 3), each policy expresses
several choices and orders of possible augmentation opera-
 
tions, where each operation is an image processing function (e.g., translation, rotation, or color normalization),
the probabilities of applying the function, and the magnitudes with which they are applied.
We use a search algorithm to ﬁnd the best choices and orders of these operations such that training a neural network yields the best
validation accuracy. In our experiments, we use Reinforcement Learning as the search algorithm, but we believe
the results can be further improved if better algorithms are
used .
Our extensive experiments show that AutoAugment
achieves excellent improvements in two use cases: 1) AutoAugment can be applied directly on the dataset of interest
to ﬁnd the best augmentation policy (AutoAugment-direct)
and 2) learned policies can be transferred to new datasets
(AutoAugment-transfer). Firstly, for direct application, our
method achieves state-of-the-art accuracy on datasets such
as CIFAR-10, reduced CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, SVHN, reduced SVHN, and ImageNet (without additional data). On
CIFAR-10, we achieve an error rate of 1.5%, which is 0.6%
better than the previous state-of-the-art . On SVHN,
we improve the state-of-the-art error rate from 1.3% 
to 1.0%. On reduced datasets, our method achieves performance comparable to semi-supervised methods without
using any unlabeled data. On ImageNet, we achieve a Top-
1 accuracy of 83.5% which is 0.4% better than the previous
record of 83.1%. Secondly, if direct application is too expensive, transferring an augmentation policy can be a good
alternative.
For transferring an augmentation policy, we
show that policies found on one task can generalize well
across different models and datasets. For example, the policy found on ImageNet leads to signiﬁcant improvements
on a variety of FGVC datasets. Even on datasets for which
ﬁne-tuning weights pre-trained on ImageNet does not help
signiﬁcantly , e.g. Stanford Cars and FGVC Aircraft , training with the ImageNet policy reduces test
set error by 1.2% and 1.8%, respectively. This result suggests that transferring data augmentation policies offers an
alternative method for standard weight transfer learning. A
summary of our results is shown in Table 1.
2. Related Work
Common data augmentation methods for image recognition have been designed manually and the best augmentation strategies are dataset-speciﬁc. For example, on MNIST,
most top-ranked models use elastic distortions, scale, translation, and rotation .
On natural image
datasets, such as CIFAR-10 and ImageNet, random cropping, image mirroring and color shifting / whitening are
more common . As these methods are designed manually, they require expert knowledge and time. Our approach
of learning data augmentation policies from data in principle can be used for any dataset, not just one.
This paper introduces an automated approach to ﬁnd data
augmentation policies from data. Our approach is inspired
by recent advances in architecture search, where reinforcement learning and evolution have been used to discover
model architectures from data . Although these methods have improved upon
human-designed architectures, it has not been possible to
beat the 2% error-rate barrier on CIFAR-10 using architecture search alone.
Previous attempts at learned data augmentations include
Smart Augmentation, which proposed a network that automatically generates augmented data by merging two or
more samples from the same class . Tran et al. used a
Bayesian approach to generate data based on the distribution learned from the training set . DeVries and Taylor
used simple transformations in the learned feature space to
augment data .
Generative adversarial networks have also been used for
the purpose of generating additional data (e.g., ). The key difference between our method and generative models is that our method generates symbolic transformation operations, whereas generative models, such as
GANs, generate the augmented data directly. An exception
is work by Ratner et al., who used GANs to generate sequences that describe data augmentation strategies .
3. AutoAugment: Searching for best Augmentation policies Directly on the Dataset of Interest
We formulate the problem of ﬁnding the best augmentation policy as a discrete search problem (see Figure 1).
Our method consists of two components: A search algorithm and a search space. At a high level, the search algorithm (implemented as a controller RNN) samples a data
augmentation policy S, which has information about what
image processing operation to use, the probability of using
the operation in each batch, and the magnitude of the operation. Key to our method is the fact that the policy S will
be used to train a neural network with a ﬁxed architecture,
whose validation accuracy R will be sent back to update the
controller. Since R is not differentiable, the controller will
be updated by policy gradient methods. In the following
section we will describe the two components in detail.
Search space details: In our search space, a policy consists of 5 sub-policies with each sub-policy consisting of
two image operations to be applied in sequence. Additionally, each operation is also associated with two hyperparameters: 1) the probability of applying the operation, and
2) the magnitude of the operation.
Figure 2 shows an example of a policy with 5-subpolicies in our search space. The ﬁrst sub-policy speciﬁes
a sequential application of ShearX followed by Invert. The
Figure 1. Overview of our framework of using a search method
(e.g., Reinforcement Learning) to search for better data augmentation policies. A controller RNN predicts an augmentation policy
from the search space. A child network with a ﬁxed architecture
is trained to convergence achieving accuracy R. The reward R will
be used with the policy gradient method to update the controller
so that it can generate better policies over time.
probability of applying ShearX is 0.9, and when applied,
has a magnitude of 7 out of 10. We then apply Invert with
probability of 0.8. The Invert operation does not use the
magnitude information. We emphasize that these operations
are applied in the speciﬁed order.
Figure 2. One of the policies found on SVHN, and how it can be
used to generate augmented data given an original image used to
train a neural network. The policy has 5 sub-policies. For every
image in a mini-batch, we choose a sub-policy uniformly at random to generate a transformed image to train the neural network.
Each sub-policy consists of 2 operations, each operation is associated with two numerical values: the probability of calling the operation, and the magnitude of the operation. There is a probability
of calling an operation, so the operation may not be applied in that
mini-batch. However, if applied, it is applied with the ﬁxed magnitude. We highlight the stochasticity in applying the sub-policies
by showing how one image can be transformed differently in different mini-batches, even with the same sub-policy. As explained
in the text, on SVHN, geometric transformations are picked more
often by AutoAugment. It can be seen why Invert is a commonly
selected operation on SVHN, since the numbers in the image are
invariant to that transformation.
The operations we used in our experiments are from PIL,
a popular Python image library.1 For generality, we considered all functions in PIL that accept an image as input and
1 
output an image. We additionally used two other promising augmentation techniques: Cutout and SamplePairing . The operations we searched over are ShearX/Y,
TranslateX/Y, Rotate, AutoContrast, Invert, Equalize, Solarize, Posterize, Contrast, Color, Brightness, Sharpness,
Cutout , Sample Pairing .2
In total, we have 16
operations in our search space. Each operation also comes
with a default range of magnitudes, which will be described
in more detail in Section 4. We discretize the range of magnitudes into 10 values (uniform spacing) so that we can use
a discrete search algorithm to ﬁnd them. Similarly, we also
discretize the probability of applying that operation into 11
values (uniform spacing). Finding each sub-policy becomes
a search problem in a space of (16×10×11)2 possibilities.
Our goal, however, is to ﬁnd 5 such sub-policies concurrently in order to increase diversity. The search space with 5
sub-policies then has roughly (16×10×11)10 ≈2.9×1032
possibilities.
The 16 operations we used and their default range of values are shown in Table 1 in the Appendix. Notice that there
is no explicit “Identity” operation in our search space; this
operation is implicit, and can be achieved by calling an operation with probability set to be 0.
Search algorithm details:
The search algorithm that
we used in our experiment uses Reinforcement Learning,
inspired by . The search algorithm has two
components: a controller, which is a recurrent neural network, and the training algorithm, which is the Proximal
Policy Optimization algorithm . At each step, the controller predicts a decision produced by a softmax; the prediction is then fed into the next step as an embedding. In
total the controller has 30 softmax predictions in order to
predict 5 sub-policies, each with 2 operations, and each operation requiring an operation type, magnitude and probability.
The training of controller RNN: The controller is
trained with a reward signal, which is how good the policy is
in improving the generalization of a “child model” (a neural
network trained as part of the search process). In our experiments, we set aside a validation set to measure the generalization of a child model. A child model is trained with
augmented data generated by applying the 5 sub-policies on
the training set (that does not contain the validation set). For
each example in the mini-batch, one of the 5 sub-policies is
chosen randomly to augment the image. The child model
is then evaluated on the validation set to measure the accuracy, which is used as the reward signal to train the recurrent
network controller. On each dataset, the controller samples
about 15,000 policies.
Architecture of controller RNN and training hyperparameters: We follow the training procedure and hyperparameters from for training the controller. More con-
2Details about these operations are listed in Table 1 in the Appendix.
cretely, the controller RNN is a one-layer LSTM with
100 hidden units at each layer and 2 × 5B softmax predictions for the two convolutional cells (where B is typically
5) associated with each architecture decision. Each of the
10B predictions of the controller RNN is associated with
a probability. The joint probability of a child network is
the product of all probabilities at these 10B softmaxes. This
joint probability is used to compute the gradient for the controller RNN. The gradient is scaled by the validation accuracy of the child network to update the controller RNN such
that the controller assigns low probabilities for bad child
networks and high probabilities for good child networks.
Similar to , we employ Proximal Policy Optimization
(PPO) with learning rate 0.00035. To encourage exploration we also use an entropy penalty with a weight of
0.00001. In our implementation, the baseline function is
an exponential moving average of previous rewards with a
weight of 0.95. The weights of the controller are initialized uniformly between -0.1 and 0.1. We choose to train
the controller using PPO out of convenience, although prior
work had shown that other methods (e.g. augmented random search and evolutionary strategies) can perform as well
or even slightly better .
At the end of the search, we concatenate the sub-policies
from the best 5 policies into a single policy (with 25 subpolicies). This ﬁnal policy with 25 sub-policies is used to
train the models for each dataset.
The above search algorithm is one of many possible
search algorithms we can use to ﬁnd the best policies. It
might be possible to use a different discrete search algorithm such as genetic programming or even random
search to improve the results in this paper.
4. Experiments and Results
Summary of Experiments.
In this section, we empirically investigate the performance of AutoAugment in
two use cases: AutoAugment-direct and AutoAugmenttransfer.
First, we will benchmark AutoAugment with
direct search for best augmentation policies on highly
competitive datasets:
CIFAR-10 , CIFAR-100 ,
SVHN (Section 4.1), and ImageNet (Section 4.2)
datasets. Our results show that a direct application of AutoAugment improves signiﬁcantly the baseline models and
produces state-of-the-art accuracies on these challenging
Next, we will study the transferability of augmentation policies between datasets. More concretely, we
will transfer the best augmentation policies found on ImageNet to ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation datasets such as Oxford
102 Flowers, Caltech-101, Oxford-IIIT Pets, FGVC Aircraft, Stanford Cars (Section 4.3). Our results also show
that augmentation policies are surprisingly transferable and
yield signiﬁcant improvements on strong baseline models
on these datasets. Finally, in Section 5, we will compare
AutoAugment against other automated data augmentation
methods and show that AutoAugment is signiﬁcantly better.
4.1. CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, SVHN Results
Although CIFAR-10 has 50,000 training examples, we
perform the search for the best policies on a smaller dataset
we call “reduced CIFAR-10”, which consists of 4,000 randomly chosen examples, to save time for training child
models during the augmentation search process (We ﬁnd
that the resulting policies do not seem to be sensitive to this
number). We ﬁnd that for a ﬁxed amount of training time,
it is more useful to allow child models to train for more
epochs rather than train for fewer epochs with more training
data. For the child model architecture we use small Wide-
ResNet-40-2 (40 layers - widening factor of 2) model ,
and train for 120 epochs. The use of a small Wide-ResNet is
for computational efﬁciency as each child model is trained
from scratch to compute the gradient update for the controller. We use a weight decay of 10−4, learning rate of
0.01, and a cosine learning decay with one annealing cycle .
The policies found during the search on reduced CIFAR-
10 are later used to train ﬁnal models on CIFAR-10, reduced
CIFAR-10, and CIFAR-100. As mentioned above, we concatenate sub-policies from the best 5 policies to form a single policy with 25 sub-policies, which is used for all of AutoAugment experiments on the CIFAR datasets.
The baseline pre-processing follows the convention for
state-of-the-art CIFAR-10 models: standardizing the data,
using horizontal ﬂips with 50% probability, zero-padding
and random crops, and ﬁnally Cutout with 16x16 pixels . The AutoAugment policy is applied
in addition to the standard baseline pre-processing: on one
image, we ﬁrst apply the baseline augmentation provided by
the existing baseline methods, then apply the AutoAugment
policy, then apply Cutout. We did not optimize the Cutout
region size, and use the suggested value of 16 pixels .
Note that since Cutout is an operation in the search space,
Cutout may be used twice on the same image: the ﬁrst time
with learned region size, and the second time with ﬁxed region size. In practice, as the probability of the Cutout operation in the ﬁrst application is small, Cutout is often used
once on a given image.
On CIFAR-10, AutoAugment picks mostly color-based
transformations. For example, the most commonly picked
transformations on CIFAR-10 are Equalize, AutoContrast,
Color, and Brightness (refer to Table 1 in the Appendix for
their descriptions). Geometric transformations like ShearX
and ShearY are rarely found in good policies. Furthermore,
the transformation Invert is almost never applied in a successful policy. The policy found on CIFAR-10 is included
in the Appendix. Below, we describe our results on the CI-
FAR datasets using the policy found on reduced CIFAR-10.
All of the reported results are averaged over 5 runs.
CIFAR-10 Results.
In Table 2, we show the test set accuracy on different neural network architectures. We implement the Wide-ResNet-28-10 , Shake-Shake 
and ShakeDrop models in TensorFlow , and ﬁnd
the weight decay and learning rate hyperparameters that
give the best validation set accuracy for regular training
with baseline augmentation.
Other hyperparameters are
the same as reported in the papers introducing the models , with the exception of using a cosine learning decay for the Wide-ResNet-28-10.
We then use the
same model and hyperparameters to evaluate the test set
accuracy of AutoAugment. For AmoebaNets, we use the
same hyperparameters that were used in for both baseline augmentation and AutoAugment. As can be seen from
the table, we achieve an error rate of 1.5% with the Shake-
Drop model, which is 0.6% better than the state-of-theart . Notice that this gain is much larger than the previous gains obtained by AmoebaNet-B against ShakeDrop
(+0.2%), and by ShakeDrop against Shake-Shake (+0.2%).
Ref. reports an improvement of 1.1% for a Wide-
ResNet-28-10 model trained on CIFAR-10.
We also evaluate our best model trained with AutoAugment on a recently proposed CIFAR-10 test set . Recht
et al. report that Shake-Shake (26 2x64d) + Cutout performs best on this new dataset, with an error rate of 7.0%
(4.1% higher relative to error rate on the original CIFAR-
10 test set). Furthermore, PyramidNet+ShakeDrop achieves
an error rate of 7.7% on the new dataset (4.6% higher relative to the original test set). Our best model, Pyramid-
Net+ShakeDrop trained with AutoAugment achieves an error rate of 4.4% (2.9% higher than the error rate on the original set). Compared to other models evaluated on this new
dataset, our model exhibits a signiﬁcantly smaller drop in
CIFAR-100 Results.
We also train models on CIFAR-
100 with the same AutoAugment policy found on reduced-
CIFAR-10; results are shown in Table 2. Again, we achieve
the state-of-art result on this dataset, beating the previous record of 12.19% error rate by ShakeDrop regularization .
Finally, we apply the same AutoAugment policy to train
models on reduced CIFAR-10 (the same 4,000 example
training set that we use to ﬁnd the best policy). Similar
to the experimental convention used by the semi-supervised
learning community we train on 4,000
labeled samples. But we do not use the 46,000 unlabeled
samples during training. Our results shown in Table 2. We
note that the improvement in accuracy due to AutoAugment
is more signiﬁcant on the reduced dataset compared to the
full dataset. As the size of the training set grows, we expect that the effect of data-augmentation will be reduced.
However, in the next sections we show that even for larger
datasets like SVHN and ImageNet, AutoAugment can still
lead to improvements in generalization accuracy.
experimented
dataset , which has 73,257 training examples (also
called “core training set”), and 531,131 additional training
examples. The test set has 26,032 examples. To save time
during the search, we created a reduced SVHN dataset of
1,000 examples sampled randomly from the core training
set. We use AutoAugment to ﬁnd the best policies. The
model architecture and training procedure of the child models are identical to the above experiments with CIFAR-10.
The policies picked on SVHN are different than the
transformations picked on CIFAR-10.
For example, the
most commonly picked transformations on SVHN are Invert, Equalize, ShearX/Y, and Rotate. As mentioned above,
the transformation Invert is almost never used on CIFAR-
10, yet it is very common in successful SVHN policies. Intuitively, this makes sense since the speciﬁc color of numbers is not as important as the relative color of the number
and its background. Furthermore, geometric transformations ShearX/Y are two of the most popular transformations
on SVHN. This also can be understood by general properties of images in SVHN: house numbers are often naturally
sheared and skewed in the dataset, so it is helpful to learn
the invariance to such transformations via data augmentation. Five successful sub-policies are visualized on SVHN
examples in Figure 2.
After the end of the search, we concatenate the 5 best
policies and apply them to train architectures that already
perform well on SVHN using standard augmentation policies. For full training, we follow the common procedure
mentioned in the Wide-ResNet paper of using the core
training set and the extra data. The validation set is constructed by setting aside the last 7325 samples of the training set.
We tune the weight decay and learning rate on
the validation set performance. Other hyperparameters and
training details are identical to the those in the papers introducing the models . One exception is that we trained
the Shake-Shake model only for 160 epochs (as opposed to
1,800), due to the large size of the full SVHN dataset. Baseline pre-processing involves standardizing the data and applying Cutout with a region size of 20x20 pixels, following
the procedure outlined in . AutoAugment results combine the baseline pre-processing with the policy learned on
SVHN. One exception is that we do not use Cutout on reduced SVHN as it lowers the accuracy signiﬁcantly. The
summary of the results in this experiment are shown in Table 2. As can be seen from the table, we achieve state-ofthe-art accuracy using both models.
Cutout 
AutoAugment
Wide-ResNet-28-10 
Shake-Shake (26 2x32d) 
Shake-Shake (26 2x96d) 
Shake-Shake (26 2x112d) 
AmoebaNet-B (6,128) 
PyramidNet+ShakeDrop 
Reduced CIFAR-10
Wide-ResNet-28-10 
Shake-Shake (26 2x96d) 
10.0 ± 0.2
Wide-ResNet-28-10 
Shake-Shake (26 2x96d) 
PyramidNet+ShakeDrop 
10.7 ± 0.2
Wide-ResNet-28-10 
Shake-Shake (26 2x96d) 
Reduced SVHN
Wide-ResNet-28-10 
Shake-Shake (26 2x96d) 
Table 2. Test set error rates (%) on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and SVHN datasets. Lower is better. All the results of the baseline models, and
baseline models with Cutout are replicated in our experiments and match the previously reported results . Two exceptions
are Shake-Shake (26 2x112d), which has more ﬁlters than the biggest model in – 112 vs 96, and Shake-Shake models trained on
SVHN, these results were not previously reported. See text for more details.
We also test the best policies on reduced SVHN (the
same 1,000 example training set where the best policies are
found). AutoAugment results on the reduced set are again
comparable to the leading semi-supervised methods, which
range from 5.42% to 3.86% . (see Table 2). We see
again that AutoAugment leads to more signiﬁcant improvements on the reduced dataset than the full dataset.
4.2. ImageNet Results
Similar to above experiments, we use a reduced subset
of the ImageNet training set, with 120 classes (randomly
chosen) and 6,000 samples, to search for policies. We train
a Wide-ResNet 40-2 using cosine decay for 200 epochs. A
weight decay of 10−5 was used along with a learning rate
of 0.1. The best policies found on ImageNet are similar to
those found on CIFAR-10, focusing on color-based transformations. One difference is that a geometric transformation, Rotate, is commonly used on ImageNet policies. One
of the best policies is visualized in Figure 3.
Figure 3. One of the successful policies on ImageNet. As described in the text, most of the policies found on ImageNet used
color-based transformations.
Again, we combine the 5 best policies for a total of 25
sub-policies to create the ﬁnal policy for ImageNet training. We then train on the full ImageNet from scratch with
this policy using the ResNet-50 and ResNet-200 models
for 270 epochs. We use a batch size of 4096 and a learning rate of 1.6. We decay the learning rate by 10-fold at
epochs 90, 180, and 240. For baseline augmentation, we
use the standard Inception-style pre-processing which involves scaling pixel values to [-1,1], horizontal ﬂips with
50% probability, and random distortions of colors .
For models trained with AutoAugment, we use the baseline pre-processing and the policy learned on ImageNet. We
ﬁnd that removing the random distortions of color does not
change the results for AutoAugment.
AutoAugment
Pre-processing 
76.3 / 93.1
77.6 / 93.8
ResNet-200
78.5 / 94.2
80.0 / 95.0
AmoebaNet-B (6,190)
82.2 / 96.0
82.8 / 96.2
AmoebaNet-C (6,228)
83.1 / 96.1
83.5 / 96.5
Table 3. Validation set Top-1 / Top-5 accuracy (%) on ImageNet.
Higher is better. ResNet-50 with baseline augmentation result is
taken from . AmoebaNet-B,C results with Inception-style preprocessing are replicated in our experiments and match the previously reported result by . There exists a better result of 85.4%
Top-1 error rate but their method makes use of a large amount
of weakly labeled extra data. Ref. reports an improvement of
1.5% for a ResNet-50 model.
Our ImageNet results are shown in Table 3.
be seen from the results, AutoAugment improves over
the widely-used Inception Pre-processing across a
wide range of models, from ResNet-50 to the state-of-art
AmoebaNets .
Secondly, applying AutoAugment to
AmoebaNet-C improves its top-1 and top-5 accuracy from
83.1% / 96.1% to 83.5% / 96.5%. This improvement is remarkable given that the best augmentation policy was discovered on 5,000 images. We expect the results to be even
better when more compute is available so that AutoAugment can use more images to discover even better augmentation policies. The accuracy of 83.5% / 96.5% is also the
new state-of-art top-1/top-5 accuracy on this dataset (without multicrop / ensembling).
4.3. The Transferability of Learned Augmentation
policies to Other Datasets
In the above, we applied AutoAugment directly to
ﬁnd augmentation policies on the dataset of interest
(AutoAugment-direct). In many cases, such application of
AutoAugment can be resource-intensive. Here we seek to
understand if it is possible to transfer augmentation policies
from one dataset to another (which we call AutoAugmenttransfer). If such transfer happens naturally, the resource
requirements won’t be as intensive as applying AutoAugment directly. Also if such transfer happens naturally, we
also have clear evidence that AutoAugment does not “over-
ﬁt” to the dataset of interest and that AutoAugment indeed
ﬁnds generic transformations that can be applied to all kinds
of problems.
To evaluate the transferability of the policy found on ImageNet, we use the same policy that is learned on ImageNet
(and used for the results on Table 3) on ﬁve FGVC datasets
with image size similar to ImageNet. These datasets are
challenging as they have relatively small sets of training examples while having a large number of classes.
AutoAugment-
Oxford 102
Flowers 
Caltech-101 
Oxford-IIIT
Aircraft 
Table 4. Test set Top-1 error rates (%) on FGVC datasets for
Inception v4 models trained from scratch with and without
AutoAugment-transfer. Lower rates are better. AutoAugmenttransfer results use the policy found on ImageNet. Baseline models used Inception pre-processing.
For all of the datasets listed in Table 4, we train a Inception v4 for 1,000 epochs, using a cosine learning
rate decay with one annealing cycle. The learning rate and
weight decay are chosen based on the validation set performance. We then combine the training set and the validation
set and train again with the chosen hyperparameters. The
image size is set to 448x448 pixels. The policies found on
ImageNet improve the generalization accuracy of all of the
FGVC datasets signiﬁcantly. To the best of our knowledge,
our result on the Stanford Cars dataset is the lowest error
rate achieved on this dataset although we train the network
weights from scratch. Previous state-of-the-art ﬁne-tuned
pre-trained weights on ImageNet and used deep layer aggregation to attain a 5.9% error rate .
5. Discussion
In this section, we compare our search to previous attempts at automated data augmentation methods. We also
discuss the dependence of our results on some of the design decisions we have made through several ablation experiments.
AutoAugment vs. other automated data augmentation methods: Most notable amongst many previous data
augmentation methods is the work of . The setup in 
is similar to GANs : a generator learns to propose
augmentation policy (a sequence of image processing operations) such that the augmented images can fool a discriminator. The difference of our method to theirs is that
our method tries to optimize classiﬁcation accuracy directly
whereas their method just tries to make sure the augmented
images are similar to the current training images.
To make the comparison fair, we carried out experiments
similar to that described in . We trained a ResNet-32
and a ResNet-56 using the same policy from Section 4.1, to
compare our method to the results from . By training
a ResNet-32 with Baseline data augmentation, we achieve
the same error as did with ResNet-56 (called Heur.
in ). For this reason, we trained both a ResNet-32 and
a ResNet-56. We show that for both models, AutoAugment
leads to higher improvement (∼3.0%).
Improvement ∆
AutoAugment
(ResNet-32)
AutoAugment
(ResNet-56)
Table 5. The test set error rates (%) on CIFAR-10 with different
approaches for automated data augmentation. The MF and LSTM
results are taken from , and they are for a ResNet-56.
Relation between training steps and number of subpolicies: An important aspect of our work is the stochastic
application of sub-policies during training. Every image is
only augmented by one of the many sub-policies available
in each mini-batch, which itself has further stochasticity
since each transformation has a probability of application
associated with it. We ﬁnd that this stochasticity requires a
certain number of epochs per sub-policy for AutoAugment
to be effective. Since the child models are each trained with
5 sub-policies, they need to be trained for more than 80-100
epochs before the model can fully beneﬁt from all of the
sub-policies. This is the reason we choose to train our child
models for 120 epochs. Each sub-policy needs to be applied
a certain number of times before the model beneﬁts from
it. After the policy is learned, the full model is trained for
longer (e.g. 1800 epochs for Shake-Shake on CIFAR-10,
and 270 epochs for ResNet-50 on ImageNet), which allows
us to use more sub-policies.
Transferability across datasets and architectures: It
is important to note that the policies described above transfer well to many model architectures and datasets.
example, the policy learned on Wide-ResNet-40-2 and reduced CIFAR-10 leads to the improvements described on
all of the other model architectures trained on full CIFAR-
10 and CIFAR-100. Similarly, a policy learned on Wide-
ResNet-40-2 and reduced ImageNet leads to signiﬁcant improvements on Inception v4 trained on FGVC datasets that
have different data and class distributions. AutoAugment
policies are never found to hurt the performance of models
even if they are learned on a different dataset, which is not
the case for Cutout on reduced SVHN (Table 2). We present
the best policy on ImageNet and SVHN in the Appendix,
which can hopefully help researchers improve their generalization accuracy on relevant image classiﬁcation tasks.
Despite the observed transferability, we ﬁnd that policies
learned on data distributions closest to the target yield the
best performance: when training on SVHN, using the best
policy learned on reduced CIFAR-10 does slightly improve
generalization accuracy compared to the baseline augmentation, but not as signiﬁcantly as applying the SVHNlearned policy.
5.1. Ablation experiments
Changing the number of sub-policies: Our hypothesis
is that as we increase the number of sub-policies, the neural
network is trained on the same points with a greater diversity of augmentation, which should increase the generalization accuracy. To test this hypothesis, we investigate the
average validation accuracy of fully-trained Wide-ResNet-
28-10 models on CIFAR-10 as a function of the number
of sub-policies used in training. We randomly select subpolicy sets from a pool of 500 good sub-policies, and train
the Wide-ResNet-28-10 model for 200 epochs with each of
these sub-policy sets. For each set size, we sampled subpolicies ﬁve different times for better statistics. The training details of the model are the same as above for Wide-
ResNet-28-10 trained on CIFAR-10. Figure 4 shows the
average validation set accuracy as a function of the number
of sub-policies used in training, conﬁrming that the validation accuracy improves with more sub-policies up to about
20 sub-policies.
Randomizing the probabilities and magnitudes in the
augmentation policy: We take the AutoAugment policy on
CIFAR-10 and randomize the probabilities and magnitudes
Figure 4. Validation error (averaged over 5 runs) of Wide-ResNet-
28-10 trained on CIFAR-10 as a function of number of randomly
selected sub-policies (out of a pool of 500 good sub-policies) used
in training with AutoAugment. Bars represent the range of validation errors for each number.
of each operation in it. We train a Wide-ResNet-28-10 ,
using the same training procedure as before, for 20 different
instances of the randomized probabilities and magnitudes.
We ﬁnd the average error to be 3.0% (with a standard deviation of 0.1%), which is 0.4% worse than the result achieved
with the original AutoAugment policy (see Table 2).
Performance of random policies: Next, we randomize
the whole policy, the operations as well as the probabilities
and magnitudes. Averaged over 20 runs, this experiment
yields an average accuracy of 3.1% (with a standard deviation of 0.1%), which is slightly worse than randomizing
only the probabilities and magnitudes. The best random
policy achieves achieves an error of 3.0% (when average
over 5 independent runs). This shows that even AutoAugment with randomly sampled policy leads to appreciable
improvements.
The ablation experiments indicate that even data augmentation policies that are randomly sampled from our
search space can lead to improvements on CIFAR-10 over
the baseline augmentation policy. However, the improvements exhibited by random policies are less than those
shown by the AutoAugment policy (2.6% ± 0.1% vs.
3.0% ± 0.1% error rate). Furthermore, the probability and
magnitude information learned within the AutoAugment
policy seem to be important, as its effectiveness is reduced
signiﬁcantly when those parameters are randomized. We
emphasize again that we trained our controller using RL out
of convenience, augmented random search and evolutionary
strategies can be used just as well. The main contribution
of this paper is in our approach to data augmentation and
in the construction of the search space; not in discrete optimization methodology.
6. Acknowledgments
We thank Alok Aggarwal, Gabriel Bender, Yanping
Huang, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, Simon Kornblith, Augustus Odena, Avital Oliver, Colin Raffel, and Jonathan Shlens
for helpful discussions. This work was done as part of the
Google Brain Residency program (g.co/brainresidency).