Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation
ZIWEI JI, NAYEON LEE, RITA FRIESKE, TIEZHENG YU, DAN SU, YAN XU, ETSUKO ISHII,
YEJIN BANG, DELONG CHEN, WENLIANG DAI, HO SHU CHAN, ANDREA MADOTTO,
and PASCALE FUNG, Center for Artificial Intelligence Research (CAiRE), Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology, Hong Kong
Natural Language Generation (NLG) has improved exponentially in recent years thanks to the development of sequence-to-sequence deep learning technologies such as Transformer-based language models. This
advancement has led to more fluent and coherent NLG, leading to improved development in downstream
tasks such as abstractive summarization, dialogue generation and data-to-text generation. However, it is also
apparent that deep learning based generation is prone to hallucinate unintended text, which degrades the
system performance and fails to meet user expectations in many real-world scenarios. To address this issue,
many studies have been presented in measuring and mitigating hallucinated texts, but these have never been
reviewed in a comprehensive manner before.
In this survey, we thus provide a broad overview of the research progress and challenges in the hallucination
problem in NLG. The survey is organized into two parts: (1) a general overview of metrics, mitigation methods,
and future directions; (2) an overview of task-specific research progress on hallucinations in the following
downstream tasks, namely abstractive summarization, dialogue generation, generative question answering,
data-to-text generation, machine translation, and visual-language generation; and (3) hallucinations in large
language models (LLMs) 1. This survey serves to facilitate collaborative efforts among researchers in tackling
the challenge of hallucinated texts in NLG.
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies →Natural language generation; Neural networks.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Hallucination, Intrinsic Hallucination, Extrinsic Hallucination, Faithfulness
in NLG, Factuality in NLG, Consistency in NLG
Introduction
Definitions
Categorization
Task Comparison
Terminology Clarification
Contributors to Hallucination in NLG
Hallucination from Data
Hallucination from Training and Inference
Metrics Measuring Hallucination
Statistical Metric
1This section was updated in Jan 2024.
Authors’ address: Ziwei Ji, ; Nayeon Lee, ; Rita Frieske, rita.frieske@ust.
hk; Tiezheng Yu, ; Dan Su, ; Yan Xu, ; Etsuko Ishii,
 ; Yejin Bang, ; Delong Chen, ; Wenliang Dai,
 ; Ho Shu Chan, ; Andrea Madotto, ; Pascale Fung,
 , Center for Artificial Intelligence Research (CAiRE), Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,
Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong.
. 0360-0300/2022/2-ART $15.00
 
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
 
Ziwei Ji, et al.
Model-based Metric
Human Evaluation
Hallucination Mitigation Methods
Data-Related Methods
Modeling and Inference Methods
Future Directions
Future Directions in Metrics Design
Future Directions in Mitigation Methods
Hallucination in Abstractive Summarization
Hallucination Definition in Abstractive Summarization
Hallucination Metrics in Abstractive Summarization
Hallucination Mitigation in Abstractive Summarization
Future Directions in Abstractive Summarization
Hallucination in Dialogue Generation
Hallucination Definition in Dialogue Generation
Open-domain Dialogue Generation
Task-oriented Dialogue Generation
Future Directions in Dialogue Generation
Hallucination in Generative Question Answering
Hallucination Definition in GQA
Hallucination-related Metrics in GQA
Hallucination Mitigation in GQA
Future Directions in GQA
Hallucination in Data-to-Text Generation
Hallucination Definition in Data-to-Text Generation
Hallucination Metrics in Data-to-Text Generation
Hallucination Mitigation in Data-to-Text Generation
Future Directions in Data-to-Text Generation
Hallucinations in Neural Machine Translation
Hallucinations Definition and Categories in NMT
Hallucination Metrics in NMT
Hallucination Mitigation Methods in NMT
Future Directions in NMT
Hallucination in Vision-Language Generation
Object Hallucination in Image Captioning
Hallucination in Other VL Tasks
Future Directions in VL
Hallucination in Large Language Models
Hallucination Definition in LLMs
Hallucination Metrics for LLMs
Hallucination Mitigation in LLMs
Future Directions of Hallucination Mitigation in LLMs
Conclusion
References
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation
INTRODUCTION
Natural Language Generation (NLG) is one of the crucial yet challenging sub-fields of Natural
Language Processing (NLP). NLG techniques are used in many downstream tasks such as summarization, dialogue generation, generative question answering (GQA), data-to-text generation,
and machine translation. Recently, the rapid development of NLG has captured the imagination of
many thanks to the advances in deep learning technologies, especially Transformer -based
models like BERT , BART , GPT-2 , and GPT-3 . The conspicuous development of
NLG tasks attracted the attention of many researchers, leading to an increased effort in the field.
Alongside the advancement of NLG models, attention towards their limitations and potential
risks has also increased. Some early works focus on the potential pitfalls of utilizing the
standard likelihood maximization-based objective in training and decoding of NLG models. They
discovered that such likelihood maximization approaches could result in degeneration, which refers
generated output that is bland, incoherent, or gets stuck in repetitive loops. Concurrently, it is
discovered that NLG models often generate text that is nonsensical, or unfaithful to the provided
source input . Researchers started referring to such undesirable generation as
hallucination 2.
Hallucination in NLG is concerning because it hinders performance and raises safety concerns for
real-world applications. For instance, in medical applications, a hallucinatory summary generated
from a patient information form could pose a risk to the patient. It may provoke a life-threatening
incident for a patient if the instructions of a medicine generated by machine translation are hallucinatory. Hallucination can also lead to potential privacy violations. Carlini et al. demonstrate
that language models can be prompted to recover and generate sensitive personal information from
the training corpus (e.g., email address, phone/fax number, and physical address). Such memorization and recovery of the training corpus is considered a form of hallucination because the model is
generating text that is not “faithful” to the source input content (i.e., such private information does
not exist in the source input).
Currently, there are many active efforts to address hallucination for various NLG tasks. Analyzing
hallucinatory content in different NLG tasks and investigating their relationship would strengthen
our understanding of this phenomenon and encourage the unification of efforts from different NLG
fields. However, to date, little has been done to understand hallucinations from a broader perspective
that encompasses all major NLG tasks. To the best of our knowledge, existing surveys have only
focused specific tasks like abstractive summarization and translation . Thus, in this
paper, we present a survey of the research progress and challenges in the hallucination problem in
NLG. And offer a comprehensive analysis of existing research on the phenomenon of hallucination
in different NLG tasks, namely abstractive summarization, dialogue generation, generative question
answering, data-to-text generation, and machine translation. We mainly discussed hallucination
of the unimodal NLG tasks that have textual input sources upon which the generated text can
be assessed. We also briefly summarize hallucinations in multi-modal settings such as visuallanguage tasks . This survey can provide researchers with a high-level insight derived from
the similarities and differences of different approaches. Furthermore, given the various stages of
development in studying hallucination from different tasks, the survey can assist researchers in
drawing inspiration on concepts, metrics, and mitigation methods.
2The term “hallucination” first appeared in Computer Vision (CV) in Baker and Kanade and carried more positive
meanings, such as superresolution , image inpainting , and image synthesizing . Such hallucination is
something we take advantage of rather than avoid in CV. Nevertheless, recent works have started to refer to a specific type
of error as "hallucination" in image captioning and object detection , which denotes non-existing objects
detected or localized incorrectly at their expected position. The latter conception is similar to “hallucination” in NLG.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Ziwei Ji, et al.
Organization of this Survey. The remainder of this survey is organized as follows. Section 2 ∼
Section 6 provide an overview of the hallucination problem in NLG by discussing the definition
and categorization, contributors, metrics, and mitigation methods of hallucinations, respectively.
The second part of our survey discusses the hallucination problem associated with specific NLG
tasks: abstractive summarization in Section 7, dialogue generation in Section 8, GQA in Section 9,
data-to-text generation in Section 10, machine translation in Section 11, and VL generation in
Section 12. The third part discusses this phenomenon in LLMs in Section 13. Finally, we conclude
the whole survey in Section 14.
DEFINITIONS
In the general context outside of NLP, hallucination is a psychological term referring to a particular
type of perception . Blom define hallucination as “a percept, experienced by a waking individual, in the absence of an appropriate stimulus from the extracorporeal world”.
Simply put, a hallucination is an unreal perception that feels real. The undesired phenomenon of
“NLG models generating unfaithful or nonsensical text” shares similar characteristics with
such psychological hallucinations – explaining the choice of terminology. Hallucinated text gives
the impression of being fluent and natural despite being unfaithful and nonsensical. It appears
to be grounded in the real context provided, although it is actually hard to specify or verify the
existence of such contexts. Similar to psychological hallucination, which is hard to tell apart from
other “real” perceptions, hallucinated text is also hard to capture at first glance.
Within the context of NLP, the above definition of hallucination, the generated content that is
nonsensical or unfaithful to the provided source content , is the most inclusive and
standard. However, there do exist variations in definition across NLG tasks, which will be further
described in the later task-specific sections.
Categorization
Following the categorization from previous works , there are two main types of
hallucinations, namely intrinsic hallucination and extrinsic hallucination. To explain the definition
and categorization more intuitively, we give examples of each category of hallucinations for each
NLG downstream task in Table 1.
(1) Intrinsic Hallucinations: The generated output that contradicts the source content. For
instance, in the abstractive summarization task from Table 1, the generated summary “The
first Ebola vaccine was approved in 2021” contradicts the source content “The first vaccine for
Ebola was approved by the FDA in 2019.”.
(2) Extrinsic Hallucinations: The generated output that cannot be verified from the source
content (i.e., output that can neither be supported nor contradicted by the source). For
example, in the abstractive summarization task from Table 1, the information “China has
already started clinical trials of the COVID-19 vaccine.” is not mentioned in source. We can
neither find evidence for the generated output from the source nor assert that it is wrong.
Notably, the extrinsic hallucination is not always erroneous because it could be from factually
correct external information . Such factual hallucination can be helpful because it
recalls additional background knowledge to improve the informativeness of the generated
text. However, in most of the literature, extrinsic hallucination is still treated with caution
because its unverifiable aspect of this additional information increases the risk from a factual
safety perspective.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation
Task Comparison
The previous subsection is about the definition and categorization of hallucination commonly
shared by many NLG tasks. Yet, there are some task-specific differences.
For the abstractive summarization, data-to-text, and dialogue tasks, the main difference is in what
serves as the “source” and the level of tolerance towards hallucinations. The source in abstractive
summarization is the input source text that is being summarized , while the source in data-totext is non-linguistic data , and the source(s) in the dialogue system is dialogue history
and/or the external knowledge sentences. Tolerance towards hallucinations is very low in both the
summarization and data-to-text tasks because it is essential to provide faithful
generation. In contrast, the tolerance is relatively higher in dialogue systems because the desired
characteristics are not only faithfulness but also user engagement, especially in open-domain
dialogue systems .
For the generative question answering (GQA) task, the exploration of hallucination is at its early
stage, so there is no standard definition or categorization of hallucination yet. However, we can see
that the GQA literature mainly focuses on “intrinsic hallucination” where the source is the world
knowledge . Lastly, unlike the aforementioned tasks, the categorizations of hallucinations in
machine translation vary within the task. Most relevant literature agrees that translated text is
considered a hallucination when the source text is completely disconnected from the translated
target . For further details, please refer to Section 11.
Terminology Clarification
Multiple terminologies are associated with the concept of hallucination. We provide clarification
of the commonly used terminologies hallucination, faithfulness, and factuality to resolve any
confusion. Faithfulness is defined as staying consistent and truthful to the provided source – an
antonym to "hallucination." Any work that tries to maximize faithfulness thus focuses on minimizing
hallucination. For this reason, our survey includes all those works that address the faithfulness
of machine-generated outputs. Factuality refers to the quality of being actual or based on fact.
Depending on what serves as the “fact”, "factuality" and "faithfulness" may or may not be the same.
Maynez et al. differentiate "factuality" from "faithfulness" by defining the “fact” to be the
world knowledge. In contrast, Dong et al. use the source input as the “fact” to determine the
factual correctness, making "factuality" indistinguishable from "faithfulness". In this paper, we
adopt the definition from Maynez et al. because we believe having such a distinction between
source knowledge and world knowledge provides a more clear understanding.
Note that the judging criteria for what is considered faithful or hallucinated (i.e., the definition
of hallucination) can differ across tasks. For more details of these variation definitions, you can
find in the later task-specific sections.
CONTRIBUTORS TO HALLUCINATION IN NLG
Hallucination from Data
The main cause of hallucination from data is source-reference divergence. This divergence happens
1) as an artifact of heuristic data collection or 2) due to the nature of some NLG tasks that inevitably
contain such divergence. When a model is trained on data with source-reference(target) divergence,
the model can be encouraged to generate text that is not necessarily grounded and not faithful to
the provided source.
Heuristic data collection. When collecting large-scale datasets, some works heuristically select
and pair real sentences or tables as the source and target . As a result, the target reference
may contain information that cannot be supported by the source . For instance, when
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Ziwei Ji, et al.
Abstractive
Summarization
The first vaccine for Ebola was approved by the FDA in 2019
in the US, five years after the initial outbreak in 2014. To
produce the vaccine, scientists had to sequence the DNA
The first Ebola vaccine was approved in 2021.
of Ebola, then identify possible vaccines, and finally show
successful clinical trials. Scientists say a vaccine for COVID-
19 is unlikely to be ready this year, although clinical trials
have already started.
China has already started clinical trials of the COVID-19
Taskoriented
inform (NAME = pickwick hotel, PRICERANGE = moderate)
the hotel named pickwick hotel is in a high price range.
the pickwick hotel in san diego is a moderate price range
Opendomain
Dialog History:
Speaker 1: What do you think about Murray?
Speaker 2: I think Murray is a great player he just needs
to stay healthy in order to compete more. Who do you like
Speaker 1: I like Roger Nadal the most!
Knowledge: In tennis, the term Big Four refers to the quartet
of men’s singles players comprising Roger Federer, Rafael
Nadal, Novak Djokovic, and Andy Murray.
Speaker 1: I like Djokovic. He has played in the top ten
singles players of the world.
Generative QA
Question: dow jones industrial average please?
Answer: The Dow Jones Industrial Average(DJIA) is an index
of 30 major U.S.stock indexes. The DJIAwas created in
1896 by Charles Dow, a statistician and editor of The Wall
Street Journal. The index was first published in the mid-
1880s, and was last updated on May 26,1896.
Question: definition of sadduction
Answer: Sadducees. noun. The definition of a sadducee is
a person who acts in a deceitful or duplicitous manner.
An example of a Sadduceee is a politician who acts
deceitfully in order to gain political power.1 a member
of a Jewish sect that was active during the Second Temple.
The Houston Rockets (18-4) defeated the Denver Nuggets
(10-13) 108-96 on Saturday.
Houston has won two straight games and six of their
last seven.
Translation
迈克周四去书店。(Michael went to the bookstore on
Thursday.)
Jerry didn’t go to the bookstore.
迈克周四去书店。(Michael went to the bookstore on
Thursday.)
Michael happily went to the bookstore with his friend.
Table 1. Examples of each category of hallucinations for each task. In the Data2Text task, H/A: home/away, MIN: minutes, PTS: points, REB: rebounds, AST:
assists, BLK: blocks, FG_PCT: field goals percentage. The examples for VL tasks are shown in Figure 2 and Figure 3
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation
Statistical
Shuster et al. 
Dhingra et al. , Wang et al. 
Translation
Martindale et al. 
Captioning
Rohrbach et al. 
Modelbased
Abstractive
Summarization
Durmus et al. , Kryscinski et al. , Nan et al. , Wang et al. 
Gabriel et al. , Goodrich et al. , Pagnoni et al. , Zhou et al. 
Falke et al. , Laban et al. , Mishra et al. , Scialom et al. 
Balakrishnan et al. , Honovich et al. , Li et al. 
Dziri et al. , Gupta et al. , Santhanam et al. 
Generative QA
Sellam et al. ∗,Zhang et al. ∗,Durmus et al. ∗
Wang et al. ∗, Su et al. 
Dušek and Kasner , Liu et al. , Wiseman et al. 
Filippova , Rebuffel et al. , Tian et al. 
Translation
Kong et al. , Lee et al. , Tu et al. 
Feng et al. , Garg et al. , Zhou et al. 
Parthasarathi et al. , Raunak et al. 
Task-Agnostic
Goyal and Durrett , Liu et al. , Zhou et al. 
Mitigation
Abstractive
Summarization
Cao et al. , Nan et al. , Zhu et al. 
Gunel et al. 
Honovich et al. , Shen et al. , Wu et al. 
Santhanam et al. , Shuster et al. 
Generative QA
Bi et al. , Fan et al. , Yin et al. 
Liu et al. , Nie et al. , Parikh et al. , Wang 
Nie et al. , Rebuffel et al. 
Translation
Lee et al. , Raunak et al. 
Briakou and Carpuat , Junczys-Dowmunt 
Captioning
Biten et al. 
Abstractive
Summarization
Huang et al. , Li et al. , Song et al. 
Aralikatte et al. , Cao et al. , Cao and Wang 
Albrecht and Hwa , Chen et al. , Zhao et al. 
Balakrishnan et al. , Li et al. , Rashkin et al. 
Dziri et al. 
Generative QA
Fan et al. , Krishna et al. , Li et al. 
Nakano et al. , Su et al. 
Liu et al. , Tian et al. , Wang et al. , Xu et al. 
Filippova , Rebuffel et al. , Su et al. , Xiao and Wang 
Puduppully and Lapata 
Translation
Feng et al. , Lee et al. , Weng et al. 
Li et al. , Raunak et al. , Wang and Sennrich 
Bengio et al. , Zhou et al. 
Goyal et al. , Xu et al. 
Captioning
Dai et al. , Xiao and Wang 
Table 2. Evaluation metrics and mitigation methods for each task. *The hallucination metrics are not specifically proposed for generative question answering (GQA), but they can be adapted for that task.
constructing WIKIBIO , a dataset for generating biographical notes based on the infoboxes
of Wikipedia, the authors took the Wikipedia infobox as the source and the first sentence of the
Wikipedia page as the target ground-truth reference. However, the first sentence of the Wikipedia
article is not necessarily equivalent to the infobox in terms of the information they contain. Indeed,
Dhingra et al. points out that 62% of the first sentences in WIKIBIO have additional information
not stated in the corresponding infobox. Such mismatch between source and target in datasets can
lead to hallucination.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Ziwei Ji, et al.
Another problematic scenario is when duplicates from the dataset are not properly filtered out.
It is almost impossible to check hundreds of gigabytes of text corpora manually. Lee et al. 
show that duplicated examples from the pretraining corpus bias the model to favor generating
repeats of the memorized phrases from the duplicated examples.
Innate divergence. Some NLG tasks by nature do not always have factual knowledge alignment
between the source input text and the target reference, especially those that value diversity in
generated output. For instance, it is acceptable for open-domain dialogue systems to respond in
chit-chat style, subjective style , or with a relevant fact that is not necessarily present in the
user input, history or provided knowledge source – this improves the engagingness and diversity
of the dialogue generation. However, researchers have discovered that such dataset characteristic
leads to inevitable extrinsic hallucinations.
Hallucination from Training and Inference
As discussed in the previous subsection, source-reference divergence existing in dataset is one of
the contributors of hallucination. However, Parikh et al. show that hallucination problem
still occurs even when there is very little divergence in dataset. This is because there is another
contributor of hallucinations – training and modeling choices of neural models .
Imperfect representation learning. The encoder has the role of comprehending and encoding
input text into meaningful representations. An encoder with a defective comprehension ability
could influence the degree of hallucination . When encoders learn wrong correlations between
different parts of the training data, it could result in erroneous generation that diverges from the
input .
Erroneous decoding. The decoder takes the encoded input from the encoder and generates the
final target sequence. Two aspects of decoding contribute to hallucinations. First, decoders can
attend to the wrong part of the encoded input source, leading to erroneous generation . Such
wrong association results in generation with facts mixed up between two similar entities .
Second, the design of the decoding strategy itself can contribute to hallucinations. Dziri et al.
 illustrate that a decoding strategy that improves the generation diversity, such as top-k
sampling, is positively correlated with increased hallucination. We conjecture that deliberately
added “randomness” by sampling from the top-k samples instead of choosing the most probable
token increase the unexpected nature of the generation, leading to a higher chance of containing
hallucinated content.
Exposure Bias. Regardless of decoding strategy choices, the exposure bias problem ,
defined as the discrepancy in decoding between training and inference time, can be another contributor to hallucination. It is common practice to train the decoder with teacher-forced maximum
likelihood estimation (MLE) training, where the decoder is encouraged to predict the next token
conditioned on the ground-truth prefix sequences. However, during the inference generation, the
model generates the next token conditioned on the historical sequences previously generated by
itself . Such a discrepancy can lead to increasingly erroneous generation, especially when the
target sequence gets longer.
Parametric knowledge bias. Pre-training of models on a large corpus is known to result in the
model memorizing knowledge in its parameters . This so-called parametric knowledge
helps improve the performance of downstream tasks but also serves as another contributor to
hallucinatory generation. Large pre-trained models used for downstream NLG tasks are powerful
in providing generalizability and coverage, but Longpre et al. have discovered that such
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation
models prioritize parametric knowledge over the provided input. In other words, models that favor
generating output with their parametric knowledge instead of the information from the input
source can result in the hallucination of excess information in the output. On the other hand, current
research works highlight a discrepancy between surface realization and
inherent knowledge of the model in NLG tasks. Models can realize they are generating something
hallucinated in some way.
METRICS MEASURING HALLUCINATION
Recently, various studies have illustrated that most conventional metrics used to measure the
quality of writing are not adequate for quantifying the level of hallucination . It has been
shown that state-of-the-art abstractive summarization systems, evaluated with metrics such as
ROUGE, BLEU, and METEOR, have hallucinated content in 25% of their generated summaries .
A similar phenomenon has been shown in other NLG tasks, where it has been discovered that
traditional metrics have a poor correlation with human judgment in terms of the hallucination
problem . Therefore, there are active research efforts to define effective metrics for
quantifying hallucination. FRANK surveys the faithfulness metrics for summarization and
compares these metrics’ correlations with human judgments. To assess the example-level accuracy
of metrics in diverse tasks, TRUE reports their Area Under the ROC Curve (ROC AUC) in
regard to hallucinated example detection.
Statistical Metric
One of the simplest approaches is to leverage lexical features (n-grams) to calculate the information
overlap and contradictions between the generated and the reference texts – the higher the mismatch
counts, the lower the faithfulness and thus the higher the hallucination score.
Given that many traditional metrics leverage the target text as the ground-truth reference (e.g.,
ROUGE, BLEU, etc.), Dhingra et al. build upon this idea and propose PARENT (Precision And
Recall of Entailed n-grams from the Table) 3, a metric which can also measure hallucinations using
both the source and target text as references. Particularly, PARENT n-gram lexical entailment
matches generated text with both the source table and target text. The F1-score that combines the
precision and recall of the entailment reflects the accuracy of the table-to-text task. The source text
is additionally used because it is not guaranteed that the output target text contains the complete
set of information available in the input source text.
It is common for NLG tasks to have multiple plausible outputs from the same input, which is
known as one-to-many mapping . In practice, however, covering all the possible outputs
is too expensive and almost impossible. Thus, many works simplify the hallucination evaluation
setup by relying on the source text as the sole reference. Their metrics just focus on the information
referred by input sources to measure hallucinations, especially intrinsic hallucinations. For instance,
Wang et al. propose PARENT-T, which simplifies PARENT by only using table content as
the reference. Similarly, Knowledge F1 – a variant of unigram F1 – has been proposed for
knowledge-grounded dialogue tasks to measure the overlap between the model’s generation and
the knowledge used to ground the dialogue during dataset collection.
Furthermore, Martindale et al. proposed a bag-of-vectors sentence similarity (BVSS) metric
for measuring sentence adequacy in machine translation, that only refers to the target text. This
statistical metric helps to determine whether the MT output has a different amount of information
than the translation reference.
3Note that PARENT is a general metric like ROUGE and BLEU, not only constrained to hallucination
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Ziwei Ji, et al.
Although simple and effective, one potential limitation of lexical matching is that it can only
handle lexical information. Thus, it fails to deal with syntactic or semantic variations .
Model-based Metric
Model-based metrics leverage neural models to measure the hallucination degree in the generated
text. They are proposed to handle more complex syntactic and even semantic variations. The
model-based metrics comprehend the source and generated texts and detect the knowledge/content
mismatches. However, the neural models can be subject to errors that can propagate and adversely
affect the accurate quantification of hallucination.
Information Extraction (IE)-based. It is not always easy to determine which part of the
generated text contains the knowledge that requires verification. IE-based metrics use IE models to
represent the knowledge in a simpler relational tuple format (e.g., subject, relation, object), then
verify against relation tuples extracted from the source/reference. Here, the IE model is identifying
and extracting the “facts" that require verification. In this way, words containing no verifiable
information (e.g., stopwords, conjunctions, etc) are not included in the verification step.
For example, ground-truth reference text “Brad Pitt was born in 1963” and generated
text “Brad Pitt was born in 1961” will be mapped to the relation triples and respectively 4. The mismatch between the
dates indicates that there is hallucination. One limitation associated with this approach
is the potential error propagation from the IE model.
QA-based. This approach implicitly measures the knowledge overlap or consistency between
the generation and the source reference. This is based on the intuition that similar answers will be
generated from a same question if the generation is factually consistent with the source reference. It
is already put in use to evaluate hallucinations in many tasks, such as summarization ,
dialogue , and data2text generation .
QA-based metric that measures the faithfulness of the generated text is consisted of three parts:
First, given a generated text, a question generation (QG) model generates a set of question-answer
pairs. Second, a question answering (QA) model answers the generated questions given a groundtruth source text as the reference (containing knowledge). Lastly, the hallucination score is computed
based on the similarity of the corresponding answers.
Similar to the IE-based metrics, the limitation of this approach is the potential error that might
arise and propagated from either the QG model or the QA model.
Natural Language Inference (NLI) Metrics. There are not many labelled datasets for hallucination detection tasks, especially at the early stage when the hallucination problem starts to
gain attention. As an alternative, many works leverage the NLI dataset to tackle hallucinations.
Note that NLI is a task that determines whether a “hypothesis” is true (entailment), false (contradiction), or undetermined (neutral) given a “premise”. These metrics are based on the idea that
only the source knowledge reference should entail the entirety of the information in faithful and
hallucination-free generation . More specifically, NLI-based
metrics define the hallucination/faithfulness score to be the entailment probability between the
source and its generated text, also known as the percentage of times generated text entails, neutral
to, and contradicts the source.
According to Honovich et al. , NLI-based approaches are more robust to lexical variability
than token matching approaches such as IE-based and QA-based metrics. Nevertheless, as illustrated
by Falke et al. , off-the-shelf NLI models tend to transfer poorly to the abstractive summarization
4This is an example from 
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation
task. Thus, there is a line of research in improving and extending the NLI paradigm specifically
for hallucination evaluation purposes . Apart from generalizability, Goyal and Durrett
 point out the potential limitation of using sentence-level entailment models, namely their
incapability to pinpoint and locate which parts of the generation are erroneous. In response, the
authors propose a new dependency-level entailment and attempt to identify factual inconsistencies
in a more fine-grained manner.
Faithfulness Classification Metrics. To improve upon NLI-based metrics, task-specific datasets
are constructed to improve from the NLI-based metrics. Liu et al. , Zhou et al. constructed
syntactic data by automatically inserting hallucinations into training instances. Santhanam et al.
 and Honovich et al. construct new corpora for faithfulness classification in dialogue
responses. They manually annotate the Wizard-of-Wikipedia dataset , a knowledge grounded
dialog dataset, by judging whether each response is hallucinated.
Faithfulness specific datasets can be better than NLI datasets because entailment or neutral
labels of NLI datasets and faithfulness are not equivalent. For example, the hypothesis “Putin is U.S.
president” can be considered to be either neutral to or entailed from the premise “Putin is president”.
However, from the faithfulness perspective, the hypothesis contains unsupported information
“U.S.”, which is deemed to be hallucination.
LM-based Metrics. These metrics leverage two language models (LMs) to determine if each
token is supported or not: An unconditional LM is only trained on the targets (ground-truth
references) in the dataset, while a conditional language model 𝐿𝑀𝑥is trained on both source and
target data. It is assumed that the next token is inconsistent with the input if unconditional LM
gets a smaller loss than conditional 𝐿𝑀𝑥during forced-path decoding . We classify the
generated token as hallucinatory if the loss from LM is lower. The ratio of hallucinated tokens to
the total number of target tokens |𝑦| can reflect the hallucination degree.
Human Evaluation
Due to the challenging and imperfect nature of the current automatic evaluation of hallucinations in
NLG, human evaluation is still one of the most commonly used approaches. There are two
main forms of human evaluation: (1) scoring, where human annotators rate the hallucination level
in a range; and (2) comparing, where human annotators compare the output texts with baselines or
ground-truth references .
Multiple terminologies, such as faithfulness ,
factual consistency , fidelity , factualness5 , factuality4 , or
on the other hand, hallucination , fact contradicting are used in the
human evaluation of hallucination to rate whether the generated text is in accord with the source
input. Chen et al. , Nie et al. use finer-grained metrics for intrinsic hallucination and
extrinsic hallucination separately. Moreover, there are some broad metrics, such as Correctness , Accuracy , and Informativeness considering both missing and additional
contents (extrinsic hallucinations) compared to the input source.
HALLUCINATION MITIGATION METHODS
Common mitigation methods can be divided into two categories, in accordance with two main
contributors of hallucinations: Data-Related Methods, and Modeling and Inference Methods.
5uses the source input as the “fact”.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Ziwei Ji, et al.
Data-Related Methods
Building a Faithful Dataset. Considering that noisy data encourage hallucinations, constructing faithful datasets manually is an intuitive method, and there are various ways to build such
datasets: One way is employing annotators to write clean and faithful targets from scratch given
the source , which may lack diversity . Another way is employing annotators
to rewrite real sentences on the web , or targets in the existing dataset . Basically, the
revision strategy consists of three stages: (1) phrase trimming: removing phrases unsupported by
the source in the exemplar sentence; (2) decontextualization: resolving co-references and deleting
phrases dependent on context; (3) syntax modification: making the purified sentences flow smoothly.
Meanwhile, other works leverage the model to generate data and instruct annotators to
label whether these outputs contain hallucinations or not. While this approach is typically used to
build diagnostic evaluation datasets, it has the potential to build faithful datasets.
Cleaning Data Automatically. In order to alleviate semantic noise issues, another approach is
to find information that is irrelevant or contradictory to the input from the existing parallel corpus
and then filter or correct the data. This approach is suitable for the case where there is a low or
moderate level of noise in the original data .
Some works have dealt with the hallucination issue at the instance level by using a
score for each source-reference pair and filtering out hallucinated ones. This corpus filtering method
consists of several steps: (1) measuring the quality of the training samples in terms of hallucination
utilizing the metrics described above; (2) ranking these hallucination scores in descending order;
(3) selecting and filtering out the untrustworthy samples at the bottom. Instance-level scores can
lead to a signal loss because divergences occur at the word level; i.e., parts of the target sentence
are loyal to the source input, while others diverge .
Considering this issue, other works correct paired training samples, specifically the
input data, according to the references. This method is mainly applied in the data-to-text task
because structured data are easier to correcte than utterances. This method consists of two steps:
(1) utilizing a model to parse the meaning representation (MR), such as attribute-value pairs, from
original human textual references; (2) using the MR extracted from the reference to correct the
input MR through slot matching. This method will enhance the semantic consistency between
input and output without abandoning a part of the dataset.
Information Augmentation. It is intuitive that augmenting the inputs with external information will obtain a better representation of the source. Because the external knowledge, explicit
alignment, extra training data, etc., can improve the correlation between the source and target and
help the model learn better task-related features. Consequently, a better semantic understanding
helps alleviate the divergence from the source issue. Examples of the augmented information
include entity information , extracted relation triples from source document obtained
by Fact Description Extraction, pre-executed operation results , synthetic data generated
through replacement or perturbation , retrieved external knowledge ,
and retrieved similar training samples .
These methods enforce a stronger alignment between inputs and outputs. However, they will
bring challenges due to the gap between the original source and augmented information, such as
the semantic gap between an ambiguous utterance and a distinct MR of structured data, and the
format discrepancy between the structured knowledge graph and natural language.
Modeling and Inference Methods
Architecture.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation
Fig. 1. The frameworks of training methods.
Encoder. The encoder learns to encode a variable-length sequence from input text into a fixedlength vector representation. As we mentioned above in Section 5.1.3, hallucination appears when
the models lack semantic interpretation over the input. Some works have modified the encoder
architecture in order to make it more compatible with input and learn a better representation. For
example, Huang et al. and Cao et al. propose a dual encoder, consisting of a sequential
document encoder and a structured graph encoder to deal with the additional knowledge.
Attention. The attention mechanism is an integral component in neural networks that selectively
concentrates on some parts of sequences while ignoring others based on dependencies . In
order to encourage the generator to pay more attention to the source, Aralikatte et al. introduce
a short circuit from the input document to the vocabulary distribution via source-conditioned bias.
Krishna et al. employ sparse attention to improve the model‘s long-range dependencies in
the hope of modeling more retrieved documents so as to mitigate the hallucination in the answer.
Wu et al. adopt inductive attention, which removes potentially uninformative attention links
by injecting pre-established structural information to avoid hallucinations.
Decoder. The decoder is responsible for generating the final output in natural language given
input representations . Several work modified the decoder structures to mitigate hallucination,
such as the multi-branch decoder , uncertainty-aware decoder , dual decoder, consisting
of a sequential decoder and a tree-based decoder , and constrained decoder with lexical or
structural limitations . Based on the observation that the “randomness” from sampling-based
decoding, especially near the end of sentences, can lead to hallucination, propose to iteratively
reduce the “randomness” through time. These decoders improve the possibility of faithful tokens
while reducing the possibility of hallucinatory ones during inference by figuring out the implicit
discrepancy and dependency between tokens or restricted by explicit constraints. Since such
decoders may have more difficulty generating fluent or diverse text, there is a balance to be struck
between them.
Planning/Sketching. Planning is a common method to control and restrict what the model generates by informing the content and its order . Planning can be a separate step in a two-step
generator , which is prone to progressive amplification of the hallucination
problem. Or be injected into the end-to-end model during generation . Sketching has a similar
function to planning, and can also be adopted for handling hallucinations . The difference is
that the skeleton is treated as a part of the final generated text. While providing more controllability,
such methods also need to strike a balance between faithfulness and diversity.
Reinforcement Learning (RL). As pointed out by Ranzato et al. , word-level maximum likelihood training leads to the problem of exposure bias. Some works adopt RL
to solve the hallucination problem, which utilizes different rewards to optimize the model. The
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Ziwei Ji, et al.
purpose of RL is for the agent to learn an optimal policy that maximizes the reward that accumulates
from the environment .The reward function is critical to RL and, if properly designed, it can
provide training signals that help the model accomplish its goal of hallucination reduction. For
example, Li et al. propose a slot consistency reward which is the cardinality of the difference
between generated template and the slot-value pairs extracted from input dialogue act. Improving
the slot consistency can help reduce the hallucination phenomenon of missing or misplacing slot
values in generated templates. Mesgar et al. attain persona consistency sub-reward via an
NLI model to reduce the hallucinations in personal facts. Huang et al. use a combination of
ROUGE and the multiple-choice cloze score as the reward function to improve the faithfulness of
summarization outputs. The cloze score is similar to the QA-based metric, measuring how well
a QA model can address the questions by reading the generated summary (as context), where
the questions are automatically constructed from the reference summary. As the above examples
show, some RL reward functions for mitigating hallucination are inspired by existing automatic
evaluation metrics. Although RL is challenging to learn and converge due to the extremely large
search space, this method has the potential to obtain the best policy for the task without an oracle.
Multi-task Learning. Multi-task learning is also utilized for handling hallucinations in different
NLG tasks. In this training paradigm, a shared model is trained on multiple tasks simultaneously to
learn the commonalities of the tasks. The hallucination problem may be derived from the reliance
of the training process on a single dataset, leading to the fact that the model fails to learn the actual
task features. By adding proper additional tasks along with the target task during training, the model
can suffer less from the hallucination problem. For example, Weng et al. and Garg et al. 
incorporate a word alignment task into the translation model to improve the alignment accuracy
between the input and output, and thus faithfulness. Li et al. combine an entailment task with
abstractive summarization to encourage models to generate summaries entailed by and faithful
to the source. Li et al. incorporate rationale extraction and the answer generation, which
allows more confident and correct answers and reduces the hallucination problem. The Multi-task
approach has several advantages, such as data efficiency improvement, overfitting reduction, and
fast learning. It is crucial to choose which tasks should be learned jointly, and learning multiple
tasks simultaneously presents new challenges of design and optimization .
Controllable Generation. Current works treat the hallucination level as a controllable attribute
in order to remain the hallucination in outputs at a low level. Controllable generation techniques
such as controlled re-sampling , control codes that can be provided manually ,
or predicted automatically are leveraged to improve faithfulness. This method may require
some annotated datasets for training. Considering that hallucination is not necessarily harmful
and may bring some benefits, controllable methods can be further adapted to change the degree of
hallucination to meet the demands of different real-world applications.
Other general training methods such as regularization and loss reconstruction have also been proposed to tackle the hallucination problem.
Post-Processing. Post-processing methods can correct hallucinations in the output, and this
standalone task requires less training data. Especially for noisy datasets where a large proportion of
the ground truth references suffer from hallucinations, modeling correction is a competitive choice
to handle the hallucination problem . Cao et al. , Chen et al. , Dong et al. , and Dziri
et al. follow a generate-then-refine strategy. While the post-processing correction step tends
to result in ungrammatical texts, this method allows researchers to utilise SOTA models which
perform best in respect of other attributes, such as fluency, and then correct the results specifically
for faithfulness by using small amounts of automatically generated training data.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Many studies have been conducted to tackle the hallucination problem in NLG and its downstream
tasks. As mentioned above, we have discussed common metrics and mitigation methods to advance
research in these fields. From a broader perspective, we wish to point out open challenges and
potential directions in regard to metric and mitigation method.
Future Directions in Metrics Design
Fine-grained Metrics. Most of the existing hallucination metrics measure intrinsic and extrinsic
hallucinations together as a unified metric. However, it is common for a single generation to have
both types and a number of hallucinatory sub-strings. Fine-grained metrics that can distinguish
between the two types of hallucinations will provide richer insight to researchers.
In order to implement a fine-graded metric, the first step would be to identify the exact location
of the hallucinatory sub-strings correctly. However, some metrics such as those that are QA-based
cannot identify the individual hallucinatory sub-strings. Improvements in this aspect would help
improve the quality and explainability of the metrics. The next step would be to categorize the
detected hallucinatory sub-strings. The hallucinatory sub-string will be intrinsic if it is wrong or
nonsensical, and extrinsic if it is non-existing in the source context. Future work that explores an
automatic method of categorization would be beneficial.
Fact-Checking. The factual verification of extrinsic hallucinations requires fact-checking against
world knowledge, which can be time consuming and laborious. Leveraging an automatic factchecking system for extrinsic hallucination verification is, thus, other future work that requires
attention. Fact-checking consists of the knowledge evidence selection and claim verification subtasks, and the following are the remaining challenges associated with each sub-task.
The main research problem associated with the evidence selection sub-task is how to retrieve
evidence from the world knowledge. Most of the literature leverages Wikipedia as the knowledge
source , which is only a small part of world knowledge. Other literature attempts to use
the whole web as the knowledge source . However, this method leads to another research
problem – “how to ensure the trustworthiness of the information we use from the web” . Sourcelevel methods that leverages the meta-information of the web source (e.g., web traffic, PageRank or
URL structure) have been proposed to deal with this trustworthiness issue . Addressing
the aforementioned issues to allow evidence selection against world knowledge will be an important
future research direction.
For the verification subtask, verification models perform relatively well if given correct evidence . However, it has been shown that verification models are prone to adversarial attacks
and are not robust to negation, numerical or comparative words . Improving this weakness of
verification models would also be crucial because the factuality of a sentence can easily be changed
by small word changes (i.e., changes in negations, numbers, and entities).
Generalization. Although we can see that the source and output text of different tasks are in
various forms, investigating their relationship and common ground and proposing general metrics
to evaluate hallucinations are worth exploring. Task-agnostic metrics with cross-domain robustness
could help the research community to build a unified benchmark. It is also important and meaningful
to build open-source platforms to collaborate and standardize the evaluation metrics for NLG tasks.
Incorporation of Human Cognitive Perspective. A good automatic metric should correlate with
human evaluation. Humans are sensitive to different types of information. For instance, proper
nouns are usually more important than pronouns in the generated text. Mistakes concerning named
entities are striking to human users, but automatic metrics treat them equally if not properly
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Ziwei Ji, et al.
designed. In order to address this issue, new metrics should be designed from the human cognitive
perspective. The human ability to recognize salient information and filter the rest is evident in
scenarios where the most important facts need to be determined and assessed. For instance, when
signing an agreement, a prospective employee naturally skims the document to look at the entries
with numbers first. In this way, humans classify what they believe is crucial.
Automatic check-worthy detection has the potential to be applied to improve the correlation
with human judgement. Implementing the automatic human-like judgment mentioned above can
further mitigate hallucination and improve NLG systems.
Future Directions in Mitigation Methods
General and robust data pre-processing approaches. Since the data format varies between downstream tasks, there is still a gap for data processing methods between tasks, and currently, no
universal method is effective for all NLG tasks . Data pre-processing might result in grammatical errors or semantic transformation between the original and processed data, which can
negatively affect the performance of generation. Therefore, we believe that general and robust data
pre-processing methods can help mitigate the hallucinations in NLG.
Hallucinations in numerals. Most existing mitigation methods do not focus on the hallucination
of numerals. However, the correctness of numerals in generated text, such as date, quantities and
scalars are important for readers . For example, given the source document “The
optimal oxygen saturation (𝑆𝑝𝑂2) in adults with COVID-19 who are receiving supplemental oxygen is
unknown. However, a target 𝑆𝑝𝑂2 of 92% to 96% seems logical, considering that indirect evidence from
patients without COVID-19 suggests that an 𝑆𝑝𝑂2 of <92% or >96% may be harmful. 6”, the summary
“The target oxygen saturation range for patients with COVID-19 is 82–86%.” includes wrong numbers,
which could be fatal. Currently, some works point out that using commonsense
knowledge can help to gain better numeral representation. And Zhao et al. alleviate numeral
hallucinations by re-ranking candidate-generated summaries based on the verification score of
quantity entities. Therefore, we believe that explicitly modeling numerals to mitigate hallucinations
is a potential direction.
Extrinsic Hallucination Mitigation. Though many works on mitigating hallucinations have been
published, most do not distinguish between intrinsic and extrinsic hallucination. Moreover, the
main research focus has been on dealing with intrinsic hallucination, while extrinsic hallucination
has been somewhat overlooked as it is more challenging to reduce . Therefore, we believe
it is worth exploring different mitigation methods for intrinsic and extrinsic hallucinations, and
relevant methods in fact-checking can be potentially used for this purpose.
Hallucination in long text. Many tasks in NLG require the model to process long input texts, such
as multi-document summarization and generative question answering. We think adopting existing
approaches to a Longformer -based model could help encode long inputs. Meanwhile, part of
dialogue systems need to generate long output text, in which the latter part may contradict history
generation. Therefore, reducing self-contradiction is also an important future direction.
Reasoning. Misunderstanding facts in the source context will lead to intrinsic hallucination and
errors. To help models understand the facts correctly requires reasoning over the input table or
text. Moreover, if the generated text can be reasoned backwards to the source, we can assume it is
faithful. There are some reasoning works in the area of dialogue , but few in reducing
hallucinations. Moreover, tasks with quantities, such as logical table-to-text generation, require
6 
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation
numerical reasoning. Therefore, adding reasoning ability to the hallucination mitigation methods
is also an interesting future direction.
Controllability. Controllability means the ability of models to control the level of hallucination
and strike a balance between faithfulness and diversity . As mentioned in Section 3, it is
acceptable for chit-chat models to generate a certain level of hallucinatory content as long as it is
factual. Meanwhile, for the abstractive summarization task, there is no agreement in the research
community about whether factual hallucinations are desirable or not . Therefore, we believe
controllability merits attention when exploring hallucination mitigation methods.
HALLUCINATION IN ABSTRACTIVE SUMMARIZATION
Abstractive summarization aims to extract essential information from source documents and to
generate short, concise, and readable summaries . Neural networks have achieved remarkable
results on abstractive summarization. However, Maynez et al. observe that neural abstractive
summarization models are likely to generate hallucinatory content that is unfaithful to the source
document. Falke et al. analyze three recent abstractive summarization systems and show that
25% of the summaries generated from state-of-the-art models have hallucinated content. In addition,
Zhou et al. mention that even if a summary contains a large amount of hallucinatory content,
it can achieve a high ROUGE score. This has encouraged researchers to actively devise ways to
improve the evaluation of abstractive summarization, especially from the hallucination perspective.
In this section, we review the current progress in automatic evaluation and the mitigation of
hallucination, and list the remaining challenges for future work. In addition, it is worth mentioning
that researchers have used various terms to describe the hallucination phenomenon, such as
faithfulness, factual errors, and factual consistency, and we will use the original terms from their
papers in the remainder of this section.
Hallucination Definition in Abstractive Summarization
The definition of hallucination in abstractive summarization follows that in Section 2. Specifically,
we adopt the definition from : given a document and its abstractive summary, a summary
is hallucinated if it has any spans not supported by the input document. Once again, intrinsic
hallucination refers to output content that contradicts the source, while extrinsic hallucination
refers to output content that the source cannot verify. For instance, in Table 1, given the input
article shown in the caption, an example of intrinsic hallucination is “The Ebola vaccine was rejected
by the FDA in 2019,” because this statement contradicts the given content “The first vaccine for Ebola
was approved by the FDA in 2019 in the US”. And an example of extrinsic hallucination is “China
has already started clinical trials of the COVID-19 vaccine,” because this statement is not mentioned
in the given content. We can neither find evidence of it from the input article nor assert that it is
Pagnoni et al. define fine-grained types of factual errors in summaries. As mentioned in
2.3, since the “fact” here refers to source knowledge, “factual error” can be treated as hallucination,
and we can adopt this classification as a sub-type of hallucination. They establish three categories
as semantic frame error, discourse error, and content verifiability error.
Hallucination Metrics in Abstractive Summarization
Existing metrics for hallucination in abstractive summarization are mainly model-based. Following , we divide the hallucination metrics into two categories: (1) unsupervised metrics and
(2) semi-supervised metrics. Note that existing hallucination metrics evaluate both intrinsic and
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Ziwei Ji, et al.
extrinsic hallucinations together in one metric because it is difficult to automatically distinguish
between them.
Unsupervised Metrics. Given that hallucination is a newly emerging problem, there are only
a few hallucination-related datasets. Therefore, researchers have proposed to adopt other datasets
to build unsupervised hallucination metrics. There are three types of such unsupervised metrics:
(1) information extraction (IE)-based metrics, (2) natural language inferencing (NLI)-based metrics,
(3) question answering (QA)-based metrics.
IE-based Metrics. As mentioned in Section 4, IE-based metrics leverage IE models to extract
knowledge as relation tuples (subject, relation, object) from both the generation and knowledge
source to analyze the factual accuracy of the generation . However, IE models are not 100%
reliable yet (making errors in the identification of the relation tuples). Therefore, Nan et al. 
propose an entity-based metric relying on the Named-Entity Recognition model, which is relatively
more robust. Their metric builds on the assumption that there will be a different set of named
entities in the gold and generated summary if there exists hallucination.
NLI-based Metrics. As mentioned in Section 4, the NLI-model (textual entailment model) can
be utilized to measure hallucination based on the assumption that a faithful summary will be
entailed by the gold source. However, Falke et al. discover that models trained on NLI datasets
can not transfer well to abstractive summarization tasks, degrading the reliability of NLI-based
hallucination metrics. To improve NLI models for hallucination evaluation, they release collected
annotations as additional test data. Other efforts have also been made to further improve NLI
models. Mishra et al. find that the low performance of NLI-based metrics is mainly caused by
the length of the premises in NLI datasets being shorter than the source documents in abstractive
summarization. Thus, the authors propose to convert multiple-choice reading comprehension
datasets into long premise NLI datasets automatically. The results indicate that long-premise NLI
datasets help the model achieve a higher performance than the original NLI datasets. In addition,
Laban et al. introduce a simple but efficient method called SUMMAC𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑣by applying NLI
models to sentence units that are segmented from documents. The performance of their model is
better than applying NLI models to the whole document.
QA-based Metrics. QA-based metrics measure the knowledge overlap or consistency between
summaries and the source documents based on the intuition that QA models will achieve similar
answers if the summaries are factually consistent with the source documents. QA-based metrics
such as FEQA , QAGS , and QuestEval follow three steps to obtain a final score:
(1) a QG model generates questions from the summaries, (2) a QA model obtains answers from
the source documents, and (3) calculate the score by comparing the set of answers from source
documents and the set of answers from summaries. The results show that these reference-free
metrics have substantially higher correlations with human judgments of faithfulness than the
baseline metrics. Gabriel et al. further analyze the FEQA and find that the effectiveness of
QA-based metrics depends on the question. They also provide a meta-evaluation framework that
includes QA metrics.
Semi-Supervised Metrics. Semi-supervised metrics are trained on the synthetic data generated
from summarization datasets. Trained on these task-specific corpora, models can judge whether the
generated summaries are hallucinatory. Kryscinski et al. propose a weakly supervised model
named FactCC for evaluating factual consistency. The model is trained jointly for three tasks: (1)
checking whether the synthetic sentences remain factually consistent, (2) extracting supporting
spans in the source documents, and (3) extracting inconsistent spans in the summaries, if any exist.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation
They transfer this model to check whether the summaries generated from summarization models
are factually consistent. Results show that the performance of their FactCC model surpasses the
classifiers trained on the MNLI or FEVER datasets. Zhou et al. introduce a method to fine-tune
a pre-trained language model on synthetic data with automatically inserted hallucinations in order
to detect the hallucinatory content in summaries. The model can classify whether spans in the
machine-generated summaries are faithful to the article. This method shows higher correlations
with human factual consistency evaluation than the baselines.
Hallucination Mitigation in Abstractive Summarization
Recently, many approaches have been proposed to reduce the hallucination phenomenon in abstractive summarization.
Architecture Method. Seq-to-seq models are widely used and achieve state-of-the-art
performance in abstractive summarization. Researchers have made modifications to the architecture
design of the seq-to-seq models to reduce hallucinated content in the summaries. We describe
various efforts made to improve the encoder, decoder, or both the encoder and decoder of the
seq-to-seq models.
Encoder. Zhu et al. propose to use an explicit graph neural network (GNN) to encode the
fact tuples extracted from source documents. In addition to an explicit graph encoder, Huang
et al. further design a multiple-choice cloze test reward to encourage the model to better
understand entity interactions. Moreover, Gunel et al. use external knowledge from Wikipedia
to make knowledge embeddings, which the results show improve factual consistency.
Decoder. Song et al. present the incorporation of a sequential decoder with a tree-based
decoder to generate a summary sentence and its syntactic parse. This joint generation is performed
improve faithfulness. Aralikatte et al. introduce the Focus Attention Mechanism, which encourages decoders to generate tokens similar or topical to the source documents. The results on the BBC
extreme summarization task show that models augmented with the Focus Attention Mechanism
generate more faithful summaries.
Encoder-decoder. Cao et al. extract fact descriptions from the source text and apply a dualattention seq-to-seq framework to force the summaries to be conditioned on both source documents
and the extracted fact descriptions. Li et al. propose an entailment-aware encoder and
decoder with multi-task learning which incorporates the entailment knowledge into abstractive
summarization models.
Training Method. Aside from architecture modification, some works improved the training
approach to reduce hallucination. Cao and Wang introduce a contrastive learning method
to train summarization models. The positive training data are reference summaries, while the
negative training data are automatically generated hallucinatory summaries, and the contrastive
learning system is trained to distinguish between them. In the dialogue summarization field, Tang
et al. propose another contrastive fine-tuning strategy, named CONFIT, that can improve the
factual consistency and overall quality of summaries.
Post-Processing Method. Some works carry out post-editing to reduce the hallucination of
the model-generated summaries, which are viewed as draft summaries. Dong et al. propose
SpanFact, a pair of factual correction models that use knowledge learned from QA models to
correct the spans in the generated summaries. Similar to SpanFact, Cao et al. introduce a
post-editing corrector module to identify and correct hallucinatory content in generated summaries.
The corrector module is trained on synthetic data which are created by adding a series of heuristic
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Ziwei Ji, et al.
transformations to reference summaries. Zhao et al. present HERMAN, a system that learns
to recognize quantities (dates, amounts of money, etc.) in the generated summary and verify their
factual consistency with the source text. According to the quantity hallucination score, the system
chooses the most faithful summary where the source text supports its quantity terms from the
candidate-generated summaries. Chen et al. introduce a contrast candidate generation and
selection system to do post-processing. The contrast candidate generation model replaces the
named entities in the generated summaries with ones present in the source documents, and the
contrast candidate selection model will select the best candidate as the final output summary.
Future Directions in Abstractive Summarization
Factual Hallucination Evaluation. Factual hallucinations contain information not found in source
content, though it is factually correct. In the summarization task, this kind of hallucination could
lead to better summaries. However, there is little work focused on evaluating factual hallucination
explicitly. Fact-checking approaches could be potentially used in this regard.
Extrinsic Hallucination Mitigation. There has been little research on extrinsic hallucinations as
it is more challenging to detect and mitigate content based on world knowledge. We believe it is
worth exploring extrinsic hallucination in terms of evaluation metrics and mitigation methods.
Hallucination in Dialogue Summarization. In conversational data, the discourse relations between
utterances and co-references between speakers are more complicated than from, say, news articles. For example, Zhong et al. show that 74% of samples in the QMSum dataset consist of
inconsistent facts. We believe exploring the hallucination issue in dialogue summarization is an
important and special component of research into hallucination in abstractive summarization.
HALLUCINATION IN DIALOGUE GENERATION
Dialogue generation is an NLG task that automatically generates responses according to user
utterances. The generated responses are required to be fluent, coherent, and consistent with the
dialogue history. The dialogue generation task can be divided into two sub-tasks: (1) task-oriented
dialogue generation; (2) open-domain dialogue generation. A task-oriented dialogue system aims to
complete a certain task according to a user query in a specific domain, such as restaurant booking,
hotel recommendation, and calendar checking. Meanwhile, an open-domain dialogue system aims
to establish a multi-turn, long-term conversation with users while providing the users with an
engaging experience.
Hallucination Definition in Dialogue Generation
The hallucination problem also exists in the dialogue generation task. It is important to note that a
dialogue system is expected either to provide the user with the required information or to provide
an engaging response without repeating utterances from the dialogue history. Thus, the tolerance
for producing proper “hallucination” from the dialogue history is relatively higher.
The definition of hallucination in this task can be adopted from the general definition as follows:
(1) Intrinsic hallucination: the generated response is contradictory to the dialogue history or
the external knowledge sentences. In the examples of intrinsic hallucination shown in Table 1, we
can verify that the output contradicts the inputs: In one example, the input is a “moderate” price
range, but the model mistakenly generates a sentence with a “high” price range. In another case, the
confusion of the names “Roger Federer” and “Rafael Nadal” causes the output generation of “Roger
Nadal”. (2) Extrinsic hallucination: the generated response is hard to verify with the dialogue
history or the external knowledge sentences. Responses with extrinsic hallucination are impossible
to verify with the given inputs. “Pickwick hotel” might be “in san diego”, and Djokovic may have
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation
been “in the top ten singles players of the world”. However, we do not have enough information to
check the truth of these statements.
In the following sections, the hallucination problem in open-domain and task-oriented dialogue
generation tasks will be separately discussed according to the their natures.
Open-domain Dialogue Generation
While the term “hallucination” seems to have newly emerged in the NLP field, a related behavior,
“inconsistency”, of neural models has been widely discussed. This behavior has been pointed
out as a shortcoming of generation-based approaches for open-domain chatbots .
Two possible types of inconsistency occur in open-domain dialogue generation: (1) inconsistency
among the system utterances, such as when the system contradicts its previous utterance; (2)
inconsistency with an external source, such as factually incorrect utterances. Whereas the first
type is described using the term "inconsistency" or "incoherence" , some
have recently started to call the second type "hallucination" . Self-inconsistency can be
considered as an intrinsic hallucination problem, while the external inconsistency involves both
intrinsic and extrinsic hallucinations, depending on the reference source.
As mentioned earlier, a certain level of hallucination may be acceptable in open-domain chit-chat
as long as it does not involve severe factual issues. Moreoever, it is almost impossible to verify factual
correctness since the system usually lacks a connection to external resources. With the introduction
of knowledge-grounded dialogue tasks , which provide an external reference, however,
there has been more active discussion of hallucination in open-domain dialogue generation.
Self-Consistency. In end-to-end generative open-domain dialogue systems, the inconsistency
among system utterances has been pointed out as the bottleneck to human-level performance .
We often observe an inconsistency in the answers to semantically similar yet not identical questions.
For example, a system may answer the questions of “What is your name?” and “May I ask your
name?" with different responses. Persona consistency has been the center of attention 
and it is one of the most obvious cases of self-contradiction regarding the character of the dialogue
system. "Persona" is defined as the character that a dialogue system plays during a conversation,
and can be composed of identity, language behavior, and an interaction style . While some
works has set their objective as teaching models to utilize speaker-level embeddings ,
others condition generation with a set of descriptions about a persona, which we will discuss in
detail in the next section.
External Consistency. Besides self-consistency, an open-domain dialogue system should also
generate persona-consistent and informative responses corresponding so as to user utterances to
further engage with the user during conversation. In this process, an external resource containing
explicit persona information or world knowledge is introduced into the system to assist the model
generation process.
The PersonaChat datasets have accelerated research into persona consistency . In PersonaChat datasets, each conversation has persona descriptions such
as “I like to ski” or “I am a high school teacher” attached. By conditioning the response generation
on the persona description, a chit-chat model is expected to acquire an ability to generate a more
persona-consistent response. Lately, the application of NLI methods or reinforcement
learning frameworks have been investigated. Although these methods conditioned on the
PersonaChat datasets have been successful, further investigation of approaches that do not rely on
a given set of persona descriptions is necessary because such descriptions are not always available,
and covering every aspect of a persona with them is impossible.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Ziwei Ji, et al.
In addition to PersonaChat-related research, the knowledge-grounded dialogue (KGD) task
in the open-domain requires the model to generate informative responses with the help of an
external knowledge graph (KG) or knowledge corpus . Hallucination in conversations,
which is also considered as a factual consistency problem, has raised much research interest
recently . Here, we continue to split the hallucination problem in the KGD
task into intrinsic hallucination and extrinsic hallucination. Most of the KGD works tackle the
hallucination problem when responses contain information that contradicts (intrinsic) or cannot
be found in the provided knowledge input (extrinsic). Since world knowledge is enormous and
ever-changing, the extrinsic hallucination may be factual but hard to verify. Dziri et al. further
adopt the same definition of hallucination as mentioned above to the knowledge graph-grounded
dialogue task, where intrinsic hallucination indicates the case of misusing either the subject or
object of the knowledge triple; and extrinsic hallucination indicates that there is no corresponding
valid knowledge triple in the gold reference knowledge. Recently, there have been some attempts to
generate informative responses without explicit knowledge inputs, but with the help of the implicit
knowledge inside large pre-trained language models instead during the inference time.
Under this setting, the study of extrinsic hallucination is of great value but still poorly investigated.
Hallucination Metrics. For generation-based dialogue systems, especially open-domain chatbots, the hallucination evaluation method remains an open problem . As of now, there is
no standard metric. Therefore, chatbots are usually evaluated by humans on factual consistency
or factual correctness . We also introduce some automatic statistical and model-based
metrics as a reference, which will be described in more detail below.
Variants of F1 Metrics. Knowledge F1 (KF1) measures the overlap between the generated
responses and the gold knowledge sentences to which the human referred for conversation during
dataset collection . KF1 attempts to capture whether a model can generate knowledgable
responses by correctly utilizing the relevant knowledge. KF1 is only available for datasets with
labeled ground-truth knowledge. Shuster et al. further propose Rare F1 (RF1), which only
considers the infrequent words in the dataset when calculating F1 to avoid influence from the
common uni-grams. The authors define an infrequent word as being in the lower half of the
cumulative frequency distribution of the reference corpus.
Model-based Metric. Natural language has its natural on the flexibility of the surface forms
with the same semantics, so overlap-based metrics cannot provide the comprehensive evaluation.
Recently, several works have proposed evaluation metrics for measuring consistency, such as
using natural language inference (NLI) , training learnable evaluation metrics , or
releasing an additional test set for coherence . These methods are more flexible and supports
the generated responses with different surface forms. For the KGD task, Dziri et al. propose the
BEGIN benchmark, which consists of samples taken from Dinan et al. with additional human
annotation and a new classification task extending the NLI paradigm. Honovich et al. present
a trainable metric for the KGD task, which also applies NLI. It is also noteworthy that Gupta et al.
 propose datasets that can benefit fact-checking systems specialized for dialogue systems. The
Conv-FEVER corpus is a factual consistency detection dataset, which was created by adapting
the Wizard-of-Wikipedia dataset . It consists of both factually consistent and inconsistent
responses and can be used to train a classifier to detect factually inconsistent responses with respect
to the knowledge provided.
Mitigation Methods. The hallucination issue can be mitigated by data pre-processing, which
includes introducing extra information into the data. Shen et al. propose a measurement based
on seven attributes of the dialogue quality, including self-consistency. Based on this measurement,
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation
the untrustworthy samples which get lower scores are filtered out from the training set to improve
the model performance in terms of self-consistency (i.e., intrinsic hallucination). Shuster et al. 
conduct a comprehensive investigation on a retrieval-augmented KGD task where a retriever is
introduced to the system for knowledge selection. The authors study several key problems, such
as whether retrieval helps reduce hallucinations and how the generation should be augmented
with the retrieved knowledge. The experimental results show that retrieval helps substantially in
improving performance on KGD tasks and in reducing the hallucination in conversations without
sacrificing conversational ability.
Rashkin et al. introduce a set of control codes and concatenate them with dialogue inputs
to reduce the hallucination by forcing the model to be more aware of how the response relies on
the knowledge evidence in the response generation. Some researchers have also tried to reduce
hallucinated responses during generation by improving dialogue modeling. Wu et al. apply
inductive attention into transformer-based dialogue models, and potentially uninformative attention links are removed with respect to a piece of pre-established structural information between
the dialogue context and the provided knowledge. Instead of improving the dialogue response
generation model itself, Dziri et al. present a response refinement strategy with a token-level
hallucination critic and entity-mention retriever, so that the original dialogue model is left without
retraining. The former module is designed to label the hallucinated entity mentioned in the generated responses, while the retriever is trained to retrieve more faithful entities from the provided
knowledge graph. RHO is a framework that uses three mechanisms to tackle hallucinations,
namely, local knowledge grounding, global knowledge grounding, and response re-ranking to
tackle hallucinations in open-domain dialogues, and has been empirically shown to perform this.
Task-oriented Dialogue Generation
A task-oriented dialogue system is often composed of several modules: a natural language understanding (NLU) module, a dialogue manager (DM), and a natural language generation (NLG)
module . Intrinsic hallucination can occur between the DM and NLG, where a dialogue
act such as recommend(NAME=peninsula hotel, AREA=tsim sha tsui) is transformed into a natural
language representation “the hotel named peninsula hotel is located in tsim sha tsui area.” .
Hallucination Metrics. To evaluate hallucination, Li et al. and Balakrishnan et al. 
combine traditional metrics such as the BLEU score and human evaluation as well as hallucinationspecific automatic metrics. Following previous works such as , and , Li et al. 
use the slot error rate, which is computed by (𝑝+ 𝑞)/𝑁, where 𝑁represents the total number of
slots extracted by another model in the dialogue act. Here, 𝑝stands for the missing slots in the
generated template, and 𝑞is the number of redundant slots. On the other hand, Balakrishnan et al.
 introduce a novel metric called the tree accuracy, which determines whether the prediction’s
tree structure is identical to that of the input meaning representations.
Mitigation Methods. While Balakrishnan et al. propose to adopt tree-structured semantic
representations and add constraints on decoding, Li et al. frame a reinforcement learning
problem to which they apply a bootstrapping algorithm to sample training instances and then
leverage a reward related to slot consistency. Recently, there has emerged another line of research in
task-oriented dialogue, which is to build a single end-to-end system rather than connecting several
modules (e.g., Eric and Manning , Madotto et al. [167, 170? ]). As discussed in previous sections
of this paper, there is potential for such end-to-end systems to produce extrinsic hallucinations, yet
this remains less explored. For example, a model might generate a response with an entity that
appears out of nowhere. In the example of hotel recommendation in Hong Kong given above, a
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Ziwei Ji, et al.
model could generate a response such as “the hotel named raffles hotel is located in central area,7”
which cannot be verified from the knowledge base of the system.
Future Directions in Dialogue Generation
Self-Contradiction in Dialogue Systems. One of the possible reasons for self-contradiction is that
current dialogue systems tend to have a short memory of dialogue history . Firstly, common
dialogue datasets provide several turns of conversation, yet these are not long enough to assess a
model’s ability to deal with a long context. To overcome this, Xu et al. introduce a new dataset
that consists of, on average, over 40 utterances per episode. Secondly, we often truncate dialogue
history into fewer turns to fit into models such as Transformer-based architectures, which makes it
difficult for a model to memorize the past. In addition to the works on dialogue summarization,
e.g., Gliwa et al. , it would be beneficial to apply other works which are aiming to grasp the
longer context but do not focus on dialogue generation .
Fact-checking in dialogue systems. In addition to the factual consistency in responses from
knowledge grounded dialogue systems, fact-checking is a future direction in dealing with the
hallucination problem in dialogue systems . Dialogue fact-checking involves verifiable claim
detection, which is an important line in distinguishing hallucination-prone dialogue, and evidence
retrieval from an external source. This fact-checking in the dialogue system could be utilized not
only as an evaluation metric for facilitating factual consistency but also to model such a system.
HALLUCINATION IN GENERATIVE QUESTION ANSWERING
Generative question answering (GQA) aims to generate an abstractive answer rather than extract
an answer to a given question from provided passages . It is an important task since many
of the everyday questions that humans deal with and pose to search engines require in-depth
explanations (e.g., why/how..?), and the answers are normally long and cannot be directly
extracted from existing phrase spans. A GQA system can be integrated with a search engine 
to empower more intelligent search or combined with a virtual conversation agent to enhance user
experience.
Normally, a GQA system involves searching an external knowledge source for information
relevant to the question. Then it generates the answer based on the retrieved information . In
most cases, no single source (document) contains the answer, and multiple retrieved documents will
be considered for answer generation. Those documents may contain redundant, complementary, or
contradictory information. Thus, hallucination is common in the generated answers.
The hallucination problem is one of the most important challenges in GQA. Since an essential
goal of a GQA system is to provide factualy-correct answers given the question, hallucination in
the answer will mislead the user and damage the system performance dramatically.
Hallucination Definition in GQA
As a challenging yet under-explored task, there is no standard definition of hallucination in GQA.
However, almost all the works on GQA involve a human evaluation process, in
which the factual correctness measuring the faithfulness of the generated answer can be seen as a
measurement of the hallucination; i.e., the more faithful the answer is, the less hallucinated content
it contains. The most recent such work uses the term semantic drift, which indicates how the
answer drifts away from a correct one during generation, and this can also be seen as a specific
definition of hallucination in GQA.
7Raffles Hotel is a hotel located in Downtown Core, Singapore.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation
In line with the general categorization of hallucination in Section 2.1, we give two concrete
hallucination examples in GQA in Table 1. The sources of both questions are Wikipedia web pages.
For the first question, “dow jones industrial average please?”, the generated answer “index of 30
major U.S. stock indexes” conflicts with the statement “of 30 prominent companies listed on stock
exchanges in the United States” from Wikipedia. So we categorize it as an intrinsic hallucination. For
the second example, the sentences “The definition of a Sadducee is a person who acts in a deceitful or
duplicitous manner. An example of a Sadduceee is a politician who acts deceitfully in order to gain
political power” in the generated answer can not be verified from the source documents; thus, we
categorize it as an extrinsic hallucination.
Hallucination-related Metrics in GQA
Currently, there is no automatic metric to evaluate hallucination in QGA specifically. While most
works on GQA use automatic evaluation metrics such as ROUGE score and F1 to measure the
quality of the answer, these N-gram overlap-based metrics are not a meaningful way to evaluate
hallucination due to their poor correlation with human judgments, as indicated by Krishna et al.
 . On the other hand, almost all the GQA-related work involves a human evaluation process as
a complement to the automatic evaluation. Normally, human annotators will be asked to assign a
score indicating the faithfulness of the answer, which can also be viewed as a measurement of the
answer hallucination. However, the metrics obtained via human evaluation come normally from a
small sample of the data.
Metrics such as semantic overlap , a learned evaluation metric based on BERT that models
human judgments, could be considered a better measurement of hallucination for GQA. Other
metrics such as the factual correctness can also be considered as a way to measure hallucination in
GQA. Zhang et al. propose to explicitly measure the factual correctness of a generated text
against the reference by first extracting facts via an information extraction (IE) module. Then they
define and measure the factual accuracy score to be the ratio of facts in the generation text equal to
the corresponding facts in the reference.
Factual consistency, which measures the faithfulness of the generated answer given its source
documents, can be employed as another way to measure hallucination in GQA. Durmus et al.
 , Wang et al. propose an automatic QA-based metric to measure faithfulness in summary,
leveraging the recent advances in machine reading comprehension. They first use a question
generation model to construct question-answer pairs from the summary, and then a QA model
is applied to extract short answer spans from the given source document for the question. The
extracted answers that do not match the provided answers indicate unfaithful information in the
summary. While these metrics were first proposed in summarization works, they can be easily
adopted in generative QA to measure hallucinations in the generated long-form answer.
The most recent work on GQA by Su et al. proposed to estimate the faithfulness of the
generated long-form answer via zero-shot short answer recall on extractive QA datasets. They
first generate long-form answers for questions from two extractive QA datasets Natural Questions(NQ) and HotpotQA , both of which contains large-scale question-answer pairs,
then they measure the ratio of golden short answer span contained in the generated long answer as
an estimation of faithfulness of the generated long-answer. While the idea is similar to the factual
consistency metric in summarization work , and also matches with our intuition to some extent,
its correlation with human evaluation on faithfulness has not been verified.
Hallucination Mitigation in GQA
Unlike conditional text generation tasks such as summarization, or data-to-text generation, in which
the source documents are provided and normally related to the target generation, the hallucination
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Ziwei Ji, et al.
problem in GQA is more complicated. Generally speaking, it might come from two sources: 1)
the incompetency of the retriever, which retrieves documents irrelevant to the answer, and 2) the
intrinsic and extrinsic hallucination in the conditional generation model itself. Normally these two
parts are interconnected and cause hallucinations in the answer.
Early works on GQA mostly tried to improve the faithfulness of the answer by investigating
reliable external knowledge sources or incorporating multiple information sources. Yin et al. 
propose Neural Generative Question Answering (GENQA), an end-to-end model that generates
answers to simple factoid questions based on the knowledge base, while Bi et al. propose the
Knowledge-Enriched Answer Generator (KEAG) to generate a natural answer by integrating facts
from four different information sources, namely, questions, passages, vocabulary, and knowledge.
Nevertheless, these methods rely on the existence of high-quality, relevant resources which are not
easily available.
Recent works focus more on the conditional generation model. Fan et al. construct a local
knowledge graph for each question to compress the information and reduce redundancy from the
retrieved documents, which can be viewed as an early trial to mitigate hallucination. Li et al. 
propose Rationale-Enriched Answer Generator (REAG), in which they add an extraction task to
obtain the rationale for an answer at the encoding stage, and the decoder is expected to generate
the answer based on both the extracted rationale and original input. The recent work employs
a Routing Transformer (RT), a sparse attention-based Transformer-based model that employs local
attention and mini-batch k-means clustering for long-range dependence, as the answer generator in
the hope of modeling more retrieved documents to mitigate the hallucination in the answer. Su et al.
 propose a framework named RBG (read before generate), to jointly models answer generation
with machine reading. They augment the generation model with fine-grained, answer-related
salient information predicted by the MRC module, to enhance answer faithfulness. Such methods
can exploit and utilize the information in the original input better, while they require the extra
effort of building models to extract that information.
Most recently, Lin et al. propose a benchmark, which comprises 817 questions that span 38
categories, to measure the truthfulness of a language model in the QA task. This work investigates
the performances of GPT-3 , GPT-Neo/J , GPT-2 and a T5-based model . The
results suggest that simply scaling up the model is less promising than fine-tuning it in terms of
improving truthfulness since larger models are better at learning the training distribution from
web data and thus tend to produce more imitative falsehoods. In another recent work, Nakano et al.
 fine-tune GPT-3 to answer long-form questions with a web-browsing environment, which
allows the model to navigate the web as well as use human feedback to optimize answer quality
directly using imitation learning . While this method seems promising, it also hinges on how
that feedback is processed.
Future Directions in GQA
While GQA is challenging yet under-explored, many possible directions could be explored to
improve the answer quality and mitigate hallucination. First, better automatic evaluation metrics are
needed to measure hallucination. The previously mentioned metrics, such as the semantic overlap
between the generated answer and the ground-truth answer, the faithfulness of the generated
answer, and factual consistency between the answer and the source documents, only consider one
aspect of hallucination. Metrics that can consider all the factors related to hallucination (such as
semantic overlap, faithfulness, or factual consistency) could be designed. Second, datasets with
hallucination annotations should be proposed since none of the current GQA datasets have that
information. Another possible direction to mitigate hallucination in the answer is improving the
performance of the models. We need better retrieval models that retrieve relevant information
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation
according to queries and generation models that can synthesize more accurate answers from
multi-source documents.
HALLUCINATION IN DATA-TO-TEXT GENERATION
Data-to-Text Generation is the task of generating natural language descriptions conditioned on structured data , such as tables , database records , and knowledge graphs .
Although this field has been recently boosted by neural text generation models, it is well known
that these models are prone to hallucinations because of the gap between structured data
and text, which may cause semantic misunderstanding and erroneous correlation. Moreover, the
tolerance of hallucination is very low when this task is applied to the real world, such as in the
case of patient information table description , and analysis of experimental results tables in
a scientific report. Recent years have seen a growth of interest in hallucinations in Data-to-Text
Generation, and researchers have proposed works from the aspect of evaluation and mitigation.
Hallucination Definition in Data-to-Text Generation
The definition and categories of hallucination in Data-to-Text Generation follow the descriptions
in Section 2. We follow the general hallucination definition in this task: (1) Intrinsic Hallucinations:
the generated text contains information that is contradicted by the input data . For example, in
Table 1, “The Houston Rockets (18-4)” uses the information “[TEAM: Rockets, CITY:Houston, WIN:18,
LOSS: 5]” in the source table. However, “(18-4)” is contradicted by “[LOSS: 5]” and it should be
“(18-5)”. (2) Extrinsic Hallucinations: the generated text contains extra information irrelevant to the
input . For example, in Table 1, “Houston has won two straight games and six of their last
seven.” is not mentioned in the source table .
Hallucination Metrics in Data-to-Text Generation
Statistical. PARENT measures the accuracy of table-to-text generation by aligning n-grams
from the reference description 𝑅and generated texts 𝐺to the table 𝑇. And it is the average F-score
by combining the entailment precision and recall. Wang et al. modify PARENT and denote
this table-focused version as PARENT-T. Different from PARENT, which evaluates i-th instance
(𝑇𝑖, 𝑅𝑖,𝐺𝑖), PARENT-T ignores the reference description R and evaluates each instance (𝑇𝑖,𝐺𝑖).
IE-based. Liu et al. estimate hallucination with two entity-centric metrics: table record
coverage (the ratio of covered records in a table) and hallucinated ratio (the ratio of hallucinated
entities in text). This metric firstly uses entity recognition to extract the entities of input and
generated output, then aligns these entities by heuristic matching strategies, and finally calculates
the ratios of faithful and hallucinated entities separately. Moreover, there are some general posthoc IE-based metrics that could be applied to hallucination evaluation, such as Slot Error Rate
(SER) , Content Selection (CS), Relation Generation (RG), and Content Ordering (CO) .
QA-based. Data-QuestEval adapt QuestEval from summarization into data-to-text
generation. First, a textual QG model is trained on a textual QA dataset. For each sample (structured
data, textual descriptions), the textual QG model generates synthetic problems based on the descriptions. The structured data, textual descriptions (answers), and synthetic questions make up a
synthetic QG/QA dataset to train synthetic QA/QG models. Then, the synthetic QG model generates
questions based on the textual description to be evaluated. The synthetic QA model then generates
answers based on a synthetic question and the structured input data. Finally, BERTScore 
measures the similarity between the generated answer and description, indicating faithfulness.
NLI-based. Dušek and Kasner recognize the textual entailment between the input data and
the output text for both omissions and hallucinations with an NLI model. This work measures the
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Ziwei Ji, et al.
semantic accuracy in two directions: check omissions by inferring whether the input fact is entailed
by the generated text and check hallucinations by inferring the generated text from the input.
LM-based. Filippova , Tian et al. are based on the intuition that when an unconditional
LM, only trained on the targets, gets a smaller loss than a conditional 𝐿𝑀𝑥, trained on both sources
and targets, the token is predicted unfaithfully. Thus, they calculate the ratio of hallucinated tokens
to the total target length to measure the hallucination level.
Hallucination Mitigation in Data-to-Text Generation
Data-Related Methods. Several clean and faithful corpora are collected to tackle the challenges
from data infidelity. TOTTO is an open-domain faithful table-to-text dataset, where each
sample includes a Wikipedia table with several highlighted cells and a description. To ensure
that targets exclude hallucinations, the annotators revise existing Wikipedia candidate sentences
and clear the parts unsupported by the table. Moreover, RotoWire-FG (Fact-Grounding) is a
purified and enlarged and enriched version of RotoWire generating NBA game summaries
from score tables. Annotators trim the hallucination part in target texts and extract the mapped
table records as content plans to better align input tables and output summaries.
For data processing, OpAtt designs a gating mechanism and a quantization module for
the symbolic operation to augment the record table with pre-calculated results. Nie et al. 
utilize a language understanding module to improve the equivalence between the input MR and the
reference utterance in the dataset. They train an NLU model with an iterative relabeling procedure:
First, they train the model on original data; parse the MR by model inference; train the model
on new paired data with high confidence; and then repeat the above processes. Liu et al. 
select training instances based on faithfulness ranking. Finer-grained than the above instance-level
method, Rebuffel et al. label tokens according to co-occurrence analysis and sentence structure
through dependency parsing in the pre-processing step to explicate the correspondence between
the input table and the text. Generally, the data-related methods are appropriate when the training
dataset is noisy.
Modeling and Inference Methods. Planning and skeleton generation are common methods to
improve the faithfulness to the input in data-to-text tasks. Liu et al. propose a two-step
generator with a separate text planner augmented by auxiliary entity information. The planner
predicts the plausible content plan based on the input data. Then, given the above input data and
the content plan, the sequence generator generates the text. Similarly, Plan-then-Generate 
also consists of a content planner and a sequence generator. In addition, this work adopts a
structure-aware RL training to generate output text following the generated content plan faithfully.
Puduppully and Lapata first induce a macro plan consisting of multiple sequences of entities
and events from the input table and its corresponding multi-paragraph long document. The predicted
macro plan then serves as the input to an encoder-decoder model for surface realization. SANA 
is a skeleton-based two-stage model that includes skeleton generation to select key tokens from
the source table and edit-based generation to produce texts via iterative insertion and deletion
operations. In contrast to the above two-step model using planning or skeleton, AGGGEN is
an end-to-end model that jointly learns to plan and generate at the same time. This architecture
with a Hidden Markov Model and Transformer encoder-decoder reintroduces explicit sentence
planning stages into neural systems by aligning facts in the target text to input representations.
Other modeling methods have also been proposed to mitigate the hallucination problem. Conjecturing that hallucinations can be caused by inattention to the source, Tian et al. propose a
confidence score and a variational Bayes training framework to learn the score from data. Wang
et al. introduce a table-text optimal-transport matching loss and an embedding similarity loss
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation
to encourage faithfulness. The hallucination degree can also be treated as a controllable factor in
generating texts. In Filippova , the hallucination degree of each training sample is estimated
and converted into a categorical value which is a part of the inputs as a controlled setting. This
approach does not require the dismissal of any input or modification of the model structure.
To mitigate hallucinations at the inference step, Rebuffel et al. propose a Multi-Branch
Decoder that leverages word-level alignment labels between the input table and paired text to learn
the relevant parts of the training instance. These word-level labels are gained through dependency
parsing during the pre-processing step. The branches separately integrate three co-dependent
control factors: content, hallucination, and fluency. Uncertainty-aware beam search (UABS) is
an extension to beam search to reduce hallucination. Considering that the hallucination probability
is positively correlated with predictive uncertainty, this work adds a weighted penalty term in the
beam search which is able to balance the predictive probability and uncertainty. This approach is
task-agnostic and can also be applied to other tasks, such as image captioning.
These various types of methods do not necessarily conflict and can collaborate to solve the
hallucination problem in data-to-text generation.
Future Directions in Data-to-Text Generation
Given the challenges brought by the discrepancy between structure data and natural text, and the
low fault tolerance in the Data-to-Text Generation task, there are several potential directions worth
exploring in terms of hallucination.
Firstly, numbers contain information about scales and are common and crucial in the Data-to-
Text task . It is frequent to have errors in numbers, which results in hallucinations and
infidelity. This is a serious problem for Data-to-Text generation, yet models rarely give special
consideration to the numbers found in the table or text . The current automatic metrics of
hallucinations also do not specifically treat numbers. This indiscriminate treatment contradicts
findings in cognitive neuroscience, where numbers are known to be represented differently from
lexical words in a different part of the brain . Thus, considering or highlighting numbers when
mitigating and assessing hallucinations is worth exploring. This requires the generative model
to learn a better numerical presentation and capture scales, which will reduce the hallucinations
caused by the misunderstanding of numbers.
Moreover, for the logical data-to-text generation task, rather than surface-level generation, logical
inference, calculation, and comparison are required, which is challenging and causes hallucinations
more easily. Thus, reasoning (including numerical reasoning), which is usually combined with
graph structures is another direction to improve the accuracy of entity relationships and
alleviate hallucinations.
HALLUCINATIONS IN NEURAL MACHINE TRANSLATION
Neural Machine Translation (NMT) is the task of generating translation of the source language into
the target language via inference, given parallel data samples for training. Compared to statistical
machine translation (SMT) the output of NMT is usually quite fluent and of human-level quality,
which creates the danger of misinforming users when there are hallucinations .
Hallucinations Definition and Categories in NMT
The problem of hallucination was identified with the deployment of the first NMT models. Early
work comparing SMT and NMT systems , without explicitly using the term “hallucination”,
mentioned that NMT models tend to “sacrifice adequacy for the sake of fluency” especially when
evaluated with out-of-domain test sets. Following further development of NMT, most of the relevant
research papers agree that translated text is considered a hallucination when it is completely
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Ziwei Ji, et al.
Correct Translation
Hallucinatory Translation
Mike goes to the bookstore on Thursday.
Jerry doesn’t go to the bookstore on
Mike goes to the bookstore on Thursday.
Mike happily goes to the bookstore
on Thursday with his friend.
Das kann man nur feststellen, wenn
die kontrollen mit einer großen intensität durchgeführt werden.
This can only be detected if controls
undertaken are more rigorous.
Blood alone moves the wheel of history, i say to you and you will understand, it is a privilege to fight.
Oscillatory
1995 das produktionsvolumen von 30
millionen pizzen wird erreicht.
1995 the production
reached 30 million pizzas.
The US, for example, has been in the
past two decades, but has been in the
same position as the US, and has been
in the United States.
Table 3. Categories and examples of hallucinations in MT by Zhou et al. and Raunak et al. 
disconnected from the source . The categorization of hallucination in NMT is unlike that
in any other NLG tasks, and uses various terms that are often overlapping. In order to maintain
consistency with other NLG tasks, in this section we use the intrinsic and extrinsic hallucination
categories applied to the NMT task by . After a formal definition, we will describe other
identified types of hallucinations and hallucination categories mentioned in the relevant literature.
Intrinsic and Extrinsic Hallucinations. Following the idea that hallucinations are outputs that are
disconnected from the source, suggest categorizing the hallucinatory content based on the
way the output is disconnected:
• Intrinsic Hallucination: translations contain incorrect information compared to information
present in the source. In Table 3, the example of such hallucination is “Jerry doesn’t go”, since
the original name in the source is “Mike” and the verb “to go” is not negated.
• Extrinsic Hallucination: translations produce additional content without any regard to the
source. In Table 3, “happily” and “with his friend” are the two examples of the hallucinatory
content since they are added without any apparent connection to the input.
Other Categories and Types of Hallucinations. Raunak et al. propose an alternative categorization of hallucinations. They divide hallucinations into hallucinations under perturbations and
natural hallucinations. Hallucinations under perturbation are those that can be observed if a model
tested on the perturbed and unperturbed test set returns drastically different content. Their work
on hallucinations under perturbation strictly follows the algorithm proposed by Lee et al. ; see
Section 11.2.2 on the entropy measure. The second category, natural hallucinations, are created with
a connection to the noise in the dataset and can be further divided into detached and oscillatory,
where detached hallucinations mean that a target translation is semantically disconnected from
a source input, and oscillatory hallucinations mean those that are decoupled from the source by
manifesting a repeating n-gram. Tu et al. and Kong et al. analyze this phenomenon
under the name “over-translation”, that is, a repetitive appearance of words that were not in the
source text. Conversely, under-translation is skipping the words that need to be translated .
Finally, abrupt jumps to the end of the sequence and outputs that remain mostly in the source
language are also examples of hallucinatory content .
Hallucination Metrics in NMT
The definition of hallucinations in machine translation (MT) tends to be qualitative and subjective,
and thus researchers often identify hallucinated content manually. Most detrimentally, the appearance of hallucinations is found not to affect the BLEU score of the translated text . There
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation
are, nevertheless, several notable efforts to automatize and quantify the search for hallucinations
using statistical methods.
Statistical Metrics. Martindale et al. propose identifying sentence adequacy using the
bag-of-vectors sentence similarity (BVSS) metric. This metric indicates that the information is lost
because the reference contains more information than the MT output, or the MT output contains
more information than the reference.
Model-Based Metrics.
Auxiliary Decoder. “Faithfulness” refers to the amount of source meaning that is faithfully
expressed in the translation, and it is used interchangeably with the term “adequacy” . Feng
et al. propose adding another “evaluation decoder” apart from the standard translation decoder.
In their work, faithfulness is based on word-by-word translation probabilities, and is calculated in
the evaluation module along with translation fluency. The loss returned by the evaluation module
helps to adjust the probability returned by the translation module.
Entropy Measure. In scenarios where the ground truth of a translation is not available, an entropy
measure of the average attention distribution can be used to detect hallucinations. Tu et al. and
Garg et al. show that hallucinations are visible in attention matrices. When the model outputs
correct translation, the attention mechanism attends to the entire input sequence throughout
decoding. However, it tends to concentrate on one point when the model outputs hallucinatory
content. The entropy is calculated on the average attention weights when the model does or does
not produce hallucinations during testing. For comparison, a clean test set is used along with the
purposefully perturbed one, which is created to incite hallucinations (test sets featuring multiple
repetitions). The mean entropy returned by hallucinatory models diverges from the mean of the
models that do not produce hallucinations spontaneously .
Token Level Hallucination Detection. Zhou et al. propose a method for detecting hallucinated
tokens within a sentence, making the search more fine-grained. They use a synthetic dataset that
is created by adding noise to the source data, more specifically it is generated by a language
model with certain tokens of correct translations masked. Tokens in synthetic data are labeled as
hallucinated (1) or not (0). Then the authors compute the hallucination prediction loss between
binary labels and the tokens from the hallucinated sentence. This work further employs a word
alignment-based method and overlap-based method as baselines for hallucination.
Similarity-based Mathods. Zhou et al. use an unsupervised model that extracts alignments
from similarity matrices of word embeddings , and then predicts the target token as hallucinated if it is not aligned to the source. Parthasarathi et al. propose calculating faithfulness by
computing similarity scores between perturbed source sentence and target sentence after applying
the same perturbation.
Overlap-based Mathods. Zhou et al. predict that the target token is hallucinated if it does
not appear in the source. Since the target and source are two different languages, the authors use
the density matching method for bilingual synonyms from Zhou et al. . Kong et al. 
suggest the Coverage Difference Ratio (CDR) as the metric to evaluate adequacy, which is especially
successful in finding cases of under-translation. It is estimated by comparing source words covered
by generated translation with human translations.
The overlap-based methods for detecting hallucinations are heuristics based on the assumption
that all translated words should appear in the source. However, this is not always the case, e.g.,
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Ziwei Ji, et al.
when paraphrasing or using synonyms. Using word embeddings as similarity-based methods helps
avoid such simplifications and allows more diverse, synonymous translations.
Approximate Natural Hallucination Detection. Raunak et al. propose Approximate Natural
Hallucination (ANH) detection based on the fact that hallucinations often occur as oscillations
(repeating n-grams) and the lower unique bigram count indicates a higher appearance of oscillatory
hallucinations. Furthermore, the ANH detection method searches for repeated targets in the
translation output. Their method finds translation above a certain n-gram threshold and searches
for repeated targets in the output translation, following the assumption that if hallucinations are
often incited by aligning unique sources to the same target, then repeating targets will also appear
during the inference .
Hallucination Mitigation Methods in NMT
Hallucinations in MT are hard to discover for a person who is not fluent in the target language,
and thus they can lead to many possible errors, or even dangers. Out of all the natural language
generation tasks, NMT engines such as Google in the English-speaking internet and Baidu in the
Sinosphere are probably the most widely accessible to netizens. Consequently, there is a big interest
in improving NMT´s performance, also by mitigating hallucinations. This subsection compiles
methods of mitigating hallucinations in NMT.
Data-Related. Data augmentation appears to be one of the most common methods for
removing hallucination. Lee et al. and Raunak et al. suggest addition of perturbed
sentences. Furthermore, perturbation, where the insertions of most common tokens are placed
at the beginning of the sentence, seems to be the most successful in hallucination mitigation. A
disadvantage of this method is the need to understand different types of hallucinations produced
by the model in order to apply a correct augmentation method. Corpus filtering is a method
of mitigating hallucinations caused by the noise in the dataset by removing the repetitive and
mismatching source and target sequences . Junczys-Dowmunt implements a crossentropy data filtering method for bilingual data, which uses cross-entropy scores calculated for
noisy pairs according to two translation models trained on the clean data. The scores that suggest
dissagreament between sentence pairs from two models are subsequently penalized.
While and define noise as mismatched source and target sentences, analyzes
the influence of fine-grained semantic divergences on NMT outputs. The authors consequently
propose a mitigation method for fine-grained divergences based on semantic factors. The tags are
applied to each source and target sentence to inform about the position of divergent tokens. Factorizing divergence not only helps to mitigate hallucinations, but improves the overall performance of
the NMT. This shows that tagging small semantic divergences can provide useful information for
the network during training.
Modeling and Inference. Overexposure bias is a common problem in NMT, amplified by the
teacher-forcing technique used in sequence-to-sequence models. The models are trained on the
ground truth, but during inference, they attend to the past predictions, which can be incorrect . To mitigate this problem, Wang and Sennrich propose substituting MLE as a training
objective with minimum risk training (MRT) . Scheduled sampling is a classic method of
mitigating overexposure bias first proposed by . Based on that method, create a differentiable
approximation to greedy decoding that shows a good performance in the NMT task. propose
further improvement of the scheduled sampling algorithm for NMT by optimizing the probability
of source and target word alignments. This improvement helps to address the issue flexibility in
word order between a source and target language when performing scheduled sampling.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation
Zhou et al. propose a method of improving self-training of NMT based on hallucination
detection. They create hallucination labels (see Section 11.2.2), and then discard losses of tokens
predicted as hallucinations, which is known as token loss truncation. This is similar to the method
proposed by Kang and Hashimoto , the latter for full sentences in the summarization task.
Furthermore, instead of adjusting losses, Zhou et al. mask the hidden states of the discarded
losses in the decoder in a procedure called decoder HS masking. Experimental results show both a
translation quality improvement in terms of BLEU and also a large reduction in hallucination. The
token loss truncation method shows good results in the low-resource languages scenario.
Another method to mitigate the impact of noisy datasets is tilted empirical risk minimization
(TERM), a training objective proposed by Li et al. . mentions that techniques such as
dropout, L2E regularization, and clipping tend to decrease the number of hallucinations. Lastly,
several authors propose methods of improving phrase alignment that are helpful both in increasing
translation accuracy and identifying content that did not appear in the source translation [80, 281,
Future Directions in NMT
The future work on hallucinations in NMT is to define hallucinations in a quantifiable manner;
i.e., to specify a cut-off value between translation error and hallucinated content using a particular
metric. Martindale et al. propose a threshold between fluency and adequacy which is the
closest to this ideal. They, however, do not concentrate on hallucinated content as such, and thus
fluent but inadequate sentences may not always indicate hallucinations but also other types of
translation errors. Balakrishnan et al. mention constrained decoding as a method to mitigate
hallucinations in dialogue systems, but it could also be applied in NMT. 
and use constrained decoding to incorporate specific terminology into MT, but the above
methods can be repurposed to mitigate hallucinations.
Another direction for future work on hallucinations is improving existing methods of searching
for hallucinatory content, such as the algorithms proposed by Feng et al. , Lee et al. and
Raunak et al. , that are computationally expensive or require the creation of an additional
perturbed test-set . Similarly, for mitigation of lack of faithfulness and fluency, the method
proposed by Feng et al. requires the creation of a one-to-many architecture (one encoder and
two decoders), which is also computationally expensive. Future directions would therefore include
simplification of existing hallucination evaluation methods, applying them to different architectures
like CNNs and transformers, and possibly conducting research on finding simpler hallucination
search methods.
HALLUCINATION IN VISION-LANGUAGE GENERATION
With the vast advancement of the Transformer architecture in both CV and NLP, there
is a trend to pre-train large-scale unified vision-language (VL) models 
to perform vision grounded text generation tasks, such as image captioning and visual question
answering (VQA). Generally, there are two common schemas for vision-language pre-training: 1)
pre-train from scratch with a massive amount of image-text pairs as well as optionally a large
text-only corpus; or 2) initialize model parameters from a large pre-trained LM and then adapt
it to the VL domain with adequate image-text pairs. Either way, the learned vision and language
representations are aligned in the same multimodal space and the resulting model can be seen as a
LM that understands visual information. Therefore, the hallucination problem is also observed in
VL models due to similar reasons as found in NLG.
In the VL domain, the research on hallucination is still in its very early stage and how to measure
and mitigate hallucination is an open question. In this section, we first review the hallucination in
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Ziwei Ji, et al.
image captioning as it is the only VL task that has corresponding previous research works. Then,
we introduce hallucination phenomena found in other VL tasks. Finally, we discuss potential future
research directions on this problem.
Object Hallucination in Image Captioning
Definition. Object hallucination is defined as models generating captions that contain nonexistent or inaccurate objects from the input image. Following tasks in NLG, we also categorize
object hallucination into intrinsic and extrinsic ones:
Intrinsic Object Hallucination
A chest of drawers with a mirror on top of it.
A chest of drawers and a football on top of it.
Extrinsic Object Hallucination
A chest of drawers and letters inside drawers.
A chest of drawers and a fan on the roof.
Fig. 2. Examples of intrinsic and extrinsic object hallucination in image captioning.
• Intrinsic Object Hallucination: captions contain incorrect or definitely non-existent objects
given the input image. For example in Figure 2, there is no “mirror” or “football” on top of
the chest in the given image.
• Extrinsic Object Hallucination: captions contain objects cannot be verified their existence
from the input image. For example in Figure 2, we cannot verify whether there are “letters”
in the drawer or a “fan” on the roof.
Metrics. To automatically measure object hallucination, Rohrbach et al. propose the CHAIR
(Caption Hallucination Assessment with Image Relevance) metric, which calculates what proportion of object words generated are actually in the image according to the ground truth captions.
Specifically, there are two variants of it, which are CHAIR𝑖and CHAIR𝑠defined as follows,
# {hallucinated objects}
# {all objects in ground truth}, CHAIR𝑠= # {hallucinated captions}
# {all captions}
CHAIR𝑖measures per-instance object hallucination, i.e. what fraction of object instances in each
generated caption are hallucinated. CHAIR𝑠measures per-sentence object hallucination, i.e. what
fraction of generated captions include at least one hallucinated object. For example, to calculate
CHAIR scores for the MSCOCO dataset , Rohrbach et al. apply the 80-object list used
in the MSCOCO segmentation challenge Lu et al. and find exact matches of object words or
phrases in captions.
Mitigation. As a research problem that is in its early stage, there are currently a limited number
of approaches proposed to mitigate object hallucination in image captioning. Biten et al. 
hypothesize that the main cause of object hallucination is the systematic co-occurence of particular
object categories in input images. They propose three simple yet effective ways of data augmentation
to make the co-occurence statistics matrix more uniform to mitigate object hallucination. Results
show that their introduced method can reduce object hallucination without changing model
architectures. From another perspective, Xiao and Wang propose an uncertainty-aware beam
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation
search method for decoding and exhibit that reducing uncertainty can lead to less hallucination.
Specifically, a weighted penalty term is added to the beam search objective to balance between log
probability and predictive uncertainty of the selected word candidates. More recently, Dai et al.
 analyze object hallucination in VL pre-training and propose a novel pre-training objective
named object masked language modeling to alleviate this problem.
Hallucination in Other VL Tasks
In addition to image captioning, hallucination has also been observed in other VL tasks and raised
as an open research question. For example, in open-ended visual question answering, Figure 3 (left
and right) shows that the model could generate seem likely answers when we only see the text,
however wrong when given the image. Moreover, Figure 3 (middle) indicates that hallucination can
also be triggered by adversarially prompting an unanswerable question. The model will imagine an
unsupported answer that commonly matches the given visual scene.
Question: What is on the
phone screen? Answer: A text
message from a friend.
Question: What can you see
out the window? Answer: A
parking lot.
Question: Whom is the person
texting? Answer: The driver.
Fig. 3. Examples of hallucination in visual question answering (taken from ). The bold text is the output
generated by the model and the part before it is the input prompt.
Future Directions in VL
For future research on the hallucination problem in VL, we summarize three promising directions.
Firstly, hallucination detection and mitigation in VL is still in the early stage. There is a lack of
empirical and theoretical analyses in many tasks, such as visual storytelling, visual commonsense
reasoning, video captioning, etc. Secondly, more effective evaluation metrics are needed. For
example, although CHAIR can automatically evaluate the degree of object hallucination in image
captioning, it requires a pre-defined list of object categories, which does not generalize well.
Furthermore, currently there is no automatic metric for the hallucination types discussed in
Section 12.2. Therefore, we cannot perform quantitative evaluations for them. Thirdly, we believe
how to perform controlled generation with visual grounding is a promising direction to
mitigate hallucination in VL.
HALLUCINATION IN LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS
Scaling up models and data sizes for language models has shown great empirical success. The
resulting Large Language Models (LLMs) not only have achieved significant performance improvements upon previous PLMs across a diverse array of NLP tasks, but have also demonstrated many
emerging abilities and strong steerability after instruction tuning and Reinforcement Learning from
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Ziwei Ji, et al.
Human Feedback (RLHF) . However, they still exhibit the hallucination problem. Even
worse, since LLMs generate highly fluent and convincing responses, their hallucinations become
more difficult to identify, and more likely to have harmful consequences. The launch of ChatGPT as
an LLM with a conversational user interface led to the popularity of LLMs and their wide range of
real-world applications. The research on the identification and mitigation of hallucination in LLMs
has intensified. LLMs are usually open-ended general-purpose systems, which differ much from
task-specific models, and their architectural designs, data coverage, training methodologies, and
model behaviors are also different from PLMs mentioned in previous sections. Therefore, in the
following sections, we specifically discuss the hallucination problem in LLMs, by covering more
recent works, introducing novel strategies for measuring and mitigating hallucination, as well as
listing unsolved questions and future directions. 8
Hallucination Definition in LLMs
In the realm of LLMs, hallucination takes on a broader definition than before because of the vastness
of training data, the breadth of knowledge base, and multitasking capability. Unlike earlier NLG
models that depend heavily on the input source, LLMs leverage their vast internal parametric
knowledge. Consequently, hallucination in LLMs not only signifies deviations from the source input
but also extends to deviations from training data, marking it more oriented towards the Extrinsic
type. In other words, the reference discussed in Section 2.3 includes both the input source and the
training data.
Existing works often assume that training data is consistently factual and treat it as a stand-in for
“fact” or “truth”. This assumption allows for a practical simplification, with the degree of hallucination reflecting the model’s ability to accurately and faithfully comprehend and represent the world.
However, this assumption is not always valid, given that training datasets may contain non-factual
and contradictory information. Thus, the concept of hallucination should be distinguished from
that of factuality.
Hallucination Metrics for LLMs
Hallucination metrics for LLMs are designed to either measure the level of hallucination in LLMgenerated content, or quantify the hallucination risk of individual LLMs. Most of the related
work focuses on measuring extrinsic hallucinations in the open domain. Depending on whether
a metric requires golden references to identify hallucinations, we divide existing hallucination
metrics for LLMs into reference-dependent and reference-free ones. In reference-dependent metrics,
generations of LLM are analyzed based on references sourced from verified knowledge bases such as
Wikipedia, news articles, books, and knowledge graphs. For reference-free metrics, hallucinations
are identified by token probability-based uncertainty measures or self-consistency checks.
Reference-dependent Metrics. Reference-dependent metrics are often formatted as “hallucination benchmarks” that measure the hallucination level not risks of different LLMs. Most
benchmarks utilize multiple choice QA or fill-in-the-blank QA to assess model hallucination, while
some efforts further consider the ratio of partially incorrect answers or instances where the
model admits that it cannot answer . Some benchmarks adopt the open domain and open-ended
QA setting, where exact-match-based evaluations generally fail to recognize semantically equivalent
answers . Free-form responses from LLMs can be analyzed based on atomized decomposition
(FactualityPrompt and FActScore ), LLM-based evaluation (self-judgment or GPT-
4-based judgment ), or by measuring the discrepancy of the vanilla response and the response
giving the knowledge for reference .
8This section was updated in Jan 2024.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation
Human-annotated Hallucination Benchmarks. Collecting human-verified QA samples to test
the factual knowledge of LLMs is the most straightforward method. Since the training corpora
of LLMs are extremely large, high frequency count knowledge and basic commonsense can be
easily memorized. As a result, examining low frequency, long-tailed knowledge becomes a primary focus of these hallucination benchmarks. Testing samples for long-tail knowledge can be
selected based on frequency of appearance (e.g., in pretraining corpora or Wikitext ),
popularity measurements based on website traffic data (e.g., PopQA , Head-to-Tail ),
recency (RealTimeQA ), or from specific domains (e.g., ExpertQA and Med-HALT ).
In addition to long-tail knowledge, another way to build challenging benchmarks is to gather
questions that are more likely to lead to hallucinations – a methodology similar to adversarial
prompting and red teaming . The most representative example is TruthfulQA ,
a benchmark containing challenging questions that some humans would answer falsely due to
false beliefs or misconceptions (e.g., question “If it’s cold outside, what does that tell us about global
warming?” leads to GPT-3 answers “It tells us that global warming is a hoax”). Similarly, the DecodingTrust evaluated the trustworthiness of GPT models in terms of adversarial robustness,
OOD knowledge, vulnerability of jail-breaking, misleading instructions, etc. Known-Unknown 
and SeflAware evaluated LLMs’ awareness of uncertainty for question without definitive
answer (e.g., “If the Universe started at the Big Bang, what existed before then?”)
Automated Hallucination Benchmarking. Manual question collection and answer annotation are
labor intensive, hard to scale, and hard to adapt to new domains. To address this issue, annotationfree benchmarking methods have been proposed, which can be further divided into 1) automated
benchmark generation and 2) automated evidence retrieval. For the first type of methods ,
factual but unstructured corpora (for example, Wikipedia and reliable news articles) are transformed
into a unified QA format based on information extraction and answer candidate generation. The
second type of methods automatically retrieves evidence related to LLM generations from the
Internet, similar to automated fact checking . They typically adopt a chained pipeline,
where search queries are first generated (by an LLM) based on the content that needs to be
verified, and then a model determines whether it contains hallucinations according to the retrieved
evidence ). This pipeline can be further enhanced by upgrading the verification model from an
NLI model to prompted/fine-tuned LLMs (as in AttributionScore and ), or by adding
additional steps to the pipeline, such as tool interaction (as in FactTool and CRITIC ),
claim decomposition (Self-Checker ), additional second stage fine-grained retrieval and claimfocused summarization (as in ), or chain-of-verification .
Reference-free Metrics. Reference-free metrics aim to assess the hallucination risk of LLMs
without relying on external references or ground truth. Although not as reliable as reference-based
ones, these metrics are particularly useful when golden references are unavailable, expensive to
obtain, or when hallucination identification needs to be performed in real-time. Reference-free
metrics generally fall into two categories: uncertainty-based and consistency-based hallucination
detection. Uncertainty-based methods rely on the token probabilities assigned by the LLM during
generation, whereas consistency-based methods evaluate the coherence of multiple completions
generated by the LLM. There are also some benchmarks to measure the effectiveness of these
reference-free hallucination metrics, which are also termed “hallucination detection benchmarks”,
such as HaluEval and HaDes These benchmarks serve as meta-metrics of hallucination
metrics, offering valuable resources for developing more effective methods to identify hallucinations.
Uncertainty-based Hallucination Detection. This type of method assumes that LLMs assign high
probabilities to tokens that they are confident of, and low probabilities to uncertain tokens, which
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Ziwei Ji, et al.
usually contain hallucinated information. It has a close relationship with classical uncertainty
estimation methods , since the generation of each token can be viewed as a vocabulary size
classification problem. The difference here is that autoregressive text generation of LLM is a chained
classification process, therefore individual token (subword) probabilities need to be aggregated
so that they can reflect word-/sentence-/passage-level uncertainty. Such aggregation can be done
by average-/max-/min-pooling on token probabilities, calculating the normalized product of the
token probabilities, or calculating the maximum/averaged entropy [105, 174, 261? ]. These methods
can be further extended by adding prompts like “Generate factually consistent summary for the
following text: <source-text> <generated-text>” for fine-grained control (factuality evaluation
on summarization), or “<question> <generated-answer> The answer is true.” [? ] for self-evaluation
of QA samples.
Consistency-based Hallucination Detection. is the more reliable and common approach. In practical
applications, many LLMs only offer an API while internal logits remain inaccessible (i.e., the “blackbox setting”), thus making uncertainty-based methods inapplicable. Efforts have been made to
create surrogate approximations of token probability. Specifically, LLMs first generate multiple
completions with stochastic sampling given a fixed context, and then the consistency of these
completions is used to reflect the uncertainty. Consistency can be measured by the BLUE-based
variation ratio , BERTScore , n-gram approximation , NER-based overlap
ratio , NLI model , or LLM-based judgment .
Hallucination Mitigation in LLMs
Data-Related Methods.
Data for Pretraining. Recent studies show that the knowledge within LLMs is almost entirely
acquired during pretraining. Thus, a strong emphasis should be placed on ensuring the quality of
the pretraining data. This can be performed through the collection of pretraining data from credible
sources and the minimization of defective and noisy data such as those that are unreliable
or unverifiable . A representative example of such data-driven methods can be found in the
development of Llama-2 , where the most factual sources within the pretraining data were
up-sampled in order to reduce hallucinations. Similarly, Falcon LLM also demonstrated that
their data refinement methods including rigorously filtering and deduplicating can significantly
boost LLM performance. Due to the extensive pretraining datasets, some approaches have been
developed to overcome the impracticalities that arise from manually selecting them. For instance,
for the pretraining of GPT-3 , a classifier-based automatic filtering method was applied to
remove low-quality documents. However, as pretraining data is being continuously scaled up, it
is becoming increasingly costly for the research community to even access the entire pretraining
dataset. As an alternative, small LLMs like phi-1.5 , which are trained on strictly controlled
“textbooks-style” small-scale corpus, provide a valuable opportunity for doing rigors ablations to
investigate the relationship between pretraining data and model hallucination.
Data for Instruction-tuning. During the fine-tuning stage, data refinement can also be used to
dampen hallucinations. As the size of fine-tuning data is significantly smaller, manual approaches
can also be practically used . For example, the authors of LIMA collected a diverse dataset of
1,000 carefully curated prompts and responses which are aligned with each other . Conversely,
Chen et al. point out that widely used fine-tuning datasets e.g. Alpaca’s 52k data contain
low-quality instances with incorrect or irrelevant responses which are detrimental to fine-tuning,
used an automated approach leveraging strong LLMs to identify and discard such low-quality
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation
data. Alongside, the authors of InstructMining , proposed linear rules for selecting high-quality
instruction fine-tuning data and avoided the need for human or machine annotations.
Data for Reward Model Training. Training reliable reward models such that desirable and undesirable outputs are distinguished is an effective method for mitigating hallucination. These models
can subsequently be incorporated into reinforcement learning pipelines. Since the effectiveness of
the system is constrained by the performance of the reward model itself, emphasis has been placed
on determining the most effective training methods . Thus, OpenAI released a dataset, namely,
PRM800K, which resulted in a SOTA reward model . In the development of GPT-4 , two
different approaches were implemented. Firstly, in tackling open-domain hallucinations, OpenAI
collected real-world ChatGPT data that were flagged as non-factual by users and used it together
with additional labeled comparison data to train their reward models. Secondly, for closed-domain
hallucinations, OpenAI utilized GPT-4 itself to generate and subsequently utilize synthetic data for
reward model training.
Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG). RAG is a technique that leverages external sources
to enhance the reliability of generative models , which is a popular method used to
mitigate hallucination . For example, Gemini incorporates the search engine to provide external
references during generation. However, RAG faces several challenges : In the retrieval stage,
the model is required to discern the noise, irrelevant or fake information. In the augmentation stage,
integrating heterogeneous, independent, and even conflicting information presents challenges.
Additionally, the model needs to reject generation when insufficient information is given. Recent
works make efforts to address these challenges. For example, MixAlign Zhang et al. enhances
the alignment between user questions and stored knowledge to improve retrieval and reduce
hallucination.
Modelling and Inference Methods.
Safety Fine-Tuning and Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback (RLHF). Safety fine-tuning
is a prevalent method to mitigate risks associated with LLMs, such as hallucinations. A prominent
technique in this domain is Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback (RLHF). The application
of RLHF in the fine-tuning process of GPT-3 leads to the development of InstructGPT, which
significantly reduces the hallucination rate from 41% to 21% in closed domain tasks . Similarly,
Llama2 demonstrates that post-RLHF, the model consistently generated factual responses
to prompts on factual information. The study also highlighted the use of RLHF in enhancing the
overall safety of LLMs, including a reduction in hallucinations . Despite the advantages, Safety
Fine-Tuning and RLHF can incur ‘alignment tax’ and ‘catastrophic forgetting’ where the models
lose diverse previously acquired abilities after alignment . To counterbalance these issues, Lin
et al. proposes Adaptive Model Averaging (AMA) optimizing the averaging ratios of different
model layers to maximize alignment reward.
Model Editing. Editing Models such as parameter adapting can also serve to reduce hallucination.
Given that some parameters are more responsible for causing hallucinations, EWR (Elastic Weight
Removal) weighs their individual importance via Fisher Information matrix and performs
parameter interpolation to remove the undesired behaviors.
Decoding Methods. Without editing architecture or additional fine-tuning, novel decoding strategies are proposed to reduce hallucinations. Inspired by the finding that factual knowledge is
localized to particular layers, DoLa (Decoding by Contrasting Layers) utilizes the difference
in logits from the later layers versus earlier layers to amplify the factual knowledge probability.
Similarly, CAD (Context-Aware Decoding) exploits the difference in logits with and without
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Ziwei Ji, et al.
context. In addition, Li et al. observe the gap between surface generation and internal knowledge and propose ITI (Inference-Time Intervention) to reduce this gap. It first identifies attention
heads with high linear probing accuracy for truthfulness and then shifts activations along these
truth-correlated directions during inference.
Chain-of-Thought and Variants. Chain-of-Thought and its variants encourage LLMs to reason
prior to arriving at a final reply, which improves performance and reduces hallucinations by
leveraging the model’s internal knowledge . For example, Chain-of-
Verification (COVE) consists of four steps where an LLM first drafts an initial response, plans
verification questions to fact check it, answers the questions independently to ensure the answers
are not biased by other responses, and finally generates the verified response. Chain of Natural
Language Inference (CoNLI) detect hallucinations in the initial response by prompting
the LLM to conduct sentence/entity-level NLI, and then refine the response according to the
detection result. Ji et al. propose iterative self-reflection loops that involve generating relevant
background knowledge for a given question followed by a factuality evaluation and self-correction.
During answering, a similar generation-score-refine strategy is used for its entailment with the
question. Solo Performance Prompting (SPP) prompts a single LLM to engage in multi-turn
self-collaboration with multiple personas, such that their individual strengths and knowledge are
combined to boost the problem-solving and performance in tasks.
Post-processing. Petite Unsupervised Research and Revision (PURR) fine-tune an editor to
denoise the corruptions and use the editor to correct the hallucinations in the initial outputs. Other
works like REFEED leverage retrieved documents for post-correction. Similarly, CRITIC 
uses external tools such as search engines and code interpreters to verify and post-correct the
initial output.
Ensemble. Ensembling multiple models to mitigate hallucination is another way. For example,
in , multiple LLMs individually produce responses and then jointly debate their responses and
reasoning, ultimately reaching a single common answer. This approach has been demonstrated to
improve the factuality of generated content.
Future Directions of Hallucination Mitigation in LLMs
Hallucination in Large Multimodal Models. Large multimodal models (LMMs) such as GPT-
4V can generate rich and detailed responses for visual inputs, therefore being inherently riskier
compared to previous VLMs for single-sentence captioning and short-answer VQA. Furthermore,
images convey different levels of information encompassing object existence, attributes (color, shape,
etc), spatial relationships, and sometimes high-level emotional responses they elicit (peaceful, beautiful, etc.), which makes mitigating hallucination in LMM even more challenging. The exploration
of this area is still in its early stage, with a primary focus on object existence hallucination .
However, it is imperative for LMMs to analyze images well beyond that surface level, otherwise,
the use of LMM would be redundant and a simple object detector would suffice. The most crucial
factor in this problem is the availability and quality of data and supervision. Language-supervised
representations (e.g., CLIP) have demonstrated inherent shortcomings in recognizing certain types
of visual patterns, such as object orientation, quantity, and viewpoint . Even with perfect
representation, imperfect vision-language alignment can result in a significant gap between the
visual recognition abilities of the LMM and its visual backbone . The cost of annotation during
the mitigation of multimodal hallucination should also be considered. While there are works on
the visual extension of faithfulness-oriented RLHF , these essentially involve labeling more
data, which is expensive and difficult to scale. The versatility of the visual domains also makes it
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation
challenging to guarantee robustness and generalization. Large-scale self-supervision may be the
path forward, as supervised learning has proven to be insufficient for both the CV and NLP in the
past decade.
Hallucination in Long-tail and Low-resource Domains. Hallucinations in LLMs in long-tail
and low-resource domains still remain a significant challenge. This has become a new research focus
– for example, many recent hallucination benchmarks are proposed to measure LLM hallucination
in various long-tail and low-resource domains (see Section 13.2.1). However, our scope should
not be confined to only narrow professional areas (e.g., medical, legal, finance), but should also
consider broader scenarios that are also long-tailed and low-resource. For example, hallucination
in low-resource languages is a less explored area, as hallucination mitigation methods applied
to rich-resource languages do not necessarily generalize to low-resource ones. Similarly, the
temporal axis also impacts the frequency of world knowledge appearance, where more recent
data could also be considered as long-tailed and low-resource. Furthermore, beyond textual data,
multi-modal scenarios are inherently low-resource for text-only pretrained LLMs. In light of the
above, instead of developing domain-specific methods for hallucination mitigation, we need to
design a unified framework and generalizable strategies for addressing hallucination in various
imbalanced scenarios.
Estimating the Knowledge Boundary and Expressing the Uncertainty. Despite the vast size
and continuous scaling of pretraining datasets for LLMs, it is impossible for them to encompass all
the world’s knowledge. Consequently, teaching models to express their inability to answer specific
questions and honestly admit “I don’t know” is crucial, and it requires LLMs to accurately model
their knowledge boundaries. Notably, this task lies in a different dimension from other objectives
that we expect LLMs to achieve (e.g., improving QA task accuracy) since it is not explicitly included
in the pretraining corpora, making it more challenging. Furthermore, the diverse sources and
complex distributions of LLM pretraining data, along with varying training corpora for different
LLMs, exacerbate the difficulty of this task. Related research is still in its early stages, with existing
methods including calibration-based uncertainty estimation and posterior approaches based
on QA testing results , but none of them can satisfactorily solve this issue. For instances near
the knowledge boundary, the situation is no longer a binary opposition between knowing and not
knowing. In these cases, accurately expressing the model’s uncertainty level with fine granularity
becomes a critical research question that warrants further exploration.
Minimizing the Alignment Tax During Hallucination Mitigation. Several studies have confirmed that the performance of ChatGPT and GPT-4 degrades over time due to continuous safety
fine-tuning. This phenomenon is a typical example of an alignment tax. Similarly, when addressing
hallucination problems in low-resource languages, the rate of hallucination in the original languages may increase. In the process of enhancing the faithfulness of LLMs’ multi-modal perception
through visual instruction tuning on VQA datasets, the “politeness” of LLM responses may decrease
due to the overly succinct nature of VQA answer annotations . Furthermore, the alignment
tax problem is not confined to fine-tuning-based methods but also extends to prompting-based
methods such as Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG). These methods may also compromise the
quality of responses when the quality of retrieved evidence is sub-optimal. In light of these findings,
it is clear that we must explore strategies to minimize the cost during hallucination mitigation
and prevent LLMs from becoming overly conservative, losing their creativity, or suffering from
catastrophic forgetting in task performance.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.
Ziwei Ji, et al.
Understanding Hallucination in LLMs. Although the research community has put extensive
efforts into developing empirical methods for measuring and mitigating hallucinations, our understanding of LLM hallucination still remains limited. The absence of reliable theoretical frameworks
and rigorous mathematical formulations hinders our ability to answer fundamental questions and
make further advancements. For instance, how does hallucination correlate with model and data size
(e.g., scaling laws)? What is the relationship between hallucination and auto-regressive generation?
Do SFT and RLHF employ different mechanisms to mitigate hallucinations? What is the lower
bound of hallucination across different tasks and domains? These questions are also intrinsically
linked to a broader question – although now there are a lot of effort on empirically investigating
what LLM can and cannot do from different dimensions, we still don’t understand why and how it
works. There has been some attempts from various perspectives, such as knowledge encoding ,
compression , model selection , compositionality , computational perspective , but
we are still a long way from truly understanding the mechanism behind various LLM behaviors.
CONCLUSION
In this survey, we provide the first comprehensive overview of the hallucination problem in NLG,
summarizing existing evaluation metrics, mitigation methods, and the remaining challenges for
future research. Hallucination is an artifact of neural-based NLG and is of concern because they
appear fluent and can therefore be misleading to users. In some scenarios and tasks, hallucination
can cause harm. We survey various contributors to hallucination, ranging from noisy data, erroneous
parametric knowledge, incorrect attention mechanism, inappropriate training strategy, to inference
exposure bias, etc. We show that there are two categories of hallucinations, namely intrinsic
hallucination and extrinsic hallucination, and they need to be treated differently with diverse
mitigation strategies. Hallucination is relatively easy to detect in abstractive summarization and in
NMT against the evidence in the source. For dialogue systems, it is important to balance diversity
vs consistency in dialogue responses. Hallucination in GQA and VL tasks is detrimental to the
performance, but research on mitigation methods is still very preliminary in these areas. For datato-text generation, hallucination arises from the discrepancy between the input and output format.
Most methods to mitigate hallucinations in NMT either aim to reduce dataset noise or alleviate
exposure bias. In the VL domain, models also generate unfaithful output given the visual scene,
and recent works have mainly focused on the object hallucination problem. There remain many
challenges ahead in identifying and mitigating hallucinations in NLG, and we hope research in this
area can benefit from this survey.