HAL Id: inria-00548585
 
Submitted on 20 Dec 2010
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of scientific research documents, whether they are published or not.
The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
Beyond bags of features: spatial pyramid matching for
recognizing natural scene categories
Svetlana Lazebnik, Cordelia Schmid, Jean Ponce
To cite this version:
Svetlana Lazebnik, Cordelia Schmid, Jean Ponce. Beyond bags of features: spatial pyramid matching
for recognizing natural scene categories. IEEE Conference on Computer Vision & Pattern Recognition
(CPRV ’06), Jun 2006, New York, United States. pp.2169 - 2178, ￿10.1109/CVPR.2006.68￿. ￿inria-
Beyond Bags of Features: Spatial Pyramid Matching
for Recognizing Natural Scene Categories
Svetlana Lazebnik1
 
1Beckman Institute
University of Illinois
Cordelia Schmid2
 
2INRIA Rhˆone-Alpes
Montbonnot, France
Jean Ponce1,3
 
3Ecole Normale Sup´erieure
Paris, France
This paper presents a method for recognizing scene categories based on approximate global geometric correspondence. This technique works by partitioning the image into
increasingly ﬁne sub-regions and computing histograms of
local features found inside each sub-region.
The resulting “spatial pyramid” is a simple and computationally efﬁcient extension of an orderless bag-of-features image representation, and it shows signiﬁcantly improved performance on challenging scene categorization tasks. Speciﬁcally, our proposed method exceeds the state of the art on
the Caltech-101 database and achieves high accuracy on a
large database of ﬁfteen natural scene categories. The spatial pyramid framework also offers insights into the success
of several recently proposed image descriptions, including
Torralba’s “gist” and Lowe’s SIFT descriptors.
1. Introduction
In this paper, we consider the problem of recognizing
the semantic category of an image. For example, we may
want to classify a photograph as depicting a scene (forest,
street, ofﬁce, etc.) or as containing a certain object of interest. For such whole-image categorization tasks, bag-offeatures methods, which represent an image as an orderless
collection of local features, have recently demonstrated impressive levels of performance . However,
because these methods disregard all information about the
spatial layout of the features, they have severely limited descriptive ability. In particular, they are incapable of capturing shape or of segmenting an object from its background.
Unfortunately, overcoming these limitations to build effective structural object descriptions has proven to be quite
challenging, especially when the recognition system must
be made to work in the presence of heavy clutter, occlusion, or large viewpoint changes.
Approaches based on
generative part models and geometric correspondence
search achieve robustness at signiﬁcant computational expense. A more efﬁcient approach is to augment a
basic bag-of-features representation with pairwise relations
between neighboring local features, but existing implementations of this idea have yielded inconclusive results. One other strategy for increasing robustness to geometric deformations is to increase the level of invariance of
local features (e.g., by using afﬁne-invariant detectors), but
a recent large-scale evaluation suggests that this strategy usually does not pay off.
Though we remain sympathetic to the goal of developing robust and geometrically invariant structural object representations, we propose in this paper to revisit “global”
non-invariant representations based on aggregating statistics of local features over ﬁxed subregions. We introduce a
kernel-based recognition method that works by computing
rough geometric correspondence on a global scale using an
efﬁcient approximation technique adapted from the pyramid
matching scheme of Grauman and Darrell . Our method
involves repeatedly subdividing the image and computing
histograms of local features at increasingly ﬁne resolutions.
As shown by experiments in Section 5, this simple operation sufﬁces to signiﬁcantly improve performance over a
basic bag-of-features representation, and even over methods based on detailed geometric correspondence.
Previous research has shown that statistical properties of
the scene considered in a holistic fashion, without any analysis of its constituent objects, yield a rich set of cues to its
semantic category . Our own experiments conﬁrm that
global representations can be surprisingly effective not only
for identifying the overall scene, but also for categorizing
images as containing speciﬁc objects, even when these objects are embedded in heavy clutter and vary signiﬁcantly
in pose and appearance. This said, we do not advocate the
direct use of a global method for object recognition (except
for very restricted sorts of imagery). Instead, we envision a
subordinate role for this method. It may be used to capture
the “gist” of an image and to inform the subsequent
search for speciﬁc objects (e.g., if the image, based on its
global description, is likely to be a highway, we have a high
probability of ﬁnding a car, but not a toaster). In addition,
the simplicity and efﬁciency of our method, in combination with its tendency to yield unexpectedly high recognition rates on challenging data, could make it a good baseline for “calibrating” new datasets and for evaluating more
sophisticated recognition approaches.
2. Previous Work
In computer vision, histograms have a long history as a
method for image description (see, e.g., ). Koenderink and Van Doorn have generalized histograms to
locally orderless images, or histogram-valued scale spaces
(i.e., for each Gaussian aperture at a given location and
scale, the locally orderless image returns the histogram of
image features aggregated over that aperture). Our spatial
pyramid approach can be thought of as an alternative formulation of a locally orderless image, where instead of a
Gaussian scale space of apertures, we deﬁne a ﬁxed hierarchy of rectangular windows. Koenderink and Van Doorn
have argued persuasively that locally orderless images play
an important role in visual perception. Our retrieval experiments (Fig. 4) conﬁrm that spatial pyramids can capture
perceptually salient features and suggest that “locally orderless matching” may be a powerful mechanism for estimating overall perceptual similarity between images.
It is important to contrast our proposed approach with
multiresolution histograms , which involve repeatedly
subsampling an image and computing a global histogram
of pixel values at each new level. In other words, a multiresolution histogram varies the resolution at which the features (intensity values) are computed, but the histogram resolution (intensity scale) stays ﬁxed. We take the opposite
approach of ﬁxing the resolution at which the features are
computed, but varying the spatial resolution at which they
are aggregated. This results in a higher-dimensional representation that preserves more information (e.g., an image
consisting of thin black and white stripes would retain two
modes at every level of a spatial pyramid, whereas it would
become indistinguishable from a uniformly gray image at
all but the ﬁnest levels of a multiresolution histogram). Finally, unlike a multiresolution histogram, a spatial pyramid,
when equipped with an appropriate kernel, can be used for
approximate geometric matching.
The operation of “subdivide and disorder” — i.e., partition the image into subblocks and compute histograms
(or histogram statistics, such as means) of local features in
these subblocks — has been practiced numerous times in
computer vision, both for global image description and for local description of interest regions .
Thus, though the operation itself seems fundamental, previous methods leave open the question of what is the right
subdivision scheme (although a regular 4 × 4 grid seems
to be the most popular implementation choice), and what is
the right balance between “subdividing” and “disordering.”
The spatial pyramid framework suggests a possible way to
address this issue: namely, the best results may be achieved
when multiple resolutions are combined in a principled way.
It also suggests that the reason for the empirical success of
“subdivide and disorder” techniques is the fact that they actually perform approximate geometric matching.
3. Spatial Pyramid Matching
We ﬁrst describe the original formulation of pyramid
matching , and then introduce our application of this
framework to create a spatial pyramid image representation.
3.1. Pyramid Match Kernels
Let X and Y be two sets of vectors in a d-dimensional
feature space. Grauman and Darrell propose pyramid
matching to ﬁnd an approximate correspondence between
these two sets.
Informally, pyramid matching works by
placing a sequence of increasingly coarser grids over the
feature space and taking a weighted sum of the number of
matches that occur at each level of resolution. At any ﬁxed
resolution, two points are said to match if they fall into the
same cell of the grid; matches found at ﬁner resolutions are
weighted more highly than matches found at coarser resolutions. More speciﬁcally, let us construct a sequence of grids
at resolutions 0, . . . , L, such that the grid at level ℓhas 2ℓ
cells along each dimension, for a total of D = 2dℓcells. Let
Y denote the histograms of X and Y at this resolution, so that Hℓ
X(i) and Hℓ
Y (i) are the numbers of points
from X and Y that fall into the ith cell of the grid. Then
the number of matches at level ℓis given by the histogram
intersection function :
In the following, we will abbreviate I(Hℓ
Y ) to Iℓ.
Note that the number of matches found at level ℓalso includes all the matches found at the ﬁner level ℓ+ 1. Therefore, the number of new matches found at level ℓis given
by Iℓ−Iℓ+1 for ℓ= 0, . . . , L −1 . The weight associated
with level ℓis set to
2L−ℓ, which is inversely proportional
to cell width at that level. Intuitively, we want to penalize
matches found in larger cells because they involve increasingly dissimilar features. Putting all the pieces together, we
get the following deﬁnition of a pyramid match kernel:
2L−ℓ+1 Iℓ.
Both the histogram intersection and the pyramid match kernel are Mercer kernels .
3.2. Spatial Matching Scheme
As introduced in , a pyramid match kernel works
with an orderless image representation. It allows for precise matching of two collections of features in a highdimensional appearance space, but discards all spatial information. This paper advocates an “orthogonal” approach:
perform pyramid matching in the two-dimensional image
space, and use traditional clustering techniques in feature
space.1 Speciﬁcally, we quantize all feature vectors into M
discrete types, and make the simplifying assumption that
only features of the same type can be matched to one another. Each channel m gives us two sets of two-dimensional
vectors, Xm and Ym, representing the coordinates of features of type m found in the respective images. The ﬁnal
kernel is then the sum of the separate channel kernels:
KL(X, Y ) =
κL(Xm, Ym) .
This approach has the advantage of maintaining continuity
with the popular “visual vocabulary” paradigm — in fact, it
reduces to a standard bag of features when L = 0.
Because the pyramid match kernel (3) is simply a
weighted sum of histogram intersections, and because
c min(a, b) = min(ca, cb) for positive numbers, we can
implement KL as a single histogram intersection of “long”
vectors formed by concatenating the appropriately weighted
histograms of all channels at all resolutions (Fig. 1). For
L levels and M channels, the resulting vector has dimensionality M L
ℓ=0 4ℓ= M 1
3(4L+1 −1). Several experiments reported in Section 5 use the settings of M = 400
and L = 3, resulting in 34000-dimensional histogram intersections. However, these operations are efﬁcient because
the histogram vectors are extremely sparse (in fact, just as
in , the computational complexity of the kernel is linear
in the number of features). It must also be noted that we did
not observe any signiﬁcant increase in performance beyond
M = 200 and L = 2, where the concatenated histograms
are only 4200-dimensional.
1In principle, it is possible to integrate geometric information directly
into the original pyramid matching framework by treating image coordinates as two extra dimensions in the feature space.
Figure 1. Toy example of constructing a three-level pyramid. The
image has three feature types, indicated by circles, diamonds, and
crosses. At the top, we subdivide the image at three different levels of resolution. Next, for each level of resolution and each channel, we count the features that fall in each spatial bin. Finally, we
weight each spatial histogram according to eq. (3).
The ﬁnal implementation issue is that of normalization.
For maximum computational efﬁciency, we normalize all
histograms by the total weight of all features in the image,
in effect forcing the total number of features in all images to
be the same. Because we use a dense feature representation
(see Section 4), and thus do not need to worry about spurious feature detections resulting from clutter, this practice is
sufﬁcient to deal with the effects of variable image size.
4. Feature Extraction
This section brieﬂy describes the two kinds of features
used in the experiments of Section 5. First, we have socalled “weak features,” which are oriented edge points, i.e.,
points whose gradient magnitude in a given direction exceeds a minimum threshold. We extract edge points at two
scales and eight orientations, for a total of M = 16 channels. We designed these features to obtain a representation
similar to the “gist” or to a global SIFT descriptor 
of the image.
For better discriminative power, we also utilize higherdimensional “strong features,” which are SIFT descriptors
of 16 × 16 pixel patches computed over a grid with spacing
of 8 pixels. Our decision to use a dense regular grid instead of interest points was based on the comparative evaluation of Fei-Fei and Perona , who have shown that dense
features work better for scene classiﬁcation. Intuitively, a
dense image description is necessary to capture uniform regions such as sky, calm water, or road surface (to deal with
low-contrast regions, we skip the usual SIFT normalization
procedure when the overall gradient magnitude of the patch
is too weak). We perform k-means clustering of a random
subset of patches from the training set to form a visual vocabulary. Typical vocabulary sizes for our experiments are
M = 200 and M = 400.
living room
industrial
tall building∗
inside city∗
open country∗
Figure 2. Example images from the scene category database. The starred categories originate from Oliva and Torralba .
Weak features (M = 16)
Strong features (M = 200)
Strong features (M = 400)
Single-level
Single-level
Single-level
Table 1. Classiﬁcation results for the scene category database (see text). The highest results for each kind of feature are shown in bold.
5. Experiments
In this section, we report results on three diverse
datasets: ﬁfteen scene categories , Caltech-101 , and
Graz . We perform all processing in grayscale, even
when color images are available. All experiments are repeated ten times with different randomly selected training
and test images, and the average of per-class recognition
rates2 is recorded for each run. The ﬁnal result is reported as
the mean and standard deviation of the results from the individual runs. Multi-class classiﬁcation is done with a support vector machine (SVM) trained using the one-versus-all
rule: a classiﬁer is learned to separate each class from the
rest, and a test image is assigned the label of the classiﬁer
with the highest response.
2The alternative performance measure, the percentage of all test images classiﬁed correctly, can be biased if test set sizes for different classes
vary signiﬁcantly. This is especially true of the Caltech-101 dataset, where
some of the “easiest” classes are disproportionately large.
5.1. Scene Category Recognition
Our ﬁrst dataset (Fig. 2) is composed of ﬁfteen scene categories: thirteen were provided by Fei-Fei and Perona 
(eight of these were originally collected by Oliva and Torralba ), and two (industrial and store) were collected by
ourselves. Each category has 200 to 400 images, and average image size is 300 × 250 pixels. The major sources
of the pictures in the dataset include the COREL collection,
personal photographs, and Google image search. This is
one of the most complete scene category dataset used in the
literature thus far.
Table 1 shows detailed results of classiﬁcation experiments using 100 images per class for training and the rest
for testing (the same setup as ). First, let us examine the
performance of strong features for L = 0 and M = 200,
corresponding to a standard bag of features. Our classi-
ﬁcation rate is 72.2% (74.7% for the 13 classes inherited
from Fei-Fei and Perona), which is much higher than their
best results of 65.2%, achieved with an orderless method
and a feature set comparable to ours. We conjecture that
Fei-Fei and Perona’s approach is disadvantaged by its reoffice
living room
living room
industrial
industrial
tall building
tall building
inside city
inside city
open country
open country
Figure 3. Confusion table for the scene category dataset. Average
classiﬁcation rates for individual classes are listed along the diagonal. The entry in the ith row and jth column is the percentage of
images from class i that were misidentiﬁed as class j.
liance on latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) , which is
essentially an unsupervised dimensionality reduction technique and as such, is not necessarily conducive to achieving the highest classiﬁcation accuracy. To verify this, we
have experimented with probabilistic latent semantic analysis (pLSA) , which attempts to explain the distribution of
features in the image as a mixture of a few “scene topics”
or “aspects” and performs very similarly to LDA in practice . Following the scheme of Quelhas et al. , we
run pLSA in an unsupervised setting to learn a 60-aspect
model of half the training images.
Next, we apply this
model to the other half to obtain probabilities of topics given
each image (thus reducing the dimensionality of the feature
space from 200 to 60). Finally, we train the SVM on these
reduced features and use them to classify the test set. In this
setup, our average classiﬁcation rate drops to 63.3% from
the original 72.2%. For the 13 classes inherited from Fei-
Fei and Perona, it drops to 65.9% from 74.7%, which is
now very similar to their results. Thus, we can see that latent factor analysis techniques can adversely affect classiﬁcation performance, which is also consistent with the results
of Quelhas et al. .
Next, let us examine the behavior of spatial pyramid
matching. For completeness, Table 1 lists the performance
achieved using just the highest level of the pyramid (the
“single-level” columns), as well as the performance of the
complete matching scheme using multiple levels (the “pyramid” columns). For all three kinds of features, results improve dramatically as we go from L = 0 to a multi-level
setup. Though matching at the highest pyramid level seems
to account for most of the improvement, using all the levels
together confers a statistically signiﬁcant beneﬁt. For strong
features, single-level performance actually drops as we go
from L = 2 to L = 3. This means that the highest level of
the L = 3 pyramid is too ﬁnely subdivided, with individual bins yielding too few matches. Despite the diminished
discriminative power of the highest level, the performance
of the entire L = 3 pyramid remains essentially identical to
that of the L = 2 pyramid. This, then, is the main advantage
of the spatial pyramid representation: because it combines
multiple resolutions in a principled fashion, it is robust to
failures at individual levels.
It is also interesting to compare performance of different feature sets. As expected, weak features do not perform as well as strong features, though in combination with
the spatial pyramid, they can also achieve acceptable levels
of accuracy (note that because weak features have a much
higher density and much smaller spatial extent than strong
features, their performance continues to improve as we go
from L = 2 to L = 3). Increasing the visual vocabulary
size from M = 200 to M = 400 results in a small performance increase at L = 0, but this difference is all but eliminated at higher pyramid levels. Thus, we can conclude that
the coarse-grained geometric cues provided by the pyramid
have more discriminative power than an enlarged visual vocabulary. Of course, the optimal way to exploit structure
both in the image and in the feature space may be to combine them in a uniﬁed multiresolution framework; this is
subject for future research.
Fig. 3 shows a confusion table between the ﬁfteen scene
categories. Not surprisingly, confusion occurs between the
indoor classes (kitchen, bedroom, living room), and also between some natural classes, such as coast and open country.
Fig. 4 shows examples of image retrieval using the spatial
pyramid kernel and strong features with M = 200. These
examples give a sense of the kind of visual information captured by our approach. In particular, spatial pyramids seem
successful at capturing the organization of major pictorial
elements or “blobs,” and the directionality of dominant lines
and edges. Because the pyramid is based on features computed at the original image resolution, even high-frequency
details can be preserved.
For example, query image (b)
shows white kitchen cabinet doors with dark borders. Three
of the retrieved “kitchen” images contain similar cabinets,
the “ofﬁce” image shows a wall plastered with white documents in dark frames, and the “inside city” image shows a
white building with darker window frames.
5.2. Caltech-101
Our second set of experiments is on the Caltech-101
database (Fig. 5). This database contains from 31 to
800 images per category. Most images are medium resolution, i.e., about 300 × 300 pixels. Caltech-101 is probably
the most diverse object database available today, though it
(a) kitchen
living room
living room
living room
living room
living room
living room
living room
(b) kitchen
inside city
(d) tall bldg
inside city
inside city
(e) tall bldg
inside city
(f) inside city
(g) street
Figure 4. Retrieval from the scene category database. The query images are on the left, and the eight images giving the highest values of
the spatial pyramid kernel (for L = 2, M = 200) are on the right. The actual class of incorrectly retrieved images is listed below them.
is not without shortcomings. Namely, most images feature
relatively little clutter, and the objects are centered and occupy most of the image. In addition, a number of categories,
such as minaret (see Fig. 5), are affected by “corner” artifacts resulting from artiﬁcial image rotation. Though these
artifacts are semantically irrelevant, they can provide stable
cues resulting in misleadingly high recognition rates.
We follow the experimental setup of Grauman and Darrell and J. Zhang et al. , namely, we train on 30 images per class and test on the rest. For efﬁciency, we limit
the number of test images to 50 per class. Note that, because some categories are very small, we may end up with
just a single test image per class. Table 2 gives a breakdown of classiﬁcation rates for different pyramid levels for
weak features and strong features with M = 200. The
results for M = 400 are not shown, because just as for
the scene category database, they do not bring any signiﬁcant improvement. For L = 0, strong features give 41.2%,
which is slightly below the 43% reported by Grauman and
Darrell. Our best result is 64.6%, achieved with strong features at L = 2. This exceeds the highest classiﬁcation rate
previously published,3 that of 53.9% reported by J. Zhang
et al. . Berg et al. report 48% accuracy using 15
training images per class. Our average recognition rate with
this setup is 56.4%. The behavior of weak features on this
database is also noteworthy: for L = 0, they give a classiﬁcation rate of 15.5%, which is consistent with a naive
graylevel correlation baseline , but in conjunction with a
four-level spatial pyramid, their performance rises to 54%
— on par with the best results in the literature.
Fig. 5 shows a few of the “easiest” and “hardest” object
classes for our method. The successful classes are either
dominated by rotation artifacts (like minaret), have very little clutter (like windsor chair), or represent coherent natural
“scenes” (like joshua tree and okapi). The least successful classes are either textureless animals (like beaver and
cougar), animals that camouﬂage well in their environment
3See, however, H. Zhang et al. in these proceedings, for an algorithm that yields a classiﬁcation rate of 66.2 ± 0.5% for 30 training
examples, and 59.1 ± 0.6% for 15 examples.
minaret (97.6%)
windsor chair (94.6%)
joshua tree (87.9%)
okapi (87.8%)
cougar body (27.6%)
beaver (27.5%)
crocodile (25.0%)
ant (25.0%)
Figure 5. Caltech-101 results. Top: some classes on which our method (L = 2, M = 200) achieved high performance. Bottom: some
classes on which our method performed poorly.
Weak features
Strong features (200)
Single-level
Single-level
Table 2. Classiﬁcation results for the Caltech-101 database.
class 1 misclass 2 misclass 1 / class 2
classiﬁed as
classiﬁed as
ketch / schooner
lotus / water lily
crocodile / crocodile head
crayﬁsh / lobster
ﬂamingo / ibis
Table 3. Top ﬁve confusions for our method (L = 2, M = 200)
on the Caltech-101 database.
Opelt 
Zhang 
Table 4. Results of our method (M = 200) for the Graz database
and comparison with two existing methods.
(like crocodile), or “thin” objects (like ant). Table 3 shows
the top ﬁve of our method’s confusions, all of which are
between closely related classes.
To summarize, our method has outperformed both stateof-the-art orderless methods and methods based on
precise geometric correspondence .
Signiﬁcantly, all
these methods rely on sparse features (interest points or
sparsely sampled edge points). However, because of the
geometric stability and lack of clutter of Caltech-101, dense
features combined with global spatial relations seem to capture more discriminative information about the objects.
5.3. The Graz Dataset
As seen from Sections 5.1 and 5.2, our proposed approach does very well on global scene classiﬁcation tasks,
or on object recognition tasks in the absence of clutter with
most of the objects assuming “canonical” poses. However,
it was not designed to cope with heavy clutter and pose
changes. It is interesting to see how well our algorithm
can do by exploiting the global scene cues that still remain
under these conditions. Accordingly, our ﬁnal set of experiments is on the Graz dataset (Fig. 6), which is
characterized by high intra-class variation. This dataset has
two object classes, bikes (373 images) and persons (460 images), and a background class (270 images). The image resolution is 640 × 480, and the range of scales and poses at
which exemplars are presented is very diverse, e.g., a “person” image may show a pedestrian in the distance, a side
view of a complete body, or just a closeup of a head. For this
database, we perform two-class detection (object vs. background) using an experimental setup consistent with that of
Opelt et al. . Namely, we train detectors for persons and
bikes on 100 positive and 100 negative images (of which 50
are drawn from the other object class and 50 from the background), and test on a similarly distributed set. We generate
ROC curves by thresholding raw SVM output, and report
the ROC equal error rate averaged over ten runs.
Table 4 summarizes our results for strong features with
M = 200. Note that the standard deviation is quite high because the images in the database vary greatly in their level
of difﬁculty, so the performance for any single run is dependent on the composition of the training set (in particular, for
L = 2, the performance for bikes ranges from 81% to 91%).
For this database, the improvement from L = 0 to L = 2
is relatively small. This makes intuitive sense: when a class
is characterized by high geometric variability, it is difﬁcult
to ﬁnd useful global features. Despite this disadvantage of
our method, we still achieve results very close to those of
Opelt et al. , who use a sparse, locally invariant feature
representation. In the future, we plan to combine spatial
pyramids with invariant features for improved robustness
against geometric changes.
6. Discussion
This paper has presented a “holistic” approach for image
categorization based on a modiﬁcation of pyramid match
kernels . Our method, which works by repeatedly subdividing an image and computing histograms of image features over the resulting subregions, has shown promising rebike
background
Figure 6. The Graz database.
sults on three large-scale, diverse datasets. Despite the simplicity of our method, and despite the fact that it works not
by constructing explicit object models, but by using global
cues as indirect evidence about the presence of an object,
it consistently achieves an improvement over an orderless
image representation. This is not a trivial accomplishment,
given that a well-designed bag-of-features method can outperform more sophisticated approaches based on parts and
relations . Our results also underscore the surprising
and ubiquitous power of global scene statistics: even in
highly variable datasets, such as Graz, they can still provide
useful discriminative information. It is important to develop
methods that take full advantage of this information — either as stand-alone scene categorizers, as “context” modules within larger object recognition systems, or as tools for
evaluating biases present in newly collected datasets.
Acknowledgments. This research was partially supported
by the National Science Foundation under grants IIS-
0308087 and IIS-0535152, and the UIUC/CNRS/INRIA
collaboration agreement.