Driving Style Estimation by Fusing Multiple Driving Behaviors:
A Case Study of Freeway in China
Yulin Ma1, Zhixiong Li2, 3, Yicheng Li4, Hongtai Li1, R. Malekian5
1. National Center of ITS Engineering and Technology, Research Institute of Highway, Ministry of Transport, Beijing,
100088 China
2. School of Mechatronic Engineering, China University of Mining and Technology, Xuzhou 221000, China
3. School of Mechanical, Materials, Mechatronic and Biomedical Engineering, University of Wollongong,
Wollongong, NSW 2522, Australia
4. ITS Research Center, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan 430063, China
5. Department of Electrical, Electronic & Computer Engineering, University of Pretoria, Pretoria 0002, South Africa
Traffic accident is one of the most serious issues in traffic problems. In China, more than 50 thousand
people die in each year from traffic accidents. To alleviate the incidence of traffic accidents, this paper
proposes a driving style estimation method by fusing multiple driving behaviors for Chinese drivers.
Firstly, we invite Chinese volunteers to operate a driving simulator. Massive driving data are collected
by the simulator. Then, a driving dataset is set up by the collected data. Furthermore, we adopt the
collected driving data to represent behaviors by using SVM. Last but not least, a novel classification
method is proposed to estimate driving styles, which is called multiple decision tree. The method can
fuse multiple behaviors and explore the relationship between driving styles and behaviors. As a result,
20 volunteers and a freeway in China is selected for case study. After test, the proposed method has a
95% accuracy for style estimation. However, about 25% volunteers have a Risk style and these
volunteers should change their driving habits. It also reveals the high incidence of accidents in China.
Hence, the proposed method can alert the driver with bad styles and is helpful to ease traffic accidents.
Key Words: traffic accident; driving style estimation; driving behavior; multiple decision tree; SVM
1. INTRODUCTION
Traffic accident is one of the most serious issues in traffic problems. It is the key cause of death of the
population in recent years. To alleviate this issue, many auxiliary driving systems have been designed
 , such as Forward Collision Warning (FCW), Adaptive Cruise Control (ACC), Lane Departure
Warning System (LDWS), etc. The above systems can alleviate incidence of traffic accidents.
However, there are still many people dead in vehicle crashes. Table 1 shows the traffic accident
statistics from 2009 to 2013 in China . From this table, we can find that although the death toll
decreased, it was still more than 50,000 in 2013. The statistics indicate that traffic accident remission
cannot only depend on high-tech systems. So it is critical to implement suitable prevention strategies
to improve the safety .
TABLE 1 Traffic accident statistics from 2009 to 2013 in China
Traffic accidents (events)
Death toll (number
of people)
Chinese government has conducted further analysis and investigation of traffic accidents.
The research shows that hazardous driving is one of the main reasons to cause traffic accidents. Hence,
driving behavior has become a hot topic all over the world . Various researches are focus on
hazardous driving , angry driving , etc. These researches mainly explore driving behaviors.
When drivers operate hazardous drivings, these methods will send a warning signal to drivers.
However, in some dangerous situations, the drivers usually have no time to change their operations
before the warning signals are sent to them. Hence, another method should be proposed. The method
should have an ability to make long term observation for drivers and classify the styles of drivers.
Therefore, if drivers have known which driving style the drivers belong to, they will avoid hazardous
driving behaviors when in dangerous situations. To this end, this paper proposes a driving style
estimation method to decide what kind of driving style a driver belongs to. The proposed method is
aimed at reducing the incidence of traffic accidents.
2. RELATED WORKS
2.1 Review of driving behavior
Driving behavior is different from driving style, but it has an influence on judgment of
driving styles. Driving style is decided by multiple driving behaviors. A driver maybe drive with a lot
of behaviors including risk, moderation and safety. However, he has only one style. For instance, if a
driver has a lot of risk behaviors, his style will be risk. Hence, the work presented here is strongly
related to driving behavior analysis, from which we draw many inspirations, particularly in clustering
analysis, driving behaviors classification .
From literature, various methods have been proposed to classify driving behaviors. In these
methods, vehicle speed, acceleration, position, braking are the main data to analyze driving behaviors.
For instance, Aarts et al. analyze the relationship between speed and road crashes. They conclude
that vehicle speed not only affects the severity of collisions, but also increases the risk of collisions.
Based on this, Wu et al. set up a driving behavior clustering model by using GPS data mining. In
this model, they adopt vehicle speed and acceleration to classify driving behaviors into four kinds:
driving behavior of acceleration-deceleration, pro-speeding, acceleration and deceleration. In addition,
Zito et al. investigate the use of GPS data for traffic monitoring. In their method, GPS data can
compute the vehicle position and travelling time. Vehicle position and travelling time combined with
hazardous situations can help drivers recognize their hazardous driving behaviors. Moreover, Yan et al.
 set up a model to detect hazardous situations by using Markov Blanket and sequential minimal
optimization. From the above literature, the goal of driving behavior classification is to detect driving
safety. Vehicle speed, position and travelling time are closely related with driving safety. However, the
researches discussed above are mainly focus on some specific traffic events. To evaluate the whole
journey, driving style should be researched.
2.2 Review of driving style
Driving style is based on driver’s habits. Previous researches reveal that drivers with risk style are
usually driving faster, braking harder than drivers with safety style . Hence, to study driving
style, we can start from driving data.
Guo et al. collect naturalistic driving data on various roads and then adopt these data to
detect behaviors . Furthermore, they divide drivers styles into three risk levels by using K-means
cluster method. However, they only adopt braking data as the features to evaluate driving styles.
Similarly, Wang et al. collect naturalistic driving data on real Chinese roads. The driving database
includes vehicle status, potential crash objects, driver information, actions, etc. They fuse these kinds
of data and cluster different driving-risk levels involved in near-crashes by using nine rules. Moreover,
in , Bonsal et al. set up a model for personal driving style classification based on several
safety-related parameters. From this model, they confirm the parameters which effect traffic safety
most as key parameters. Li et al. propose a method to identify driving styles. Driving behavior is
represented by 12 kinds of behaviors. Then they employ a conditional likelihood maximization
method to extract driving features. Finally, driving styles are classified by using these features.
From the mentioned literature, we can find that multi-dimensional naturalistic driving data
are important for driving style analysis. How to establish the relationship among the different kinds of
data is a key point to classify driving styles. Hence, in this paper, we first set up a driving database for
multi-dimensional driving data. Furthermore, we adopt the driving data to represent multiple driving
behaviors. Last but not leaset, we propose a method to classify driving styles by fusing the multiple
driving behaviors.
3. MULTI-DIMENSIONAL DRIVING DATABASE CREATION
Various factors affect the classification of driving styles, which is shown in Figure 1. According to the
figure, driving style contains three levels, driving decisions, driving behaviors and driving data.
Driving behaviors are based on driving data, such as vehicle speed, acceleration, braking, etc. In other
words, we can adopt sequence of driving data to represent behaviors.
We utilize a driving simulator to create the database. The driving simulator is shown in
Figure 2. This simulator contains the main freeways in China. We randomly select more than 200
volunteers from China whose driving age are more than 1 year. These volunteers can represent the
styles of Chinese drivers. In the step of database creation, volunteers first select a destination and then
select a route for driving. The route may be a time-saving route, short-distance route, etc. When
volunteers operate the simulator, various data are collected at the same time. These data contain GPS
data, vehicle speed, acceleration, braking, yaw angle. Hence, there are more than 7 kinds of behaviors
are selected for each volunteer. Each volunteer drives more than one hour. More than 10,000 data are
collected for each volunteer.There are more than 2 million data in the dataset. All of these data have
timestamps. Table 2 shows part of data in multi-dimensional driving database.
FIGURE 1. Representation for driving styles
There are two methods to determine that which driving style does a driver belong to. The
first one is to collect crash rate of driver in many years. The other one is evaluated by experts.
Obviously, the first one is not practical as it will spend a lot of times and resources. The second
method is adopted for styles classification . Hence, in the process of data collection by
volunteers, five experts vote driving style for types, Safety, Moderation and Risk. After data collecting,
the type with highest vote is the style of the driver.
FIGURE 2. Driving database creation system
TABLE 2 Part of data in multi-dimensional driving database
Yaw angle (°)
Speed(m/s)
Acceleration(m/s2)
117.531543
117.531894
117.531295
117.286169
117.286164
117.286155
117.357180
117.357238
117.357283
4. METHODOLOGY
Driving styles are estimated based on the created driving database. In this step, our goal is to classify
driving styles by driving data. The difficulty is that there are multi-dimensional data which are not
easy to find the relationship. As we know, driving style is determined by series of driving behaviors.
Hence, we adopt the driving data to represent driving behaviors. Thereafter, we set up the relationship
between driving behaviors and driving style. Before we represent driving behaviors, the first thing we
should do is data preprocessing.
4.1 Data preprocessing
Driving data from database have huge quantity. We need to reduce data quantity. Considered that the
data collection frequency in simulator follows the frequency of GPS data in real word. These types of
data have a high frequency with about 1 Hz. Hence, some data keep constant in some scenarios. This
problem results in data redundancy.
These data are reduced based on distance. For each type of data, we compute their averages
in a constant distance, which is 200 m. The computation is shown as follow:
is the j th type of data, which
1d denotes vehicle speed,
d denotes vehicle
acceleration and
d denotes yaw angle. Meanwhile, we also select GPS data in every 200 m. Thus, it
can be ensured that each data collection node includes vehicle speed, acceleration, GPS and yaw angle.
In this way, the data quantity can be reduced at least 6 times. Note that we also set up two thresholds
for acceleration and yaw angle, respectively. If either of
exceeds the threshold, we will
stop to remain the original data in this 200-meter route.
4.2 Driving behavior representation
In this step, the driving data are adopted to represent behaviors. We first divide driving behaviors into
characteristic and non characteristic. Characteristic behavior includes the lane changing, overtaking,
turning, etc. These behaviors are represented by vehicle speed, acceleration, braking, position, yaw
angle, etc. To the contrary, non characteristic behavior indicates that vehicle drives in uniform linear
motion. Non characteristic behavior is represented by vehicle speed, driving time for uniform linear
motion. It is easy to represent non characteristic behaviors. The characteristics behaviors are
distinguished from driving behaviors in two ways, GPS based selection and acceleration-yaw-angle
based selection.
In GPS based selection, we first match GPS data with some special scenarios, such as
crossroads, traffic lights, etc. When volunteers drive to these scenarios, GPS data are matched with
these scenarios. In this time, we start to collect data for behaviors representation. Similarly, in
acceleration-yaw-angle based selection, we adopt the two thresholds mentioned above for selection. It
is because if acceleration or yaw angle exceeds the threshold, the vehicle is faced for lane changing,
overtaking, deceleration or other behaviors. These behaviors can usually reflect driving style for driver.
Hence, in this time, we also start to collect data for behavior representation.
Furthermore, we represent characteristic behaviors by collected data. First of all, the GPS
data are mapped in the global coordinate. The heading angle in each position is computed as follow:
where i denotes the number of position. The vehicle speed and acceleration create trajectories. The
driving behaviors are shown in Figure 3. The figure shows four behaviors, turning, lane changing,
overtaking and car following. The length of arrows denote vehicle speed while the direction of arrow
denotes acceleration or deceleration. Black dots denote braking in this position.
(a) (b) (c) (d)
FIGURE 3 Representation for driving behaviors
4.3 Driving behavior classification
We have divided driving behaviors into characteristic and non characteristic. As we know, driving
style is decided by multiple driving behaviors. Hence, we divide driving behaviors into three types
which are corresponding to driving styles, Safety, Moderation and Risk.
As characteristic behavior only includes two types of data, vehicle speed and driving time, it
is easy to evaluate whether the behavior is risk or non risk. Furthermore, we select two thresholds
for each type of data, where
 denote the thresholds of vehicle speed.
denote the thresholds of driving time. The thresholds selection are based on the traffic rules in the
route. The behavior type classification for non characteristic is shown in Table 3, where v denotes
speed; t denotes time; R denotes Risk; S denotes Safety; M denotes Moderation.
TABLE 3 Driving behavior type classification for non characteristic
There are many types of driving data to represent characteristic behaviors. Hence, we should
set up a model to classify these behaviors. In this step, we adopt Support Vector Machine (SVM) to
classify characteristic behaviors . SVM can efficiently perform a non-linear
classification and implicitly map the driving data into high-dimensional feature space. In this model,
the training data are described as { ,y }
ix denotes the driving data,
iy denote their corresponding labels. The goal for using SVM model is to find a hyperplane which is
the best to distinguish the three types of driving behaviors. A hyperplane can be formulated as follow:
where,  is the vector perpendicular to the hyperplane. x is a point on the hyperplane. b is a
deviation constant. The illustration for SVM is shown in Figure 4. Therefore, the decision function is
formulated as follow:
Support Vectors
Support Vectors
FIGURE 4 Illustration for data clustering by SVM
The margin of hyperplane is denoted as
. Then the hyperplane can be computed as follow:
Hence, the driving data can be classified in two types, risk and non risk. Furthermore, we
adopt SVM again to classify the non-risk data. As a result, the non-risk data are divided into two types,
moderation and safety.
4.4 Driving style classification by multiple decision tree
We have classified the behaviors types. To classify the types of driving styles, we should set up the
relationships between multiple behaviors. In this step, we set up a multiple decision tree to make
driving style classification.
A driver does a lot of driving behaviors when driving. These behaviors can be represented
by decision trees, which is shown in Figure 5 (a), where OT is short for overtaking; UR is short for
uniform rectilinear motion; LC is short for lane changing; CF is short for car following. However,
only represent these behavior cannot evaluate driving behaviors clearly. Hence, we adopt the
classification results of behaviors to evaluate driving styles. Therefore, we set up multiple decision
trees for behaviors representation, which is shown in Figure 5 (b). In this sub-figure, the three types of
behaviors are represented in three different colors. Red circle denotes Risk; orange circle denotes
Moderation and green circle denotes Safety. In the database, experts have evaluated the drivering style
for each volunteer. Thus, their corresponding behaviors are also labeled by one type of style. Hence,
we can encode each type of driving style by multiple decision trees. As a result, a style description
database is set up.
Therefore, when new collection data are input, we first transfer the data into behaviors.
Then, behaviors are classified in three types. Last but not least, multiple decision trees are set up and
the behaviors are encoded. As a result, we match the created codes of behaviors with style description
database. A series of codes which is most similar with the input codes is selected. We decide that the
style for the most similar codes is the style of input codes.
Time-saving route
Moderation
Length-saving route
Moderation
Time-saving route
FIGURE 5 Decision trees and multiple decision trees for driving behaviors
5. CASE STUDY
In case study, we adopt actual roadway to evaluate the driving styles. The test route is a freeway
selected in Tianjin, China, which is shown in Figure 6. The total length of test route is about 17 km. 20
drivers are invited as volunteers to collect driving data. The test vehicle is equipped with laser scanner,
cameras, odometry, GPS receiver and many other sensors to collect the real-time driving data, which
is shown in Figure 7. All the behaviors are in strict compliance with local regulations and they are not
deliberately maintained through the test. The collection data include GPS data, speed, acceleration,
yaw angle, braking. Then, we adopt these collection data to match with dataset and evaluate driving
style for each volunteer. To ensure the accuracy of evaluation, we also invite the same experts who
have evaluated the styles in database generation. Three of them are in the test vehicle while the others
are in the following vehicle.
Before we evaluated the driving style by using the collection data, we first eliminate outliers
by Random Sample Consensus (RANSAC) method. Unlike the data collected by simulator, the data
collected in roadway would have some outliers, such as drift error for GPS data. The outliers should
have effect on behaviors representation. RANSAC method is good at outlier detection and it is very
efficiency to remove the outliers .
FIGURE 6 Test route selection
FIGURE 7 Data collection system
When the outliers are removed, the next steps are data preprocessing and behavior
representation. Furthermore, driving behaviors are classified in three types by the method presented in
previous section. As we know, driving behaviors classification is a key task for driving style
estimation. To ensure the accuracy, we eliminate some uncertain types of behaviors. We use
precision-recall curve to evaluate the behavior classification, which were shown in Figure 8. “Recall”
here is the proportion of the number of corrected classification to the number of behaviors detections.
We adopted this curve to estimate each type of behaviors, where (a) shows the Risk type, (b) shows
the Moderation type, (c) shows the Safety type. In each type, we select the main characteristic
behaviors of OT, UR, LC and CF to evaluate the classification. From this figure, when the precision
rates achieve 100%, all the behaviors have recalls more than 70% in Risk, more than 50% in
moderation, more than 70% in Saftey. And all the recalls of behaviors are more than 80% in each type
when the precision rates achieve 80%. More than half of behaviors have recalls more than 90% when
the precision rates achieve 80%. These results show that the behaviors classification method has a
high accuracy and the results can be efficiently used for further estimation.
(a) (b) (c)
FIGURE 8 Precision-recall curves for types of behaviors: (a) Risk; (b) Moderation; (c) Safety
Behavior types
Similarity rate
Behavior types
Similarity rate
Behavior types
Similarity rate
Behavior types
Similarity rate
FIGURE 9 Style classification for volunteers: (a) driver 1 to driver 5; (b) driver 6 to driver 10; (c)
driver 11 to driver 15; (d) driver 16 to driver 20.
The behavior classification results are used to estimate the style of each driver. Each set of
driving data is matched with database by using multiple decision trees. There would be a computed
similarity rate for each type of style. As a result, we obtain three similarity rates for all the styles. The
style type with the highest rate is selected for volunteers. The matched results for volunteers are
shown in Figure 9. From this figure, we can find that there are 10 drivers who have the highest rate for
Moderation type. The number of drivers with a Risk style is 6. The other 4 drivers have a Safety style.
However, what is accuracy of styles estimation? The results are compared with the ground truth which
are collected by five experts. The comparison results are shown in Table 4. From this table, we can
find that all the estimation is correct except driver 1. The ground truth is Moderation but the
estimation is Risk. It is because the two similarity rates are close which can be found in Figure 9 (a).
This driver has a tendency to become a Risk style due to the similarity rate. Hence, it is helpful to
estimate driver 1 to a Risk style. Overall, the proposed method has a 95% accuracy for style
estimation, which proves that this method is reliable.
According to case study, we can find that about a quarter of volunteers have a Risk style. It
is very dangerous not ony for drivers themselves, but for their passengers and pedestrians. They need
to enhance security awareness and change their driving styles. Moreover, there are also some drivers
with a Safety style. Although they are more safe in driving, they may cause a waste of time and energy.
The target of our study is to appeal to the drivers with bad styles to change their styles. We will get a
safer trip when travelling by vehicle.
TABLE 4 Results comparison with ground truth
Estimated by the proposed method
Ground truth
Estimated by the proposed method
Ground truth
Moderation
Moderation
Moderation
Moderation
Moderation
Moderation
Moderation
Moderation
Moderation
Moderation
Moderation
Moderation
Moderation
Moderation
Moderation
Moderation
Moderation
Moderation
Moderation
Moderation
Moderation
6. CONCLUSIONS
This paper presents a driving style estimation method to enhance drivers’ awareness of traffic safety.
The method is realized by fusing multiple driving behaviors which are based on actual driving data.
Firstly, the method adopts actual driving data to represent driving behaviors. Then, driving behaviors
are classified by SVM model. Last but not least, driving styles are estimated by exploring the
relationship between driving behaviors. As a result, we select 20 volunteers in China to estimate their
styles as casy study. The results show that the proposed method has a 95% accuracy for style
estimation. This paper also reveals that about a quarter of drivers have a style of Risk and many
drivers have a style of Safety in China. The study presented in this paper can alert the driver with bad
styles to change their habits. It is helpful to ease traffic accidents and save travel time. In the future,
we will consider the factor of gender difference. It is also a very important factor to affect the driving
styles. Furthermore, we will also conduct some experiments in ordinary urban roads to evaluate the
proposed method.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The work presented in this paper was funded bythe National Key Research and Development Program
(2016YFB0100903) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61503284 and 51505475),
Yingcai Project of CUMT (YC2017001), Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher
Education Institutions, and the UOW Vice-Chancellor’s Postdoctoral Research Fellowship.