PBL and Computer Programming — The
Seven Steps Method with Adaptations
Esko Nuutila*, Seppo To¨rma¨ and Lauri Malmi
Helsinki University of Technology, Finland
Problem-Based Learning (PBL) method emphasizes students’ own activity in learning about
problems, setting up their own learning goals and actively searching for and analyzing information.
In this paper, we describe and discuss our experiences on applying PBL, especially the seven steps
method widely used in medical faculties, in an introductory computer programming course. We
explain how the method is implemented, give examples and identify different kinds of PBL cases,
and describe how the method is supplemented by other learning methods in our course. According
to our experience, the PBL method increases the commitment of the students which results in a
signiﬁcantly lower drop-out rate: the average is 17% versus 45% in our traditional programming
courses. In addition to computer programming, students also learn generic skills related to group
work, collaborative design work, independent studying, and externalization of their knowledge.
1. INTRODUCTION
In 1966 McMaster University Medical School began to pioneer a new approach to
medical education called Problem-Based Learning (PBL). This approach has
subsequently spread to other medical schools and educational institutions worldwide.
As the basic approach is not speciﬁc to medical education, it has been gradually
applied in many other ﬁelds ranging from architecture and mechanical engineering to
social work and law.
In PBL the learning of voluminous and fragmented material is centered around the
types of problems that professional practitioners in the ﬁeld would encounter in their
day-to-day work. Thus, a student faces the material in a more integrative and
motivating manner. This approach is not new; it is closer to the way learning took
place before the advent of classrooms and organized education. Even in classrooms,
good teachers everywhere have used elements of problem-based learning to motivate
and activate the students, and to improve the transfer of the knowledge to real-world
situations.
*Corresponding author. Esko Nuutila, Helsinki University of Technology, Laboratory of Information Processing Science, P.O. Box 5400, FIN-02015 HUT, Finland. E-mail: 
Computer Science Education
Vol. 15, No. 2, June 2005, pp. 123 – 142
ISSN 0899-3408 (print)/ISSN 1744-5175 (online)/05/020123-20 ª 2005 Taylor & Francis Group Ltd
DOI: 10.1080/08993400500150788
The effectiveness of PBL has been studied over the years. Norman and Schmidt
 review the evidence gathered. They conclude that while there has been no
evidence that PBL results in an improvement in the results of standard examinations
(or may even slightly lower them), ‘‘it may foster, over periods up to several years,
increased retention of knowledge’’, ‘‘may enhance both transfer of concepts to new
problems and integration of basic scientiﬁc concepts into clinical problems’’,
‘‘enhances intrinsic interest in the subject matter’’, and ‘‘appears to enhance selfdirected learning skills.’’
Various speciﬁc ways for implementing PBL exist. Schmidt presents the
seven steps method of PBL used at Maastricht University. The speciﬁc aims of this
method is to foster learning by (1) activating the prior knowledge of students about the
topics to learn, (2) connecting the learning to speciﬁc problem situations that might
occur in practice, and (3) making the students to elaborate the material that they have
In this paper we describe our experiences since 1999 of using the seven steps
method of PBL in an introductory programming course in Helsinki University of
Technology. Each year there has been about 30 ﬁrst-year university students coming
from the study program of information networks, a multi-disciplinary program
combining information technology, social sciences and business management. About
half of these students are female.
The goal of the course is to learn the Java programming language to the extent that
the students can independently implement non-trivial Java applications (e.g., ones
with a graphical user interface). In our implementation of the seven steps method,
students meet once-a-week in groups to discuss real-world cases. The role of a case is
to present something that requires explanation or solution, and that will lead the group
to deﬁne learning goals. A new case is opened every week and closed next week after
each member of a group has independently studied to achieve the learning goals. In one
semester students process ten cases, each focusing on some important aspect of
programming. The PBL cases and sessions replace the traditional lectures.
In our course, PBL is supplemented with other learning methods. Practical
programming assignments and a personal programming project form an important part of
the course. In addition, the students write essays, draw concept maps , and collect all material they have produced in a portfolio.
In a questionnaire made in autumn 2002 the students reported that group work in
PBL improved the motivation, provided emotional support, and gave a social context
for the course. A measurable beneﬁt of this learning method has been a drop-out rate
much lower than in our traditional programming courses, 17% versus 45%. Both the
students of the PBL course and the students of the traditional programming courses
take subsequently the same advanced course in Java programming. The average
scores for the students coming from the PBL course have been slightly better, but the
difference is not signiﬁcant.
From the teacher’s point of view, the close interaction with the students in the PBL
sessions enables rapid identiﬁcation of difﬁculties in learning and spotting of
problems in the course arrangements. Further, the PBL method seems to promote
E. Nuutila et al.
learning of new concepts and mechanisms as well as problem solving and program
PBL is a term that is used for a wide range of practical teaching approaches, and the
role of the problems varies in these approaches. Firstly, according to 
PBL refers to learning that is stimulated by descriptions of real-world problems.
Students do not necessarily try to solve a problem but rather deﬁne learning goals to
better understand it. Our PBL course is primarily based on this approach. Secondly,
PBL is often used to mean a learning method in which students solve practical
problems and the learning happens as a side effect of the solution process. This has
also been called problem-oriented learning. Thirdly, when the size of the problems
becomes larger, the approach becomes project-based learning.
Other applications of PBL in computer science courses have been reported in the
literature.
University
foundation
implemented with an approach that consists of two project like cases per semester
 . The authors deﬁne PBL as
‘‘learning by solving a large, real-world problem.’’ In Linkoping University PBL has
been used in a course that integrates computer science studies with other engineering
disciplines . This course is based on a single large scenario that is
processed through four major themes. The role of problems in these courses differs
from that in our course; in our classiﬁcation these approaches fall more in the
category of problem-oriented or project-based learning. However, similar beneﬁts are
reported: learning generic skills, familiarity with group work, and ability to deal with
vaguely speciﬁed problems.
In Section 2 we present the PBL method and how we have implemented it on our
course. We give examples of PBL cases that we have used. In Section 3 we list the
observations we have made during different versions of the PBL course between 1999
and 2003. In Section 4 we present the other learning methods that were used in
addition to the PBL method. Finally, we discuss the pros and cons of the method in
Section 5 and identify such elements of programming skill that are well supported
with the PBL method, as well as such elements which require different learning
methods. The Appendix contains the full list of cases and the programming
assignments we have used in our course.
2. IMPLEMENTATION
In this section, we describe the use of PBL in our programming course. We start by
giving a short overview of the course and the variety of learning methods used in
addition to PBL. Then we describe the PBL method in detail and give examples of
PBL cases used.
2.1. Course Overview
The course is meant for ﬁrst year university students, who have no previous
programming experience. The goal of the course is that the students learn basic
PBL and Computer Programming
object-oriented programming in the Java language and are able to independently
construct Java applications with graphical user interfaces.
Traditionally, a series of lectures has created the structure and rhythm for learning
in our programming courses. The conceptual and factual content of a programming
language, and elements of the programming skill are presented in the lectures. In this
course, the PBL cases have a similar role. The course includes ten different PBL
cases, approximately one case per week.
Since programming is a skill, it needs to be rehearsed. Thus, already in the ﬁrst
course version we supplemented the PBL cases with programming
assignments and a personal programming project. Solving the programming
assignments is supported by weekly meetings with the course assistants.
In addition, students write essays and draw concept maps about key mechanisms of
the programming language. Based on the material they have produced in these tasks,
they ﬁnally prepare a portfolio, in which they summarize and reﬂect their learning.
The students are evaluated based on the programming assignments, the programming project, an exam, and the portfolio.
As the reader can guess, we do not believe PBL to be a magic solution for
learning programming. However, PBL has a more central role than other learning
methods mentioned above. It is the main organizing method in the course, and
the weekly PBL sessions establish a social organization among the students and
the teachers. We explain the motivation and the role of the other learning methods
2.2. PBL: The Seven Steps Method
Several concrete implementations of PBL exist. We have adapted our method from
the seven steps method described in .
The students are divided into groups of 7 – 10 persons. Each PBL group is
supervised by a tutor, whose primary role is to act as a domain expert, and the
secondary role is to be a facilitator of the group process. The tutors are either faculty
members or students who have taken the same PBL course earlier.
The tutor is mainly passive during the PBL session but is ready to answer any
questions. However, if the discussion of the group takes a wrong track or if clearly
false conceptions start to dominate, the tutor should correct the situation, for
instance, with appropriate questions. If the activity in the group is unbalanced or
unproductive, the tutor tries to improve the behavior of the group. Our experience
suggests that if the tutor becomes too active, the PBL session starts to resemble a
lecture, and the students begin to see the tutor as responsible for their learning.
Each PBL group meets once a week in a three hours PBL session. A group needs a
meeting room equipped with a white board or a ﬂip chart. Self-stick notes and white
board markers are also provided for all students.
The meeting starts with the closing session of the previous case, if any. Then a new
case is opened. The processing of the case goes through the sequence of steps shown
in Figure 1.
E. Nuutila et al.
Steps 1 and 2, examination of the case and identiﬁcation of the problem, are
straightforward. Only in the ﬁrst few cases the students may have difﬁculties in ﬁnding
a title for the case. The tutor may tell that the wittiness of the title is not important.
In step 3, brainstorming, the goal is to connect the case with the previous
knowledge and experience of the students. It is essential that the students do not
criticize each others — or their own — ideas. In fruitful brainstorming there are
parallel and freely combining streams of ideas. In our experience, brainstorming is
usually the least problematic step of the method.
Step 4, sketching of an explanatory model, has been less satisfying. The students
usually conﬁne themselves to regrouping the self-stick notes on the white board.
Seldom any signiﬁcant structural or conceptual reorganization of the material takes
Figure 1. The sequence of steps used to process each case
PBL and Computer Programming
place. Recently, we have experimented with concept maps in sketching the model. The
results have been encouraging: new abstractions and relationships emerge among the
ideas and less fruitful ideas are left out. It is worth studying whether the tutor could
take a more active role in guiding the sketching process. It is important, however, that
the group, and not the tutor, provides the content of the explanatory model, since it
should reveal what weaknesses or gaps there are in the current understanding.
In step 5, establishing the learning goals, the tutor should encourage the students to
make the learning goals as precise and concrete as possible. Generally, the students
are able to identify relatively good learning goals but often look for the tutor’s
approval for the goals. Finally, the group should identify material for independent
studying (books, articles, and web sites), a task where the tutor can help.
Step 6, independent studying period, is the most crucial of the steps. If the students
fail to study enough, the PBL method does not work. The importance of self study
should be emphasized to the students from the beginning and the morale should be
kept high throughout the course. In addition, this should be taken into account when
designing the syllabus. There should be enough time reserved for independent
The quality of step 7, discussion about learned material, is directly connected to
the amount of self study. Optimally, each student is so familiar with the facts,
concepts, and mechanisms related to the learning goals that the discussion is mostly
focused on reﬂection on the meaning, importance, and use of learned material. In the
other extreme, if the step 6 has failed, the group may even seem to know less about
the subject than in the opening session.
The material should not be ﬁxed too rigidly in step 5. It is beneﬁcial if students use
different material during independent studying. When multiple viewpoints exist, the
quality of the discussion in step 7 will greatly improve. The discussion will be better
motivated and more thorough. The students’ meta-cognitive skills — evaluation of
difference sources, resolution of conﬂicting viewpoints, and so on — will be
rehearsed. The whole method will be more robust since errors or weaknesses in
source material are more likely to be revealed and corrected.
2.3. Different Kinds of Cases
The cases differ not only in their content, but also in the form. We have identiﬁed at
least three forms of cases:
Knowledge-oriented cases. The ‘‘classical’’ PBL cases belong to this category.
The students are presented some curious real-world event or problem that
creates a cognitive dissonance and requires explanation. If this happens, the
students will have an intrinsic motivation to understand the causes and
mechanisms behind the case.
This kind of cases can be used to make the students learn important concepts,
constructs, or factual knowledge about programming. An example is to learn the
concepts of class and object in the Java programming language.
E. Nuutila et al.
Design cases. These are adapted PBL cases that work well in programming
courses and would probably work as well in any engineering-oriented domain.
The PBL group is presented a complicated real-life design problem, typically too
challenging for them to solve completely. In addition to training the problem
solving skills and demonstrating the need to deﬁne new concepts and
abstractions, the case can also lead to identiﬁcation of gaps in the knowledge.
Our PBL groups often do surprisingly well in this kind of cases.
The learning goals identiﬁed in design cases usually differ from those of
knowledge-oriented cases. Sometimes the design itself suggests some areas where
learning is needed but typically the learning goals deal with the completion of the
design or implementation of some part of it.
Analytical or diagnostic cases. This kind of cases were motivated by the
constructivist learning methods where new learning begins from the identiﬁcation and confrontation of students’ previous misconceptions about the topic to
learn . (This has been a successful method to teach elementary
physics where a conceptual change is often needed and the naive model of, for
example, motion must be confronted to make room for new and more powerful
An example of this kind of case is to present the students a seemingly correct but
subtly erroneous computer program and the output of its execution. It is essential
to choose a program that a student with some common misunderstanding would
consider correct and whose output clearly shows it to be incorrect. The idea is
that when the students try to understand the situation, the misunderstanding is
revealed and as a result, the students will revise their mental models. These kind
of cases, however, have not turned out to be successful. If there is even one
member in the PBL group that does not have the misconception, she or he will
quickly explain the situation to the others. Moreover, even if all students have
similar misconceptions, some may rapidly identify them, while the others may
completely miss the point. In our experience, individual diagnostic tasks should
be used instead of group level diagnostic cases.
Currently our course thus consists of a mix of knowledge-oriented cases and design
cases. Below are some examples of both. An example syllabus listing all cases is in the
2.4. Examples of Cases
2.4.1. Case: Plato’s Theory of Eternal Forms vs. Computer Games. This case is presented
in the beginning of the course, when the students have no knowledge about objects
and classes, which are the fundamental concepts in object-oriented programming.
However, all students have taken an elementary course on philosophy in the high
school and probably heard about Plato’s theory of forms.
The case description contains a short summary of Plato’s theory of forms as
PBL and Computer Programming
According to Plato, in addition to the perceptible world there exists another world, the world of
forms. For instance, when we draw triangles in the sand, they all differ from each other. They
have properties that are not essential to triangles, like the thickness of the lines. We can think
that the drawings are not real triangles, but more or less accurate reﬂections of the form or idea
of a triangle. This form is immaterial and eternal. For everything in the perceptible world there
is a corresponding form: the form of a table, the form of a man, the form of beauty. According
to Plato, the world of forms is more perfect and real than the perceptible world.
In addition, the case description presents a popular computer adventure game. The
game contains creatures, friendly or hostile. One creature represents the player. Each
creature has several properties like strength and wisdom. In addition, the game world
contains items like weapons, food, jewels, and keys that the creatures can manipulate.
The tutor usually tells the students that the Platonic forms correspond to classes
and the concrete things to objects in the Java language. The main objective in the case
is to discover the distinction between a class and an object belonging to that class. In
brainstorming, the students usually identify many possible classes and objects in the
game, but sometimes confuse them with each other. The typical learning goals are
related to classes and objects in the Java language.
In the closing session next week, the students have better understanding of the
difference between an object and a class, and they may even be able to model parts of
the game world in Java.
2.4.2. Design Case: A Computer File System. This case is presented a couple of weeks
later, when the students already know some essential programming concepts. The
goal is to introduce hierarchical object structures and recursion and to make a
distinction to the class hierarchy. The case description is the following:
A computer ﬁle system consists of ﬁles that are of two different types: 1) documents and 2)
folders. A folder can contain a set of ﬁles (either documents or folders) and each ﬁle belongs to
some folder. Typical operations to ﬁles are move, rename, copy, and delete. The size of storage
required by a ﬁle can be presented to the user. How can we model such a ﬁle system by Javaclasses? What variables and methods are required?
The problem here is to ﬁnd a minimal set of classes — only three are needed — and
to design the ﬁle operations. The concept of recursion, which is not familiar to the
students, is needed when copying folders and counting the size required by a folder.
In the opening session, the students realize the need for recursion, but cannot yet
formulate it. Further, they seem to have difﬁculties in understanding the idea of
objects that refer to other objects and form a tree-like structure. By the closing
session, the students have gained a rather ﬂuent understanding of object hierarchies
and recursion.
3. OBSERVATIONS
The PBL course has been given ﬁve times starting in 1999. Each year there has been
about 30 ﬁrst-year university students coming from the study program of information
E. Nuutila et al.
networks. About half of these students are female. The main observations are
described below. For the years 1999 – 2003 we have collected drop-out rates. After
the autumn 2002 we gathered information from the students about the use of time to
different learning methods and subjective feelings about the usefulness of different
3.1. Drop-out Rate and Quality of Learning
In years 1999 – 2003 the average drop-out rate was 17% ranging from 0% to 29%.
The highest drop-out rate, 29%, was in the ﬁrst course year 1999, when some of the
course arrangements failed. After the course arrangements stabilized, the average
drop-out rate has been 14% ranging from 0% to 22%. This is in a sharp contrast with
our traditional programming courses where the average drop-out rate during the
same period was 45% ranging from 41% to 51%.
In computing the drop-out rate, we included only those students that submitted at
least one assignment in the course. In the traditional courses the enrolment includes
many students who do nothing in the course.
In our subjective judgment, the quality of learning has been high in the PBL
course. The students that pass the course generally submit good projects and are able
to describe the implementation in a manner that shows good conceptual understanding. However, since the PBL course differs from the traditional courses in the
structure, the student proﬁle, and the evaluation method used, we cannot present any
statistically valid data about the overall quality of learning compared to the traditional
Both the students of the PBL course and the students of the traditional
programming courses take subsequently the same advanced course in Java
programming. In spring 2003, the average scores in this course where 2.92 (in a
scale from 0 to 5) for the students coming from the PBL course and 2.78 for the
others. In spring 2004, the corresponding scores where 2.83 and 2.44. Thus, the
average scores for the students coming from the PBL course have been slightly better.
3.2. Group Work
Being a member of a group is an essential aspect of the PBL method. It seems to have
a clear positive impact on learning. In a questionnaire made in autumn 2002 the
students reported that group work in PBL improved the motivation, provided
emotional support, and gave a social context for the course.
Being a member of a group of students of equal initial skills and equal difﬁculties
helped the members to cope with the anxiety created by the challenging goals and
contents of the course. In the traditional course, many students face the difﬁculties
alone and are more likely to give up. Students working in a group will see that others
have similar problems, a realization that in itself can be relieving. The members of a
group can also help each other to understand difﬁcult issues and provide emotional
support to each other.
PBL and Computer Programming
In addition, passing through a difﬁcult course together also seems to create a strong
bond among the students and they continue to work together and to support each
other also in their subsequent studies.
It should be noted that in our PBL method the group work is only a tool that aids
the members of the group in their individual learning. All external results in the
course are produced individually: the examination, the portfolio, the programming
assignments, and the programming project. Therefore, the problem of group-work
called ‘‘free riders’’, i.e., members that avoid responsibility or contribution, does not
arise in a same way as in the groups that produce common results. Naturally, the
activity of different students in the participation to discussion varies, but that has not
been a major problem in our course.
3.3. Individual Work
Many students use too little time for the independent studying for the closing session
(step 6). To create and maintain strong morale in the PBL group throughout the
course is the most challenging aspect when arranging a PBL course. The tutor should
give the group clear feedback about the level of learning they have achieved. If the
amount of individual studying is not sufﬁcient, it should be indicated to the students.
Feedback should be given also after the closing session: students often tell that they
would like to know if they have studied enough. It can be more difﬁcult to know this
in PBL courses than in traditional courses, since learning goals are not speciﬁed as
some particular amount of material to read.
3.4. Finding Good Cases
It has been somewhat more difﬁcult — although not overwhelming — to ﬁnd good
cases than we thought in the beginning of the ﬁrst PBL course. This difﬁculty is
caused by two facts. First, the cases should be presented in concepts familiar to the
students. However, the students have no previous knowledge about programming;
the programming concepts are not familiar even from other contexts.
Second, the professions involving programming work do not provide a ready
source of cases, as do some other professions. In the ﬁeld of medicine, for example,
the recorded descriptions of patients’ visits to a doctor often provide a rich source of
PBL cases. Programming is an engineering profession and therefore mostly projectoriented; it does not automatically decompose into small cases that could be
summarized in a few lines of text.
3.5. Teachers’ Point of View
As a result of the close interaction with students, the teachers get to know the students
better. The interaction and close monitoring of the progress of the students improves
the motivation of the teachers. Moreover, the feedback about the contents or the
arrangements of the course comes quicker and is more relevant. The problems are
E. Nuutila et al.
identiﬁed earlier and it is easier to respond to them quickly. In addition to improving
the on-going course, this also creates a better ground for the future development of
the course.
4. ADAPTATIONS
In this section, we present the adaptations that we have made to the plain PBL
method. Complementary learning methods were required to address the need to
develop programming skills and to improve conceptual understanding. Over the
years, the order in which the material has been presented to the students and the
stafﬁng of the course have also changed, as described below.
4.1. Programming Assignments and Programming Project
In the beginning our initial idea was simply to teach programming using the method
of problem based learning. However, soon after we began the planning of the course
syllabus for the ﬁrst time, we realized that since programming is a skill, it needs to be
rehearsed. We considered having group exercises, which might have been more in the
spirit of PBL. However, there is a danger that some members of a group will end up
doing most of the programming and the others would not learn the necessary
practical skills well enough.
In the end, it was decided to have a set of individual programming assignments
during the course, and an individual programming project towards the end of the
course. This arrangement has always been the most natural and least problematic
addition to the PBL method.
However, recently we have wondered if the work needed to complete the
programming assignments might interfere with the amount of studying for the PBL
closing sessions. The student questionnaire after the autumn 2002 course indicated
that students used on average 5 hours/week on programming assignments whereas
they used only 2.1 hours/week for other studying for the PBL closing sessions.
4.2. Essays, Concept Maps, and Case Reports
In the ﬁrst version of the PBL course it was observed that students had difﬁculties in
learning some abstract concepts such as, ‘‘object’’ or ‘‘class’’. We gave them an
additional assignment to write an essay about these concepts. Writing an essay turned
out to clarify the students’ conceptual understanding considerably.
During the subsequent course versions we have paid more attention on choosing
the PBL cases and the order in which the difﬁcult concepts have been presented.
Thus, the students have been able to learn the abstract concepts without major
difﬁculties in the PBL cases. Consequently, the original motivation for the use of
essays has largely disappeared.
However, we have observed that it is difﬁcult to create meaningful PBL cases of
some technical concepts of Java programming language such as exceptions, threads,
PBL and Computer Programming
or event handling. Characteristic to these concepts is that they deal with non-obvious
design choices made by the creators of the language. Essays have turned out to be
successful method of learning these concepts.
One problem with essays is that some students try to hide the lack of conceptual
understanding behind verbose rhetoric. To make the students focus on the
concepts and their relations, in autumn 2001 we encouraged the students to
construct concept maps as an alternative
to essays.
The experiences on concept maps have been solely positive. The quality of the
maps has been better than we expected. It is much easier to see the misunderstandings and gaps in the knowledge in a concept map than in an essay. An additional
advantage is that copying concept maps from the Internet is more difﬁcult than
copying material to essays.
In autumn 2000, we experimented with PBL case reports. For each PBL case, each
student wrote a short description of the opening session, the individual learning
period, and the closing session. The goals were to make the students reﬂect their
learning and to make them work in a more disciplined manner. Apart from a couple
of exceptions, the case reports were superﬁcial and contained no real reﬂection. The
costs of writing and reading the case reports were considered much higher than the
beneﬁts that were gained. We therefore decided to drop them from the subsequent
4.3. Demonstrations and Supervised Laboratory Times
In the ﬁrst two course versions, the students had difﬁculties in practical skills such
as using editors and other programming tools. Their programming habits were
ineffective, e.g., writing the whole program before the ﬁrst attempt to compile it.
Starting from autumn 2001, we have been arranging programming demonstrations
to give examples of using the programming tools efﬁciently. These demonstrations
have stimulated student questions more than traditional lectures. They have often
turned into spontaneous and effective question and answer sessions.
Due to the problems that many novice students have with independent
programming work, we introduced supervised laboratory times in the autumn
2001. This addition has been successful. There has been a real demand for this kind
of assistance; students have been more than eager to ask the course assistants for
4.4. PBL and the Presentation of Object-oriented Programming
The order in which different aspects of the domain of study are introduced is
important in the PBL method. In a successful PBL session the students can connect
the case to something that they already know. If they can not, the result is a silent and
confused PBL session that is damaging to the motivation of the students. In an
introductory programming course this problem is emphasized due to the abstract
E. Nuutila et al.
nature of the domain and the general lack among the students of any knowledge
about internals of software systems. In our PBL course we encountered this problem
speciﬁcally with the order in which different aspects of an object-oriented
programming language were introduced.
In the ﬁrst course version 1999, the learning of Java started from algorithms and
control structures and only later on proceeded to object-oriented programming.
The ﬁrst case described the Russian peasant’s method of multiplication (a method
that reduces multiplication of large numbers to doubling, halving and addition
operations) with the aim of introducing the concept of algorithm. Unfortunately, the
students failed to see the point and did not manage to specify any meaningful learning
goals without the assistance of a tutor.
Later, when the students had gained some understanding of program control with
simple scalar and array variables, the concepts of object-oriented programming were
introduced in another case. That was not a great success either. After the students
had ﬁnally got familiar with the details of control, they appeared to ﬁnd it difﬁcult to
grasp more abstract entities such as objects and classes.
We had a hypothesis that concepts dealing with algorithms and program control are
remote to the previous knowledge of the students and that objects and classes would
be easier for students to understand. The general trend in the new Java text books
conforms with this hypothesis: they increasingly use so-called objects-ﬁrst approach
as described in the ACM Computer Curricula 2001 . This approach
has another beneﬁt too. Since the basic knowledge about objects and classes would
enable the use of design cases, the object-ﬁrst approach could make it possible to use
design cases earlier on and thus offer more freedom in the design of the syllabus.
In autumn 2000 we switched to objects-ﬁrst approach: the ﬁrst cases dealt with the
basic concepts of object oriented programming, then focused on the methods of
objects, and ﬁnally on the algorithms executed in the methods. After this change, the
quality of learning generally improved and the confusion felt by the students reduced.
We did not encounter really unsuccessful PBL sessions anymore.
It is, however, not clear that these improvements are due to the switch to objects-
ﬁrst approach. At the same time many old cases were dropped or modiﬁed, and
new cases were introduced. In fact, one of the most successful cases ever is the
‘‘robot in a maze’’ (see Case 4, in Appendix). It essentially deals with the design of
an algorithm that a robot could use to ﬁnd a way out of a maze. The students ﬁnd
this case inspiring and end up with relatively good algorithms. This case works
already in the beginning of a course, since it does not require knowledge of objects
and classes.
We have come into conclusion that our hypothesis about the superiority of objects-
ﬁrst approach is too simplistic. It is possible that the real ﬂaw of the Russian peasant’s
case mentioned above is different: Before the students had designed any algorithms
ever, they were presented a ready-made algorithm and were then expected to
recognize abstract algorithmic concepts such as loops, conditionals, and termination.
This is a difﬁcult task for someone with no previous experience in the design of
algorithms. However, the students seem to perform quite well in tasks of designing
PBL and Computer Programming
speciﬁc algorithms, and after a couple of such tasks the abstract algorithmic concepts
are much easier to recognize.
As a summary, it is not obvious that objects-ﬁrst approach is necessary, or even the
best one, when teaching Java using the PBL method. It is clear, however, that an
important question to consider when designing the syllabus of a PBL course is how
well the students will be able to connect each of the cases to their previous knowledge
at the time that case is presented.
4.5. Students as Tutors
In the ﬁrst two years of the course all the tutors were members of the faculty. In the
autumn 2001 we began to use the best students from the previous years as tutors. So
far the experiences have been good. This is not a unique ﬁnding as similar
experiences are reported in .
When compared to the alternative of using faculty members or graduate students as
tutors, previous years students have some distinct advantages. They are often eager to
become tutors. There are plenty of them and they are not as expensive as the
members of the faculty. They have gained ﬁrst-hand experience of the PBL method
and are thoroughly familiar with the PBL process. While their technical knowledge
about the area is not as deep as that of the faculty, in practice it has proven to be quite
sufﬁcient, and sometimes even more pertinent to the needs of the students.
Moreover, they are in a position to better understand the conceptual or technical
difﬁculties that novices face in the course. They are also familiar with different kinds
of practical problems, for example, those related to the use of the student computer
systems. Finally, in our experience, they generally can handle the problems in the
group process quite as well as the members of the faculty.
4.6. Portfolio and Evaluation
We do not evaluate the PBL sessions, since that would probably have a negative effect
on the spirit of the group work. The evaluation has been based on the deliverables
that students have produced in the other learning methods as well as on a small exam.
Since the autumn 2002, the evaluation of the students was based on the programming
assignments (40%), the programming project (30%), a small exam (10%), and a
portfolio (20%).
In the portfolio, the students collect their answers to the programming assignments, their programming projects as well as all learning material that they have
gathered for the PBL cases. At the end of the course, the students write a summary of
the portfolio (in HTML) for evaluation.
5. DISCUSSION
‘‘computer
programming’’
designing,
implementing and analyzing computer programs of various scales. In this section
E. Nuutila et al.
we discuss the difﬁculties that novice students face when learning computer
programming and how the PBL method relates to these difﬁculties.
First, a novice needs to acquire a large number of new, abstract concepts and
mechanisms in order to have even a rudimentary programming skills. Examples are
‘‘procedure call’’, ‘‘module’’, ‘‘declaration’’, ‘‘parameter’’, ‘‘exception’’, ‘‘interface’’,
‘‘object’’, and ‘‘class’’. These concepts are interdependent and often describe
different aspects of the same dynamic or structural mechanisms. These mechanisms
relate to the programming language (for example to parameter passing) and to the
data structures and algorithms (for example, to the structure of and operations on a
binary tree).
Second, programming requires continual use of problem solving and design
skills. Novice programmers seldom have any experience of this kind of cognitive
activity. In other academic areas, e.g., mathematics and physics, the student tries to
solve small problems deﬁned by the teacher. There is typically only one correct
solution, and the student does not use the solution anywhere. In programming, the
problem is usually much larger and has a large number of possible solutions, some
better and some worse. To design a program, the student must self deﬁne and solve
sub-problems and use the solutions. Moreover, program design requires the
deﬁnition of new abstractions which, in general, can be regarded a particularly
demanding cognitive task . The unfamiliarity with the methods in
this area often leads the student to stare at the blank computer screen with no idea
of what to do next.
A third difﬁculty is caused by the strict syntax and semantics of programming
languages. The notation of programming languages seems often complex for
beginning programmers. Moreover, they are usually unfamiliar with any tasks that
require similar meticulous and careful attention to detail as the use of programming
language does. No errors in syntax and semantics of programs are tolerated.
Fourth, programming requires familiarity with a set of speciﬁc tools — editor,
interpreter or compiler, debugger, and a manual browsing tool — and appropriate
work practices. An example is iterative development style — composed of editing,
compilation, and testing steps — that a student should learn to use in a proper, goal
directed manner, instead of resorting to ineffective trial-and-error style ).
Programming cannot be learned without some level of parallel progress in all these
areas, even if the mastery in the skill only comes after years of practice.
PBL has an important role in learning new concepts and mechanisms. A properly
designed case makes the student to wonder about the concepts and raises questions
about them. Subsequent self study thus falls in fertile ground. In addition, the
discussion in the closing session can aid the conceptual learning by revealing different
interpretations and viewpoints to the concepts. It can be instructive to see, what kinds
of difﬁculties or misunderstandings others have had with the concepts.
Concept maps and essays can be effective tools in further clarifying the meaning of
the concepts and their relations with each other. It should be stressed that concepts
that have a central role in some dynamic mechanisms of a programming language
PBL and Computer Programming
require active working with these concepts. For this, different kinds of programming
exercises are indispensable.
Problem solving and program design skills need active training. The use of design
cases in PBL sessions has turned out to be a successful way to do that. Students can
practice analysis and design skills in several different cases. Working in a PBL group
helps the design process considerably. There are more perspectives, which typically
aids in the analysis of the problem. PBL groups do not get stuck to one unproductive
point-of-view as easily as individuals do. Moreover, when students try to explain the
problem or proposed designs to each other, they naturally develop more abstractions.
This generally improves the design of the program. As a result of all of this, the
students feel that design work is more fun in a group than when done alone.
At the ﬁrst glance, PBL cases do not appear suitable for learning the syntax and
semantics of a language. However, we have used fairly successful cases to introduce
the syntax of HTML and Java. Both of these cases have been similar: students are
handed a page of code and something resulting from the interpretation of the code
(for instance, a picture of a rendered page or the output of a program). After the
initial confusion, the PBL group usually starts to look the code more closely and is
able to form many hypotheses of what different constructs might mean. This has
served as a good way to motivate the subsequent learning of the syntax and
interpretation of language constructs. However, in order to reveal the strictness of the
form and interpretation of a program to a student, active working with a computer is
Finally, learning to use programming tools or to apply effective programming
practices requires exercises and demonstrations. PBL has little role in these areas.
6. SUMMARY
In this paper we have presented an implementation of an introductory programming
course in Java using the Problem-Based Learning approach, especially the seven step
method. During the years 1999 – 2003 we have carried out the course ﬁve times, and
tested various types of PBL cases and combinations of PBL and other learning
methods. We have tried to identify the best practices to implement a PBL course in
programming.
We have recognized some areas in the programming skill that are well trained
using the PBL method and other areas where complementary methods are needed.
PBL sessions are an effective way to create motivation to learn abstract concepts.
The discussion in the closing session of a PBL case is useful to deepen the
understanding of the meaning of the concepts. The use of concept maps, either in
the PBL session or in the individual learning, clariﬁes the relations between the
concepts. Programming exercises are indispensable in learning the practical use of
the concepts. The exercises are also needed to learn the use of programming tools
and work practices.
PBL sessions are fruitful in learning problem solving and programming design. In
the PBL group, the problem is analyzed from different perspectives. When students
E. Nuutila et al.
try to explain the problem or proposed designs to each other, they naturally develop
more abstractions. This generally improves the design of the program.
The PBL method has other advantages not related to programming. First, students
learn working in groups, creative methods such as brainstorming, and planning of
their work. Second, they train their communication and argumentation skills. Third,
they get support from their peers that helps relieve the anxiety caused by difﬁcult
topics. Fourth, they learn to search for information from different sources. Finally,
they learn to take more responsibility of their studies. This seems to carry over to
subsequent courses in their studies.
A concept map is a simple diagrammatic representation of a set of concepts and
named relations between these concepts .
This emphasis may be different in less technical areas where different (possibly
conﬂicting) viewpoints exist.