Machine Learning, 50, 95–125, 2003
c⃝2003 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Manufactured in The Netherlands.
Being Bayesian About Network Structure.
A Bayesian Approach to Structure Discovery
in Bayesian Networks
NIR FRIEDMAN
 
School of Computer Science & Engineering, Hebrew University, Jerusalem 91904, Israel
DAPHNE KOLLER
 
Computer Science Department, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305-9010, USA
Editors: Nando de Freitas, Christophe Andrieu, Arnaud Doucet
In many multivariate domains, we are interested in analyzing the dependency structure of the underlying distribution, e.g., whether two variables are in direct interaction. We can represent dependency structures
using Bayesian network models. To analyze a given data set, Bayesian model selection attempts to ﬁnd the most
likely (MAP) model, and uses its structure to answer these questions. However, when the amount of available data
is modest, there might be many models that have non-negligible posterior. Thus, we want compute the Bayesian
posterior of a feature, i.e., the total posterior probability of all models that contain it. In this paper, we propose
a new approach for this task. We ﬁrst show how to efﬁciently compute a sum over the exponential number of
networks that are consistent with a ﬁxed order over network variables. This allows us to compute, for a given
order, both the marginal probability of the data and the posterior of a feature. We then use this result as the basis
for an algorithm that approximates the Bayesian posterior of a feature. Our approach uses a Markov Chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) method, but over orders rather than over network structures. The space of orders is smaller and
more regular than the space of structures, and has much a smoother posterior “landscape”. We present empirical
results on synthetic and real-life datasets that compare our approach to full model averaging (when possible), to
MCMC over network structures, and to a non-Bayesian bootstrap approach.
Bayesian networks, structure learning, MCMC, Bayesian model averaging
Introduction
Bayesian networks are a graphical representation of a multivariate joint probability distribution that exploits the dependency structure of distributions to describe them
in a compact and natural manner. A Bayesian network (BN) is a directed acyclic graph,
in which the nodes correspond to the variables in the domain and the edges correspond
to direct probabilistic dependencies between them. Formally, the structure of the network
represents a set of conditional independence assertions about the distribution: assertions of
the form the variables X and Y are independent given that we have observed the values of the
variables in some set Z. Thus, the network structure allows us to distinguish between the
simple notion of correlation and the more interesting notion of direct dependence; i.e., it
allows us to state that two variables are correlated, but that the correlation is an indirect one,
N. FRIEDMAN AND D. KOLLER
mediated by other variables. The use of conditional independence is the key to the ability
of Bayesian networks to provide a general-purpose compact representation for complex
probability distributions.
In the last decade there has been a great deal of research focused on the problem of
learning BNs from data . An obvious motivation for this
task is to learn a model that we can then use for inference or decision making, as a substitute
for a model constructed by a human expert. In other circumstances, our goal might be to
learn a model of the system not for prediction, but for discovering the domain structure. For
example, we might want to use BN learning to understand the mechanism by which genes
in a cell express themselves in protein, and the causal and dependence relations between
the expression levels of different genes . If we learn
the “true” BN structure of our distribution, we reveal many important aspects about our
domain. For example, if X and Y are not connected directly by an edge, then any correlation
between them is an indirect one: there is some set of variables Z such that the inﬂuence of
X on Y is mediated via Z. More controversially, the presence of a directed path from X to
Y indicates ) that X causes Y. The extraction of such structural features is
often our primary goal in the discovery task, as can be seen by the emphasis in data mining
research on discovering association rules. In fact, we can view the task of learning the
structure of the underlying BN as providing a semantically coherent and well-deﬁned goal
for the discovery task.
The most common approach to discovering BN structure is to use learning with model
selection to provide us with a single high-scoring model. We then use that model (or its
Markov equivalence class) as our model for the structure of the domain. Indeed, in small
domains with a substantial amount of data, it has been shown that the highest scoring model
is orders of magnitude more likely than any other .
In such cases, the use of model selection is a good approximation. Unfortunately, there are
many domains of interest where this situation does not hold. In our gene expression example,
we might have thousands of genes (each of which is modeled as a random variable) and
only a few hundred experiments (data cases). In cases like this, where the amount of data is
small relative to the size of the model, there are likely to be many models that explain the
data reasonably well. Model selection makes a somewhat arbitrary choice between these
models. However, structural features (e.g., edges) that appear in this single structure does
not necessarily appear in other likely structures; indeed, we have no guarantees that these
structural features are even likely relative to the set of possible structures. Furthermore,
model selection is sensitive to the particular instances that it was given. Had we sampled
another data set of the same size (from the same distribution), model selection would have
learned a very different model. For both of these reasons, we cannot simply accept our
chosen structure as a true representation of the underlying process.
Given that there are many qualitatively different structures that are approximately equally
good,wecannotlearnauniquestructurefromthedata.Moreover,inmanylearningscenarios
there are exponentially many structures that are “reasonably” good given the data. Thus,
enumerating these structures is also impractical. However, there might be certain features of
the distribution that are so strong that we can extract them reliably. As an extreme example,
BEING BAYESIAN ABOUT NETWORK STRUCTURE
if two variables are highly correlated (e.g., deterministically related to each other), it is
likely that an edge between them will appear in any high-scoring model. As we discussed
above, extracting these structural features is often the primary goal of BN learning.
Bayesian learning allows us to estimate the strength with which the data indicates the
presence of a certain feature. The Bayesian score of a model is simply its posterior probability given the data. Thus, we can estimate the extent to which a feature, e.g., the presence
of an edge, is likely given the data by estimating its probability:
P( f | D) =
P(G | D) f (G),
where G represents a model, and f (G) is 1 if the feature holds in G and 0 otherwise. If this
probability is close to 1, then almost any high-scoring model contains the feature . On the
other hand, if the probability is low, we know that the feature is absent in the most likely
The number of BN structures is super-exponential in the number of random variables
in the domain; therefore, this summation can be computed in closed form only for very
small domains, or those in which we have additional constraints that restrict the space . Alternatively, this summation can be approximated
by considering only a subset of possible structures. Several approximations have been
proposed . One theoretically wellfounded approach is to use Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods: we deﬁne a
Markov chain over structures whose stationary distribution is the posterior P(G | D), we
then generate samples from this chain, and use them to estimate Eq. (1). This approach is
quite popular, and variants have been used by Madigan and York , Madigan et al.
 , Giudici and Green and Giudici, Green, and Tarantola .
In this paper, we propose a new approach for evaluating the Bayesian posterior probability
ofcertainstructuralnetworkproperties.Thekeyideainourapproachistheuseofanordering
on the network variables to separate the problem into two easier one. An order ≺is a
total ordering on the variables in our domain, which places a restriction on the structure
of the learned BN: if X ≺Y, we restrict attention to networks where an edge between X
and Y, if any, must go from X to Y. We can now decouple the problem of evaluating the
probability over all structures into two subproblems: evaluating the probability for a given
order, and summing over the set of possible orders. Our two main technical ideas provide
solutions to these two subproblems.
In Section 3, we provide an efﬁcient closed form equation for summing over all (superexponentially many) networks with at most k parents per node (for some constant k) that
are consistent with a ﬁxed order ≺. This equation allows us both to compute the overall
probability of the data for this set of networks, and to compute the posterior probability of
certain structural features over this set. In Section 4, we show how to estimate the probability
of a feature over the set of all orders by using an MCMC algorithm to sample among the
possible orders. The space of orders is much smaller than the space of network structures;
it also appears to be much less peaked, allowing much faster mixing (i.e., convergence to
the stationary distribution of the Markov chain). We present empirical results illustrating
this observation, showing that our approach has substantial advantages over direct MCMC
N. FRIEDMAN AND D. KOLLER
over BN structures. The Markov chain over orders mixes much faster and more reliably
than the chain over network structures. Indeed, different runs of MCMC over networks
typically lead to very different estimates in the posterior probabilities of structural features,
illustrating poor convergence to the stationary distribution; by contrast, different runs of
MCMC over orders converge reliably to the same estimates. We also present results showing
that our approach accurately detects dominant features even with sparse data, and that
it outperforms both MCMC over structures and the non-Bayesian bootstrap approach of
Friedman, Goldszmidt, and Wyner .
Bayesian learning of Bayesian networks
The Bayesian learning framework
Consider the problem of analyzing the distribution over some set of random variables
X1, . . . , Xn, each of which takes values in some domain Val (Xi). We are given a fully
observed data set D = {x , . . . , x[M]}, where each x[m] is a complete assignment to the
variables X1, . . . , Xn in Val (X1, . . . , Xn).
The Bayesian learning paradigm tells us that we must deﬁne a prior probability distribution P(B) over the space of possible Bayesian networks B. This prior is then updated using
Bayesian conditioning to give a posterior distribution P(B | D) over this space.
For Bayesian networks, the description of a model B has two components: the structure
G of the network, and the values of the numerical parameters θG associated with it. The
network structure G is a directed acyclic graph, whose nodes represent the variables in
the domain, and whose edges represent direct probabilistic dependencies between them. The
BN structure encodes a set of conditional independence assumptions: that each node X is
conditionally independent of all of its nondescendants in G given its parents (in G) PaG(Xi).
These independence assumptions, in turn, imply many other conditional independence
statements, which can be extracted from the network using a simple graphical criterion
called d-separation . In particular, they imply that a variable X is conditionally
independent of all other network variables given its Markov blanket—the set consisting of
X’s parents, its children, and the other parents of its children. Intuitively, the Markov blanket
of X is the set of nodes that are, in some sense, directly correlated with X, at least in some
circumstances.1 We use the family of a node X to denote the set consisting of X and its
The parameterization θG of the network varies. For example, in a discrete Bayesian
network of structure G, the parameters θG typically deﬁne a multinomial distribution θXi|u
for each variable Xi and each assignment of values u to PaG(Xi). If we consider Gaussian
Bayesian networks over continuous domains, then θXi|u contains the coefﬁcients for a linear
combination of u and a variance parameter.
To deﬁne the prior P(B), we need to deﬁne a discrete probability distribution over graph
structures G, and for each possible graph G, to deﬁne a density measure over possible
values of parameters θG.
The prior over structures is usually considered the less important of the two components.
Unlike other parts of the posterior, it does not grow as the number of data cases grows.
BEING BAYESIAN ABOUT NETWORK STRUCTURE
Hence, relatively little attention has been paid to the choice of structure prior, and a simple
prior is often chosen largely for pragmatic reasons. The simplest and therefore most common
choice is a uniform prior over structures . To provide a greater penalty to
dense networks, one can deﬁne a prior using a probability β that each edge be present; then
networks with m edges have prior probability proportional to βm(1 −β)( n
2 )−m . An alternative prior, and the one we use in our experiments, considers the number
of options in determining the families of G. Intuitively, if we decide that a node Xi has k
parents, then there are ( n−1
k ) possible parents sets. If we assume that we choose uniformly
from these, we get a prior:
Note that the negative logarithm of this prior corresponds to the description length of
specifying the parent sets, assuming that the cardinality of these sets are known. Thus, we
implicitly assume that cardinalities of parent sets are uniformly distributed.
A key property of all these priors is that they satisfy:
• Structure modularity. The prior P(G) can be written in the form
ρXi(PaG(Xi))
where ρXi(PaG(Xi)) is a distribution over the possible parent-sets of Xi.
That is, the prior decomposes into a product, with a term for each variable in our domain. In
other words, the choices of the families for the different variables are independent a priori.
Next we consider the prior over parameters, P(θG | G). Here, the form of the prior
varies depending on the type of parametric families we consider. In discrete networks, the
standard assumption is a Dirichlet prior over θXi|u for each variable Xi and each instantiation
u to its parents . In Gaussian networks, we might use a Wishart prior
 . For our purpose, we need only require that the prior satisﬁes
two basic assumptions, as presented by Heckerman, Geiger, and Chickering :
• Global parameter independence. Let θXi|PaG(Xi) be the parameters specifying the behavior of the variable Xi given the various instantiations to its parents. Then we require
P(θG | G) =
θXi|PaG(Xi)
• Parameter modularity. Let G and G′ be two graphs in which PaG(Xi) = PaG′(Xi) = U
N. FRIEDMAN AND D. KOLLER
Once we deﬁne the prior, we can examine the form of the posterior probability. Using
Bayes rule, we have that
P(G | D) ∝P(D | G)P(G).
The term P(D | G) is the marginal likelihood of the data given G, and is deﬁned as the
integral of the likelihood function over all possible parameter values for G.
P(D | G) =
P(D | G, θG)P(θG | G) dθG
The term P(D | G, θG) is simply the probability of the data given a speciﬁc Bayesian network. When the data is complete, this term is simply a product of conditional probabilities.
Using the above assumptions, one can show (see Heckerman, Geiger, and Chickering
Theorem 2.1.
If D is complete and P(G) satisﬁes parameter independence and parameter
modularity, then
P(D | G) =
xi[m] | paG(Xi)[m], θXi|PaG(Xi)
θXi|PaG(Xi)
dθXi|PaG(Xi).
If the prior also satisﬁes structure modularity, we can also conclude that the posterior
probability decomposes:
P(G | D) ∝P(D | G)P(G) =
score(Xi, PaG(Xi) | D)
score(Xi, U | D) = ρXi(U)
xi[m] | u[m], θXi|U
For standard priors such as Dirichlet or Wishart, score(Xi, PaG(Xi)) has a simple closed
form solution that is easily computed from the prior and certain sufﬁcient statistics over
the data. (e.g., in the case of multinomials with a Dirichlet prior, the sufﬁcient statistics are
simply the counts of the different events xi, u in the data.)
We note that the parameter prior can have a substantial impact on the posterior distribution
over structures. For example, in Dirichlet priors, the greater the “strength” of the parameter
prior (the equivalent sample size deﬁned by the hyperparameters), the greater the bias
towards the distribution induced by the hyperparameters, leading structures that resemble
that distribution to have a higher score. Of course, as the amount of data in the training set
grows, the impact of the prior shrinks, but the impact can be quite signiﬁcant for small data
sets. This issue is fundamental to the Bayesian approach, including the use of the Bayesian
score in standard BN structure search, and is outside the scope of this paper.
BEING BAYESIAN ABOUT NETWORK STRUCTURE
Bayesian model averaging
Recall that our goal is to compute the posterior probability of some feature f (G) over all
possible graphs G. This is equal to:
P( f | D) =
f (G)P(G | D)
The problem, of course, is that the number of possible BN structures is super-exponential:
2(n2), where n is the number of variables.2
We can reduce this number by restricting attention to structures G where there is a bound
k on the number of parents per node. This assumption, which we will make throughout this
paper, is a fairly innocuous one. There are few applications in which very large families are
called for, and there is rarely enough data to support robust parameter estimation for such
families. From a more formal perspective, networks with very large families tend to have
low score. Let Gk be the set of all graphs with indegree bounded by some constant k. Note
that the number of structures in Gk is still super-exponential: 2(kn log n).3
Thus, exhaustive enumeration over the set of possible BN structures is feasible only
for tiny domains (4–5 nodes). One solution, proposed by several researchers , is to approximate this exhaustive enumeration by ﬁnding a set G of high scoring structures, and then
estimating the relative mass of the structures in G that contains f :
P( f | D) ≈
G∈G P(G | D) f (G)
G∈G P(G | D)
This approach leaves open the question of how we construct G. The simplest approach
is to use model selection to pick a single high-scoring structure, and then use that as
our approximation. If the amount of data is large relative to the size of the model, then
the posterior will be sharply peaked around a single model, and this approximation is a
reasonable one. However, as we discussed in the introduction, there are many interesting
domains (e.g., our biological application) where the amount of data is small relative to the
size of the model. In this case, there is usually a large number of high-scoring models, so
using a single model as our set G is a very poor approximation.
A simple approach to ﬁnding a larger set is to record all the structures examined during
the search, and return the high scoring ones. However, the set of structures found in this
manner is quite sensitive to the search procedure we use. For example, if we use greedy hillclimbing, then the set of structures we will collect will all be quite similar. Such a restricted
set of candidates also show up when we consider multiple restarts of greedy hill-climbing
and beam-search. This is a serious problem since we run the risk of getting estimates of
conﬁdence that are based on a biased sample of structures.
Madigan and Raftery propose an alternative approach called Occam’s window,
which rejects models whose posterior probability is very low, as well as complex models
whoseposteriorprobabilityisnotsubstantiallybetterthanasimplermodel(onethatcontains
a subset of the edges). These two principles allow them to prune the space of models
N. FRIEDMAN AND D. KOLLER
considered, often to a number small enough to be exhaustively enumerated. Madigan and
Raftery also provide a search procedure for ﬁnding these models.
An alternative approach, proposed by Madigan and York , is based on the use of
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) simulation. In this case, we deﬁne a Markov Chain
over the space of possible structures, whose stationary distribution is the posterior distribution P(G | D). We then generate a set of possible structures by doing a random walk in
this Markov chain. Assuming that we continue this process until the chain converges to the
stationary distribution, we can hope to get a set of structures that is representative of the posterior. Related approaches have also been adopted by other researchers. Giudici and Green
 and Giudici, Green, and Tarantola propose an MCMC approach over junction
trees—undirected graphical models that are decomposable, i.e., where graph is triangulated.
Green andGiudici,Green,andTarantola alsoextendtheMCMCmethodology
to cases where closed-form integration over parameters is infeasible, by deﬁning a reversible
jump Markov Chain that traverses the space of parameters as well as structure. Madigan
et al. provide an approach for MCMC sampling over the space of Partially Directed
Acyclic Graphs (PDAGs), representing equivalence classes over network structures.
These MCMC solutions are the only approach that can, in principle, approximate true
Bayesian model averaging by sampling from the posterior over network structures. They
have been demonstrated with success on a variety of small domains, typically with 4–14
variables. However, there are several issues that potentially limit its effectiveness for large
domains involving many variables. As we discussed, the space of network structures grows
super-exponentially with the number of variables. Therefore, the domain of the MCMC
traversal is enormous for all but the tiniest domains.4 More importantly, the posterior distribution over structures is often quite peaked, with neighboring structures having very different scores. The reason is that even small perturbations to the structure—a removal of a single
edge—can cause a huge reduction in score. Thus, the “posterior landscape” can be quite
jagged, with high “peaks” separated by low “valleys”. In such situations, MCMC is known
to be slow to mix, requiring many samples to reach the posterior distribution. In Section 5 we
provide experimental evidence indicating that these difﬁculties do, indeed, arise in practice.
Closed form for known order
In this section, we temporarily turn our attention to a somewhat easier problem. Rather than
perform model averaging over the space of all structures, we restrict attention to structures
that are consistent with some known total order ≺. In other words, we restrict attention to
structures G where if Xi ∈PaG(X j) then i ≺j. This assumption was a standard one in the
early work on learning Bayesian networks from data .
Computing the marginal likelihood
We ﬁrst consider the problem of computing the probability of the data given the order:
P(G |≺)P(D | G)
BEING BAYESIAN ABOUT NETWORK STRUCTURE
Note that this summation, although restricted to networks with bounded indegree and consistent with ≺, is still exponentially large: the number of such structures is still 2(kn log n).5
The key insight is that, when we restrict attention to structures consistent with a given
order ≺, the choice of family for one node places no additional constraints on the choice of
family for another. Note that this property does not hold without the restriction on the order;
for example, if we pick Xi to be a parent of X j, then X j cannot in turn be a parent of Xi.
Therefore, we can choose a structure G consistent with ≺by choosing, independently,
a family U for each node Xi. The parameter modularity assumption in Eq. (4) states that
the choice of parameters for the family of Xi is independent of the choice of family for
another family in the network. Hence, summing over possible graphs consistent with ≺is
equivalent to summing over possible choices of family for each node, each with its parameter
prior. Given our constraint on the size of the family, the possible parent sets for the node
Ui,≺= {U : U ≺Xi, |U| ≤k}.
where U ≺Xi is deﬁned to hold when all nodes in U precede Xi in ≺. Let Gk,≺be the set
of structures in Gk consistent with ≺. Using Eq. (5), we have that
score(Xi, PaG(Xi) | D)
score(Xi, U | D).
Intuitively, the equality states that we can sum over all networks consistent with ≺by
summing over the set of possible families for each node, and then multiplying the results
for the different nodes. This transformation allows us to compute P(D |≺) very efﬁciently.
The expression on the right-hand side consists of a product with a term for each node Xi,
each of which is a summation over all possible families for Xi. Given the bound k over
the number of parents, the number of possible families for a node Xi is at most (n
Hence, the total cost of computing Eq. (8) is at most n · nk = nk+1.
We note that the decomposition of Eq. (8) was ﬁrst mentioned by Buntine , but
the ramiﬁcations for Bayesian model averaging were not pursued. The concept of Bayesian
modelaveragingusingaclosed-formsummationoveranexponentiallylargesetofstructures
was proposed (in a different setting) by Pereira and Singer .
The computation of P(D |≺) is useful in and of itself; as we show in the next section,
computing the probability P(D |≺) is a key step in our MCMC algorithm.
Probabilities of features
For certain types of features f , we can use the technique of the previous section to compute,
in closed form, the probability P( f |≺, D) that f holds in a structure given the order and
N. FRIEDMAN AND D. KOLLER
In general, if f (·) is a feature. We want to compute
P( f |≺, D) = P( f, D |≺)
We have just shown how to compute the denominator. The numerator is a sum over all
structures that contain the feature and are consistent with the order:
P( f, D |≺) =
f (G)P(G |≺)P(D | G)
The computation of this term depends on the speciﬁc type of feature f .
The simplest situation is when we want to compute the posterior probability of a particular
choice of parents U. This in effect require us to sum over all graphs where PaG(Xi) = U.
In this case, we can apply the same closed form analysis to (9). The only difference is that
we restrict U j,≺to be the singleton {U}. Since the terms that sum over the parents of Xk for
k ̸= j are not disturbed by this constraint, they cancel out from the equation.
Proposition 3.1.
P(PaG(Xi) = U | D, ≺) =
score(Xi, U | D)
U′∈Ui,≺score(Xi, U′ | D).
A slightly more complex situation is when we want to compute the posterior probability
of the edge feature Xi →X j. Again, we can apply the same closed form analysis to (9).
The only difference is that we restrict U j,≺to consist only of subsets that contain Xi.
Proposition 3.2.
P(X j ∈PaG(Xi) |≺, D) =
{U∈Ui,≺: X j∈U} score(Xi, U | D)
U∈Ui,≺score(Xi, U | D)
A somewhat more subtle computation is required to compute the posterior of the Markov
feature Xi
M∼X j, denoting that Xi is in the Markov blanket of X j; this feature holds if G
contains the edge Xi →X j, or the edge X j →Xi, or there is a variable Xk such that both
edges Xi →Xk and X j →Xk are in G.
Assume, without loss of generality, that Xi precedes X j in the order. In this case, Xi can
be in X j’s Markov blanket either if there is an edge from Xi to X j, or if Xi and X j are
both parents of some third node Xl. We have just shown how the ﬁrst of these probabilities
P(X j ∈PaG(Xi) | D, ≺), can be computed in closed form. We can also easily compute the
probability P(Xi, X j ∈PaG(Xl) | D, ≺) that both Xi and X j are parents of Xl: we simply
restrict Ul,≺to families that contain both Xi and X j. The key is to note that as the choice
of families of different nodes are independent, these are all independent events. Hence, Xi
and X j are not in the same Markov blanket only if all of these events fail to occur. Thus,
BEING BAYESIAN ABOUT NETWORK STRUCTURE
Proposition 3.3.
M∼X j | D, ≺)
= 1 −(1 −P(X j ∈PaG(Xi) | D, ≺)) ·
(1 −P(Xi, X j ∈PaG(Xl) | D, ≺))
Unfortunately, this approach cannot be used to compute the probability of arbitrary
structural features. For example, we cannot compute the probability that there exists some
directed path from Xi to X j, as we would have to consider all possible ways in which a
path from Xi to X j could manifest itself through our exponentially many structures.
Wecanovercomethisdifﬁcultyusingasimplesamplingapproach.Equation(10)provides
us with a closed form expression for the exact posterior probability of the different possible
families of the node Xi. We can therefore easily sample entire networks from the posterior
distribution given the order: we simply sample a family for each node, according to the
distribution in Eq. (10). We can then use the sampled networks to evaluate any feature, such
as the existence of a causal path from Xi to X j.
MCMC methods
In the previous section, we made the simplifying assumption that we were given a predetermined order. Although this assumption might be reasonable in certain cases, it is clearly
too restrictive in domains where we have very little prior knowledge (e.g., our biology
domain). We therefore want to consider structures consistent with all n! possible orders
over BN nodes. Here, unfortunately, we have no elegant tricks that allow a closed form
solution. Therefore, we provide a solution which uses our closed form solution of Eq. (8) as
a subroutine in a Markov Chain Monte Carlo algorithm . This hybrid algorithm is a form of Rao-Blackwellized Monte Carlo sampling algorithm . Related approaches, called mixture estimators were proposed and analyzed
by Gelfand and Smith and by Liu, Wong, and Kong (see discussion below).
This approach is somewhat related to the work of Larra˜naga et al. , which proposes
the use of a genetic algorithm to search for a high-scoring order; there, however, the score
of an order is the score of a single high-scoring structure ), and the overall purpose is model selection rather than
model averaging. Furthermore, genetic algorithms, unlike MCMC, are not guaranteed to
generate samples from the posterior distribution.
The basic algorithm
We introduce a uniform prior over orders ≺, and deﬁne P(G |≺) to be of the same nature
as the priors we used in the previous section. It is important to note that the resulting prior
over structures has a different form than our original prior over structures. For example,
if we deﬁne P(G |≺) to be uniform, we have that P(G) is not uniform: graphs that are
consistent with more orders are more likely. For example, a Naive Bayes graph is consistent
N. FRIEDMAN AND D. KOLLER
with (n−1)! orders, whereas any chain-structured graph is consistent with only one. As one
consequence, our induced structure distribution is not hypothesis equivalent , in that different network structures that are in the same
equivalence class often have different priors. For example, the chain X →Y →Z is
associated with a unique order, whereas the equivalent structure X ←Y →Z is associated
with two orders, and is therefore twice as likely a priori. However, as Heckerman et al.
observe, hypothesis equivalence is often too strong an assumption (e.g., in causal settings).
They propose likelihood equivalence as a substitute, a property which clearly holds in our
In general, while this discrepancy in priors is unfortunate, it is important to see it in
proportion. The standard priors over network structures are often used not because they are
particularly well-motivated, but rather because they are simple and easy to work with. In
fact, the ubiquitous uniform prior over structures is far from uniform over PDAGs (Markov
equivalence classes)—PDAGs consistent with more structures have a higher induced prior
probability. One can argue that, for causal discovery, a uniform prior over PDAGs is more
appropriate; nevertheless, a uniform prior over networks is most often used for practical
reasons. Finally, the prior induced over our networks does have some justiﬁcation: one can
argue that a structure which is consistent with more orders makes fewer assumptions about
causal order, and is therefore more likely a priori .
We now construct a Markov chain M, with state space O consisting of all n! orders ≺;
our construction will guarantee that M has the stationary distribution P(≺| D). We can
then simulate this Markov chain, obtaining a sequence of samples ≺1, . . . , ≺T . We can now
approximate the expected value of any function g(≺) as:
E[g | D] ≈1
Speciﬁcally, we can let g(≺) be P( f |≺, D) for some feature (edge) f . We can then compute
g(≺t) = P( f |≺t, D), as described in the previous section.
It remains only to discuss the construction of the Markov chain. We use a standard
Metropolis algorithm . We need to guarantee two things:
• that the chain is reversible, i.e., that P(≺→≺′) = P(≺′ →≺);
• that the stationary distribution of the chain is the desired posterior distribution P(≺| D).
We accomplish this goal using a standard Metropolis sampling. For each order ≺, we deﬁne
a proposal probability q(≺′ | ≺), which deﬁnes the probability that the algorithm will
“propose” a move from ≺to ≺′. The algorithm then accepts this move with probability
1, P(≺′ | D)q(≺| ≺′)
P(≺| D)q(≺′ | ≺)
It is well known that the resulting chain is reversible and has the desired stationary distribution .
BEING BAYESIAN ABOUT NETWORK STRUCTURE
We consider several speciﬁc constructions for the proposal distribution, based on different
neighborhoods in the space of orders. In one very simple construction, we consider only
operators that ﬂip two nodes in the order (leaving all others unchanged):
(i1 . . . i j . . . ik . . . in) →(i1 . . . ik . . . i j . . . in).
Computational issues
Although our closed form solution to the marginal likelihood and to the probabilities of
the different structural features allows us to perform the computation in time polynomial
in n, it can still be quite expensive, especially for large networks and reasonable size k. We
utilize several ideas and approximations to reduce the complexity of these computations.
Our ﬁrst set of ideas serve to reduce the scope of the summation both for the marginal
likelihood and for the computation of feature probabilities. For each node Xi, we restrict
attention to at most C other nodes as candidate parents (for some ﬁxed C). We select these
C nodes in advance, before any MCMC step, as follows: for each potential parent X j, we
compute the score of the single edge X j →Xi; we then select the C nodes X j for which
this score was highest. Note that C is different from k: C is the size of the set of nodes that
could potentially be parents of a node Xi, whereas k is an upper bound on the size of the
parent set actually chosen for Xi from among the set of C candidate parents.
Second, for each node Xi, we precompute the score for some number F of the highestscoring families. The parents in these families are selected from among the C candidate
parents for Xi. Again, this procedure is executed once, at the very beginning of the process.
The list of highest-scoring families is sorted in decreasing order; let ℓi be the score of the
worst family in Xi’s list. As we consider a particular order, we extract from the list all
families consistent with that order. We know that all families not in the list score no better
than ℓi. Thus, if the best family extracted from the list is some factor γ better than ℓi, we
choose to restrict attention to the families extracted from the list, under the assumption that
other families will have negligible effect relative to these high-scoring families. If the score
of the best family extracted is not that good, we do a full enumeration.
When performing exhaustive enumeration, we prune families that augment low-scoring
families with low-scoring edges. Speciﬁcally, assume that for some family U, we have
that score(Xi, U | D) is substantially lower than other families enumerated so far. In this
case, families that extend U are likely to be even worse. More precisely, we deﬁne the
incremental value of a parent Y for Xi to be its added value as a single parent: (Y; Xi) =
score(Xi, Y) −score(Xi). If we now have a family U such that, for all other possible parents
Y, score(Xi, U) + (Y; Xi) is lower than the best family found so far for Xi, we prune all
extensions of U.
In addition to reducing the scope of the summation, we can further reduce the cost of
our MCMC algorithm, by observing that, when we take a single MCMC step in the space,
we can often preserve much of our computation. In particular, let ≺be an order and let ≺′
be the order obtained by ﬂipping i j and ik. Now, consider the terms in Eq. (8); those terms
corresponding to nodes iℓin the order ≺that precede i j or succeed ik do not change, as the
set of potential parent sets Uil,≺is the same. Furthermore, the terms for il that are between
N. FRIEDMAN AND D. KOLLER
i j and ik also have a lot in common—all parent sets U that contain neither i j nor ik remain
the same. Thus, we only need to subtract
{U∈Ui,≺: U∋Xi j }
score(Xi, U | D)
{U∈Ui,≺′ : U∋Xik }
score(Xi, U | D).
Having collected a set of order samples using our MCMC algorithm, we can use them
to estimate the probability of the various structural features. However, this process can be
quite expensive, especially when we are interested in the probabilities of all (n2) (edge
or Markov) features. To reduce the computational burden, we perform this computation
using only a small set of sampled orders. To make sure that we got a representative set
of orders, we did not simply use the ﬁrst orders generated by the MCMC process after a
burn-in phase; rather, after the burn-in phase we continued running the MCMC process,
collecting an order sample at ﬁxed intervals (e.g., every 100 steps). This process results
in samples from the chain that are closer to independent, thereby allowing us to provide a
lower-variance estimate of the probability using a smaller number of samples.6
Experimental results
We evaluated our approach in a variety of ways. We ﬁrst compare it with a full Bayesian
model averaging, in those domains small enough to permit an exhaustive enumeration of
BN structures. Most importantly, we compare it with the more practical and most common
approach to Bayesian model averaging: using MCMC directly over BN structures . In this approach, a Metropolis-Hastings Markov chain is deﬁned whose
states correspond to individual BN structures. Each step in the chain corresponds to a
local transformation on the structure: adding, deleting, or reversing an edge. The proposal
distribution is uniform over these local transformations, and the acceptance probability is
deﬁned using the Bayesian score, in a way that guarantees that the stationary distribution
of the chain is the posterior P(G | D). We call our approach order-MCMC and the MCMC
over BN structure structure-MCMC. Our primary measure for comparing the different
approaches is via the probability that they give to the structural features we discuss above:
edge features and Markov features.
Evaluating the sampling process
Our ﬁrst goal is to evaluate the extent to which the sampling process reﬂects the result of
true Bayesian model averaging. We ﬁrst compared the estimates made by order-MCMC
to estimates given by the full Bayesian averaging over networks. We experimented on the
Flare dataset , that has nine discrete variables, most of which take
BEING BAYESIAN ABOUT NETWORK STRUCTURE
20 samples
50 samples
20 samples
50 samples
Comparison of posterior probabilities for the exact posterior over orders (x-axis) versus order-MCMC
(y-axis) in the Flare dataset with 100 instances. The ﬁgures show the probabilities for all Markov features and
edge features.
2 or 3 values. We ran the MCMC sampler with a burn-in period of 1,000 steps and then
proceeded to collect either 5, 20, or 50 order samples at ﬁxed intervals of 100 steps. (We
note that the burn-in time and sampling interval are probably excessive, but they ensure
that we are sampling very close to the stationary probability of the process.) The results are
shown in ﬁgure 1. As we can see, the estimates are very robust. In fact, for Markov features
even a sample of 5 orders gives a surprisingly decent estimate. This surprising success is
due to the fact that a single sample of an order contains information about exponentially
many possible structures. For edges we obviously need more samples, as edges that are not
in the direction of the order necessarily have probability 0. With 20 and 50 samples we see
a very close correlation between the MCMC estimate and the exact computation for both
types of features.
Mixing rate
We then considered larger datasets, where exhaustive enumeration is not an option. For
this purpose we used synthetic data generated from the Alarm BN ,
a network with 37 nodes. Here, our computational heuristics are necessary. We used the
following settings: k (max. number of parents in a family) = 3;7 C (max. number of potential
parents) = 20; F (number of families cached) = 4000; and γ (difference in score required
in pruning) = 10. Note that γ = 10 corresponds to a difference of 210 in the posterior
probability of the families. Different families have huge differences in score, so a difference
of 210 in the posterior probability is not uncommon.
Our ﬁrst goal was the comparison of the mixing rate of the two MCMC samplers. For
structure-MCMC, we used a burn in of 100,000 iterations and then sampled every 25,000
iterations. For order-MCMC, we used a burn in of 10,000 iterations and then sampled
N. FRIEDMAN AND D. KOLLER
every 2,500 iterations. In both methods we collected a total of 50 samples per run. We
note that, computationally, structure-MCMC is faster than order-MCMC. In our current
implementation, generating a successor network is about an order of magnitude faster than
generating a successor order. We therefore designed the runs in ﬁgure 2 to take roughly the
same amount of computation time.
In both approaches, we experimented with different initializations for the MCMC runs.
In the uninformed initialization, we started the structure-MCMC with an empty network
and the order-MCMC with a random order. In the informed initialization, we started the
structure-MCMC with the greedy network—the BN found by greedy hill climbing search
over network structures and the order-MCMC with an order consistent
with that structure.
One phenomenon that was quite clear was that order-MCMC runs mix much faster. That
is, after a small number of iterations, these runs reached a “plateau” where successive
samples had comparable scores. Runs started in different places (including random order
and orders seeded from the results of a greedy-search model selection) rapidly reached the
same plateau. On the other hand, MCMC runs over network structures reached very different
levels of scores, even though they were run for a much larger number of iterations. Figure 2
illustrates this phenomenon for examples of Alarm with 100, 500, and 1000 instances. Note
the substantial difference in the scale of the y-axis between the two sets of graphs.
In the case of 100 instances, both MCMC samplers seemed to mix. Structure-MCMC
mixes after about 20,000–30,000 iterations, while order-MCMC mixes after about 1,000–
2,000 iterations. On the other hand, when we examine 500 samples, order-MCMC converges
to a high-scoring plateau, which we believe is the stationary distribution, within 10,000
iterations. By contrast, different runs of the structure-MCMC stayed in very different regions
of the in the ﬁrst 500,000 iterations. The situation is even worse in the case of 1,000 instances.
In this case, structure-MCMC started from an empty network does not reach the level of
score achieved by the runs starting from the structure found by greedy hill climbing search.
Moreover, these latter runs seem to ﬂuctuate around the score of the initial seed, never
exploring another region of the space. Note that different runs show differences of 100–500
bits. Thus, the sub-optimal runs sample from networks that are at least 2100 less probable!
Effects of mixing
This phenomenon has two explanations. Either the seed structure is the global optimum
and the sampler is sampling from the posterior distribution, which is “centered” around the
optimum; or the sampler is stuck in a local “hill” in the space of structures from which
it cannot escape. This latter hypothesis is supported by the fact that runs starting at other
structures (e.g., the empty network) take a very long time to reach similar level of scores,
indicating that there is a very different part of the space on which stationary behavior is
reached. We now provide further support for this second hypothesis.
We ﬁrst examine the posterior computed for different features in different runs. Figure 3
comparestheposteriorprobabilityofMarkovfeaturesassignedbydifferentrunsofstructure-
MCMC. Let us ﬁrst consider the runs over 500 instances. Here, although different runs
give a similar probability estimate to most structural features, there are several features
BEING BAYESIAN ABOUT NETWORK STRUCTURE
100 Instances
80000 100000 120000
500 Instances
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000 600000
1000 Instances
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000 600000
Plots of the progression of the MCMC runs. Each graph shows plots of 6 independent runs over Alarm
with either 100, 500, and 1000 instances. The graph plot the score (log2(P(D | G)P(G)) or log2(P(D |≺)P(≺)))
of the “current” candidate (y-axis) for different iterations (x-axis) of the MCMC sampler. In each plot, three of
the runs are initialized with an uniformed network or order, and the others with the greedy network or an ordering
consistent with it.
N. FRIEDMAN AND D. KOLLER
100 instances
empty vs. empty
greedy vs. greedy
500 instances
empty vs. empty
greedy vs. greedy
Scatter plots that compare posterior probability of Markov features on the Alarm dataset, as determined
by different runs of structure-MCMC. Each point corresponds to a single Markov feature; its x and y coordinates
denote the posterior estimated by the two compared runs. The position of points is slightly randomly perturbed to
visualize clusters of points in the same position.
on which they differ radically. In particular, there are features that are assigned probability
close to 1 by structures sampled from one run and probability close to 0 by those sampled
from the other. While this behavior is less common in the runs seeded with the greedy
structure, it occurs even there. This phenomenon suggests that each of these runs (even runs
that start at the same place) gets trapped in a different local neighborhood in the structure
space. Somewhat surprisingly, a similar phenomenon appears to occur even in the case of
100 instances, where the runs appeared to mix. In this case, the overall correlation between
BEING BAYESIAN ABOUT NETWORK STRUCTURE
the runs is, as we might expect, weaker: with 100 instances, there are many more highscoring structures and therefore the variance of the sampling process is higher. However,
we once again observe features which have probability close to 0 in one run and close to 1
in the other. These discrepancies are not as easily explained by the variance of the sampling
process. Therefore, even for 100 instances, it is not clear that structure-MCMC mixes.
By contrast, comparison of the predictions of different runs of order-MCMC are tightly
correlated. To test this, we compared the posterior estimates of Markov features and Path
features. The latter represent relations of the form “there is a directed path from X to Y” in
the PDAG of the network structure. As discussed in Section 3, we cannot provide a closed
form expression for the posterior of such a feature given an order. However, we can sample
networks from the order, and estimate the feature relative to those. In our experiments,
we sampled 20 networks from each order. Figure 4 compares two runs, one starting from
an order consistent with the greedy structure and the other from a random order. We can
see that the predictions are very similar, both for the small dataset and the larger one. The
predictions for the Path features have somewhat higher variance, which we attribute to the
additional randomness of sampling structures from the ordering. The very high degree of
correlation between the two runs reafﬁrms our claim that they are indeed sampling from
similar distributions. That is, they are sampling from the exact posterior.
We believe that the difference in mixing rate is due to the smoother posterior landscape
of the space of orders. In the space of networks, even a small perturbation to a network can
lead to a huge difference in score. By contrast, the score of an order is a lot less sensitive to
slight perturbations. For one, the score of each order is an aggregate of the scores of a very
large set of structures; hence, differences in scores of individual networks can often cancel
out. Furthermore, for most orders, we are likely to ﬁnd a consistent structure which is not
too bad a ﬁt to the data; hence, an order is unlikely to be uniformly horrible.
The disparity in mixing rates is more pronounced for larger datasets. The reason is quite
clear: as the amount of data grows, the posterior landscape becomes “sharper” since the
effect of a single change in the structure is ampliﬁed across many samples. As we discussed
above, if our dataset is large enough, model selection is often a good approximation to
model averaging. However, it is important to note that 500 instances for Alarm are not
enough to peak the posterior sharply enough that model selection is a reliable approach to
discovering structure. We can see that by examining the posterior probabilities in ﬁgure 4.
We see that the posterior probability for most Markov features is fairly far from 0 or 1.
As Markov features are invariant for all networks in the same Markov equivalence class
(PDAG), this phenomenon indicates that there are several PDAGs that have high score given
the data. By contrast, in the case of 1000 instances, we see that the probability of almost
all features is clustered around 0 or 1, indicating that model selection is likely to return a
fairly representative structure in this case.
A second form of support for the non-mixing conjecture is obtained by considering an
even smaller data set: the Boston-housing data set, from the UCI repository , is a continuous domain with 14 variables and 506 samples. Here, we considered
linear Gaussian networks, and used a standard Wishart parameter prior. We started the
structure-MCMC on the structure obtained from greedy hill-climbing search. We started
the order-MCMC on an order consistent with that structure. As usual, as shown in ﬁgure 6(a),
N. FRIEDMAN AND D. KOLLER
Markov features
Path features
100 instances
500 instances
1000 instances
Scatter plots that compare posterior probability of Markov and Path features on the Alarm domain as
determined by different runs of order-MCMC. Each point corresponds to a single feature; its x and y coordinates
denote the posterior estimated by the greedy seeded run and a random seeded run respectively.
BEING BAYESIAN ABOUT NETWORK STRUCTURE
100 instances
500 instances
Scatter plots that compare posterior probability of Markov features on the Alarm domain as determined
by the two different MCMC samplers. Each point corresponds to a single Markov feature; its x and y coordinates
denote the posterior estimated by the greedy seeded run of order-MCMC and structure-MCMC, respectively.
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000 600000
Plots of the progression of the MCMC runs on the Boston-housing data set. Each graph shows plots
of 4 independent runs. All the runs are seeded with the network found by searching over network structures.
structure-MCMC does not converge. However, as shown in ﬁgure 6(b), the runs of order-
MCMC are also somewhat more erratic, indicating a more jagged posterior landscape even
over orders. In a way, this is not surprising, given the large number of instances and small
domain. In ﬁgure 7, we see that, as above, different runs of structure-MCMC lead to very
different answers, whereas different runs of order-MCMC are very consistent.
More interesting is the examination of the feature probabilities themselves. Figure 8(a)
shows a comparison between the feature probabilities of structure-MCMC and those of the
structure returned by greedy search, used as the starting point for the chain. We can see
N. FRIEDMAN AND D. KOLLER
Structure-MCMC
Order-MCMC
Scatter plots that compare posterior probability of Markov on the Boston-housing data set, as
determined by different runs of structure-MCMC and order-MCMC.
Structure-MCMC
Order-MCMC
Scatter plots that compare posterior probability of Markov features on the Boston-housing data set, as
determined by different runs of structure-MCMC and order-MCMC, to the probabilities according to the initial
seed of the MCMC runs. The x-axis denotes whether the feature appears in the seed network: 1 if it appear and 0 if
does not. The y-axis denote the estimate of the posterior probability of the feature based on the MCMC sampling.
that most of the structures traversed by the MCMC search are very similar to the greedy
seed. By contrast, ﬁgure 8(b) shows that order-MCMC traverses a different region of the
space, leading to very different estimates. It turns out that the structure found by the greedy
search is suboptimal, but that structure-MCMC remains stuck in a local maximum around
that point. By contrast, the better mixing properties of order-MCMC allow is to break out of
BEING BAYESIAN ABOUT NETWORK STRUCTURE
this local maximum, and to reach a substantially higher-scoring region. Thus, even in cases
where there is a dominant global maximum, order-MCMC can be a more robust approach
than greedy hill-climbing, structure-MCMC, or their combination.
Comparison of estimates
We now compare the estimates of the two approaches on the Alarm data set. We deliberately
chose to use the smaller data sets for two reasons: to allow structure-MCMC a better chance
to mix, and to highlight the differences resulting from the different priors used in the two
approaches. The results are shown in ﬁgure 5. We see that, in general, the estimates of the
two methods are not too far apart, although the posterior estimate of the structure-MCMC
is usually larger.
We attribute these discrepancies in the posterior to the different structure prior we employ
in the order-MCMC sampler. To test this conjecture, in a way that decouples it from the
effects of sampling, we chose to compare the exact posterior computed by summing over
all orders to the posterior computed by summing over all equivalence classes of Bayesian
networks (PDAGs) (i.e., we counted only a single representative network for each equivalence class). Of course, in order to do the exact Bayesian computation we need to do an
exhaustive enumeration of hypotheses. For orders, this enumeration is possible for as many
as 10 variables, but for structures, we are limited to domains with 5–6 variables. We took
two data sets—Vote and Flare—from the UCI repository and selected ﬁve variables from each (all of which are discrete). We generated datasets of sizes 50
and 200, and computed the full Bayesian averaging posterior for these datasets using both
methods. Figure 9 compares the results for both datasets. We see that the two approaches
are well correlated, but that the prior does have some effect.
Comparison of posterior probabilities for different Markov features between full Bayesian averaging
using: orders (x-axis) versus PDAGs (y-axis) for two UCI datasets (5 variables each).
N. FRIEDMAN AND D. KOLLER
To gain a better understanding of the general effect of a structure prior, we examined the
sensitivity of Bayesian model averaging to changes in the prior. Recall that our experiments
use the MDL prior shown in Eq. (2), whether for P(G) (in structure-MCMC) or for P(G | ≺)
(in order-MCMC). We ran the same experiment, raising this prior to some power—0, 1
2. Note that a power of 0 corresponds to a uniform prior, over structures in the structure-
MCMC case and over structures within an order in the order-MCMC case. By contrast,
a power of 2 corresponds to an even more extreme penalty for large families. Figure 10
shows the comparison of the modiﬁed priors to the “standard” case. As we can expect, a
stronger structure prior results in lower posterior for features while a uniform structure prior
is more prone to adding edges and thus most features have higher posterior. Thus, we see
that the results of a structure discovery algorithm are always sensitive to the structure prior,
and that even two very reasonable (and common) priors can lead to very different results.
This effect is at least as large as the effect of using our order-based structure prior. Given
that the choice of prior in BN learning is often somewhat arbitrary, there is no reason to
assume that our order-based prior is less reasonable than any other.
Structure reconstruction
This phenomenon raises an obvious question: given that the approaches give different
results, which is better at reconstructing features of the generating model. To test this, we
label Markov features in the Alarm domain as positive if they appear in the generating
network and negative if they do not. We then use our posterior to try and distinguish “true”
features from “false” ones: we pick a threshold t, and predict that the feature f is “true” if
P( f ) > t. Clearly, as we vary the the value of t, we will get different sets of features. At
each threshold value we can have two types of errors: false positives—positive features that
are misclassiﬁed as negative, and false negatives—negative features that are classiﬁed as
positive. Different values of t achieve different tradeoffs between these two type of errors.
Thus, for each method we can plot the tradeoff curve between the two types of errors. Note
that, in most applications of structure discovery, we care more about false positives than
about false negatives. For example, in our biological application, false negatives are only to
be expected—it is unrealistic to expect that we would detect all causal connections based on
our limited data. However, false positives correspond to hypothesizing important biological
connections spuriously. Thus, our main concern is with the left-hand-side of the tradeoff
curve, the part where we have a small number of false positives. Within that region, we
want to achieve the smallest possible number of false negatives.
We computed such tradeoff curves for Alarm data set with 100, 500, and 1000 instances
for two types of features: Markov features and Path features. Figure 11 displays ROC curves
comparing order-MCMC, structure-MCMC, and the non-parametric Bootstrap approach of
Friedman, Goldszmidt, and Wyner , a non-Bayesian simulation approach to estimate
“conﬁdence” in features. The curves represent the average performance over ten repetitions
of the experiment—we sampled ten data sets from the Alarm data set, and for each each
threshold t we report the average number of errors of both types.
As we can see, in all cases order-MCMC does as well or better than the other approaches,
with marked gains in three cases. In particular, for t larger than 0.4, order-MCMC makes
BEING BAYESIAN ABOUT NETWORK STRUCTURE
Order vs. Standard Order
Structure vs. Standard Structure
Order vs. Structure
Figure 10.
Comparison of the posterior of Markov features when we change the structure prior strength for
Alarm with 100 instances. The top row compares the modiﬁed prior (y-axis) in order-MCMC against the standard
prior (x-axis). The middle row makes an analogous comparison for structure-MCMC. The bottom compares the
modiﬁed prior with order (x-axis) against the modiﬁed prior with structures (y-axis). Each column corresponds
to a different weighting of the prior, as denoted at the top of the column.
N. FRIEDMAN AND D. KOLLER
Markov features
Path features
100 Instances
False Negatives
False Positives
False Negatives
False Positives
500 Instances
False Negatives
False Positives
False Negatives
False Positives
1000 Instances
False Negatives
False Positives
False Negatives
False Positives
Figure 11.
Classiﬁcation tradeoff curves for different methods on datasets of varying sizes sampled from the
Alarm network. The x-axis and the y-axis denote false positive and false negative errors, respectively. The curve
is achieved by different threshold values in the range . Each graph contains three curves, each collected over
50 samples: order-MCMC, with order samples collected every 200 iterations; structure-MCMC, with structure
samples collected every 1000 iterations; and 50 network structures generated by the non-parametric bootstrap
sampling method.
BEING BAYESIAN ABOUT NETWORK STRUCTURE
no false positive errors for Markov features on the 1000-instance data set. We believe that
features it misses are due to weak interactions in the network that cannot be reliably learned
from such a small data set.
Application to gene expression data
As stated in the introduction our goal is to apply structure estimation methods for causal
learning from gene expression data. We tested our method on a relatively small genetic data
set of Friedman et al. . This data set is derived from a larger data set of S. cerevisiae
cell-cycle measurements reported in Spellman et al. . The data set contains 76 samples
of 250 genes. Friedman et al. discretized each measurement into three values (“underexpressed”, “normal”, “over-expressed”).
We applied order-MCMC, using an informed greedy initialization. For these runs, we
used: k (max. number of parents in a family) = 3; C (max. number of potential parents) =
45; F (number of families cached) = 4000; and γ (difference in score required in pruning) =
10. (The choice of k = 3 is imposed by computational limitations, induced by the large
number of variables in the domain.) We used a burn-in period of 4000 iterations, and then
sampled every 400 iterations collecting 50 samples in each run.
Figure 12 shows the progression of runs of the two MCMC methods on this data. As
we can see, order-MCMC mixes rapidly (after a few hundred iterations). On the other
hand, structure-MCMC seems to be mixing only after 200,000 iterations. Figure 13 shows
comparison of estimates from two different runs of the order based MCMC sampler. As in
the other data sets, the estimates for Markov features based on the two different runs are very
similar. In this case, we also show the estimates for path features, which are obtained (as
discussed in Section 3.2) by sampling speciﬁc networks from the distribution over networks
for a given order, and then evaluating the presence or absence of a path in each sampled
networks. In this case, we sampled 500 networks from our 50 sampled orderings. The
variance of this estimator is, as can be expected, much higher; nevertheless, the estimates
are still quite well-correlated.
Figure 12.
Plots of the progression of the MCMC runs on the Genetics data set. Each graph shows plots of 4
independent runs. All the runs are seeded with the network found by searching over network structures.
N. FRIEDMAN AND D. KOLLER
Markov features
Path features
Figure 13.
Scatter plots that compare posterior probability of Markov and path features on the Genetics data set,
as determined by different runs of order-MCMC.
Markov features
Path features
False Negatives
False Positives
False Negatives
False Positives
Figure 14.
Classiﬁcation tradeoff curves for different methods on the simulated Genetics data set. The x-axis and
the y-axis denote false positive and false negative errors, respectively. The curve is achieved by different threshold
values in the range .
Since we want to use this tool for scientiﬁc discovery, we want to evaluate how well
Bayesian structure estimation performs in this domain. To do so we performed the following
simulation experiments. We sampled 100 instances from the network found by structure
search on the genetics data. We then applied the order based MCMC sampler and the
bootstrap approach and evaluated the success in reconstructing features of the generating
network. Figure 14 shows the tradeoff between the two types of errors for these two methods
in predicting Markov and path features. As we can see, order-MCMC clearly outperforms
the bootstrap approach.
We should stress that the simulation is based on a network that is probably simpler than
the underlying structure (since we learned it from few samples). Nonetheless, we view these
results as an indication that using Bayesian estimates is more reliable in this domain. A
BEING BAYESIAN ABOUT NETWORK STRUCTURE
discussion of the biological conclusions from this analysis are beyond the scope of this
Discussion and future work
We have presented a new approach for expressing the posterior distribution over BN structures given a data set, and thereby for evaluating the posterior probability of important
structural features of the distribution. Our approach is based on two main ideas. The ﬁrst
is a clean and computationally tractable expression for the posterior of the data given a
known order over network variables. The second is Monte Carlo sampling algorithm over
orders. We have shown experimentally that this approach mixes substantially faster than
the standard MCMC algorithm that samples structures directly.
Once we have generated a set of orders sampled from the posterior distribution, we can
use them in a variety of ways. As we have shown, we can estimate the probabilities of certain structural features—edge features or adjacency in Markov neighborhoods—directly in
closed form for a given order. For other structural features, we can estimate their probability
by sampling network structures from each order, and testing for the presence or absence of
the feature in each structure.
We have shown that the estimates returned by our algorithm, using either of these two
methods, are substantially more robust than those obtained from standard MCMC over
structures. To some extent, if we ignore the different prior used in these two approaches, this
phenomenon is due to the fact that mixture estimators have lower variance than estimators
based on individual samples . More
signiﬁcantly, however, we see that the results of MCMC over structures are substantially
less reliable, as they are highly sensitive to the region of the space to which the Markov
chain process happens to gravitate.
We have also tested the efﬁcacy of our algorithm for the task of recovering structural
features which we know are present. We have shown that our algorithm is always more
reliable at recovering features than MCMC over structures, and in all but one case also
more reliable than the bootstrap approach of Friedman, Goldszmidt, and Wyner
We believe that this approach can be extended to deal with data sets where some of the
data is missing, by extending the MCMC over orders with MCMC over missing values,
allowing us to average over both. If successful, we can use this combined MCMC algorithm
for doing full Bayesian model averaging for prediction tasks as well. Finally, we plan to
apply this algorithm in our biology domain, in order to try and understand the underlying
structure of gene expression.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Yoram Singer for useful discussions and Harald Steck, Nando de Freitas,
andtheanonymousreviewersforhelpfulcommentsandreferences.Thisworkwassupported
by ARO grant DAAH04-96-1-0341 under the MURI program “Integrated Approach to
Intelligent Systems”, by DARPA’s Information Assurance program under subcontract to
N. FRIEDMAN AND D. KOLLER
SRI International, and by Israel Science Foundation (ISF) grant 244/99. Nir Friedman was
also supported through the generosity of the Michael Sacher Trust Alon Fellowship, and
Sherman Senior Lectureship. Daphne Koller was also supported through the generosity
of the Sloan Foundation and the Powell Foundation. The experiments reported here were
performed on computers funded by an ISF infrastructure grant.
1. More formally, the Markov blanket of X is the set of nodes that are directly linked to X in the undirected
Markov network which is a minimal I-map for the distribution represented by G.
2. Recall that the ( f (n)) denotes both an asymptotic lower bound and an asymptotic upper bound (up to a
constant factor). In this case, the number of BN structures is at least 2(n
2), because we have at least this many
subgraphs for any complete graph over the n nodes. We have at most 3(n
2) structures, because for each possible
pair of nodes Xi, X j we have either no edge, an edge Xi →X j, or an edge Xi ←X j. Hence, we we have
that the number of possible structures is both 2
(n2) and 2O(n2).
3. For each node Xi, we have at most ( n
k ) possible families, so that the number of possible networks is ( n
nkn = 2kn log n, giving us the upper bound. For the lower bound, consider a ﬁxed ordering on the number of
nodes, and consider each of the nodes Xi that appear in the second half of the ordering. For each of these, we
have ( n/2
k ) possible families, which, for k constant, is
(nk). Considering the choice of family only for these
nodes, the number of possible structures is at least ( n/2
k )n/2, which is 2
(kn log n).
4. For the experiments done so far, the larger domains (those with more than 7–8 variables) were typically
associated with a large set of structural constraints limiting the set of possible structures.
5. Ourlowerboundinfootnote3wasderivedinthecaseofaﬁxedordering,andthematchingupperboundcertainly
continues to hold in the more restricted case. Clearly, the number of structures in this case is substantially lower,
but that difference expresses only in the different constant factor in the exponent, which is obscured by the 
notation. (Note that a constant factor in the exponent corresponds to a different base for the exponent, a very
signiﬁcant difference.)
6. An even better estimate would be obtained if we could use all of the samples generated by the MCMC process,
but the computational cost of estimating feature probabilities for all of them would be prohibitive.
7. We note that the maximum number of parents in a family in the original Alarm network is 3, hence our choice