Tokens-to-Token ViT: Training Vision Transformers from Scratch on ImageNet
Li Yuan1*, Yunpeng Chen2, Tao Wang1,3∗, Weihao Yu1, Yujun Shi1,
Zihang Jiang1, Francis E.H. Tay1, Jiashi Feng1, Shuicheng Yan1
1 National University of Singapore
2 YITU Technology
3 Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore
 , , 
Transformers, which are popular for language modeling,
have been explored for solving vision tasks recently, e.g.,
the Vision Transformer (ViT) for image classiﬁcation. The
ViT model splits each image into a sequence of tokens with
ﬁxed length and then applies multiple Transformer layers
to model their global relation for classiﬁcation. However,
ViT achieves inferior performance to CNNs when trained
from scratch on a midsize dataset like ImageNet. We ﬁnd
it is because: 1) the simple tokenization of input images
fails to model the important local structure such as edges
and lines among neighboring pixels, leading to low training sample efﬁciency; 2) the redundant attention backbone
design of ViT leads to limited feature richness for ﬁxed computation budgets and limited training samples. To overcome
such limitations, we propose a new Tokens-To-Token Vision Transformer (T2T-ViT), which incorporates 1) a layerwise Tokens-to-Token (T2T) transformation to progressively
structurize the image to tokens by recursively aggregating
neighboring Tokens into one Token (Tokens-to-Token), such
that local structure represented by surrounding tokens can
be modeled and tokens length can be reduced; 2) an ef-
ﬁcient backbone with a deep-narrow structure for vision
transformer motivated by CNN architecture design after
empirical study. Notably, T2T-ViT reduces the parameter
count and MACs of vanilla ViT by half, while achieving
more than 3.0% improvement when trained from scratch on
ImageNet. It also outperforms ResNets and achieves comparable performance with MobileNets by directly training
on ImageNet. For example, T2T-ViT with comparable size
to ResNet50 (21.5M parameters) can achieve 83.3% top1
accuracy in image resolution 384×384 on ImageNet. 1
1. Introduction
Self-attention models for language modeling like Transformers have been recently applied to vision tasks,
including image classiﬁcation , object detec-
*Work done during an internship at Yitu Tech.
1Code: 
Figure 1. Comparison between T2T-ViT with ViT, ResNets and
MobileNets when trained from scratch on ImageNet. Left: performance curve of MACs vs. top-1 accuracy. Right: performance
curve of model size vs. top-1 accuracy.
tion and image processing like denoising, superresolution and deraining .
Among them, the Vision
Transformer (ViT) is the ﬁrst full-transformer model
that can be directly applied for image classiﬁcation. In particular, ViT splits each image into 14×14 or 16×16 patches
(a.k.a., tokens) with ﬁxed length; then following practice of
the transformer for language modeling, ViT applies transformer layers to model the global relation among these tokens for classiﬁcation.
Though ViT proves the full-transformer architecture is
promising for vision tasks, its performance is still inferior
to that of similar-sized CNN counterparts (e.g. ResNets)
when trained from scratch on a midsize dataset (e.g., ImageNet). We hypothesize that such performance gap roots
in two main limitations of ViT: 1) the straightforward tokenization of input images by hard split makes ViT unable
to model the image local structure like edges and lines,
and thus it requires signiﬁcantly more training samples (like
JFT-300M for pretraining) than CNNs for achieving similar
performance; 2) the attention backbone of ViT is not welldesigned as CNNs for vision tasks, which contains redundancy and leads to limited feature richness and difﬁculties
in model training.
To verify our hypotheses, we conduct a pilot study to
investigate the difference in the learned features of ViT-
L/16 and ResNet50 through visualization in Fig. 2.
We observe the features of ResNet capture the desired local
 
ResNet50: conv1
ViT-L/16: block24
ResNet50: conv25
ViT-L/16: block12
T2T-ViT-24: block12
T2T-ViT-24: block24
ResNet50: conv49
ViT-L/16: block1
T2T-ViT-24: T2T block1
Figure 2. Feature visualization of ResNet50, ViT-L/16 and our proposed T2T-ViT-24 trained on ImageNet. Green boxes highlight
learned low-level structure features such as edges and lines; red boxes highlight invalid feature maps with zero or too large values. Note the
feature maps visualized here for ViT and T2T-ViT are not attention maps, but image features reshaped from tokens. For better visualization,
we scale the input image to size 1024 × 1024 or 2048 × 2048.
structure (edges, lines, textures, etc.) progressively from the
bottom layer (conv1) to the middle layer (conv25). However, the features of ViT are quite different: the structure
information is poorly modeled while the global relations
(e.g., the whole dog) are captured by all the attention blocks.
These observations indicate that the vanilla ViT ignores the
local structure when directly splitting images to tokens with
ﬁxed length. Besides, we ﬁnd many channels in ViT have
zero value (highlighted in red in Fig. 2), implying the backbone of ViT is not efﬁcient as ResNets and offers limited
feature richness when training samples are not enough.
We are then motivated to design a new full-transformer
vision model to overcome above limitations. 1) Instead of
the naive tokenization used in ViT , we propose a progressive tokenization module to aggregate neighboring Tokens to one Token (named Tokens-to-Token module), which
can model the local structure information of surrounding
tokens and reduce the length of tokens iteratively. Speciﬁcally, in each Token-to-Token (T2T) step, the tokens output
by a transformer layer are reconstructed as an image (restructurization) which is then split into tokens with overlapping (soft split) and ﬁnally the surrounding tokens are
aggregated together by ﬂattening the split patches. Thus
the local structure from surrounding patches is embedded
into the tokens to be input into the next transformer layer.
By conducting T2T iteratively, the local structure is aggregated into tokens and the length of tokens can be reduced
by the aggregation process. 2) To ﬁnd an efﬁcient backbone for vision transformers, we explore borrowing some
architecture designs from CNNs to build transformer layers for improving the feature richness, and we ﬁnd “deepnarrow” architecture design with fewer channels but more
layers in ViT brings much better performance at comparable model size and MACs (Multi-Adds). Speciﬁcally, we
investigate Wide-ResNets (shallow-wide vs deep-narrow
structure) , DenseNet (dense connection) , ResneXt
structure , Ghost operation and channel attention . We ﬁnd among them, deep-narrow structure 
is the most efﬁcient and effective for ViT, reducing the parameter count and MACs signiﬁcantly with nearly no degradation in performance. This also indicates the architecture
engineering of CNNs can beneﬁt the backbone design of
vision transformers.
Based on the T2T module and deep-narrow backbone architecture, we develop the Tokens-to-Token Vision Transformer (T2T-ViT), which signiﬁcantly boosts the performance when trained from scratch on ImageNet (Fig. 1), and
is more lightweight than the vanilla ViT. As shown in Fig. 1,
our T2T-ViT with 21.5M parameters and 4.8G MACs can
achieve 81.5% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet, much higher
than that of ViT with 48.6M parameters and 10.1G
MACs (78.1%). This result is also higher than the popular CNNs of similar size, like ResNet50 with 25.5M parameters (76%-79%). Besides, we also design lite variants of
T2T-ViT by simply adopting fewer layers, which achieve
comparable results with MobileNets (Fig. 1).
To sum up, our contributions are three-fold:
• For the ﬁrst time, we show by carefully designing
transformers architecture (T2T module and efﬁcient
backbone), visual transformers can outperform CNNs
at different complexities on ImageNet without pretraining on JFT-300M.
• We develop a novel progressive tokenization for ViT
and demonstrate its advantage over the simple tokenization approach by ViT, and we propose a T2T
module that can encode the important local structure
for each token.
• We show the architecture engineering of CNNs can
beneﬁt the backbone design of ViT to improve the feature richness and reduce redundancy. Through extensive experiments, we ﬁnd deep-narrow architecture design works best for ViT.
2. Related Work
Transformers in Vision
Transformers are the models that entirely rely on the self-attention mechanism
to draw global dependencies between input and output,
and currently they have dominated natural language modelling .
A transformer layer usually consists of a multi-head self-attention layer (MSA) and
an MLP block.
Layernorm (LN) is applied before each
layer and residual connections in both the self-attention
layer and MLP block. Recent works have explored applying transformers to various vision tasks: image classiﬁcation , object detection , segmentation , image enhancement , image generation , video processing , and 3D point cloud
processing .
Among them, the Vision Transformer
(ViT) proves that a pure Transformer architecture can also
attain state-of-the-art performance on image classiﬁcation.
However, ViT heavily relies on large-scale datasets such as
ImageNet-21k and JFT-300M (which is not publically available) for model pretraining, requiring huge computation resources. In contrast, our proposed T2T-ViT is more efﬁcient
and can be trained on ImageNet without using those largescale datasets. A recent concurrent work DeiT applies
Knowledge Distillation to improve the original ViT
by adding a KD token along with the class token, which is
orthogonal to our work, as our T2T-ViT focuses on the architecture design, and our T2T-ViT can achieve higher performance than DeiT without CNN as teacher model.
Self-attention in CNNs
Self-attention mechanism has
been widely applied to CNNs in vision task .
Among these
works, the SE block applies attention to channel dimensions and non-local networks are designed for capturing long-range dependencies via global attention. Compared with most of the works exploring global attention on
images , some works also explore
self-attention in a local patch to reduce the memory and
computation cost.
More recently, SAN investigates
both pairwise and patchwise self-attention for image recognition, where the patchwise self-attention is a generalization
of convolution. In this work, we also replace the T2T module with multiple convolution layers in experiments and ﬁnd
the convolution layers do not perform better than our designed T2T module.
Tokens to Token
T2T Transformer
T2T Transformer
T2T process
step2: soft split1
step1: re-structurization
Figure 3. Illustration of T2T process.
The tokens Ti are restructurized as an image Ii after transformation and reshaping;
then Ii is split with overlapping to tokens Ti+1 again. Speciﬁcally,
as shown in the pink panel, the four tokens (1,2,4,5) of the input
Ii are concatenated to form one token in Ti+1. The T2T transformer can be a normal Transformer layer or other efﬁcient
transformers like Performer layer at limited GPU memory.
3. Tokens-to-Token ViT
To overcome the limitations of simple tokenization and
inefﬁcient backbone of ViT, we propose Tokens-to-Token
Vision Transformer (T2T-ViT) which can progressively tokenize the image to tokens and has an efﬁcient backbone.
Hence, T2T-ViT consists of two main components (Fig. 4):
1) a layer-wise “Tokens-to-Token module” (T2T module)
to model the local structure information of the image and
reduce the length of tokens progressively; 2) an efﬁcient
“T2T-ViT backbone” to draw the global attention relation
on tokens from the T2T module. We adopt a deep-narrow
structure for the backbone to reduce redundancy and improve the feature richness after exploring several CNNbased architecture designs. We now explain these components one by one.
3.1. Tokens-to-Token: Progressive Tokenization
The Token-to-Token (T2T) module aims to overcome the
limitation of simple tokenization in ViT. It progressively
structurizes an image to tokens and models the local structure information, and in this way the length of tokens can
be reduced iteratively. Each T2T process has two steps: Restructurization and Soft Split (SS) (Fig. 3).
Re-structurization
As shown in Fig. 3, given a sequence
of tokens T from the preceding transformer layer, it will
be transformed by the self-attention block (the T2T transformer in Fig. 3):
T ′ = MLP(MSA(T)),
where MSA denotes the multihead self-attention operation
with layer normalization and “MLP” is the multilayer perceptron with layer normalization in the standard Transformer . Then the tokens T ′ will be reshaped as an
image in the spatial dimension,
I = Reshape(T ′).
Here “Reshape” re-organizes tokens T ′ ∈Rl×c to I ∈
Rh×w×c, where l is the length of T ′, h, w, c are height,
width and channel respectively, and l = h × w.
Soft Split
As shown in Fig. 3, after obtaining the restructurized image I, we apply the soft split on it to model
local structure information and reduce length of tokens.
Speciﬁcally, to avoid information loss in generating tokens
from the re-structurizated image, we split it into patches
with overlapping. As such, each patch is correlated with
surrounding patches to establish a prior that there should
be stronger correlations between surrounding tokens. The
tokens in each split patch are concatenated as one token
(Tokens-to-Token, Fig. 3), and thus the local information
can be aggregated from surrounding pixels and patches.
When conducting the soft split, the size of each patch is
k×k with s overlapping and p padding on the image, where
k−s is similar to the stride in convolution operation. So for
the reconstructed image I ∈Rh×w×c, the length of output
tokens To after soft split is
h + 2p −k
w + 2p −k
Each split patch has size k × k × c. We ﬂatten all patches in
spatial dimensions to tokens To ∈Rlo×ck2. After the soft
split, the output tokens are fed for the next T2T process.
T2T module
By conducting the above Re-structurization
and Soft Split iteratively, the T2T module can progressively
reduce the length of tokens and transform the spatial structure of the image. The iterative process in T2T module can
be formulated as
i = MLP(MSA(Ti),
Ii = Reshape(T ′
Ti+1 = SS(Ii),
i = 1...(n −1).
For the input image I0, we apply a soft split at ﬁrst to split
it to tokens: T1 = SS(I0). After the ﬁnal iteration, the
output tokens Tf of the T2T module has ﬁxed length, so the
backbone of T2T-ViT can model the global relation on Tf.
Additionally, as the length of tokens in the T2T module
is larger than the normal case (16 × 16) in ViT, the MACs
and memory usage are huge. To address the limitations, in
our T2T module, we set the channel dimension of the T2T
layer small (32 or 64) to reduce MACs, and optionally adopt
an efﬁcient Transformer such as Performer layer to reduce memory usage at limited GPU memory. We provide an
ablation study on the difference between adopting standard
Transformer layer and Performer layer in our experiments.
3.2. T2T-ViT Backbone
As many channels in the backbone of vanilla ViT are invalid (Fig. 2), we plan to ﬁnd an efﬁcient backbone for our
T2T-ViT to reduce the redundancy and improve the feature
richness. Thus we explore different architecture designs for
ViT and borrow some designs from CNNs to improve the
backbone efﬁciency and enhance the richness of the learned
features. As each transformer layer has skip connection as
ResNets, a straightforward idea is to apply dense connection as DenseNet to increase the connectivity and feature richness, or apply Wide-ResNets or ResNeXt structure
to change the channel dimension and head number in the
backbone of ViT. We explore ﬁve architecture designs from
CNNs to ViT:
1. Dense connection as DenseNet ;
2. Deep-narrow vs. shallow-wide structure as in Wide-
ResNets ;
3. Channel attention as Squeeze-an-Excitation (SE) Networks ;
4. More split heads in multi-head attention layer as
ResNeXt ;
5. Ghost operations as GhostNet .
The details of these structure designs in ViT are given in the
appendix. We conduct extensive experiments on the structures transferring in Sec. 4.2. We empirically ﬁnd that 1)
by adopting a deep-narrow structure that simply decreases
channel dimensions to reduce the redundancy in channels
and increase layer depth to improve feature richness in ViT,
both the model size and MACs are decreased but performance is improved; 2) the channel attention as SE block
also improves ViT but is less effective than using the deepnarrow structure.
Based on these ﬁndings, we design a deep-narrow architecture for our T2T-ViT backbone. Speciﬁcally, it has a
small channel number and a hidden dimension d but more
layers b. For tokens with ﬁxed length Tf from the last layer
of T2T module, we concatenate a class token to it and then
add Sinusoidal Position Embedding (PE) to it, the same as
ViT to do classiﬁcation:
Tf0 = [tcls; Tf] + E,
E ∈R(l+1)×d
Tfi = MLP(MSA(Tfi−1)),
y = fc(LN(Tfb))
where E is Sinusoidal Position Embedding, LN is layer normalization, fc is one fully-connected layer for classiﬁcation
and y is the output prediction.
Fixed Tokens
Transformer layer
Transformer layer
T2T-ViT Backbone
Tokens-to-Token module
T2T Transformer
T2T Transformer
Figure 4. The overall network architecture of T2T-ViT. In the T2T module, the input image is ﬁrst soft split as patches, and then unfolded
as a sequence of tokens T0. The length of tokens is reduced progressively in the T2T module (we use two iterations here and output Tf).
Then the T2T-ViT backbone takes the ﬁxed tokens as input and outputs the predictions. The two T2T blocks are the same as Fig. 3 and PE
is Position Embedding.
Table 1. Structure details of T2T-ViT. T2T-ViT-14/19/24 have comparable model size with ResNet50/101/152. T2T-ViT-7/12 have comparable model size with MobileNetV1/V2. For T2T transformer layer, we adopt Transformer layer for T2T-ViTt-14 and Performer layer
for T2T-ViT-14 at limited GPU memory. For ViT, ‘S’ means Small, ‘B’ is Base and ‘L’ is Large. ‘ViT-S/16’ is a variant from original
ViT-B/16 with smaller MLP size and layer depth.
Tokens-to-Token module
T2T-ViT backbone
Model size
transformer
ViT-S/16 
ViT-B/16 
ViT-L/16 
T2T-ViT-14
T2T-ViT-19
T2T-ViT-24
T2T-ViTt-14
Transformer
T2T-ViT-12
3.3. T2T-ViT Architecture
The T2T-ViT has two parts: the Tokens-to-Token (T2T)
module and the T2T-ViT backbone (Fig. 4). There are various possible design choices for the T2T module. Here, we
set n = 2 as shown in Fig. 4, which means there is n+1 = 3
soft split and n = 2 re-structurization in T2T module. The
patch size for the three soft splits is P = , and the
overlapping is S = , which reduces size of the input
image from 224 × 224 to 14 × 14 according to Eqn. (3).
The T2T-ViT backbone takes tokens with ﬁxed length
from the T2T module as input, the same as ViT; but has
a deep-narrow architecture design with smaller hidden dimensions (256-512) and MLP size (512-1536) than ViT. For
example, T2T-ViT-14 has 14 transformer layers in T2T-ViT
backbone with 384 hidden dimensions, while ViT-B/16 has
12 transformer layers and 768 hidden dimensions, which is
3x larger than T2T-ViT-14 in parameters and MACs.
To fairly compare with common hand-designed CNNs,
we make T2T-ViT models have comparable size with
ResNets and MobileNets.
Speciﬁcally, we design three
T2T-ViT-14, T2T-ViT-19 and T2T-ViT-24 of
comparable parameters with ResNet50, ResNet101 and
ResNet152 respectively. To compare with small models like
MobileNets, we design two lite models: T2T-ViT-7, T2T-
ViT-12 with comparable model size with MibileNetV1 and
MibileNetV2. The two lite TiT-ViT have no special designs
or tricks like efﬁcient convolution and simply reduce
the layer depth, hidden dimension, and MLP ratio. The network details are summarized in Tab. 1.
4. Experiments
We conduct the following experiments with T2T-ViT for
image classiﬁcation on ImageNet. a) We validate the T2T-
ViT by training from scratch on ImageNet and compare it
with some common convolutional neural networks such as
ResNets and MobileNets of comparable size; we also transfer the pretrained T2T-ViT to downstream datasets such
as CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 (Sec. 4.1). (b) We compare
ﬁve T2T-ViT backbone architecture designs inspired from
CNNs (Sec. 4.2). (c) We conduct ablation study to demonstrate effects of the T2T module and the deep-narrow architecture design of T2T-ViT (Sec. 4.3).
4.1. T2T-ViT on ImageNet
All experiments are conducted on ImageNet dataset ,
with around 1.3 million images in training set and 50k images in validation set. We use batch size 512 or 1024 with 8
NVIDIA GPUs for training. We adopt Pytorch library
and Pytorch image models library (timm) to implement
our models and conduct all experiments. For fair comparisons, we implement the same training scheme for the CNN
models, ViT, and our T2T-ViT. Throughout the experiments
on ImageNet, we set default image size as 224×224 except
for some speciﬁc cases on 384 × 384, and adopt some common data augmentation methods such as mixup and
cutmix for both CNN and ViT&T2T-ViT model
training, because ViT models need more training data to
reach reasonable performance. We train these models for
310 epochs, using AdamW as the optimizer and cosine learning rate decay . The details of experiment setting are given in appendix. We also use both Transformer
layer and Performer layer in T2T module for our models, resulting in T2T-ViTt-14/19/24 (Transformer) and T2T-ViT-
14/19/24 (Performer).
T2T-ViT vs. ViT
We ﬁrst compare performance of T2T-
ViT and ViT on ImageNet. The results are given in Tab. 2.
Our T2T-ViT is much smaller than ViT in number of parameters and MACs, yet giving higher performance. For
example, the small ViT model ViT-S/16 with 48.6M and
10.1G MACs has 78.1% top-1 accuracy when trained from
scratch on ImageNet, while our T2T-ViTt-14 with only
44.2% parameters and 51.5% MACs achieves more than
3.0% improvement (81.5%). If we compare T2T-ViTt-24
with ViT-L/16, the former reduces parameters and MACs
around 500% but achieves more than 1.0% improvement
on ImageNet. Comparing T2T-ViT-14 with DeiT-small and
DeiT-small-Distilled, our T2T-ViT can achieve higher accuracy without large CNN models as teacher to enhance ViT.
We also adopt higher image resolution as 384×384 and get
83.3% accuracy by our T2T-ViT-14↑384.
T2T-ViT vs.
For fair comparisons, we set up
three T2T-ViT models that have similar model size and
MACs with ResNet50, ResNet101 and ResNet152. The experimental results are given in Tab. 3. The proposed T2T-
ViT achieves 1.4%-2.7% performance gain over ResNets
with similar model size and MACs. For example, compared
with ResNet50 of 25.5M parameters and 4.3G MACs, our
T2T-ViT-14 have 21.5M parameters and 4.8G MACs obtain
81.5% accuracy on ImageNet.
T2T-ViT vs. MobileNets
The T2T-ViT-7 and T2T-ViT-
12 have similar model size with MobileNetV1 and Mo-
Table 2. Comparison between T2T-ViT and ViT by training from
scratch on ImageNet.
Top1-Acc (%)
ViT-S/16 
DeiT-small 
DeiT-small-Distilled 
T2T-ViT-14
T2T-ViT-14↑384
ViT-B/16 
ViT-L/16 
T2T-ViT-24
Table 3. Comparison between our T2T-ViT with ResNets on ImageNet. T2T-ViTt-14: using Transformer in T2T module. T2T-
ViT-14: using Performer in T2T module. * means we train the
model with our training scheme for fair comparisons.
Top1-Acc (%)
ResNet50 
T2T-ViT-14
T2T-ViTt-14
ResNet101 
ResNet101*
T2T-ViT-19
T2T-ViTt-19
ResNet152 
ResNet152*
T2T-ViT-24
T2T-ViTt-24
bileNetV2 , but achieve comparable or higher performance than MobileNets (Tab. 4). For example, Our T2T-
ViT-12 with 6.9M parameters achieves 76.5% top1 accuracy, which is higher than MobileNetsV21.4x by 0.9%. But
we also note the MACs of our T2T-ViT are still larger than
MobileNets because of the dense operations in Transformers. However, there are no special operations or tricks like
efﬁcient convolution in current T2T-ViT-7 and T2T-
ViT-12, and we only reduce model size by reducing the hidden dimension, MLP ratio and depth of layers, indicating
T2T-ViT is also very promising as a lite model. We also apply knowledge distillation on our T2T-ViT as the concurrent
work DeiT and ﬁnd that our T2T-ViT-7 and T2T-ViT-
12 can be further improved by distillation. Overall, the experimental results show, our T2T-ViT can achieve superior
performance when it has mid-size as ResNets and reasonable results when it has a small model size as MobileNets.
Transfer learning
We transfer our pretrained T2T-ViT to
downstream datasets such as CIFAR10 and CIFAR100. We
Table 4. Comparison between our lite T2T-ViT with MobileNets.
Models with ’-Distilled’ are taught by teacher model with the
method as DeiT .
Top1-Acc (%)
MobileNetV1 1.0x*
T2T-ViT-7-Distilled
MobileNetV2 1.0x*
MobileNetV2 1.4x*
MobileNetV3 (Searched)
T2T-ViT-12
T2T-ViT-12-Distilled
Table 5. The results of ﬁne-tuning the pretrained T2T-ViT to downstream datasets: CIFAR10 and CIFAR100.
Params (M)
T2T-ViT-14
T2T-ViT-19
ﬁnetune the pretrained T2T-ViT-14/19 with 60 epochs by
using SGD optimizer and cosine learning rate decay.The
results are given in Tab. 5.
We ﬁnd that our T2T-ViT
can achieve higher performance than the original ViT with
smaller model sizes on the downstream datasets.
4.2. From CNN to ViT
To ﬁnd an efﬁcient backbone for vision transformers,
we experimentally apply DenseNet structure, Wide-ResNet
structure (wide or narrow channel dimensions), SE block
(channel attention), ResNeXt structure (more heads in multihead attention), and Ghost operation from CNN to ViT.
The details of these architecture designs are given in the
appendix. From experimental results on “CNN to ViT” in
Tab. 6, we can ﬁnd both SE (ViT-SE) and Deep-Narrow
structure (ViT-DN) beneﬁt the ViT but the most effective
structure is deep-narrow structure, which decreases model
size and MACs nearly 2x and brings 0.9% improvement on
the baseline model ViT-S/16.
We further apply these structures from CNN to our T2T-
ViT, and conduct experiments on ImageNet under the same
training scheme.
We take ResNet50 as the baseline for
CNN, ViT-S/16 for ViT, and T2T-ViT-14 for T2T-ViT. All
experimental results are given in Tab. 6, and those on CNN
and ViT&T2T-ViT are marked with the same colors. We
summarize the effects of each CNN-based structure below.
Deep-narrow structure beneﬁts ViT:
The models ViT-
DN (Deep-Narrow) and ViT-SW (Shallow-Wide) in Tab. 6
are two opposite designs in channel dimension and layer
depth, where ViT-DN has 384 hidden dimensions and 16
layers and ViT-SW has 1,024 hidden dimensions and 4 layers. Compared with the baseline model ViT-S/16 with 768
hidden dimensions and 8 layers, shallow-wide model ViT-
SW has 8.2% decrease in performance while ViT-DN with
only half of model size and MACs achieve 0.9% increase.
These results validate our hypothesis that vanilla ViT with
shallow-wide structure is redundant in channel dimensions
and limited feature richness with shallow layers.
Dense connection hurts performance of both ViT and
Compared with the ResNet50, DenseNet201
has smaller parameters and comparable MACs, while it has
higher performance. However, the dense connection can
hurt performance of ViT-Dense and T2T-ViT-Dense (dark
blue rows in Tab. 6).
SE block improves both ViT and T2T-ViT:
rows in Tab. 6, we can ﬁnd SENets, ViT-SE and T2T-ViT-
SE are higher than the corresponding baseline.
module can improve performance on both CNN and ViT,
which means applying attention to channels beneﬁts both
CNN and ViT models.
ResNeXt structure has few effects on ViT and T2T-ViT:
ResNeXts adopt multi-head on ResNets, while Transformers are also multi-head attention structure. When we adopt
more heads like 32, we can ﬁnd it has few effects on performance (red rows in Tab 6). However, adopting a large
number of heads makes the GPU memory large, which is
thus unnecessary in ViT and T2T-ViT.
Ghost can further compress model and reduce MACs of
Comparing experimental results of Ghost operation (magenta row in Tab. 6), the accuracy decreases
2.9% on ResNet50, 2.0% on T2T-ViT, and 4.4% on ViT.
So the Ghost operation can further reduce the parameters
and MACs of T2T-ViT with smaller performance degradation than ResNet. But for the original ViT, it would cause
more decrease than ResNet.
Besides, for all ﬁve structures, the T2T-ViT performs
better than ViT, which further validates the superiority of
our proposed T2T-ViT. And we also wish this study of transferring CNN structure to ViT can motivate the network design of Transformers in vision tasks.
4.3. Ablation study
To further identify effects of T2T module and deepnarrow structure, we do ablation study on our T2T-ViT.
T2T module
To verify the effects of the proposed T2T
module, we experimentally compare three different models:
T2T-ViT-14, T2T-ViT-14wo T 2T , and T2T-ViTt-14, where
T2T-ViT-14wo T 2T has the same T2T-ViT backbone but
without T2T module. We can ﬁnd with similar model size
and MACs, the T2T module can improve model performance by 2.0%-2.2% on ImageNet.
As the soft split in T2T module is similar to convolution operation without convolution ﬁlters, we also replace
the T2T module by 3 convolution layers with kernel size
(7,3,3), stride size (4,2,2) respectively. Such a model with
Table 6. Transfer of some common designs in CNN to ViT&T2T-ViT, including DenseNet, Wide-ResNet, SE module, ResNeXt, Ghost
operation. The same color means the correspond transfer. All models are trained from scratch on ImageNet. * means we reproduce the
model with our training scheme for fair comparisons.
Model Type
Top1-Acc (%)
Params (M)
Hidden dim
Traditional CNN
AlexNet 
VGG11 
Inception v3 
Skip-connection CNN
ResNet50 
ResNet50* (Baseline)
Wide-ResNet18x1.5*
78.0 (-1.1)
DenseNet201*
77.5 (-1.6)
80.3 (+1.2)
ResNeXt50*
79.9 (+0.8)
ResNet50-Ghost*
76.2 (-2.9)
CNN to ViT
ViT-S/16 (Baseline)
79.0 (+0.9)
69.9 (-8.2)
76.8 (-1.3)
78.4 (+0.3)
ViT-ResNeXt
78.0 (-0.1)
73.7 (-4.4)
CNN to T2T-ViT
T2T-ViT-14 (Baseline)
T2T-ViT-Wide
77.9 (-3.4)
T2T-ViT-Dense
80.6 (-1.1)
T2T-ViT-SE
81.6 (+0.1)
T2T-ViT-ResNeXt
81.5 (+0.0)
T2T-ViT-Ghost
79.5 (-2.0)
Table 7. Ablation study results on T2T module, Deep-Narrow(DN)
structure.
Ablation type
T2T module
T2T-ViT-14wo T 2T
T2T-ViT-14
81.5 (+2.0)
T2T-ViTt-14
81.7 (+2.2)
T2T-ViTc-14
80.8 (+1.3)
DN Structure
T2T-ViT-14
T2T-ViT-d768-4
78.8 (-2.7)
convolution layers to build T2T module is denoted as T2T-
From Tab. 7, we can ﬁnd the T2T-ViTc-14 is
worse than T2T-ViT-14 and T2T-ViTt-14 by 0.5%-1.0% on
ImageNet. We also note that the T2T-ViTc-14 is still higher
than T2T-ViT-14wo T 2T , as the convolution layers in the
early stage can also model the structure information. But
our designed T2T module is better than the convolution layers as it can model both the global relation and the structure
information of the images.
Deep-narrow structure
We use the deep-narrow structure with fewer hidden dimensions but more layers, rather
than the shallow-wide one in the original ViT. We compare the T2T-ViT-14 and T2T-ViT-d768-4 to verify its effects. T2T-ViT-d768-4 is a shallow-wide structure with hidden dimension of 768 and 4 layers, with similar model size
and MACs as T2T-ViT-14. From Tab. 7, we can ﬁnd after changing our deep-narrow to shallow-wide structure, the
T2T-ViT-d768-4 has 2.7% decrease in top-1 accuracy, validating deep-narrow structure is crucial for T2T-ViT.
5. Conclusion
In this work, we propose a new T2T-ViT model that can
be trained from scratch on ImageNet and achieve comparable or even better performance than CNNs. T2T-ViT effectively models the structure information of images and enhances feature richness, overcoming limitations of ViT. It
introduces the novel tokens-to-token (T2T) process to progressively tokenize images to tokens and structurally aggregate tokens. We also explore various architecture design choices from CNNs for improving T2T-ViT performance, and empirically ﬁnd the deep-narrow architecture
performs better than the shallow-wide structure. Our T2T-
ViT achieves superior performance to ResNets and comparable performance to MobileNets with similar model size
when trained from scratch on ImageNet. It paves the way
for further developing transformer-based models for vision