Natural Scales in Geographical Patterns
Telmo Menezes1, ∗and Camille Roth2, 1, 3, †
1Centre Marc Bloch Berlin e.V., Friedrichstr. 191, 10117 Berlin, Germany
2Sciences Po, m´edialab, 84 rue de Grenelle, 75007 Paris, France
3Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque, France
Human mobility is known to be distributed across several orders of magnitude of physical distances, which makes it generally diﬃcult to endogenously ﬁnd or deﬁne typical and meaningful
scales. Relevant analyses, from movements to geographical partitions, seem to be relative to some
ad-hoc scale, or no scale at all. Relying on geotagged data collected from photo-sharing social media,
we apply community detection to movement networks constrained by increasing percentiles of the
distance distribution. Using a simple parameter-free discontinuity detection algorithm, we discover
clear phase transitions in the community partition space. The detection of these phases constitutes
the ﬁrst objective method of characterising endogenous, natural scales of human movement. Our
study covers nine regions, ranging from cities to countries of various sizes and a transnational area.
For all regions, the number of natural scales is remarkably low (2 or 3). Further, our results hint at
scale-related behaviours rather than scale-related users. The partitions of the natural scales allow us
to draw discrete multi-scale geographical boundaries, potentially capable of providing key insights
in ﬁelds such as epidemiology or cultural contagion where the introduction of spatial boundaries is
INTRODUCTION
Geographical scaling has been at the core of a wealth
of studies of human mobility.
On one hand, physical distances between connected individuals or between related places have repeatedly been shown to
hardly obey any distinctive scale, let alone exhibit distinct phases.
Distance frequencies observed in large
geotagged datasets of human behaviour usually follow
strongly heterogeneous distributions spanning several orders of magnitude, be it for links based on cell phone
movements14,17 and calls9,18,31, social media “checkins”10,22 or postings4, commutes20,29 or taxi rides21, or
circulation of artifacts8. On the other hand, this type
of data has more recently been used to uncover geographically consistent areas based on clusters of places,
movements or interactions3,7,11,13,19,22,27,31,34,35 where,
in essence, the relevant literature generally proceeds on
the assumption that all empirical measurements, irrespective of their diverse spatial scales, should be taken
into account to form a single global picture. The choice of
the appropriate description scale is left to the beholder:
ex ante, when gathering data within a given bounding
box, and often ex post, by focusing on a proper description scale.
Here, behavioural traces spanning several
orders of magnitudes are typically aggregated independently of the physical scale they correspond to; then, geographical areas or patterns are uncovered by community
detection algorithms; a ﬁnal level of description is ﬁnally
chosen according to some criterion.
In practice, these
methods generally produce dendrograms deﬁning an embedded series of geographical partitions, where lowerlevel partitions include higher-level ones in a continuum
of increasingly coarse description scales.
An appropriate level of the dendrogram is eventually selected because it either maximises some quantity (typically modularity in network-based methods34), yields a clear-cut
dichotomy31, or best matches some a priori known description scale13. Results are therefore single-scale rather
than scale-free: the aim generally consists in discovering
or, rather, recovering a gold standard geographic partition of a given area — such as the partition of Belgium
into two linguistic communities31, or the breakdown of
administrative regions in Great Britain27. While some
studies showed that long- and short-distance connections
play distinct roles in deﬁning clusters34, the quest for an
ideal set of clusters which have to be discovered once and
for all (and possibly aggregated into larger blocks13 until
a binary dichotomy is reached31) remains pregnant.
We show here that the choice of observation scales is
neither exogenous nor univocal. To this end, we demonstrate that it is possible to endogenously uncover a small
number of meaningful description scale ranges from apparently scale-free raw data. In other words, geographical data on human behaviour encloses several coexisting
and natural phases which we recover despite the absence
of scale at the lower level of link distance distributions.
Empirically, we rely on human mobility data stemming
from Instagram, an online photo-sharing service targeted
at smartphone users. Distributions of link distances between successive user locations are unsurprisingly devoid
of a typical scale (see Fig. S2). Admittedly, this heterogeneity corresponds to an entanglement of a variety of human behaviours, ranging for instance from local commuting to long-range travel. The ubiquitous scale-free distribution of distances certainly aggregates links of diverse
nature (and, in turn, depends on diverse geographical
patterns, such as borders). However, we draw markedly
distinct conclusions than the current state of the art as
regards its signiﬁcance. Rather than using all the data
and discussing the optimality of a high-level observation
scale a posteriori, we work the other way around by a
priori relying on link scale to blindly deﬁne a series of
scale-dependent networks. These networks are based on
 
an increasing link distance threshold and thus conﬁgure
an increasing movement radius. This then yields a series
of geographical partitions from which we derive a small
number of remarkably consistent high-level observation
scales. This simultaneously deﬁnes a small set of relevant
low-level scales, in terms of link distances or movement
In other words, we disentangle the endogenous scale
structure by exhibiting phase transitions based on the
similarity of geographical patterns. Therefore, while we
acknowledge that territories are potentially structured
by partially overlapping partitions, we contend that the
underlying behaviour corresponds to only a few sensible
scales. We liken this implicit ﬁnding to the explicit, manmade hierarchies which can be found in more traditional
top-down approaches relying on discrete ontologies featuring a small number of embedded spatial scales, such
as administrative divisions (e.g. NUTS)13.
EMPIRICAL APPROACH
We obtained datasets of human movement in a variety
of geographical regions from public data extracted from
Instagram over a period of 16 months (See Materials and
Methods section for a complete and formal description of
the techniques and algorithms discussed here). Modern
smartphones contain geolocation technology that can be
employed to geotag photos, and many users accept this
setting. Instagram associates photos with the identiﬁer
of the users who took them, and it also timestamps them.
The global adoption of Instagram in the last few years
make it a considerable trove of geosocial data for a
nascent literature. Regarding mobility in particular, several recent works demonstrated that reliable mobility
data could be extracted from photo-posting and check-in
platforms4,10,11,22, while Instagram appears to be both.
Focusing on individual movements,30 shows that geographical patterns inferred from Instagram are similar to
those found in data stemming in Foursquare, a so-called
“check-in” platform where users typically broadcast their
position to their friends (however, temporal patterns and
posting behaviours diﬀer between the two platforms, suggesting that they correspond to distinct Internet uses). A
more recent study7 deals more precisely with sociospatial
patterns and divisions at the level of cities. It describes
how Instagram may be used to reveal clusters of users and
places which are qualitatively meaningful and consistent
with the manual analysis of the information made available by users on their account (describing for instance
their profession, aﬃliations, interests).
For the purpose of this work we are not interested in
the photos themselves, but only in the metadata.
tracking the places where a given user took photos we
can infer the plausible relatedness between any two given
locations in a region.
We focus on nine diﬀerent areas, that were chosen to
oﬀer a diversity of cases according to several criteria:
Belgium, Portugal, Poland, Ukraine, Israel, the wider
Benelux region and the cities of Berlin and Paris. We
have thus ﬁve countries of various sizes, a transnational
region in Western Europe and two cities.
Voronoi diagrams and human movement graphs
We work with two main formalisms:
Voronoi diagrams1 and weighted graphs of intensity of human movement between places.
Given a pre-deﬁned set of geographical positions in a region – let us call them seeds
– the Voronoi diagram partitions the plane in cells, such
that every cell corresponds to a seed. Voronoi diagrams
have the property that any point in a cell is closer to
the cell seed than to any other seed. This allows us to
discretise the space, by assigning each photo in a region
to a Voronoi cell. The pre-deﬁned positions are also the
vertices in the graph, while the weight of an edge is simply the number of users that the two vertices share —
that is, the number of users that took at least one photo
in each location.
From these weighted graphs we generate distributions
of edge distances which we divide into 100 percentiles.
This constitutes the full spectrum of scales that we work
with. The use of percentiles of the distance distribution
allows for the deﬁnition of comparable scales across regions, while the absolute distance values that correspond
to each scale are determined by the aggregate of human
movement in a given region.
A graph connecting the
positions in a region is generated for each one of these
percentiles, by considering only connections with a distance up to the given percentile. In other words, for each
region, the graph at scale s gathers s% of all observed
movements ranked by increasing distance, i.e. movements
up to the distance radius that corresponds to percentile
Geographical clusters and boundaries
Scale-dependent graphs are partitioned using a community detection algorithm. The detection of geographical clusters often relies on network-based community
detection method, for instance in9 where county-level
borders are reconstructed by maximising modularity of
graph communities in US-based cell phone data, in22
which is based on a weighted network of check-in trajectories, or13 where Louvain is applied on a commuter
network. This class of algorithms attempts to ﬁnd the
partition of a graph with the highest modularity, which
is the fraction of edges inside the partitions normalised
by the expected fraction on a random graph with the
same degree distribution. Modularity thus measures the
strength of a given partition24.
At this stage we switch to Voronoi diagrams. Their
cells can now be assigned to geographical clusters according to the results of the above step. To remove residual
noise, a smoothing process is applied over the partitioned
diagrams. The actual geographical boundaries can now
be computed. Two locations are considered neighbours
if their respective Voronoi cells share a boundary. Edges
shared by two Voronoi cells assigned to diﬀerent communities are drawn as boundaries.
Phase transitions and natural scales
After community detection and smoothing for every
percentile-scale, we are in a position to analyse the similarity between scales.
More speciﬁcally, we are interested in seeing if there are well-deﬁned ranges of scales
that are suﬃciently similar amongst each other and suf-
ﬁciently distinct between ranges so that we can talk of
natural scales, and reduce the 100 percentiles to a smaller
number of scales.
Using a simple parameter-free breakpoint detection algorithm we are able to ﬁnd phase transitions in scale
We understand “phase transition” in a generic
way, i.e. it corresponds to an abrupt change in the behaviour of partitions when slightly increasing the movement radius, going from a scale to the next ones. For
the nine regions under study, our algorithm ﬁnds that
the scale space is divided into no more than 2 or 3 welldiﬀerentiated intervals of scales characterised by very
similar patterns.
Aggregating increasingly long links
while remaining below the upper bound of a given interval does not alter signiﬁcantly the space partition typical
of that interval. We call these intervals natural scales.
Moreover, the breakpoints automatically found by our
algorithm mostly match the visual intuition: in ﬁgure 1,
we see that these phase transitions are also quite obvious
simply by visual inspection.
Multi-level partitions and prototypical scales
Given intervals of similar scales or natural scales, it is
now desirable to have a method to visualise the boundaries deﬁned by the partitions in those intervals.
propose a simple solution: identify the percentile that
best represents the entire interval. We call this prototypical percentile a prototypical scale of the region under
study. The prototypical scale of a given interval is the
percentile of the interval with the corresponding partition that is the most similar to all other partitions in the
Prototypical scales found for each region are
also represented in ﬁgure 1, along with natural scales.
By construction, partitions the various scales of a given
natural scale should thus roughly resemble the partition
of the corresponding prototypical scale. In the following
maps, prototypical scales are thus used as visual representations of natural scales.
Figure 2 uses the results for Belgium to illustrate how
natural scales correspond to partitions in the map, and
how the several natural scales can be combined in a single
multiscale map, which provides richer information about
the geographical patterns of the region than what is possible with more traditional methods. By using the full
graph (percentile 100) and forcing the community detection algorithm to ﬁnd the best partition in two communities, we present a bipartite division of the territory. As
can be observed, the resulting partition matches almost
perfectly the border between the two largest linguistic
communities in Belgium. This is a well known result5,31
and it shows two things. On one hand, when we simplify our method this way, thus making it equivalent to
previously published approaches, we obtain similar results, which provides some evidence of correctness. On
the other hand, adopting these simpliﬁcations is most
likely not the best way to unravel the structure of movement patterns in Belgium: to the contrary, for all scale
phases, a bipartition does not achieve the best modularity, which usually corresponds to a larger number of
geographical areas (Fig. 2).
Following our method, Belgium may be more precisely
decomposed as an overlay of three territorial partitions of
increasing ﬁneness. The largest natural scale features a
partition based on a small number of broad areas whose
boundaries correspond to inter-urban mobility, as it only
emerges when links longer than 81.5 km are included.
By contrast, the smallest natural scale is such that most
boundaries surround and enclose a local capital; it is
based on links smaller than r ≤38.6 km. The middle natural scale appears when links between 38.6 and 81.5 km
are considered. Interestingly, it diverges from the longdistance scale by only a few boundaries: for instance,
while Hasselt is part of a broader Dutch-speaking cluster
on the large-scale map, it belongs to the same cluster as
Liege at the medium scale.
Finally, in ﬁgure 3, we further present the multi-scale
maps for all nine regions. We also depict the absolute
physical distances for all natural scale thresholds. Note
that the absolute physical meaning of “large” or “small”
scale is heavily region-dependent:
for Paris, which is
a quite dense metropolis extending over a comparably
small area, the smallest natural scale typically covers a
range of pedestrian movements (r ≤2.1 km). For Berlin,
the switch between the small and large natural scales occurs at a radius of r ≤10.0 km which could correspond
to “local” foot, bike or metro trips. For the largest regions such as Poland, Romania or Ukraine, they seem
to correspond to a wider range of motorised inter-urban
displacements, roughly around the order of magnitude of
a hundred of kilometers.
A set of high-resolution maps for all natural scales as
well as multi-scale representations of all regions may be
found in the Supp. Info. Performing a thorough sociogeographic analysis of these maps is beyond the scope
of this article, but we can identify some features that
conﬁrm folk knowledge about certain regions. In Portu-
FIG. 1. Scale dissimilarity heat maps. Dissimilarity values are normalized per region to a scale. Lighter colors represent
higher dissimilarity. Pure black (0.0) corresponds to a perfect match, bright yellow (1.0) to the maximum dissimilarity found
for the region. Dashed blue lines indicate the discontinuities identiﬁed by the breakpoint detection algorithm and, accordingly,
natural scales; green dots represent the prototypical scale for each natural scale interval. The mean absolute dissimilarity value
per pair of intervals is shown. A value in a green background corresponds to an internal mean dissimilarity (the interval is
being compared to itself); a black background indicates a mean dissimilarity between diﬀerent intervals.
gal, large scale boundaries delineate the highly touristic
beaches of Algarve in the south and fuzzily divide the
country into north and south regions, while the short
scales provide sensible local partitions, for example the
dense city of Oporto and the socio-economic divide between the capital city of Lisbon and the neighbouring but
more aﬄuent Cascais/Estoril coastal area. The Benelux
map enriches the previous insight on Belgium by providing a broader picture on potential cross-national interfaces – an achievement not possible with country-speciﬁc
datasets traditionally used in the literature – here, the
highest scale exhibits a mix of expected international
borders (for instance between Belgium and the Netherlands) and fuzzy cross-national spaces (such as the wide
FIG. 2. Belgium borders at diﬀerent scales. a) Heat map extracted from ﬁgure 1; b) Borders for the long distance scale;
c) Borders for the short distance scale; d) Borders for the middle distance scale; e) Multiscale borders; f) Borders based
on optimal two community partition of the full graph; g) Language communities of Belgium.
All maps except g) were
generated by the authors using the Basemap Matplotlib Toolkit ver.
1.0.8 ( 
c⃝Wikimedia contributers Vascer and Knorck, licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0. The licence terms can be found on the following
link: 
commuting area surrounding Luxembourg, or the narrow
strips adjacent to the French-Belgian border, e.g. around
Lille), while leaving room for cross-border low-scale patterns. Paris features both the traditional east-west sociological partition of the city, while exhibiting more speciﬁc activity neighbourhoods at the lower level (Quartier
Latin, Belleville, the governmental area).
Scale-dependent user behavior
Natural scales thus describe geographical areas and
boundaries operating within a broad range of scale percentiles, though not beyond. In this respect, they correspond to a discrete spectrum of mobility behaviours
which most likely unveil consistent yet distinct spatial
practices of the underlying region.
How are scales,
boundaries and user behaviour related?
For one, we
observe on ﬁgure 3 that some regions such as Poland
or Romania appear to exhibit a much higher proportion
of smaller, lower-scale patterns than other regions such
as Paris or Benelux.
We ﬁnd that these discrepancies
have an interpretation in terms of user-level mobility behaviour: regions where movement distance distributions
are broadest (i.e. where low and high percentiles correspond to markedly distinct physical distances) also exhibit a much larger amount of small-radius geographical
patterns at the shortest scale (see ﬁgures S3 and S4 of
Supp. Info.). In other words, we show that the relative
amount of patterns across the spectrum of natural scales
corresponds to a relative spread of actual physical link
distances across that same spectrum.
We further examine the relationship between natural
scales and user-level behaviour by assigning to users the
set of natural scales that they contributed to. We consider that users contribute to a natural scale if they perform at least one movement with a distance within the
corresponding scale interval.
Figure 4 shows a mixed
picture. Overall, the proportion of users contributing exclusively to the highest scales is generally small, while
the shortest scales are the most populated. At the same
time, the most active users in terms of visited locations
(as well as posted photos, see Supp. Info.) are those who
span the most scales. From this we conclude that there
exists a wide core of users active in all scales, which additionally always gathers a sizable proportion of all users
(often the highest proportion).
This hints at the fact
that natural scales are based on scale-related behaviours
rather than scale-related users.
Several multi-scale maps.
Green corresponds to the smallest natural scale, blue to the middle (if it exists)
and red to the largest.
All maps were generated by the authors using the Basemap Matplotlib Toolkit ver.
( Map tiles used in the background of the Berlin and Paris maps c⃝OpenStreetMap contributors, licensed under CC BY-SA (www.openstreetmap.org/copyright). The licence terms can be found on the following
link: .
CONCLUDING REMARKS
By eﬀectively distinguishing link scales and deﬁning
an increasing series of more and more global networks,
we show that territories are automatically decomposable
into a partially overlapping hierarchy of geographical partitions and, further, that this hierarchy exhibits a remarkably small number of natural scales.
Besides, we
fulﬁlled in the case of spatial mobility networks the ambition of ﬁnding natural phases in community partitions
based on some notion of resolution (see ref.36 for nongeographical scale-free networks). In contrast with the
classical expectation that aggregate mobility data is essentially scale-free, we were able to uncover a discrete
number of distance thresholds and radii conﬁguring consistent movement patterns.
FIG. 4. Fraction of users contributing to each natural scale.
The area of each slice/circle is proportional to the number of
users active in the set of scales that it represents (for instance,
“12” corresponds to users contributing exclusively to scales 1
and 2). User activity is represented by slice darkness, which is
proportional to the number of visited locations relative to the
maximal activity of a given region (100%): here, “123” users
are always the darkest / most active slice, they consistently
visit many more locations than other users.
More broadly, understanding and breaking up mobility
patterns as an overlay of a small number of endogenous
scale-speciﬁc behaviours bears important consequences
in diverse ﬁelds such as epidemiology, cultural contagion
and public policy2,15,25 where the low-level modeling of
displacements4,10,28,32,33 is pivotal: here, the introduction of boundary conditions based on a scaﬀolding of a
small number of natural scales emerging endogenously
from the data could prove to be particularly fruitful.
The datasets used in this paper can be obtained by
request to the corresponding author. The source code of
the programs that implement all the data retrieval and
processing tasks discussed in this paper was released as
open source and is available in a public repository23.
Data collection and preprocessing
The Instagram API allows for the collection of all the
meta-data and comments of photos on a maximal 5 km
radius around a given geographical coordinate. To de-
ﬁne points of interest, for countries we use a worldwide
database of geographical locations with more than 500
inhabitants. For cities we simply deﬁne a dense enough
grid that guarantees that the entire territory is covered,
given the 5 km radius around each point. We then query
the API for all photo meta-data within the maximal radius around each point. Given the possibility of overlap
for locations close to each other, we perform further data
processing to remove duplicates and associate each photo
with the closest known location.
Networks, scales and boundaries
We use the previous data to generate a weighted graph
connecting the set of locations. This graph is undirected
and based on user movement, by considering the set of
locations where a same user took photos. The weight of
an edge represents the number of users who took photos
in both the locations connected by the edge. Conventionally, we can represent this graph as G = {V, E}, where
V is the set of locations and E ⊂V × V × N the set of
weighted edges.
We ﬁnally remove all vertices with a very low degree
(which we deﬁne in ad hoc fashion as less than 5 for all
regions). Intuitively, this means that we only consider
locations where at least 5 diﬀerent users took photos.
These very low activity locations are highly susceptible
to sampling distortion and introduce noise in the community detection process.
Percentile graphs
One graph is generated for each distance percentile,
which thereby deﬁnes a scale. Let us consider ms to be
the maximum absolute distance for percentile or scale s,
and d(e) a function that gives the distance between the
two vertices of edge e. The graph Gs for scale s is then
deﬁned as:
Gs = {V, Es}, where Es = {e ∈E | d(e) ≤ms}
Network partitions
We employ the well-known Louvain method6 — a de
facto gold standard in network community detection,
widely used for the high quality of its results at a low
computational cost — as implemented in the igraph software package12,37.
Optimal community detection, like
many clustering problems, is probably NP-hard16. The
Louvain method is thus an approximation algorithm. It
is also non-deterministic. To both achieve higher quality
partitions and increase the stability of partitions across
scales, we perform 100 runs of Louvain for each graph,
and choose the result that attains the highest modularity.
Another common approach is to consider all the
outcomes of a large number of runs, and visualise the
partitions in a way that assigns visual weights to boundaries in proportion to the number of times they appear34.
Given that we are working with the extra dimension of
scale, we avoid this approach for the sake of simplicity.
Notice that community detection is performed on the
graph of locations, with no information on the geographic
proximity of the vertices. Fortunately, we do ﬁnd that
the communities detected are mostly contiguous, with
some noise (see Supp. Info.).
The Louvain method can produce an arbitrary number
of partitions. To validate our results, we are also interested in producing bi-partitions. To achieve this, we take
the best partition found by Louvain and exhaustively try
all possible merges of the given partitions into two. The
merge with the highest modularity (although typically
lower than the result produced by Louvain) is chosen.
Geographical boundary smoothing
We use this notion of Voronoi neighbourhood to de-
ﬁne a smoothing process.
From the partition process
of the previous section, every location is assigned to a
community. If the majority of the neighbours of a location (including the location itself) belong to a diﬀerent community, then the cell is assigned to this majority
community. The process is repeated iteratively, until the
previous condition is not triggered.
The geographical boundaries are ﬁnally deﬁned by the
Voronoi cell boundaries for which the two neighbouring
cells’ locations do not belong to the same community.
Scale similarity, breakpoint detection and
natural scales
Measuring partition similarity
Firstly we deﬁne a metric of similarity between two
partitions of a same set of locations using a Rand index26. Consider V the set of locations (as before) and Ps
and Ps′ two partitions of V produced at scales s and s′
by community detection followed by smoothing. A partition is deﬁned as a set of subsets of locations, it is thus
included in P(V ).
Let us deﬁne a function µP (i, j) that takes the value 1
if both i and j belong to the same subset of a partition
P, 0 otherwise:
µP (i, j) =
1, if ∃X ∈P such that i, j ∈X
0, otherwise
We can then deﬁne the similarity of Ps and Ps′ as the
ratio between the number of pairs of locations in V that
have the same value of µ for both Ps and Ps′ (i.e. they
are classiﬁed similarly at scales s and s′), and the total
number of possible location pairs:
δ(V, Ps, Ps′) = |{(i, j) ∈V 2, i ̸= j, µPs(i, j) = µPs′(i, j)}|
Intervals of similar scales
The above δ metric allows us to compare graph partitions for each percentile against every other percentile.
An immediate application is visual inspection, by generating heatmaps as the ones show in ﬁgure 1. A central
question to the research being presented in this article is
whether partitions Ps change smoothly as s increase, or
if there are clear discontinuities. The heatmaps indicate
quite clearly that the discontinuities do exist.
To identify the breakpoints in partition similarity we
introduce another metric, somewhat similar to the concept of modularity in graphs – albeit even simpler.
This metric measures interval separation, given a set of
breakpoints B = {b0, ..., bn}.
Let us also consider the
set of intervals deﬁned by these breakpoints: I(B) =
{]0..b0], ]b0, b1], ..., ]bn, 100]}. The interval separation for
a given B can thus be deﬁned as:
I∈I(B) |I| · P
s,s′∈I δ(V, Ps, Ps′)
b∈B\{b0} δ(V, Pb−1, Pb)
Intuitively, this is a ratio between the mean similarity within intervals (weighted by the interval size) and
the maximum similarity between consecutive partitions
in diﬀerent intervals. The higher the σ, the greater the
similarity between partitions in the same interval compared to the worst case similarity between partitions on
both sides of a breakpoint between consecutive intervals.
Using this metric, we deﬁne a simple algorithm that
iteratively adds breakpoints until σ can no longer be improved. We deﬁne a minimum interval size of 5 to avoid
isolating noisy outliers. In practice, the minimum interval only has an eﬀect on the two cities, for which the very
ﬁnal scales are indeed quite noisy.
Prototypical scales
Intervals thus deﬁne natural scales and for a given interval I, we deﬁne the prototypical scale sI as the percentile of I with the partition that is the most similar to
all other partitions in I. To formalise:
sI = argmaxs∈I
δ(V, Ps, Ps′)
Multi-scale smoothing
The smoothing method that was previously described
can be extended to a set of partitions at s diﬀerent scales.
To each Voronoi tile we assign a tuple consisting of the
community number (ci) that the tile x belongs to at each
scale after applying Louvain:
tx =< c0, ..., cs >
Such tuples are treated as values, and the majority rule
is applied as before. If a certain tuple is in the majority
in the neighbourhood of tx, then tx takes the value of
that entire tuple.
The advantage of this approach is that it leads to a
greater overlap of borders from diﬀerent scales. The cost
is that some precision is lost. As can be seen, for example
in ﬁgure 2, there are some deviations from the borders
at individual natural scales to the borders on the same
scales of the multiscale map. We contend that this is a
reasonable compromise for the purpose of apprehending
the relationship between the diﬀerent natural scales in a
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This paper has been partially supported by grants
“Phantomgrenzen”
(ANR-15-CE38-
funded respectively by the BMBF (German
Federal Ministry for Education and Research) and
by the ANR (French National Agency of Research).
We warmly thank B´eatrice von Hirschhausen, Sabine
von L¨owis and Karin Casanova for useful discussions
and remarks.
We are also grateful for constructive
anonymous review comments.
∗ 
† 
1 Franz Aurenhammer. Voronoi diagrams-a survey of a fundamental geometric data structure. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 23(3):345–405, 1991.
2 Duygu Balcan, Vittoria Colizza, Bruno Gon¸calves, Hao
Hu, Jos´e J. Ramasco, and Alessandro Vespignani. Multiscale mobility networks and the spatial spreading of infectious diseases. PNAS, 106(51):21484–21489, 2009.
3 Aleix Bassolas, Maxime Lenormand, Ant`onia Tugores,
Bruno Gon¸calves, and Jos´e J. Ramasco.
Touristic site
attractiveness seen through twitter.
EPJ Data Science,
5(1):1–9, 2016.
4 Mariana G. Beir´o, Andr´e Panisson, Michele Tizzoni, and
Ciro Cattuto. Predicting human mobility through the assimilation of social media traces into mobility models. EPJ
Data Science, 5(30), 2016.
5 Vincent Blondel, Gautier Krings, Isabelle Thomas, et al.
Regions and borders of mobile telephony in belgium and
in the brussels metropolitan zone. Brussels Studies, 2010.
6 Vincent D Blondel, Jean-Loup Guillaume, Renaud Lambiotte, and Etienne Lefebvre. Fast unfolding of communities in large networks. Journal of Statistical Mechanics:
Theory and Experiment, 2008(10):P10008, 2008.
7 John D. Boy and Justus Uitermark. How to study the city
on instagram. PLoS ONE, 11(6):e0158161, 2016.
8 D. Brockmann, L. Hufnagel, and T. Geisel. The scaling
laws of human travel. Nature, 439:462–465, 2006.
9 Francesco Calabrese, Dominik Dahlem, Alexandre Gerber,
Deirdre Paul, Xiaoji Chen, James Rowland, Christopher
Rath, and Carlo Ratti. The connected states of america:
Quantifying social radii of inﬂuence. In Privacy, Security,
Risk and Trust (PASSAT) and 2011 IEEE Third Inernational Conference on Social Computing (SocialCom), 2011
IEEE Third International Conference on, pages 223–230.
IEEE, 2011.
10 Eunjoon Cho, Seth A. Myers, and Jure Leskovec. Friendship and mobility: User movement in location-based social
In Proc. 17th ACM SIGKDD Intl. Conf. on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD ’11, pages
1082–1090, New York, NY, USA, 2011. ACM.
11 Justin Cranshaw, Raz Schwartz, Jason I Hong, and Norman M Sadeh. The livehoods project: Utilizing social media to understand the dynamics of a city. In ICWSM, 2012.
12 Gabor Csardi and Tamas Nepusz.
The igraph software
package for complex network research. InterJournal, Complex Systems, 1695(5):1–9, 2006.
13 Andrea De Montis,
Simone Caschili,
and Alessandro
Commuter networks and community detection:
a method for planning sub regional areas. arXiv preprint
 
14 Pierre Deville, Chaoming Song, Nathan Eagle, Vincent D.
Blondela, Albert-Laszlo Barab´asi, and Dashun Wangg.
Scaling identity connects human mobility and social interactions. PNAS, 113(26):7047–7052, 2016.
15 Neil M. Ferguson, Derek A. T. Cummings, Christophe
Fraser, James C. Cajka, Philip C. Cooley, and Donald S.
Strategies for mitigating an inﬂuenza pandemic.
Nature, 442:448–452, 2006.
16 Santo Fortunato. Community detection in graphs. Physics
reports, 486(3):75–174, 2010.
17 M. C. Gonz´alez, C. A. Hidalgo, and A.-L. Barab´asi. Understanding individual human mobility patterns. Nature,
453:779–782, 2008.
18 G. Krings, F. Calabrese, C. Ratti, and V. Blondel. A gravity model for inter-city telephone communication networks.
Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment,
L07003, 2009.
19 Bal´azs Lengyel, Attila Varga, Bence S´agv´ari, ´Akos Jakobi,
and J´anos Kert´esz. Geographies of an online social network. PLoS ONE, 10(9), 2015.
20 M. Lenormand, M. Picornell, O.G. Cant´u-Ros, A. Tugores,
T. Louail, R. Herranz, M. Barthelemy, E. Fr´ıas-Mart´ınez,
and J.J. Ramasco. Cross-checking diﬀerent sources of mobility information. PLoS ONE, 9(8):e105184, 2014.
21 X. Liang, J.C. Zhao, L. Dong, and K. Xu. Unraveling the
origin of exponential law in intra-urban human mobility.
Scientiﬁc Reports, 3(2983):1–7, 2013.
22 Yu Liu, Zhengwei Sui, Chaogui Kang, and Yong Gao. Uncovering patterns of inter-urban trip and spatial interaction
from social media check-in data. PLoS ONE, 9(1):e86026,
23 Telmo Menezes and Camille Roth. Ghostborders. https:
//github.com/telmomenezes/ghostborders, 2016.
24 Mark EJ Newman. Modularity and community structure
in networks. PNAS, 103(23):8577–8582, 2006.
25 Alexander M. Petersen, Joel Tenenbaum, Shlomo Havlin,
and H. E. Stanley. Statistical laws governing ﬂuctuations
in word use from word birth to word death.
Reports, 2(313):1–9, 2012.
26 William M Rand. Objective criteria for the evaluation of
clustering methods.
Journal of the American Statistical
association, 66(336):846–850, 1971.
27 Carlo Ratti, Stanislav Sobolevsky, Francesco Calabrese,
Clio Andris, Jonathan Reades, Mauro Martino, Rob Claxton, and Steven H Strogatz. Redrawing the map of great
britain from a network of human interactions. PLoS ONE,
5(12):e14248, 2010.
28 I. Rhee, M. Shin, S. Hong, K. Lee, and S. Chong.
the levy-walk nature of human mobility.
In INFOCOM
2008. The 27th Conference on Computer Communications.
IEEE, April 2008.
29 Camille Roth, Soong Moon Kang, Michael Batty, and
Marc Barth´el´emy. Structure of urban movements: polycentric activity and entangled hierarchical ﬂows. PLoS ONE,
6(1):e15923, 2011.
30 Thiago H. Silva, Pedro O. S. Vaz de Melo, Jussara M.
Almeida, Juliana Salles, and Antonio A. F. Loureiro. A
comparison of foursquare and instagram to the study of
city dynamics and urban social behavior. In Proc. Urb-
Comp’13, 2013.
31 Stanislav Sobolevsky, Michael Szell, Riccardo Campari,
Thomas Couronn´e, Zbigniew Smoreda, and Carlo Ratti.
Delineating geographical regions with networks of human
interactions in an extensive set of countries. PLoS ONE,
8(12):e81707, 2013.
32 Chaoming Song, Tal Koren, Pu Wang, and Albert-L´aszl´o
Barab´asi. Modelling the scaling properties of human mobility. Nature Physics, 6:818–823, 2010.
33 Chaoming Song, Zehui Qu, Nicholas Blumm, and Albert-
Laszlo Barab´asi. Limits of predictability in human mobility. Science, 327(5968):1018–1021, 2010.
34 Christian Thiemann, Fabian Theis, Daniel Grady, Rafael
Brune, and Dirk Brockmann. The structure of borders in
a small world. PLoS ONE, 5(11):e15422, 2010.
35 Jameson L. Toole, Michael Ulm, Marta C. Gonz´alez, and
Dietmar Bauer. Inferring land use from mobile phone activity.
In Proc. ACM SIGKDD Intl. Workshop on Urban Computing, UrbComp ’12, pages 1–8, New York, NY,
USA, 2012. ACM.
36 V. A. Traag, G. Krings, and P. Van Dooren.
Signiﬁcant scales in community structure.
Scientiﬁc Reports,
3(2930):1–10, 2013.
37 Vincent A. Traag. louvain-igraph: v0.5.3, December 2015.