Journal of Information Processing
22–30 
[DOI: 10.2197/ipsjjip.23.22]
Regular Paper
Quality Assessment of Wikipedia Articles Using h-index
Yu Suzuki1,a)
Received: April 13, 2014, Accepted: October 8, 2014
Abstract: In this paper, we propose a method for assessing quality values of Wikipedia articles from edit history
using h-index. One of the major methods for assessing Wikipedia article quality is a peer-review based method. In
this method, we assume that if an editor’s texts are left by the other editors, the texts are approved by the editors, then
the editor is decided as a good editor. However, if an editor edits multiple articles, and the editor is approved at a
small number of articles, the quality value of the editor deeply depends on the quality of the texts. In this paper, we
apply h-index, which is a simple but resistant to excessive values, to the peer-review based Wikipedia article assessment method. Although h-index can identify whether an editor is a good quality editor or not, h-index cannot identify
whether the editor is a vandal or an inactive editor. To solve this problem, we propose p-ratio for identifying which
editors are vandals or inactive editors. From our experiments, we conﬁrmed that by integrating h-index with p-ratio,
the accuracy of article quality assessment in our method outperforms the existing peer-review based method.
Keywords: Wikipedia, h-index, peer-review, quality
Introduction
Collaborative projects,
such as Wikipedia *1 and Open-
StreetMap *2, have become important for constructing wideranging, high quality knowledge bases. In Wikipedia’s policy,
anyone can edit any articles.
A merit of this policy is that
Wikipedia has high comprehension and fresh information, but a
demerit is that Wikipedia has many low quality texts, because
articles in Wikipedia are not reviewed. There are not only high
quality editors but also low quality editors who are referred to
as “vandals.”
Vandals are editors who post false or insuﬃcient descriptions, or editors who make an article blank. When
users browse Wikipedia articles, they do not always have enough
knowledge about the articles to ﬁnd which texts are high quality
or not. For these reasons, there is a need for assessing the quality
of Wikipedia articles.
In this paper, a quality of article is deﬁned as an approval rate
for the article from Wikipedia readers. When many editors approve an article, we judge that the article is high quality. Therefore, for assessing the quality of an article, we should acquire the
users’ approval for the articles.
One approach for gathering users’ approval is an explicit voting
method. The Wikimedia Foundation, which operates Wikipedia,
implements Article Feedback Tools *3 for the purpose of gathering votes about the approval or the disapproval of articles from
users. However, this tool only collects a small number of votes,
because many users do not decide which articles are high quality or not. The number of votes are not enough for assessing
Graduate School of Science and Technology, Nara Institute of Science
and Technology, Ikoma, Nara 630–0192, Japan
 
 
 
 Feedback Tool
Wikipedia articles accurately. From the results, gathering trustworthy users’ approval is diﬃcult using these explicit voting
To solve this problem, many researchers such as Adler et
al. , Hu et al. and the author proposed an implicit voting method, which we call a survival ratio based method. In this
method, we extract the approval of editors from edit history. We
assume that if an editor leaves a text, the editor approves the text,
but if the editor deletes the text, the editor disapproves the text.
Therefore, if a text survives beyond multiple edits, we consider
that the text is approved by many editors, and the quality of the
text should be high.
In this method, we proceed in the following four steps:
( 1 ) Extract positive ratings by editors from Wikipedia edit history.
( 2 ) Calculate text quality using the positive ratings.
( 3 ) Calculate editor quality using the text quality.
( 4 ) Calculate article quality using the editor quality.
At step ( 2 ), we calculate the text quality using the editor reputation based method as we mentioned above. In this step, we
conﬁrmed the accuracy of the text quality described at Ref. .
However, at step ( 3 ), we used a simple arithmetic mean value
for calculating editor quality. As a result, the accuracy of the editor quality decreases. This is because, if an editor posts texts to
multiple articles, and if a small number of texts earn excessively
high positive ratings in a small number of articles, the quality of
the editor is dependent on these excessive text quality values. To
solve this problem, we should develop a method for calculating
editor quality values which are resistant to excessive text quality
When we measure a researcher’s quality, we face a similar
problem. Citation count is generally used for measuring the quality of papers and researchers. Generally, researcher quality is dec⃝2015 Information Processing Society of Japan
Journal of Information Processing
22–30 
ﬁned by the arithmetic mean value of citation counts. However, if
a small number of papers written by the researchers are referred to
an excessive number of papers, the researcher’s quality depends
on these excessively high citation counts. To solve this problem,
Hersch proposed h-index for calculating a researcher’s quality
index which is resistant to excessive citation counts. In this paper,
Hersch writes as follows:
Deﬁnition 1 (h-index for scientists)
A scientist has index h
if h of his/her Np papers have at least h citations each, and the
other (Np −h) papers have no more than h citations each.
h-index has some novel features, such as being a simple method,
intuitively clear , easy to calculate , and resistant to excessive citation counts. For these reasons, h-index has become one
of the most popular indexes for evaluating scientists.
A remarkable feature of h-index is that this index is resist to
excessive values. This means that if we integrate a set of values,
and the set contains excessive values, the integrated value does
not depend on the excessive values. We consider that when we
apply this idea of h-index to calculate Wikipedia editor quality
values, the accuracy of calculating editor quality values should
When we calculate h-index for Wikipedia editors, we should
extract positive ratings which correspond to the citation counts.
Survival ratio based approach is a popular approach for extracting positive ratings. If many readers feel excellent for a text, the
quality of this text is good, but if many readers feel that a text
should be removed, the quality of this text is poor. Adler et al. 
found that 79% of poor quality texts are short-lived. We can estimate from this result that if editors ﬁnd poor quality texts, the
editors should remove them. Therefore, when an editor leaves a
text, we consider that the editor gives a positive rating to the text.
However, the problem of h-index is that if there is a low hindex editor, we cannot distinguish whether the editor is a vandal
or not. In Fig. 1, we show three types of editors, such as (A) high
quality editors, (B) vandals, and (C) inactive editors. The editors
in the cluster (A) have a high h-index, but the editors in both (B)
and (C) have a low h-index. The editors in (B) do not change
the quality of articles, because these editors do not post texts to
Wikipedia. However the editors in (C) decrease the quality of
articles, because these editors post many texts, and many part of
these texts are not good. Therefore, the clustering of (B) and (C)
Clustering of editors using editor quality.
is important.
To solve this problem, we propose p-ratio for clustering editors
who have a low h-index. If an editor posts many texts, the editor faces many chances to increase his/her h-index. Therefore, if
an editor’s h-index is low, the editor is not approved by the other
editors. However, if an editor posts a small number of texts, the
editor does not have enough chances to increase his/her h-index,
so we cannot decide whether the editor is a vandal or not. We de-
ﬁne p-ratio as the value of h-index divided by the number of all
edited articles. When we use h-index with p-ratio, the accuracy
of the article quality calculated by our proposed method should
Our two contributions are as follows:
( 1 ) We propose h-index based editor assessment method which
can identify high quality editors.
( 2 ) We propose p-ratio for identifying whether the editors are
vandals or rarely editing editors.
Related Work
In this section, we introduce several methods for assessing
Wikipedia articles. Then, we introduce assessment method for
research papers, because our proposed method is inspired by the
assessment methods of research papers.
Assessment of Wikipedia Articles
There has been many researches for assessing quality of products, people, and objects using reputation based method . A
key concept for evaluating Wikipedia articles is peer review based
process. Wikipedia is not thought to have a peer review system
because most texts are instantly made and saved, though no one
reviews these texts. However, Stivila et al. mentioned that the
open edit system is a kind of peer review system where editors of
the system vote on implicit features of the texts.
In these investigations, many features are extracted from
Wikipedia data, and they can be divided into two types: explicit
and implicit features. Explicit feature is the user’s decision which
are directly input to the system by users, and implicit features are
the user’s decision which the system presumes from their behaviors. In this section, we describe the studies that have used explicit and implicit features and also describe why we choose to
use implicit features.
One of the most important purposes of these researches is for
improving the quality of articles in Wikipedia, which is related
to the governance of Wikipedia. However, there is no standard
for measuring the eﬀectiveness of these methods, we cannot ﬁnd
how these methods are eﬀective for improving articles. Geiger
et al. shows a case study of the tool called Huggle. In this
research, they discover how Huggle is eﬀective to improve the
quality of articles.
For improving the quality of articles in Wikipedia, vandalism
detection methods are proposed by many researchers. For example, West et al. and Smets et al. proposed a machine
learning based method. These methods can identify vandals and
low quality articles, but cannot identify good quality editors or
articles. In the research introduced the following section, they try
to identify good articles and editors.
c⃝2015 Information Processing Society of Japan
Journal of Information Processing
22–30 
Explicit Features
Explicit feature is commonly used to evaluate quality of information, products, and objects. For example, many on-line shopping sites like Amazon.com *4 have voting systems for users to
evaluate products. When users want to evaluate how satisﬁed or
not they are with a product they have bought, they give the product 1–5 stars and submit review texts. Then, the system presents
the average number of stars along with the reviews. If the other
users want to know the quality or the satisfaction of the products,
they refer to the number of stars and reviews, and decide whether
to buy it or not. This system has been implemented as a part of
many on-line Web service, such as YouTube *5 and Google+ *6,
because it is easy to implement and the process of calculating the
number of stars is easy and clear.
Kramer implemented the voting system on MediaWiki *7
for educational use, and also implemented in the English version
of Wikipedia as Article Feedback Tool *8. Using these systems,
users easily understand which are good quality articles by referencing these votes. However, one problem with this system is that
not every user always appropriately evaluates or reviews. In fact,
according to statistics about YouTube, almost all users who vote
gave the highest score to almost all videos they votes *9. Moreover, the survey of the Article Feedback Tool by Wikipedia *10
shows that 90.9% rates are the highest score. From this statistic,
we ﬁnd that users rate only good targets, but they do not rate poor
The advantage of this system is that users can directly evaluate
the quality of targets. However, the disadvantage is that only a
small number of users input negative ratings. Therefore, if there
is a target with a small number of voters, we cannot identify the
target as either the poor quality target or the non-reviewed target.
One reason of this problem is a lack of negative ratings, which is
hard to recover by analysis of ratings. Therefore, we do not use
explicit features.
Implicit Features
Implicit features are the user’s decisions which the system presumes from their behaviors. When the system uses these features,
users do not need to input the evaluation of items. Our proposed
method uses this method. However, how can users’ evaluations
be presumed from their behavior?
Life-cycles of texts are used for calculating qualities of texts or
articles. W¨ohner et al. calculate Wikipedia article qualities
using the life-cycle of texts. In this method, they discovered that
the quality and life-cycle of a text have a relationship. Halfaker
et al. presume implicit features from contribution degrees for
editors. In this method, they proposed six heuristic assumptions
about why editors contribute to Wikipedia. These ideas are appropriate when the articles are frequently edited. However, the
frequency of edits is diﬀerent, then the life-cycle of a text is dif-
 
 
 
 
 
 
youtube-comes-to-a-5-star-realization-its-ratings-are-useless/
*10 feedback/Survey
ferent for every article. In addition, when edit warring occurs,
this method cannot calculate appropriate qualities. Our method
can calculate appropriate qualities if articles are not only infrequently edited but also suﬀering an edit war because we consider
editor qualities.
Adler et al. , , and Wilkinson et al. proposed
a method for calculating quality values from edit histories. This
method is based on survival ratios of texts. Hu et al. also proposed a method for calculating article quality using editor quality,
which is similar to our proposed method. This method focuses on
unchanged content, and they assumed that if an editor unchanged
texts, the editor treated the texts as good texts. However, this
method does not consider editors. Therefore, if there is an article
which has only one version, the text in the article is not edited by
the other editors, we cannot calculate the quality values of the text
using the existing methods. In our method, we consider editors.
Therefore, if the editor of the text edits another texts, and these
texts are leaved and deleted by the other editors, we can calculate
the quality of the new text.
Stvilia et al. and Warncke-Wang et al. proposed a
method for classifying articles by article qualities using machine
learning techniques. In these methods, they extract multiple features, such as reputation, completeness and complexity. However, these methods are not eﬀective if each feature is related to
the quality of articles. In our research, we conﬁrm that reputation
of editors are eﬀective for assessing quality of articles. Therefore,
if their system use our proposed article quality measure with the
other features, the accuracy of article quality values should improve.
Assessment of Researchers
Impact Factor is one of the most famous index for measuring quality of academic journal. In this index, if the papers
in an academic journal are referred by many papers, the quality
of the journal is high. This index does not express a quality of
researchers, but this index is sometimes applied for measuring a
quality of researchers.
Hirsch proposed h-index for evaluating quality of researchers. This measure is simple, intuitively clear, and easy to
calculate. For these reasons, h-index is one of the most popular index for evaluating researchers and scientists. However, this
index has several weak points which is discussed at Ref. .
For example, h-index cannot calculate appropriate quality values
for young researches. There are a lot of young researchers who
write great papers. However, young researchers spend shorter
time in research than senior researchers, young researchers submit smaller number of papers than senior researchers, generally.
Therefore, if a young researcher submit a small number of great
papers, and these papers are cited by many papers, the h-index of
the young researcher is less than the number of the papers. As
a result, h-index of young researchers are relatively smaller than
that of senior researchers.
To solve this problem, many indices, such as g-index, A-index,
and R-index, are proposed. Antonakis et al. proposed IQp,
which can solve this problem using Impact Factor. However, the
procedure of calculating IQp is very complex, and the value of
c⃝2015 Information Processing Society of Japan
Journal of Information Processing
22–30 
this index is not intuitive, hard to understand. Consequently, hindex is still a major index for evaluating quality of researchers.
In our research, we introduce p-ratio with h-index to solve
this problem. We assume an editor who posts a small amount
of texts to Wikipedia articles, and who is equivalent to a young
researcher in academic research ﬁeld. If the texts are high quality, many editors give positive ratings to the texts. Similarly, if
the papers are high quality, many papers cite the papers. In this
case, the value of h-index is very small, at most the number of
articles in the case of Wikipedia editors, the number of papers in
the case of researchers. However, p-ratio is close to 1, the maximum value of p-ratio. On the other hand, if there is a vandal or a
low quality researcher, the value of p-ratio is very small. As a result, when we use p-ratio and h-index, the value of these indices
are intuitive, and we can solve the problem of h-index for editors who edit a small amount of articles, and young researchers.
This p-ratio is similar to several indexes proposed by Iglesias 
and Jensen . However these indexes are used to identify high
quality researchers, but they do not try to identify low quality researchers. We propose p-ratio for identifying low quality editors.
Proposed Method
In this section, we describe a method for assessing Wikipedia
articles using edit history. Our proposed method consists of the
following four steps:
( 1 ) Peer reviewing of editors.
( 2 ) Calculates editor quality using two aspects.
( 3 ) Integrate two editor quality values.
( 4 ) Calculate quality values of Wikipedia editors.
Peer Reviews of Editors
In this section, we introduce how to extract editors’ positive
ratings to texts from the edit history.
In the original deﬁnition of h-index at Ref. , Hirsch assume
that if paper pa refers another paper pb, they consider that pa
gives positive ratings to pb. When we calculate h-index, we need
positive ratings of editors. Therefore, when we calculate h-index
for Wikipedia editors, we should extract positive ratings for texts
from edit history. In our method, we treat the editors’ actions of
leaving as positive ratings, which is similar to Adler’s method .
In this idea, when editors leave texts, we treat that the editors
who leave the texts give positive ratings to the texts. This is because, we assume that editors should delete the texts if the texts
are inappropriate, and editors should leave the texts if the texts
are appropriate to leave.
However, editors do not always browse the whole articles, the
editors cannot delete texts that the editors do not browse, even
if these texts are inappropriate for leaving. Therefore, we cannot treat all leaving actions of texts by editors as positive ratings.
To solve this problem, we use a section based extraction method
which is proposed at Ref. . In this method, if an editor adds or
removes several texts, the system considers that the editors gives
positive ratings to the texts in the section that the editor adds or
Using this method, we identify the peer review results of two
editors. Let us consider two editors ea, eb in all editors E, ea  eb
who are the editors of article d in all articles D, and ea leaves
eb’s texts in d. E is a set of Wikipedia editors, and D is a set of
Wikipedia articles. In this case, positive rating p(d, ea →eb) of
eb from ea in d is deﬁned as follows:
p(d, ea →eb) =
⎧⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
if |teb| −|rea→eb|
where teb is the texts written by eb in d, and |teb| is the number of
characters in teb. rea→eb is the texts written by eb and deleted by
ea, and |rea→eb| is the length of rea→eb. α (0 < α ≤1) is a parameter for deciding whether the action of eb is the leaving or not.
When ea leaves more than α · |teb| characters, p(d, ea →eb) is set
to 1, then we judge that ea gives positive ratings to eb.
One important policy is that editors do not evaluate themselves.
Therefore, even if ea leaves texts written by ea himself/herself, ea
does not give positive ratings to ea. This is because, if editors can
evaluate themselves, editors can arbitrary increase their h-index.
In our method, when ea or eb edits the same articles more than
once, and if ea gives positive ratings to eb more than once, we
judge that ea gives positive ratings to eb. Therefore, if ea edits d
twice, and ea gives positive ratings once, we judge that ea gives
positive ratings to eb. Moreover, if eb edits more than twice, and
eb earns positive ratings more than once, we judge that eb earns
positive ratings from ea. However, this ratings is calculated for
each article respectively. Therefore, if eb earns positive ratings
from ea at two articles d1 and d2, eb earns positive ratings from ea
Two Editor Quality Values
In this section, we introduce two kinds of editor quality values:
h-index and p-ratio. h-index indicates a degree of editor quality.
p-ratio is a complementary index of h-index, and p-ratio is used
to identify whether an editor is a vandal or an inactive editor.
Here, we deﬁne h-index of editor e ∈E. We already show
the original deﬁnition of h-index at Section 1. We modify this
deﬁnition for assessing Wikipedia editors.
The deﬁnition of h-index h(e) of editor e is as follows:
Deﬁnition 2 (h-index of editor e)
h(e) is the index of editor
e who edits more than h(e) articles, and in h(e) article, e get positive ratings from at least h(e) editors, and in the other N −h(e)
articles e does not get positive ratings from less than h(e) editors.
N is the number of articles which are edited by e.
In this deﬁnition, if there are two editors ea and eb ∈E, and
p(d, ea →eb) is 1 by Eq. (1), eb get positive ratings from ea.
Example 1 (h-index of editor ea)
In Fig. 2, we show the example of the behavior of editors ea, eb, ec, ed. In this ﬁgure, circle
means editor, rectangle means article, white arrow means edits,
and black arrow means positive rating. This ﬁgure shows that
there are four editors ea, eb, ec and ed. ea edits three texts to three
articles d1, d2, and d3. In d1, editors eb and ec leave ea’s text. In
d2, editor ed leaves ea’s text. In d3, no editor leaves ea’s text. The
number of editors who leave ea’s texts are shown in Table 1.
c⃝2015 Information Processing Society of Japan
Journal of Information Processing
22–30 
Example of ea’s behavior.
The number of editors who give positive ratings to editor ea.
# of editors who approve ea’s text
We check whether h-index h(ea) of ea is at least one or not. From
Table 1, ea receives more than 1 positive ratings in two articles d1
and d2. Therefore, h-index of ea is at least 1.
Next, we check whether h(ea) is at least two or not. From Table 1, ea receives more than 2 positive ratings in one article d1.
Therefore, ea does not get positive ratings more than two articles,
h-index of ea is less than 2. From these results, h-index of ea is 1.
This deﬁnition of h-index shows that if an editor edits many
articles, and the editors get positive ratings from many editors,
the editor’s h-index increases. However, if the editors only edits many articles and do not get positive ratings, or if the editors
edit small number of articles and get many positive ratings, the
h-index does not increase. Therefore, h-index is resistant to excessive number of positive ratings.
h-index is resistant to edit warring. For example, we consider
the case that good editors edits vandals’ texts, and the vandals revert the good editors’ edits. In this case, the vandals do not give
positive ratings to the good editors, and the good editors do not
give positive ratings to the vandals. Therefore, we cannot identify
which editors are good or not from this edit history. However, in
Wikipedia, there are many editors, and the grater part of the editors are good editors. Many good editors should give positive
ratings to the good editors, and should not give positive ratings
to vandals. As a result, we can divide good editors and vandals
using many editors’ decisions.
h-index can identify high quality editors, but cannot identify
rarely edited editors and low quality editors. To explain this, we
consider two editors e1 and e2 ∈E. h-index of both editors are
1. e1 can be considered vandal, because e1 edits many articles,
but e1 earn positive ratings from one editor in one article. e2 can
be considered good editor, because e2 edits only one article, but
e2 earn positive ratings from many editors in one article. In this
case, the quality value of e2 should be better than that of e1. However, when the system use only h-index, the quality values of e1
and e2 is the same.
To solve this problem, we use p-ratio with h-index. p-ratio is
a ratio of the number of articles which increase h-index to the
number of articles which is edited by the editor. We assume that
The quality values of ea, eb, and ec.
if an editor is a vandal like e1, even if the editor edits texts in
many articles, the texts are rarely approved by the other editors.
Then, p-ratio of the editor is low. On the other hand, if an editor
is a good editor like e2, even if the editor edits texts in a small
number of articles, the texts are approved by many editors. Then,
p-ratio of the editor should be high. Using p-ratio, we can identify whether an editor is a vandal or an editor who rarely edits
Wikipedia articles.
We deﬁne p-ratio p(e) of e as follows:
(if |w(e)| > 0)
(if |w(e)| = 0)
where w(e) is the articles which e edits, and |w(e)| is the number
of articles in w(e). The range of w(e) is between 0 and 1. We
deﬁne that if an editor edits no article,
Example 2 (p-ratio of editor ea)
We use the same example
in Section 3.2.1. As we described, h-index of ea is 1, and the
number of articles which ea edits is 3. Therefore, p-ratio p(ea) of
Editor Quality
We calculate editor quality u(e) of editor e using h-index and
p-ratio as follows:
uh(e) = h(e)
up+(e) = h(e) + p(e)
up∗(e) = h(e) · p(e)
When we calculate the editor quality, we select one of three
equations. uh(e) at Eq. (3) is deﬁned using h-index, ignore pratio. up+ at Eq. (4) is deﬁned as h(e) plus p(e), which is inspired
by the idea of extended boolean model. Using this equation, if
either h(e) or p(e) is high value, up+ is high value. up∗at Eq. (5)
is h(e) multiplied by p(e), which is also inspired by the idea of
extended boolean model. In this case, up∗is high value if both
h(e) and p(e) are high value. We compared these three equations
whether the operators “OR” and “AND” are eﬀective or not for
integrating h(e) and p(e).
Example 3 (Editor quality of ea)
We also use the same example as Section 3.2.1. From this example, h(ea) is 1 and p(ea)
is 0.33. Therefore, uh(ea) is 1, up+(ea) is 1 + 0.33 = 1.33, and
up∗(ea) is 1 · 0.33 = 0.33. The quality values of eb and ec are
described at Table 2.
Article Quality
Finally, we calculate the quality value q(d) of article d using a
weighted sum as follows:
t(e) · u(e)
where E(d) is the editors who edit d, t(e) is the number of characters inserted by e, and T(d) is the total number of characters in
c⃝2015 Information Processing Society of Japan
Journal of Information Processing
22–30 
d. q(d) means one of three kinds of article qualities qh(d), qp+(d),
and qp∗(d).
Using this formula and three kinds of editor qualities deﬁned
at Eqs. (3)–(5), we calculate three kinds of article qualities. For
example, there are three editors ea and ec who edit article d, and
the numbers of characters of ea and ec are 200 and 100 respectively. In this case, qh(d) is 200·1+100·2
≈1.33. In the same way,
we can calculate that qp+(d) ≈1.66 is, and qp∗(d) ≈0.44.
Experimental Evaluation
To conﬁrm that our proposed method can calculate accurate
quality values for Wikipedia articles, we did two experiments. In
these experiments, we used two kinds of test collections. One
test collection is a set of rated articles from all Wikipedia articles,
and another test collection is multiply rated articles in the speciﬁc
In our experiment, we compared four methods: hindex: the
system using h-index only (qh(d)), hindex+pr: the system using
h-index plus p-ratio (qp+(d)), hindex · pr: the system using hindex multiplied by p-ratio (qp∗(d)), and remain: the baseline system based on the proposed method proposed by Adler et al. .
We used edit history dump data of Japanese Wikipedia at
March 28, 2013 *11. In this data, there are 1,362,653 articles,
2,654.683 editors, and 38,371,993 versions. The latest version
of all articles have at least 1 characters. The editor set contains
bots *12, an automated or semi-automated tools.
In our experiments, we use two kinds of article sets as correct
answers. In experiment 1, we use the answer set as “featured” and
“good” articles selected from all articles. In experiment 2, we use
the answer set as the seven graded articles, such as “featured,”
“good,” “A,” “B,” “C,” “Start,” and “Stub,” from the articles in
the two categories.
We use two diﬀerent answer sets, because we cannot ﬁnd an
ideal answer set. The answer set in experiment 1 is a large article set, then we can observe the eﬀectiveness of our method for
a whole article. However, the coverage of featured and good articles are small, many good quality articles are not selected as
featured or good articles. This is because, the reviewers of these
articles does not always browse a whole article. To complement
the defect of this article set, we use two small article sets in experiment 2. In these sets, almost all high quality articles are selected as high grade articles. This is because, the reviewers read
all articles in the category. We did two experiments in a macroviewpoint at experiment 1 and in a micro-viewpoint at experiment 2 to complement the defects of each answer set.
The experimental procedure of experiment 1 and 2 is as follows:
( 1 ) Our proposed method extracts statistical data about positive
ratings from edit history of all articles in Wikipedia.
( 2 ) We set a correct answer set, and set scores to target articles.
• In experiment 1, target articles are all articles in the
Wikipedia. We set the score “2” to the featured articles,
“1” to the good articles, and “0” to the other articles.
*11 
*12 
• In experiment 2, target articles are the articles in the category “Islam” and “Sports.” We set the feature articles, good
articles, A-class, B-class, C-class, Start, Stub class, to score
7, 6, · · · , 0, respectively.
( 3 ) The system computes four kinds of editor quality values,
such as hindex, hindex+pr, hindex · pr, remain. We set α
from 0.1 to 1.0 in 0.1 increments and calculate ten kinds of
editor quality values for hindex, hindex+pr, hindex · pr.
( 4 ) The system computes the article quality values using the editor quality values.
( 5 ) The system makes article list in decedent order of the article
quality values.
( 6 ) The system makes article list in decedent order of the article
score described at step ( 2 ).
( 7 ) We compare two article lists at step ( 5 ) and ( 6 ), and calculate nDCG.
We use evaluation measure as nDCG , which is widely
used for evaluating multi-grade test collections. nDCG is deﬁned
as follows:
nDCG = DCG
where DCG is deﬁned as follows,
DCG = r1 +
where ri is the graded relevance of the result list at position i.
IDCG, which stands for Ideal DCG, is the value of DCG about
the result list which is sorted by the score of the correct answer
set. In this measure, if nDCG of a method is high, the article list
ordered by the method is similar to the golden standard.
Experiment 1: Featured and Good Article Based Evaluation
Experimental Setup
In this experiment, we set “featured articles” and “good articles” as a correct answer set. Featured and good articles are selected by the votes of Wikipedia editors, and are evaluated by
“Featured article criteria.” The editors select 68 featured articles
and 765 good articles from 1,362,653 articles. When we evaluate, we should convert the ratings into the numbers. Therefore,
we convert the featured article into 2, the good article into 1 and
the other article into 0.
Experimental Result
Figure 3 shows the experimental results. The horizontal axis
shows the threshold value α which is used at Section 3.1, and
the vertical axis shows nDCG. From this ﬁgure, we discover that
three methods hindex, hindex+pr, hindex · pr can calculate more
accurate article quality values than the baseline method remain.
Moreover, the accuracies of hindex and hindex+pr are almost the
same, and are higher than hindex · pr.
We also discover that if α is 0.5, the accuracy of hindex and
hindex+pr is eﬀective. However, we cannot ﬁnd the appropriate
value of α for hindex · pr.
We note that this correct answer set does not cover all high
quality articles. However, we manually browse all featured and
c⃝2015 Information Processing Society of Japan
Journal of Information Processing
22–30 
Experiment result using “Featured articles” (FA) and “Good articles”
good articles, and we conﬁrm that all featured and good articles
are high quality. Therefore, from this result, we conﬁrm that
when we use hindex or hindex+pr, we can identify high quality articles. However, we cannot conclude that these methods can
identify low quality articles, because there are many high quality articles which are not tagged as featured and good articles.
Therefore, in the next experiment, we conﬁrm which methods are
adequate for identifying low quality articles.
In Fig. 3, the shapes of the curves of hindex, hindex+pr, hindex · pr are not smooth. This is because, the ratio of leaving mentioned at Eq. (1) is not always related to the quality of text. For
example, there are two texts, and an editor leaves 80% and 20%
of the texts respectively. In this case, we assume that the former
text should have better quality than the latter text. However, in
some cases, the latter text is better quality than the former text.
As a result, the relationship of the leaving ratio of text and the
quality of text is not always ﬁxed, then the shapes of the curves
in Fig. 3 are not smooth.
Experiment 2: Evaluation Using Articles in the Speciﬁc
Categories
In experiment 1, we use the featured and good articles as correct answer articles, and we use target articles as a whole article
in Wikipedia. However, from this experiment, we cannot conﬁrm
whether the methods can identify low quality articles or not. To
solve this problem, we use target articles as a set of articles in
speciﬁc categories. The number of articles in the target of experiment 2 is very small in comparison to the number of all articles in
Wikipedia. Therefore, the reviewers can browse all articles in the
target articles, the low quality articles identiﬁed by the reviewers
are truly low quality articles. Using this correct answer set, we
can conﬁrm which methods can identify low quality articles.
Experimental Setup
In Japanese Wikipedia, there are several Wiki Projects q *13
which are the working groups for speciﬁc topics. We picked up
two projects such as “Islam” *14 and “Sports” *15, because in only
these two projects, the editors assess the quality of articles, and
categorize the articles in the projects into multiple grades.
*13 
*14 
*15 
Test collection - Evaluations of articles and the number of articles.
Evaluation results of the articles in category “Islam.”
Evaluation results about articles in category “Sports.”
In these projects, the users evaluate the articles about the
projects, and categorize into seven grades such as Featured,
Good, A-class, B-class, C-class, Start, and Stub *16. When we
evaluate our proposed method, we convert these grades into the
number 6, 5, · · · , 0. Table 3 shows the number of articles. In this
table, F means featured articles, G means good articles, A, B, and
C means A-class, B-class, and C-class articles respectively, Sta
means Start-class articles, and Stu means Stub-class articles.
Experimental Result
Figures 4 and 5 show our experimental results. The meanings
of horizontal and vertical axes are the same as Fig. 3 of experiment 1. From these ﬁgures, we can conﬁrm that our proposed
methods hindex, hindex+pr, and hindex · pr are more accurate
than the baseline method remain. Moreover, in many cases, hindex · pr is the most accurate methods than the other methods.
From Fig. 4, we conﬁrmed that when we use the category “Islam,” hindex · pr is the most accurate method. Especially, when
we use hindex · pr, the system can identify whether an article is
low quality, such as Start or Stub, or high quality, such as Featured article, Good Article, A-class, and B-class. Therefore, we
*16 1.0 Editorial Team/
Assessment
c⃝2015 Information Processing Society of Japan
Journal of Information Processing
22–30 
conﬁrm that hindex · pr is eﬀective for identifying low quality articles, and p-ratio is eﬀective for identifying low quality editors.
However, we cannot clearly conﬁrm best methods from our
proposed three methods when we use the category “Sports”
which is described at Fig. 5. Therefore, we discover the detail of
the result list. As you see in Table 3, about 91% of all articles in
this category are tagged as C-class, Start or Stub. C-class articles
are written by a small number of editors in many cases. Therefore, our proposed methods misjudge C-class articles to be Start
or Stub articles, the accuracy of our proposed methods decreases.
We also discover that when we use the category “Islam,” if
the threshold α is set to between 0.6 and 0.7, hindex · pr is the
most accurate. However, when we use the category “Sports,” we
cannot ﬁnd the most appropriate value of α. From the results of
experiment 1 and 2, appropriate value of α should depends on
target articles. Therefore, we should develop a method for setting
the most appropriate value of α.
From these results, we conclude that if the users try to identify
high quality articles, hindex or hindex+pr are the best solution.
On the other hand, if the users try to identify low quality articles,
hindex · pr is the best solution.
Discussions
To analyze the detail of results, we pick up several editors, and
analyze these editors.
First, we discuss whether h-index is eﬀective or not. “At by
at” *17 is an editor, and we observe that he is a low quality editor. His interests are mainly related to soccer, therefore he have
posted many texts to a small number of articles about soccer. His
texts were occasionally approved by many editors, then the quality value of remain is very high due to excessive text quality values. However, using our proposed method, these excessive text
quality values do not aﬀect his editor quality value. Therefore,
his hindex is very low. We can observe many cases like this editor when we did our experiments.
Next, we discuss the eﬀectiveness of p-ratio. The editor “ホ
イップ” (Whip) *18 is a vandal, and a blocked editor, who prevent
from editing Wikipedia. This editor have posted 23,575 times,
but he posted a small number of texts to a large number of articles. Almost all his texts are meaningless. However, his texts
are not seen by the other editors in many cases, his texts are occasionally approved by the editors. Therefore, his h-index is 53,
which is very high value when we compare to the other editors.
Therefore, when we use hindex or hindex+pr, he is considered
as a high quality editor. However, his p-ratio is 0.0022, which
is very low value when we compare to the other editors. Then
hindex · pr is a very low value, he is considered as a low quality
editor. As a result, the accuracy of editor quality improves, then
the accuracy of article quality also improves.
However, our proposed method is not eﬀective for sock puppetry, who is a user who use multiple Wikipedia accounts. If an
editor posts a text, and the other editor approve the text, and these
two editors are diﬀerent name but same person, the quality value
of the text increases against our intention. In future work, we
*17 by At
*18 
should construct a method against these kinds of group attacks.
Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed a method for assessing Wikipedia
articles from edit history using h-index and p-ratio. The articles
in Wikipedia are written by unspeciﬁed large number of editors,
and these articles are not reviewed by the other editors. Therefore, there are a lot of low quality articles. Remain ratio based
methods are proposed in the past, but the article quality values
calculated by these methods are aﬀected by several excessively
high and low values of remain ratios. To solve this problem, we
proposed h-index based method, which is resistant to the excessive values.
From two experimental evaluations, we conﬁrmed that our proposed article assessing technique is more useful for assessing
Wikipedia articles than the existing method. Especially, when we
identify good quality articles, hindex and hindex+pr are the adequate methods, and when we identify low quality articles, hindex
· pr is the adequate method.
However, from experimental results, we cannot develop a perfect measure which can identify both high and low quality articles. This is a limitation of our proposed measures. Therefore,
we should combine these two or three measures, and develop one
perfect measure which can identify both high and low quality articles, in the future work.
The techniques of Wikipedia article assessment can be applied
to many research areas, such as knowledge base construction and
data cleaning. Recently, large scale knowledge databases such as
DBPedia *19 and YAGO2s *20 are constructed using Wikipedia.
When the researchers of DBPedia and YAGO2s construct these
databases, they use texts in the Wikipedia. However, there are
many incorrect information in these databases. This is because,
the texts in Wikipedia are not always correct. Therefore, using
our proposed system for data cleaning, the quality of these knowledge databases will improve.
Finally, we describe our future works. h-index is considered
as a simple and eﬀective index by many researchers, and we con-
ﬁrmed that h-index is also eﬀective for Wikipedia article assessment. However, h-index is not perfect. For example, good quality
editors who posts a small number of articles are evaluated as low
quality editors. If h-index of an editor is 100, the editor should
posts at least 100 articles. Even if an editor posts only 10 articles to many good quality texts, h-index of the editor is at most
10, which is a very low value. To solve this problem, many indices like g-index , A-index, R-index, IQp are proposed.
However, several indices have the same problem as h-index, and
several indices, especially IQp, is very complex, and is not intuitive. Therefore, we should develop a simple but eﬀective method
for Wikipedia article assessment.
In these h-index improvement methods, for evaluating young
researchers or journals fairly, citations of recently edited papers
are considered as more important citations than citations of papers written in the past. However, we do not use this idea, because the history of Wikipedia is shorter than the history of aca-
*19 
*20 
c⃝2015 Information Processing Society of Japan
Journal of Information Processing
22–30 
demic research papers, and there are few editors who continuously edit Wikipedia for a long time. Therefore, almost all editors are treated as young editors, we do not care a problem that
senior editors are tend to be evaluated as high quality editors and
young editors are evaluated as low quality editors. However, if the
history of Wikipedia becomes longer, we cannot ignore this problem. Therefore, in the near future, we should develop a method
for fairly evaluating young editors, who edit Wikipedia a small
number of times.