Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 7, No. 1, January 2012, pp. 25–47
Measuring Risk Literacy: The Berlin Numeracy Test
Edward T. Cokely∗†
Mirta Galesic,†
Eric Schulz† ‡
Saima Ghazal§
Rocio Garcia-Retamero† ¶
We introduce the Berlin Numeracy Test, a new psychometrically sound instrument that quickly assesses statistical
numeracy and risk literacy. We present 21 studies (n=5336) showing robust psychometric discriminability across 15
countries (e.g., Germany, Pakistan, Japan, USA) and diverse samples (e.g., medical professionals, general populations,
Mechanical Turk web panels). Analyses demonstrate desirable patterns of convergent validity (e.g., numeracy, general
cognitive abilities), discriminant validity (e.g., personality, motivation), and criterion validity (e.g., numerical and nonnumerical questions about risk). The Berlin Numeracy Test was found to be the strongest predictor of comprehension
of everyday risks (e.g., evaluating claims about products and treatments; interpreting forecasts), doubling the predictive
power of other numeracy instruments and accounting for unique variance beyond other cognitive tests (e.g., cognitive
reﬂection, working memory, intelligence). The Berlin Numeracy Test typically takes about three minutes to complete
and is available in multiple languages and formats, including a computer adaptive test that automatically scores and
reports data to researchers (www.riskliteracy.org). The online forum also provides interactive content for public outreach
and education, and offers a recommendation system for test format selection. Discussion centers on construct validity
of numeracy for risk literacy, underlying cognitive mechanisms, and applications in adaptive decision support.
Keywords: risk literacy, statistical numeracy, individual differences, cognitive abilities, quantitative reasoning, decision
making, risky choice, adaptive testing, Mechanical Turk.
Introduction
Mathematics skills are among the most inﬂuential educational factors contributing to economic prosperity in industrialized countries . Accordingly, there has been considerable interest in the causes
and consequences of numeracy ,” and “Helping Doctors and
Their Patients Make Decisions about Health (PSI2011–22954)” funded
by the Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación (The Spanish Ministry of
Science and Innovation).
∗Department of Cognitive and Learning Sciences, Michigan Technological University. Email: 
†Center for Adaptive Behavior and Cognition, Max Planck Institute
for Human Development.
‡Perceptual and Brain Sciences, University College London.
§Department of Cognitive and Learning Sciences, Michigan Technological University.
¶Department of Psychology, University of Granada.
los, 1988), which refers speciﬁcally to mathematical or
quantitative literacy . The more basic levels of numeracy are concerned with the “real number
line, time, measurement, and estimation” whereas higher
levels focus on “an understanding of ratio concepts, notably fractions, proportions, percentages, and probabilities” . Much
of the research on numeracy has involved assessment of a
wide range of mathematical skills among large and diverse samples.
More recently, however, research and
theory in the decision sciences has focused on a subset of numeracy that is important for informed and accurate risky decision making—i.e., statistical numeracy
 .
These statistical aspects of numeracy are key features
of risk assessment in business and engineering , and play central roles in health risk quantiﬁcation and communication . Moreover—although risk commonly
refers to many topics —economic and psychological
theory have long held that decision making under risk is
that involving known “statistical probabilities” and quantitative “probabilistic reasoning” .1 In these ways and others,
statistical numeracy is one factor that gives rise to risk
literacy—i.e., the ability to accurately interpret and act on
information about risk.2 Indeed, statistical numeracy has
been shown to be a predictor of decision strategies, affective reactions, comprehension and normative choices
across many risky economic, health, and consumer decisions .
Efforts to measure individual differences in statistical
numeracy and risk literacy come primarily in three forms.
Some research examines risky decisions in relation to
individual differences in overall educational attainment,
cognitive abilities, or cognitive styles . Other research primarily focusing on clinical and health domains has developed a valid subjective instrument for self-reported estimations of numeracy . Most
common, however, is the use of objective performance
measures of numeracy—i.e., psychometric tests .
In this paper, we review the development of the most
widely used statistical numeracy instruments , examining successes
and psychometric limits. We then introduce a new test
of statistical numeracy and risk literacy—i.e., the Berlin
Numeracy Test. The Berlin Numeracy Test can be used
in multiple formats (i.e., computer adaptive, paper-andpencil, multiple choice, single-item median-split), providing a fast, valid, and reliable tool for research, assessment, and public outreach. Speciﬁcally, we show that the
new test offers unique predictive validity for comprehen-
1On Knight’s view, risk refers to known (objective) probabilities whereas uncertainty refers to unknown, subjective or indeterminable probabilities. For a related quantiﬁcation of risk that is more
inclusive of both uncertainty and other decision making trade-offs related to risk management see Kaplan and Garrack .
2Risk literacy should not be confused with risk awareness or risk
knowledge, which refer more speciﬁcally to one’s awareness of “facts”
about risks (e.g., being aware that ﬂying is safer than driving).
sion of everyday risks beyond other cognitive ability and
numeracy tests (e.g., cognitive reﬂection, working memory span, and ﬂuid intelligence). Furthermore, we show
that the Berlin Numeracy Test dramatically improves psychometric discriminability among highly-educated individuals (e.g., college students and graduates, medical
professionals), across diverse cultures and different languages. We close with a discussion of construct validity,
underlying mechanisms, and applications (e.g., customtailored, interactive, and adaptive risk communication).
Numeracy and risk literacy in educated
In 2001, Lipkus et al. published the numeracy test
for highly-educated samples, as an extension of previous
work by Schwartz et al. . Lipkus et al. conducted a series of 4 studies (n = 463) on community samples of well-educated adult participants (at least 40 years
of age) in North Carolina. Among other tasks, all participants answered 11 total numeracy questions including (i) one practice question, (ii) three numeracy questions taken from the work of Schwartz et al. , and
(iii) seven other questions (one of which had two parts)
that were framed in the health domain (e.g., if the chance
of getting a disease is 10% how many people would be
expected to get the disease: (a) out of 100, (b) out of
1000). Two questions had multiple choice options while
all others were open-ended. All questions were scored
(0 or 1) with data aggregated across several studies and
entered into a factor analysis, showing that a one factor
solution was appropriate. Overall, results indicated that
the reﬁned test by Lipkus et al. was a reliable and
internally consistent measure of high-school and college
educated individuals’ statistical numeracy.
The results of Lipkus et al. were interesting for
a number of reasons. First, the results provided additional
evidence that even among educated US community samples some sizable proportion of individuals were likely
to be statistically innumerate (e.g., 20% failed questions
dealing with risk magnitude). Such ﬁndings were and
continue to be important as many efforts designed to support informed and shared decision making rest on an erroneous assumption that decision-makers are numerate
 . Second, results indicated that domain framing (e.g., medical
versus ﬁnancial versus abstract gambles) did not necessary differentially affect test performance or comprehension. This ﬁnding indicates that various domain-speciﬁc
items (e.g., items framed in terms of ﬁnancial or medical or gambling risks) can provide a reasonable basis
for the assessment of general statistical numeracy skills
that will have predictive power across diverse domains.
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 7, No. 1, January 2012
Berlin Numeracy Test
Overall, for nearly a decade, the Lipkus et al. test,
and its predecessor from Schwartz et al. have provided relatively short, reliable, and valuable instruments
that have been used in more than 100 studies on topics
such as medical decision making, shared decision making, trust, patient education, sexual behavior, stock evaluations, credit-card usage, graphical communication, and
insurance decisions, among many others .
Psychometrics
Despite its many successes and its inﬂuential role in advancing risky decision research, as anticipated by Lipkus et al. , a growing body of data suggests some
ways the current numeracy instrument could be improved
 .
For example, one major concern is that the Lipkus et al.
test is not hard enough to adequately differentiate among
the higher-performing, highly-educated individuals who
are often studied (e.g., convenience samples from universities). To illustrate, in one study of college students at
the Florida State University, data indicated that, although
the Lipkus et al. test was a signiﬁcant predictor
of risky decisions, the Lipkus et al. test showed extensive
negative skew with scores approaching the measurement
ceiling . Another recent study using large probabilistically representative samples of the whole populations of
two countries (the United States and Germany) revealed
negative skew in numeracy scores even among participants from the general population . Although most people are not college
educated, most people in these two countries are likely
to get the majority of questions right. These data suggest that most individuals tend to produce distributions of
scores that are negatively skewed and are subject to measurement ceiling effects.
A second psychometric concern is that there is relatively little known about the relations between either
the Lipkus et al. or Schwartz et al. numeracy test and other individual differences, such as basic cognitive abilities . To illustrate, one might argue that statistical numeracy is a useful predictor of risky choice simply because it is correlated with measures of ﬂuid intelligence. It is well known that tests of general intelligence, including those designed to measure ﬂuid intelligence, are valid and reliable predictors of a wide
variety of socially desirable cognitive, behavioral, occupational, and health-related outcomes . To date, however, few tests have investigated the extent to which the Lipkus et al. or
Schwartz et al. instruments provide unique predictive power beyond other cognitive ability instruments
either within or across cultures .
A third psychometric issue is that, even if numeracy is compared with other abilities, the observed measurement skew and ceiling effects will complicate comparative evaluations (e.g., intelligence v. statistical numeracy).
Consider a recent study designed to investigate the extent to which each of several individual differences (e.g., executive functioning, cognitive impulsivity, numeracy) inﬂuenced decision-making competence
 . The study found that numeracy was less related to some decision-making competencies than were
measures of executive functioning or cognitive impulsivity, measured by the cognitive reﬂection test . It is however possible that, at least in part, some
measurement ceiling effects in numeracy scores among
the college student sample could have limited differentiation of those individuals with the highest levels of numeracy. In contrast, both executive functioning and the
cognitive reﬂection tests are known to provide discrimination even among highly-educated individuals. To be
clear, our reading of the individual differences study by
Del Missier et al. is that it represents precise and
careful research using many of the best available methods and tools. However, the potential psychometric limits
inherent in the now decade old numeracy test leave open
important questions. To the extent that a numeracy instrument does not adequately or accurately estimate variation
in the sub-populations of interest it is not an efﬁcient basis for theory development or policy evaluations.
Test development and validation
Building on the work of Lipkus et al. and
Schwartz et al. we aimed to develop a new psychometrically sound statistical numeracy test that could
3The underlying cognitive mechanisms that give rise to these effects
are debated and remain unclear 
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 7, No. 1, January 2012
Berlin Numeracy Test
be used with educated and high-ability samples.4 Our
goal was not to develop a high-ﬁdelity comprehensive
test of statistical numeracy or of its sub-skills. Rather,
the goal was to develop a brief, valid, and easy-to-use instrument, with improved discriminability. Development
of the Berlin Numeracy Test began with pre-testing on a
pool of items including all items from both the Lipkus
et al. and Schwartz et al. tests along with
other items that were internally generated.
a protocol analysis in which participants solved all numeracy problems while thinking aloud , we analyzed responses and selected 28
candidate questions for inclusion in the next stage of test
development (i.e., 12 original items plus 16 new items).
Participants
We tested a community sample of 300 participants (57%
women) from Berlin, Germany at the Max Planck Institute for Human Development. Participants were primarily current or former undergraduate or graduate students
from the Humboldt, Free, and Technical Universities of
Berlin. The mean participant age was approximately 26
years old (i.e., 25.86, SD=3.98; range=18–44). Each participant completed about six hours of testing over the
course of two to three weeks in exchange for 40 euro (ca.
Materials and procedure
A number of different instruments were used to provide
convergent, discriminant, and criterion (predictive) validity for the Berlin Numeracy Test. All comparative instruments are listed and described in Table 1. Participants
were tested in three separate phases. In phase 1, all participants were tested individually via computer and/or with
the assistance of a laboratory technician as required by
the particular instrument. The ﬁrst testing session lasted
for approximately two hours and consisted primary of
cognitive ability instruments and cognitive performance
tasks, including assessment of all candidate numeracy
items. Note that participants only answered each candidate numeracy question once. During this session calculators were not allowed; however, participants were provided with paper and pens/pencils for notes. In phase 2,
participants completed an online assessment from their
home including a variety of self-report personality and
4The Berlin Numeracy Test is named to reﬂect the international, interdisciplinary development effort initiated in 2007 in the Center for
Adaptive Behavior and Cognition at the Max Planck Institute for Human Development. For additional discussion and similar public outreach efforts concerning expertise, ethics and philosophical judgment
see philosophicalcharacter.org .
other survey instruments. All participants agreed to complete the online portion of the study in one session in
which they sat alone, in a quiet room. In phase 3, participants returned about two weeks after their ﬁrst session
and completed another two hours of testing. All participants were again tested individually via computer and/or
with the assistance of a laboratory technician as required
by the particular instrument/task. The ﬁnal two hours of
testing involved new cognitive performance tasks including a battery of everyday risky decision-making comprehension questions that served as a means of assessing predictive validity (Galesic & Garcia-Retamero, submitted;
Garcia-Retamero & Galesic, in press).
Test construction and test items
Performance quartiles for all participants were assessed
according to performance on all 28 candidate statistical
numeracy questions .
A subset of
ﬁve questions with a 4-level tree structure was identi-
ﬁed using the categorization tree application from the
predictive modeling and forecasting software DTREG
 .
The tree structure was constructed
such that participants arriving at each branch of the tree
had approximately a 50% probably of answering correctly/incorrectly. The test’s tree structure was subjected
to cross-validation and showed less than 10% misclassiﬁcation.5 Subsequent analyses indicated that reducing the
4-level solution to a simpler 3-level solution (i.e., removing one problem) did not affect test classiﬁcation performance or validity yet reduced test-taking time (i.e., 10%
reduction), increased test format ﬂexibility (i.e., simpli-
ﬁed paper-and-pencil format scoring), and provided improved discriminability among new samples (see “crosscultural discriminability” below). All ﬁnal Berlin Numeracy Test formats are based on the four questions used
for the optimal 3-level categorization tree as follows (answers provided in each blank):
1. Out of 1,000 people in a small town 500 are members of a choir. Out of these 500 members in the choir
100 are men. Out of the 500 inhabitants that are not in
the choir 300 are men. What is the probability that a
randomly drawn man is a member of the choir? Please
indicate the probability in percent. ___25%___
2a. Imagine we are throwing a ﬁve-sided die 50 times.
On average, out of these 50 throws how many times
would this ﬁve-sided die show an odd number (1, 3 or
5)? __30__ out of 50 throws.
5Although some misclassiﬁcation is unavoidable, the algorithm
rarely misclassiﬁed a participant by more than one quartile. The assessment is similar to an item response theory analysis in that it identi-
ﬁes items with high levels of discriminability across the range of item
difﬁculty with a guessing parameter of zero.
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 7, No. 1, January 2012
Berlin Numeracy Test
Table 1: Descriptions and references for tests used to establish psychometric validity.
Description
Fluid Intelligence
Short form Raven’s Advanced Progressive Matrices—a 12 item test of
ﬂuid intelligence.
Bors and Stokes
Cognitive Reﬂection (CRT)
The Cognitive Reﬂection Test uses three math questions to assess cognitive impulsivity.
Frederick 
Crystallized Intelligence (Vocabulary)
A 37 item “spot-a-word” German vocabulary test.
Lindenberger, Mayr,
and Kliegl 
Working Memory
Capacity (Span)
A multi-item performance measure of one’s ability to control attention
when simultaneously solving math operations and remember words.
Turner and Engle
Understanding
everyday risks
A ﬁve item battery involving interpretation of information about risks in
consumer products, medical treatments, and weather forecasts.
Garcia-Retamero and
Galesic (in press)
Maximizing- Satisﬁcing
A 13 item scale measuring one’s tendency to maximize v. satisﬁce during
decision making.
Schwartz et al. 
Persistence
The Grit-S is an eight item brief measure designed to assess persistence
in the face of adversity.
Duckworth and Quinn
Achievement Motivation
The AMS-R is a 10 item trait assessment of one’s general achievement
motivation (e.g., one’s desire to achieve good grades or performance
evaluations).
Lang and Fries 
Self efﬁcacy
A10 item self-report measure of one’s general sense of self efﬁcacy.
Schwarzer and
Jerusalem 
Personality
A 10 item assessment of the Big Five personality traits.
Gosling, Rentfrow,
and Swann 
Test Anxiety
The TAI-G is a 20 item assessment of test-taking anxiety.
Hodapp and Benson
Implicit theories
A four item measurement of the extent to which one believes intelligence
is stable v. changeable.
Blackwell,Trzesniewski,
and Dweck 
Satisfaction with
A ﬁve item instrument measuring self-reported levels of one’s satisfaction with life.
Diener, Emmons,
Larsen, & Grifﬁn
2b. Imagine we are throwing a loaded die (6 sides).
The probability that the die shows a 6 is twice as high as
the probability of each of the other numbers. On average,
out of these 70 throws how many times would the die
show the number 6? ___20___out of 70 throws.
3. In a forest 20% of mushrooms are red, 50% brown
and 30% white. A red mushroom is poisonous with a
probability of 20%. A mushroom that is not red is poisonous with a probability of 5%.
What is the probability that a poisonous mushroom in the forest is red?
Test formats and scoring
Different research environments have different constraints such as computer-access, group-testing options,
data-security requirements, etc.
Accordingly, we designed the test to be ﬂexible, offering multiple formats
(for the multiple choice test see the “A Multiple Choice
Format” section). A test format recommendation system
is available online at www.riskliteracy.org. This system
asks 1–4 questions (e.g., how much time is available for
testing; what type of sample will you test) in order to
recommend appropriate formats and provide sample materials.
Computer adaptive test format
In this format, 2–3 questions (of 4 possible questions) are
asked to participants (Appendix II). Questions are adaptively selected based on participants’ past success in answering previous questions (see Figure 1 for test structure).
The adaptive structure means that all questions
have about a 50% probability of being answered correctly
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 7, No. 1, January 2012
Berlin Numeracy Test
Table 2: Psychometric properties of the scale: Basic attributes, reliability, and discriminability.
Schwartz et al.
 , 3 items
Lipkus et al.
 , 11 items
Berlin Numeracy Test
Adaptive Test
format, 2–3
Pencil format,
Single Item
Basic attributes
Range of possible scores
Range of achieved scores
Average score
Standard deviation
Number of items
Mean duration in minutes
Reliability
Cronbach’s alpha
Discriminability
Item % correct (mean)
Mean score of
1st quartile
2nd quartile
3rd quartile
4th quartile
aCronbach’s alpha cannot be computed. Principal component analysis indicates that the four items used in
Berlin Numeracy Test all loaded highly on a single factor explaining 45% of variance.
bApproximately 50%, conditional on previous responses.
with subsequent questions adjusted on the basis of participants’ prior answers. If an answer is correct/incorrect
then a harder/easier question is automatically provided.
A participant’s skill-level can then be determined from
answers to 2–3 questions in roughly half the time normally required for the Lipkus et al. numeracy
test (less than three minutes; see Table 2).
To facilitate access, the computer adaptive Berlin Numeracy Test
is available online in a format that automatically scores
participants’ responses and reports data to researchers in
terms of estimated participant quartile scores.
are typically batched such that the researcher requests a
certain number of test scores and when that number is
reached the full results are emailed. The test can be found
at www.riskliteracy.org, which also provides access via
other internet ready devices (e.g., smart phones). The
online forum allows the public to complete the test and
receive feedback on their performance relative to others,
along with information about potential challenges they
may face when making risky decisions. However, before completing any online test items, the adaptive test
seamlessly redirects participants to a secure online server.
All Berlin Numeracy Test data collection is managed and
hosted via the Unipark survey software system designed
for academic research (www.unipark.de). We request that
researchers use the computer adaptive test format whenever possible as this format provides an efﬁcient balance
between speed and psychometric accuracy, and also allows us to continue to collect data that can be used to
further reﬁne the test.
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 7, No. 1, January 2012
Berlin Numeracy Test
Figure 1: The structure of the Computer Adaptive Berlin
Numeracy Test. Each question has a 50% probably of
being right/wrong. If a question is answered right/wrong
a harder/easier question is provided that again has a 50%
probability of being right/wrong.
Question 1
Question 2a
Question 2b
Question 3
Traditional (paper and pencil) format
The alternative, traditional format (Appendix III) requires
that participants answer all four questions from the Berlin
Numeracy Test in sequence. Scoring involves totaling all
correct answers (i.e., 0–4 points possible). In this format
the structure of the adaptive test is ignored, although the
adaptive scoring algorithm can be applied following data
collection as might be useful (e.g., to estimate quartiles
compared to available norms for college educated samples). This alternative (traditional) format may be useful when computerized testing is impractical, such as in
group testing or when computer access is limited. Testing
requires about as long as the original Lipkus et al. 
numeracy test (i.e., less than 5 minutes).
Single-item (median) format
In cases where time is extremely limited, it is possible to
use only the ﬁrst item of the test (question 1) as a means
of estimating median splits (Appendix IV). Those who
answer the question right are estimated to belong to the
top half of educated participants while all others are assigned the bottom half. Given the relatively small time
savings over the adaptive format we recommend this option be avoided in favor of the computer adaptive version whenever practical. Generally, this test format takes
about as long as the Schwartz et al. instrument
(i.e., about 1 minute).
Results and discussion: Psychometric
properties
Results of psychometric analyses are presented in Tables
2–4. Three formats of the Berlin Numeracy Test—i.e.,
Computer Adaptive, Traditional Paper and Pencil, and
Single Item—are compared with the standard numeracy
test by Lipkus et al. as well as with the brief three
item test by Schwartz et al. .
Basic attributes
In our educated sample, scores on the Lipkus et al. 
numeracy scale show dramatic negative skew (Table 2).
Although possible scores range from 0 to 11, the lowest
observed score was 5 (45% correct). Both the mean and
median are close to the measurement ceiling (i.e., 88%
and 91% correct, respectively). Similar levels of skew
are observed for the Schwartz et al. test. In contrast, scores on the Berlin Numeracy Test are distributed
evenly across the whole range of possible scores regardless of format. Estimates of internal consistency for the
Berlin Numeracy Test show some modest improvement
over other existing numeracy tests. However, as is common for very short tests, the Cronbach’s alpha level of all
numeracy tests was below the typical .7 aspiration level.6
A principal axis factor analysis of the four items from
the Berlin Numeracy Test indicated that all items loaded
highly on a single factor explaining 45% of the observed
variance. An additional study at Michigan Technological
University found that, when the test was taken two different times, ﬁve days apart, it showed high levels of testretest reliability, r(11)=.91, p=.001. All Berlin Numeracy
Test formats also typically take less time to complete than
the Lipkus et al. numeracy test.
Convergent and discriminant validity
If the Berlin Numeracy Test is successful in assessing levels of statistical numeracy, it should correlate with other
numeracy tests and with measures of cognitive ability
(i.e., convergent validity). Moreover, to the extent the
Berlin Numeracy Test primarily measures statistical numeracy it should not correlate with essentially unrelated
constructs, such as motivation, personality, beliefs, or attitudes (i.e., discriminant validity). As Table 3 shows,
both requirements—high correlations with related constructs and low with unrelated constructs—are satisﬁed
for all three forms of Berlin Numeracy Test.7
6For comparison, the 3 item Cognitive Reﬂection Test had a Cronbach’s alpha =.62 and a mean duration 2.5 minutes.
7For comparison, the correlation of the Cognitive Reﬂection Test
 with Raven’s Adv. Matrices was .40, with Vocabulary
.28, and with Working Memory Span .26. Correlation with Extraversion
was –.14, with Openness to experience –.23, and with Text Anxiety –
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 7, No. 1, January 2012
Berlin Numeracy Test
Table 3: Psychometric properties of tests: Convergent and discriminant validity. (BNT is Belin Numeracy Test.)
Schwartz et al.
 , 3 items
Lipkus et al.
 , 11 items
Berlin Numeracy Test
Adaptive Test
format, 2–3
Pencil format,
Single Item
Convergent validity
Numeracy tests
Lipkus et al. 11 items
BNT: Computer Adaptive
BNT: Paper and Pencil
BNT: Single Item
Cognitive abilities/styles
Raven’s Adv. Matrices
Cognitive Reﬂection Test
Vocabulary Spot-a-word
Working memory span
Discriminant validity
Motivation measures
Maximizing-Satisﬁcing
Persistence (Grit-S)
Achievement motivation
Self-efﬁcacy
Personality Traits
Emotional stability
Conscientiousness
Agreeableness
Extraversion
Openness to experience
Other measures
Test anxiety
Implicit theories
Satisfaction with life
*p=.05; **p<.01.
Predictive validity
One of the intended purposes of the Berlin Numeracy
Test is predicting people’s understanding of information
about risk in consumer, medical, and everyday contexts—
i.e., predicting risk literacy. To investigate the predictive
.13. Correlations with other variables were not signiﬁcant.
validity of the Berlin Numeracy Test, we administered
a short battery of items dealing with information about
everyday risks related to common consumer, health, and
medical choices (e.g., evaluating the efﬁcacy of toothpastes and cancer screenings), as well as information
about probabilities typically used in weather forecasts
 , 3 items
Lipkus et al.
 , 11 items
Berlin Numeracy Test
Adaptive Test
format, 2–3 items
Paper and Pencil
format, 4 items
Single Item
Mean proportion correct answers on understanding of everyday risks, by test quartiles
1st quartile
2nd quartile
3rd quartile
4th quartile
Predictive validity for correct answers on understanding of everyday risks (standardized beta coefﬁcients)
As a single predictor
With Raven
* p<.05; **p<.01
examples). Table 4 shows correlations of different numeracy tests with the overall accuracy of interpretations
of these items. All formats of the Berlin Numeracy Test
were superior to the previous numeracy tests. Both the
Computer Adaptive test and the Paper and Pencil format
doubled the predictive resolution of the previous tests.
When either of these formats was included in the model
the previous numeracy tests lost all of their unique predictive power. We next investigated the extent to which
the Berlin Numeracy Test explained additional variance
in risk understanding controlling for the strongest alternative predictors of performance—i.e., ﬂuid intelligence
and cognitive reﬂection. As Table 4 shows, all formats of
the Berlin Numeracy Test explain a substantial portion of
additional variance after these others tests are included in
a hierarchical regression model.8 In contrast, both previous numeracy tests lose most (or all) of their predictive
power when intelligence or cognitive reﬂection tests are
included. Overall, results indicate that the Berlin Numeracy Test is a reliable and valid test of statistical numeracy
and risk literacy, offering higher levels of discriminability and overcoming the major psychometric limitations
of the Lipkus et al. test and Schwartz et al. 
8For comparison, risk comprehension was predicted by the Cognitive Reﬂection Test with a standardized beta of .31 and by the Raven’s
test with a standardized beta of .20. When controlling for the Berlin
Numeracy Test, the cognitive reﬂection test continued to predict unique
variance .20, but Raven’s test did not .05. See the general discussion for
a theoretical account of these differences.
Additional validation studies
Cross-cultural discriminability
The initial validation of the Berlin Numeracy Test was
completed on a sample of highly-educated people living
in a major metropolitan city in Germany. As a means of
out-of-sample validation, we sought to assess the extent
to which test discriminability generalized to other highlyeducated samples from different cultures, presented in
different languages. Speciﬁcally, we examined test performance in studies conducted in 15 different countries
with diverse cultural backgrounds.
Studies were conducted by different research groups, examining college
student samples at research-active universities, primarily testing participants from introduction to psychology
participant pools. Studies were conducted in China (Tsinghua University), England (University College London), France (Universite de Lausanne), Germany (Max
Planck Institute for Human Development), India (Thapar University), Japan (University of Tokyo), the Netherlands (Katholieke Universiteit Leuven), Norway (University of Oslo),9 Pakistan (University of Punjab), Poland
(Wroclaw University), Portugal (University of Porto),10
9Data collection in Norway used the traditional 4 item rather than
adaptive form of the Berlin Numeracy Test. Data reported in the table
are calculated using the adaptive scoring algorithm, which was highly
correlated with overall score, r(154)=.90. In the standard format the
average score was 62% correct showing modest skew (–.29).
10Data collection in Portugal used a modiﬁed Berlin Numeracy Test.
Data were only available for the single item test and are not presented
in the table. Overall 46.4% of participants (n = 306) from Portugal
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 7, No. 1, January 2012
Berlin Numeracy Test
Table 5: Proportion of participants in each quartile from 14 countries. Quartile scores are estimated based on the
computer adaptive test algorithm. Countries are ordered by their percentage of top quartile scores. See footnote 8 for
data from Portugal.
1st quartile
2nd quartile
3rd quartile
Top quartile
Switzerland German
Spain (University of Granada), Sweden (Uppsala University), Switzerland (University of Basel), and the United
States (Michigan Technological University).11 In total,
additional data from n=2685 college students was examined. All reported data are scored via the adaptive Berlin
Numeracy Test algorithm, where 2–3 questions (out of
4) are used to estimate statistical numeracy quartiles for
each participant.12
Overall results show the test generally discriminated
within desirable tolerances (i.e., pm 10%) for each quartile (Table 5). Aggregating across samples, the mean test
score was 51.7% correct, which closely approximated the
ideal score of 50%. This score indicates that on average
the ﬁrst test item of the Berlin Numeracy Test achieved
the intended 50% discriminability.
We also observed
some modest underestimation of the third quartile and
commensurate overestimation in the top quartile. In part,
higher top quartile scores may reﬂect the fact that several of our samples were collected from elite universities and selective technical/engineering universities (e.g.,
University College London; Tsinghua University). Vianswered the ﬁrst question right (theoretical ideal test score = 50%).
11We thank Nicolai Bodemer, Siegfried Dewitte, Stefan Herzog, Marcus Lindskog, Hitashi Lomash, Yasmina Okan, Jing Qian, Samantha Simon, Helena Szrek, Masanori Takezawa, Karl Teigen, Jan Woike, and
Tomek Wysocki for assistance with cross cultural data collection.
12Translation involved iterative cycles of back-translation with revision.
sual inspection shows some speciﬁc positive and negative skewing of scores across various countries.13
example, Spain, Pakistan, and India all show moderate
positive skew. In contrast, the highest performing sample, which was collected in China, showed very strong
negative skew. Taken together, aggregated scores closely
approximated the intended quartiles. The observed distributions indicate that with only 2–3 statistical numeracy
questions the Berlin Numeracy Test achieves good discriminability across most countries even when presented
in different languages or when used at elite or technological universities.
Physician assistants
One goal for the Berlin Numeracy Test is to offer an instrument that can quickly assess statistical numeracy and
risk literacy in highly-trained professionals. Of particular interest are those professionals who commonly make
risky decisions and communicate risks. One such group
in the United States is physician assistants. Physician assistants are independently licensed medical professionals who work under the supervision of physicians in all
medical subspecialties (e.g., emergency medicine, family
practice, surgery). Physician assistants independently di-
13The Berlin Numeracy Test estimates quartiles, so caution is required when interpreting standard assessments of skew.
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 7, No. 1, January 2012
Berlin Numeracy Test
Table 6: Percentage of people in each quartile from three different samples estimated by the computer adaptive Berlin
Numeracy Test algorithm.
1st quartile 2nd quartile 3rd quartile 4th quartile
Graduating US Physician Assistants
Population Sample in Sweden
USA Web Panel Sample (M-Turk)
agnose and treat patients, and provide care similar to that
provided by a physician, with professional training typically involving two or three years of post graduate study
and clinical rotations.
Previous studies of physicians-in-training in the UK
 revealed dramatic skew in responses to the Lipkus et al. test. Speciﬁcally, in
one sample of physicians-in-training, Hanoch and colleagues found that the average Lipkus et al. test score
was 95% correct, with 64% of participants answering all
questions correctly. Here, we assessed performance of
the Berlin Numeracy Test by administering a paper and
pencil format to a group of physician assistant students (n
= 51) who were completing their ﬁnal semester of training at the University of Oklahoma.14 Results revealed
slight positive skew (.16) suggesting the test was well calibrated, if somewhat difﬁcult. A similar distribution was
observed when the adaptive scoring algorithm was applied (Table 6). The mean adaptive test score was 44.3%
correct, which reasonably approximated the ideal score of
50%. Note that, in contrast to other highly-educated samples, these data show some central clustering of scores.
To the extent this pattern generalizes it suggests physician assistants are less likely to have very low levels of
statistical numeracy, as would be expected. Overall, results indicate that the Berlin Numeracy Test is well suited
for use with these and other highly-educated professionals who are often charged with interpreting and communicating risks. Ongoing research is assessing test performance among other diverse professional groups (e.g., dieticians, ﬁnancial advisors, judges, lawyers, physicians,
professional athletes, and poker players).
Numeracy in the general population:
Data from Sweden
The Berlin Numeracy Test was designed to estimate
differences in risk literacy among educated individuals.
Considering the observed skew in scores from the Lipkus et al., test, the Berlin Numeracy Test may also
be suitable for use among general, non-highly educated
14We thank Robert Hamm for data collection.
populations. As part of a larger validation and translation study, data were collected from a quota sample of
adults living in the Uppsala area of Sweden (ages 20–
60) who were matched against the known population on
age and gender .15 Approximately 370 of 2000 potential participants responded to a request for participation, of which
213 were selected for testing in the current study. Of the
213 participants included in this sample approximately
30% had only high-school education with 20% completing a masters degree or higher. The test was presented in
Swedish and was administered using the adaptive format.
Results show the average test score was 48.8% correct,
which closely approximated the theoretically ideal score
of 50%. Distributions of estimated quartiles were somewhat concentrated around the middle quartiles, particularly quartile two (Table 6).
In addition to the Berlin Numeracy Data, data were
also collected for the Lipkus et al., test. As expected, results showed marked skew in scores with an
average score of 83.5% correct and clear negative skew
(-1.94). We next compared these Lipkus et al. test scores
with other data from previous studies that had been collected using probabilistic, representative sampling in the
USA and Germany .
Results indicate that this sample of Swedish residents’
scores showed considerably more negative skew reﬂecting signiﬁcantly higher levels of statistical numeracy
compared to the populations in Germany, t (1209)=9.29,
p = .001 (skewness = –.55), or the USA, t (1375) = 13.51,
p = .001, (skewness = –.33).
Overall, results indicate that the Berlin Numeracy Test
is well suited for estimating numeracy among some segments of the general population of Sweden or other similar community samples. However, because the current
sample from Sweden is more numerate than that of either the USA or Germany, we can expect some positive
skew in representative samples of the general population
from the US, Germany, or other similar countries. Accordingly, when assessing statistical numeracy in repre-
15This research was ﬁnanced by the Swedish Research Council. We
thank Marcus Lindskog and colleagues for sharing these data.
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 7, No. 1, January 2012
Berlin Numeracy Test
sentative samples of the general population we suggest
including at least one other test in addition to the Berlin
Numeracy Test . One promising
strategy that adds only about 1 minute in testing time is
to combine the three item Schwartz et al. test with
the Berlin Numeracy Test (for an example see the next
section on web panel data). Ongoing studies are examining this strategy in representative samples of residents of
United States web panel data from Mechanical Turk
Behavioral scientists are increasingly using paid web
panels for data collection and hypothesis testing. One
popular option for data collection is Amazon.com’s Mechanical Turk Web Panel . The ﬁrst published study
to assess numeracy among participants from Mechanical Turk was published in 2010 .
In this study, Paolacci and colleagues assessed numeracy using the subjective numeracy scale , which is known to correlate with the objective
Lipkus et al. test . Results
revealed an average subjective numeracy score of 4.35
(67% of maximum), which is similar to previously reported scores (e.g., participants recruited from a university hospital showed a modest skew (–.3); see Fagerlin
et al., 2007). Similarly, we recently investigated numeracy using the Schwartz et al., test on a convenience sample from Mechanical Turk (n =250) (Okan,
Garcia-Retamero, Galesic, & Cokely, in press). Consistent with results from the subjective numeracy test, results revealed moderate negative skew (-1.2), indicating
an average score of 2.11 (i.e., 70% correct). A total of
42% of the sample also answered 100% of the questions
To evaluate the performance of web panelists on the
Berlin Numeracy Test we administered an adaptive test
to a large Mechanical Turk web panel sample (n=1612).
All reported data were scored via the adaptive algorithm,
where 2–3 questions (out of 4) were used to estimate statistical numeracy quartiles for each participant. As anticipated, we observed positive skew (.90) in the sample
scores indicating that the test was moderately difﬁcult.16
In the previous web panel studies we observed positive and negative skew for the Berlin Numeracy Test and
the Schwartz et al. test, respectively.
to reason that combining the two tests would yield a
better distribution, providing increased discriminability.
Therefore, we conducted a new study including both the
16To the extent our data generalize, results suggest that our single
question 2a may allow for a rough approximation of a median split
among Mechanical Turk participants.
Schwartz et al. test and the Berlin Numeracy Test with
participants on Mechanical Turk (n=206). When scored
separately, we replicated the negative (–.62) and positive
(.48) skewing of scores on the two tests. However, simply adding the two scores together yielded a normal distribution with no evidence of skew (–.016). In summary,
results suggest that combining the Berlin Numeracy Test
with the Schwartz et al. test provides a very fast assessment (< 4 minutes) with good discriminability. This combined assessment is well suited for use with Mechanical
Turk and should also be appropriate for estimating the
wider range of differences in statistical numeracy that exist in samples of the general population.
A multiple choice format
In some cases researchers may require more ﬂexibility
than the current Berlin Numeracy Test formats provide.
For example, many psychometric tests are given in a multiple choice format. Unfortunately, providing potential
answers to participants increases the beneﬁts of guessing.
With four options, guessing would be expected to yield a
score of approximately 25% correct. In contrast, in all
other “ﬁll in the blank” formats of the Berlin Numeracy
Test, the contribution of a guessing parameter is essentially zero. To address this issue, multiple choice test
format development began with an analysis of patterns
of incorrect responses to previous tests from participants
in the aforementioned Mechanical Turk study (n=1612).
For each question, we listed the most frequently given incorrect options (each recorded in 8–20% of incorrect answers). Then, for each Berlin Numeracy Test question we
included the correct answer, the two most frequent incorrect answers, and a “none of the above” option (Appendix
Next, we collected data from participants at the Michigan Technological University (n=269). Participants included convenience samples primarily from departments
of Psychology, Mechanical Engineering, and Computer
Science. The majority of participants were undergraduate students, with a small proportion of the sample composed of either graduate students or faculty. Participants
were either sent a link asking them to complete a survey via internal listservs or tests were administered in
classes. Participants were presented with one of two versions of the multiple choice format differing only in the
wording of one problem (Appendix V).17 This manipulation was conducted because we received feedback that
some professional groups may be more willing to partici-
17The exact wording of the alternative question is as follows: “Out of
1,000 people in a small town, 500 have a minor genetic mutation. Out of
these 500 who have the genetic mutation, 100 are men. Out of the 500
inhabitants who do not have the genetic mutation, 300 are men. What is
the probability that a randomly drawn man has the genetic mutation?”
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 7, No. 1, January 2012
Berlin Numeracy Test
pate if questions seemed related to their areas of expertise
(e.g., some medical doctors will see more face validity in
questions about genetic mutations as compared to choir
membership). Accurate responses to the new (M=.56) v.
old (M=.60) items did not signiﬁcantly differ χ2 (1) =
.259. Distributions of scores also did not signiﬁcantly
differ between tests, t(267)=1.383, p=.17, and so data
sets were combined for subsequent analyses. Overall, the
mean multiple choice test score was 55% correct, which
reasonably approximated the ideal score of 50%. Analysis of distributions of responses indicated the multiple
choice format showed no skew (–.006). Results indicate
that the multiple choice format provided good discriminability and remained well balanced even when used
with highly numerate individuals (e.g., computer science
students).
General discussion
Over the last decade, the Schwartz et al. and Lipkus et al. numeracy tests have proven useful and
sometimes essential for various aspects of theory development, as well as for applications in risk communication. However, as anticipated by Lipkus and colleagues,
in the 10 years since publication of their test, research has
identiﬁed a number of limitations and opportunities for
improvement in measures of statistical numeracy. Building on the work of Lipkus et al. , Schwartz et al.
 , and many others , we have developed a ﬂexible, multiformat test of statistical numeracy and risk literacy for use
with diverse samples (e.g., highly-educated college graduates from around the world). Next we turn to discussion
of construct validity, underlying cognitive mechanisms,
and emerging applications in adaptive decision support.
Construct validity, limits, and future directions
The Berlin Numeracy Test speciﬁcally measures the
range of statistical numeracy skill that is important for
accurately interpreting and acting on information about
risk—i.e., risk literacy. Our studies showed that a very
short, adaptive numeracy test could provide sound assessment with dramatically improved discriminability across
diverse samples, cultures, education levels, and languages. Content validity is clear in the types of questions included in the test—i.e., math questions involving ratio concepts and probabilities. Convergent validity
was documented by showing high intercorrelations with
other numeracy tests, as well as with other assessments
of general cognitive abilities, cognitive styles, and education. Discriminant validity was documented by showing
the test was unrelated to common personality and motivation measures (e.g., uncorrelated with emotional stability
or extraversion). Criterion validity was documented by
showing that the Berlin Numeracy Test provided unique
predictive validity for evaluating both numeric and nonnumeric information about risks. This unique predictive
validity held when statistically controlling for other numeracy tests and for other general ability and cognitivestyle instruments. Taken together, results converge and
contribute to our evolving understanding of the construct
validity of both numeracy and risk literacy.18
Going forward, more research is needed to document
the causal connections between numeracy, risk literacy
and risky decision making.
Theoretically, improving
some types of mathematics skills will improve risk literacy and risky decision making. However, the evidence
of such beneﬁts along with quantiﬁcation of the magnitudes of these beneﬁts is surprisingly limited (e.g., how
much study time is required to help less numerate individuals overcome denominator neglect? Does the same
level of training continue to inoculate participants under
conditions of high emotional stress as might be expected
in medical decisions?). As well, despite the utility of current theoretical frameworks, our understanding of underlying cognitive mechanisms is still somewhat underspeci-
ﬁced (for discussion see next section). Future studies are
likely to beneﬁt by more closely aligning with current
research in mathematics and general literacy education,
as well as research on mathematics development, mathematics expertise, and training for transfer .
Additionally, there is a need for statistical numeracy tests
that provide larger item pools and parallel forms that can
be administered to the same participants multiple times
without inﬂating test scores (e.g., limiting item familiarity effects). This option for repeated measurement is necessary for the assessment of developmental changes associated with skill acquisition. Related test development
efforts are currently underway for the Berlin Numeracy
It is important to again note that the Berlin Numeracy Test is designed speciﬁcally for educated and highlyeducated samples (e.g., college students; business, medical, and legal professionals). Discriminability will be reduced when assessing individuals who have lower levels
of educational attainment (e.g., the Berlin Numeracy Test
may show some positive skew in samples of high school
students or among older adults). When this is a concern,
researchers can include an additional instrument such as
the fast three item test by Schwartz et al. . The re-
18According to Cronbach and Meehl’s review of construct validity “a construct is some postulated attribute of people, assumed to be
reﬂected in test performance.” Similarly, contemporary views hold that
construct validity “...is not a property of the test or assessment as such,
but rather of the meaning of the test scores” which is established by
integrating and evaluating multiple lines of evidence .
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 7, No. 1, January 2012
Berlin Numeracy Test
sults of our Mechanical Turk web panel study show that
this strategy can produce excellent discriminability with
virtually no skew, estimating variation among relatively
low and very high ranges of statistical numeracy.
Because the Berlin Numeracy Test provides a broad estimate of variation in statistical numeracy and risk literacy it is not able to provide a detailed assessment of speciﬁc differences in numeracy, such as identifying deﬁcits
in reasoning about probability as compared to performing multiplication. This level of analysis is necessary because, although risk literacy is a major concern, numeracy is important for thinking and general decision making
well beyond its inﬂuence on risk comprehension (Peters,
in press). Of note, other factor analytic research by Liberali and colleagues indicates that, at least with respect to some risky decisions and some judgments, component numeracy skills (e.g., multiplication vs. probability) can be differentially beneﬁcial.19 We also currently
do not have any theoretical account systematically linking component numeracy skills and competencies with
the many various types of risky decisions people commonly face (e.g., retirement planning v. medical screening decisions, etc.). There is a need for larger scale cognitive process tracing and factor analytic assessments to be
conducted across a wider range of numeracy, risk literacy,
and risky decision making. Initial studies may beneﬁt by
examining relations between established numeracy tests,
component math skills, and other established instruments
such as the advanced decision making competency tests
 .
Future research will also need to use methods that provide details about the ecological frequencies of problematic risky decisions, including those related to risk literacy, using techniques such as representative sampling
 . This type of epidemiological data could then be used to start to quantify the relative economic, personal, and social impact of
speciﬁc weaknesses in numeracy and risk literacy (e.g.,
when and how often does denominator neglect affect
high-stakes vs. lower stakes risky decisions among less
numerate individuals; for a related discussion see Garcia-
Retamero, Okan, & Cokely, in press).
This ecological approach would provide essential input for relative
prioritization of different interventions . Of course, given the wide in-
ﬂuence of numeracy, analyses will need to be conducted
across and within various domains (medicine vs. ﬁnance)
and sub-domains (e.g., retirement planning versus credit
decisions). Because there are many cognitive skills in-
19The factor structures varied across two studies, which complicates
interpretation although the results are suggestive.
volved in statistical numeracy and risk literacy a test of all
component skills may turn out to be prohibitively long,
necessitating the use of more complex adaptive testing
 . Generally, more comprehensive assessments will also need to address the wide
range of cognitive mechanisms that link numeracy, risk
literacy, and decision making.
Underlying cognitive mechanisms
At its core, numeracy refers to one’s ability to represent, store, and accurately process mathematical operations (Peters, in press). As with all complex skills, individual differences in numeracy will reﬂect the interaction
of many cognitive and affective mechanisms that vary by
situation. The recent review by Reyna and colleagues
 provides an overview of some of the causal frameworks that are used to understand the relationship between numerical processing and risky decision making.
For example, in the psychophysical tradition, theory emphasizes individual differences in the representation of
internal mental magnitudes (e.g., linear v. logarithmic).
In part, differences in risky decisions result from independent contributions of both evolved and acquired numerical estimation systems. That is, in part individual
differences in numeracy reﬂect differences in one’s intuitive number sense and the affective meaning issued by
this sense .
A second framework used to understand the relation
between numeracy and risky decision making draws on
fuzzy trace theory . Following traditions in psycholinguistics, fuzzy trace theory explains differences in numerical processing in terms of cognitive representations and
memory. Cognition is said to involve simultaneous encoding of verbatim information (“literal facts”) and gist
information (“fuzzy meaning or interpretations”) into two
separable forms of memory. For example, when evaluating two options with different prices, participants can be
shown to encode both verbatim information (e.g., “option one costs $25 dollars and option two costs $0”) as
well as gist information (e.g., “the cost is something versus nothing”).
Moreover, theoretically, people have a
fuzzy-processing preference such that responses tend to
be based on one’s gist representation. That is, people tend
to base choices on the fuzziest or the least precise representation of numeric information. There is a well developed literature linking fuzzy trace theory to judgment and
decision making, including a mathematical model that
explains some types of memory illusions and judgment
processes. However, there is currently no validated instrument that can be used to assess or predict individual
differences in one’s likelihood of relying on gist versus
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 7, No. 1, January 2012
Berlin Numeracy Test
verbatim numeric representations.20
A third framework used to understand numeracy involves computational approaches in the information processing tradition of Newell and Simon , and many
others .
A central goal of this tradition is the development of precise,
integrative computational models that allow for high-
ﬁdelity cognitive simulations .
Accordingly, this tradition relies heavily
on cognitive process tracing studies, including studies
of reaction times, eye-tracking, information search, and
think-aloud protocols .
methods provide data on how cognition unfolds over
time, often producing relatively direct evidence about
strategies (e.g., heuristics) and essential mechanisms
(e.g., the inﬂuence of an incorrect understanding of math
operations). Cognitive process tracing methods are also
thought to be essential components of test construction
and construct validation . Among other virtues these methods avoid
the perils of making inferences about speciﬁc cognitive
processes based on averaged responses. That is, because
participants sometimes use different strategies on different trials—and because different people often use different strategies—one cannot reliably identify or infer “the”
underlying cognitive strategy because multiple strategies
are at play .
In one study of decisions in simple
risky lotteries, a retrospective think-aloud protocol analysis was used in combination with assessments of decision
reaction times and decision performance .22 Results indicated that numeracy and other
20An instrument is currently in the initial stages of development in
Valerie Reyna’s Lab (personal communication with Valerie Reyna).
21Although generic dual process theory is popular among decision
scientists we do not discuss this framework here as there is concern
about its construct validity. Arguments hold that, although it is a useful
organizational framework, the framework suffers from theoretical and
conceptual under-speciﬁcation and inconsistency, and as a result lacks
predictive validity . For a brief review of recent debiasing studies
see Milkman, Chugh, and Bazerman, .
22In concurrent verbal protocol analysis participants are asked to verbalize their thoughts while performing a task. A meta-analysis indicated
abilities (e.g., working memory) predicted more normative risky decisions. However, in contrast to theory assuming that more normative decisions resulted from more
normative cognitive processes (i.e., calculating expected
value), numeracy was shown to predict more elaborative
encoding and heuristic search (e.g., transforming probabilities, comparing relative magnitudes, and considering
the time required to earn equivalent sums of money). In
turn, the differences in elaborative encoding and search
(e.g., reaction time) were found to fully mediate the relationship between numeracy and superior risky decision making. Similarly, individuals who score higher on
general cognitive ability measures are known to spend
more time preparing for tasks and more deliberatively
encode task relevant information . Research shows that elaborative encoding causes
information in working memory to be stored in longterm memory, thereby freeing-up additional resources
and functionally increasing information processing capacity . Other experimental data also shows that
varying encoding and search causes changes in numerical
processing and decision making performance . However, cognitive abilities such as numeracy do not simply result in
more complex decision algorithms . Rather, cognitive abilities tend to predict more adaptive allocation of limited
cognitive resources, which tends to include more reﬂective, careful, and elaborative encoding even when decisions are ultimately based on heuristics .
More research is needed to improve theoretical speciﬁcation of how and when differences in numeracy will
predict differences in encoding and search. One hypothesis is that higher levels of general abilities, including numeracy, are associated with differences in metacognition,
which enables greater sensitivity to feedback . In turn, better
detection of task feedback can give rise to more adaptive
decision making as participants may become more likely
to exploit cognitive niches .
that when used with the standard instructions, and Level 1 data, concurrent reports are not reactive, meaning they do not interact with cognitive
processes although they may increase total processing time . In retrospective protocol analysis participants are asked to verbalize their thoughts after a task is complete, which can be less reliable
than concurrent methods, and so converging methods such as reaction
time or eye-tracking are advisable.
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 7, No. 1, January 2012
Berlin Numeracy Test
These metacognitive processes likely include a host of
simple heuristics such as (i) double checking, (ii) performance predicting, and (iii) searching for disconﬁrming
evidence—which may be useful components of reﬂective
thinking .
The link between abilities and elaborative encoding
may in part explain why including the cognitive reﬂection test in our hierarchical model reduced the strength
of the relationship between the Berlin Numeracy Test
and risk comprehension (see validation study one). The
predictive power of the Berlin Numeracy Test may have
decreased because the cognitive reﬂection test captured
shared-variance owing to differences in encoding and
search. Research in our laboratories has demonstrated
that the cognitive reﬂection test is sometimes uniquely associated with differences in information search, predicting differences in encoding, memory, and judgment in
ﬁnancial estimation tasks . Factor analytic research by Liberali and colleagues indicates that the cognitive reﬂection test loads on a factor that is distinct from numeracy
 . This cognitive reﬂection test factor predicted differences in one’s memory for stimulus
items, which in turn was one of the strongest predictors
of task performance—consistent with an elaborative encoding account.
Beyond other mechanisms, knowledge of speciﬁc
mathematical operations and rules is at the heart of numeracy . Research shows that major differences in skill and expert performance primarily reﬂect differences in knowledge and proceduralization of skill caused by differences in deliberate practice
 .
As with all forms of learning and expertise, skill tends
to be domain-speciﬁc and generalizes or transfers only
to the extent that the skill and the new task involve similar elements . For example, if a participant had an excellent working knowledge of multiplication then other tasks that involve multiplication would also beneﬁt (e.g., risky decision tasks
that require calculation of expected values). As noted,
recent factor analytic research indicated that both multiplication and proportion-comprehension skills accouted
for unique variance when predicting ratio biases and conjunction/disjunction fallacies .
In summary, individual differences in statistical numeracy and risk literacy result from the complex interaction of many factors including one’s (1) intuitive number sense; (2) gist v. verbatim representations; (3) re-
ﬂective and elaborative encoding; and (4) skilled understanding of mathematical operations. Moreover, there are
likely many other important factors to consider. For example, the initial validation study for the Berlin Numeracy Test indicated that test anxiety was another factor that
can be negatively related to test performance. We speculate that in some cases anxiety may reduce motivation
to engage in elaborative encoding of numerical information, limiting one’s willingness to practice and develop
one’s skills. However, other individuals who do not experience anxiety may instead experience higher levels of
affective meaning from numbers which could inspire further encoding, reﬂection, and learning. In turn, greater
levels of elaborative encoding and knowledge may lead
to richer and more contextualized (if still imprecise) gist
based representations and reasoning.
Further research
is needed to disentangle and map the interplay of these
factors in close connection with speciﬁc task characteristics.23
Conclusions
We make sense of our complex and uncertain world
with data about risks that are presented in terms of ratio
concepts such as probabilities, proportions, and percentages. Whether patients, consumers, and policy-makers
correctly understand these risks—i.e., whether or not they
are risk literate—depends in part on their statistical numeracy . Rather than develop a long or comprehensive
test assessing a wide-range of statistical numeracy skills,
our efforts here focused on developing a fast test of statistical numeracy that leveraged available computing technology and internet accessibility (e.g., online data collection and scoring; accessible via smart phones and other
internet ready devices). We believe this type of technology integration with psychometric reﬁnement is timely
given the growing need for assessment of factors that interact with risky decision-making in basic and applied domains .
Looking forward, there are many emerging opportunities to use this and other validated tests to enhance
adaptive decision support systems .
For example, waiting patients or new employees selecting bene-
ﬁts might answer a couple of questions on a tablet computer in order to notify professionals about the appropriate level of subsequent risk discourse necessary for informed decision making. Similarly, following a diagnosis
23The information processing tradition typically takes a “systems”
perspective recognizing the importance of the interaction between task
environments and the computational capabilities of the actor . In other words, cognitive performance is the product of the interaction of persons, processes, and task environments .
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 7, No. 1, January 2012
Berlin Numeracy Test
of certain diseases or the introduction of new technologies, interactive information brochures could be accessed
online with custom-tailored information adaptively delivered according to one’s level of risk literacy. These
instruments hold the promise of not only helping facilitate risk communication but they may also be important
for mitigating legal and ethical concerns. An appropriate risk literacy test could provide additional evidence
that people who are considering loans or elective surgeries have sufﬁcient numeracy to interpret the risks in the
formats that are presented. Of course, there are several
promising simple solutions for transparent risk communication like visual aids and natural frequencies that are
widely understandable and should be used when practical
 . Nevertheless, one
size cannot ﬁt all—different situations will sometimes require different thresholds of numeracy and risk literacy
for accurate understanding and informed decision making .
Beyond applications in risk communication and adaptive decision support, adaptive tests like the Berlin Numeracy Test may also ﬁnd use in selecting appropriate
interactive tutorials for learning about risk literacy itself.
Using adaptive tests can quickly get students to abilityappropriate examples of common errors in risk interpretation (e.g., confusing relative and absolute risk formats).
In these cases, tests could help ensure that tutorials are
not too hard or too easy, and may limit boredom and frustration. Given the importance of statistical numeracy for
economic prosperity and informed citizenship even modest educational beneﬁts may confer considerable valuable. Research on all these topics is ongoing in our laboratories along with efforts to develop other similar fast,
adaptive tests (e.g., graph literacy, knowledge of sexual
health risks, nutritional knowledge).
Across all these
endeavors, development and applications should adhere
to standards for educational and psychological testing
 . As new tools, interactive activities, and improved
tests become available they will be added to the content
on www.riskliteracy.org .