Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 7319–7328
August 1–6, 2021. ©2021 Association for Computational Linguistics
Intrinsic Dimensionality Explains the Effectiveness
of Language Model Fine-Tuning
Armen Aghajanyan
Facebook AI
 
Sonal Gupta
 
Luke Zettlemoyer
Facebook AI
University of Washington
 
Although pretrained language models can be
ﬁne-tuned to produce state-of-the-art results
for a very wide range of language understanding tasks, the dynamics of this process are
not well understood, especially in the low data
regime. Why can we use relatively vanilla gradient descent algorithms (e.g., without strong
regularization) to tune a model with hundreds
of millions of parameters on datasets with only
hundreds or thousands of labeled examples?
In this paper, we argue that analyzing ﬁnetuning through the lens of intrinsic dimension
provides us with empirical and theoretical intuitions to explain this remarkable phenomenon.
We empirically show that common pre-trained
models have a very low intrinsic dimension;
there exists a low dimension reparameterization that is as effective for ﬁne-tuning as the
full parameter space. For example, by optimizing only 200 trainable parameters randomly
projected back into the full space, we can
tune a RoBERTa model to achieve 90% of the
full parameter performance levels on MRPC.
Furthermore, we empirically show that pretraining implicitly minimizes intrinsic dimension and, perhaps surprisingly, larger models tend to have lower intrinsic dimension after a ﬁxed number of pre-training updates, at
least in part explaining their extreme effectiveness. Lastly, we connect intrinsic dimensionality with low dimensional task representations
and compression based generalization bounds
to provide generalization bounds that are independent of the full parameter count.
Introduction
Pre-trained language models provide the defacto initialization for
modeling most existing NLP tasks. However, the
process of ﬁne-tuning them on often very small
target task datasets remains somewhat mysterious.
Why can we use relatively vanilla gradient descent
algorithms (e.g., without strong regularization) to
tune a model with hundreds of millions of parameters on datasets with only hundreds or thousands
of labeled examples?
We propose intrinsic dimensionality as a new
lens through which ﬁne-tuning can be analyzed
 . An objective function’s intrinsic
dimensionality describes the minimum dimension
needed to solve the optimization problem it de-
ﬁnes to some precision level. In the context of
pre-trained language models, measuring intrinsic
dimensional will tell us how many free parameters
are required to closely approximate the optimization problem that is solved while ﬁne-tuning for
each end task. For example, we will show that 200
parameters (randomly projected back into the full
parameter space) are enough to represent the problem of tuning a RoBERTa model to within 90%
of the performance of the full model. More generally, we also describe a set of strong empirical
and theoretical connections between intrinsic dimensionality, number of parameters, pre-training,
and generalization.
We ﬁrst empirically show that standard pretrained models can learn a large set of NLP tasks
with very few parameters and that the process of
pre-training itself implicitly minimizes the intrinsic
dimension of later tuning for different NLP tasks.
We study over a dozen different pre-trained models
to show that the number of parameters strongly inversely correlates with intrinsic dimensionality, at
least in part justifying the extreme effectiveness of
such models. We interpret pre-training as providing
a framework that learns how to compress the average NLP task. Finally, we connect intrinsic dimensional with low dimensional task representations
and compression-based generalization bounds to
provide intrinsic-dimension-based generalization
bounds independent of the full parameter count,
further justifying why these methods generalize so
well in practice across tasks.
The contributions of our paper are the following:
• We empirically show that common NLP tasks
within the context of pre-trained representations have an intrinsic dimension several orders of magnitudes less than the full parameterization.
• We propose a new interpretation of intrinsic dimension as the downstream ﬁne-tuning task’s
minimal description length within the framework of the pre-trained model. Within this
interpretation, we empirically show that the
process of pre-training implicitly optimizes
the description length over the average of NLP
tasks, without having direct access to those
same tasks.
• We measure the intrinsic dimension of a large
set of recently developed pre-training method,
and how that larger models tend to have
smaller intrinsic dimension.
• Lastly, we show that compression based generalization bounds can be applied to our intrinsic
dimension framework to provide generalization bounds for large pre-trained models independent of the pre-trained model parameter
Related Work
Calculating the intrinsic dimension of an objective
function in the context of deep-learning was ﬁrst
proposed by Li et al. . They analyzed the
impact of various architectures on the intrinsic dimensionality of their objective. Our work is a direct
extension of this approach, focusing on analyzing
pre-trained representations instead.
There is a large collection of literature analyzing
pre-trained models from the perspective of capacity.
For example, a recent line of work has shown that
pre-trained models such as BERT are redundant
in their capacity, allowing for signiﬁcant sparsiﬁcation without much degradation in end metrics
 . Houlsby et al. showed that ﬁnetuning top layers of pre-trained models is not effective and that alternate methods allow ﬁne-tuning
effectively with a couple of percent of the parameters. Furthermore, we can view computing the
intrinsic dimensionality as a continuous relaxation
of the sparsiﬁcation problem.
There also exist connections between intrinsic
dimensionality, knowledge distillation, and other
model compression methods. Fundamentally intrinsic dimensionality attempts to ﬁnd the smallest set
of parameters needed to tune to reach satisfactory
solutions, which can be thought of as a sparsiﬁcation or distillation problem . Unlike distillation approaches,
the approach of intrinsic dimensionality does not
change parameter count, sparsity, or architecture
but instead looks at the underlying rank of the objective function . There are also
connections between representing multiple tasks
within a pre-trained model and compression which
we explore in §5.
Moreover, standard approaches towards ﬁnetuning seem to have non-trivial effects on the generalization of pre-trained representations . A holistic explanatory
picture of the successes of ﬁne-tuning has not yet
been painted. A clear understanding of the underlying mechanisms which lead to the incredible
generalization of ﬁne-tuned pre-trained representations is currently missing. Moreover, we still do
not understand why various pre-training methodology manifests in universally useful representations,
although recent line of works have attempted to
cover this gap by looking at loss landscapes, and
the learned linguistic properties of pre-trained models .
Intrinsic Dimensionality of Finetuning
Background
The intrinsic dimension of an objective function measures the minimum number
of parameters needed to reach satisfactory solutions to the respective objective .
Alternatively, the intrinsic dimension represents
the lowest dimensional subspace in which one can
optimize the original function to within a certain
level of approximation error. Computing the exact intrinsic dimensional of the objective function
is computation intractable; therefore, we resort to
heuristic methods to calculate an upper bound. Let
θD = [θ0, θ1, ..., θm] be a set of D parameters that
parameterize some model f(·, θ). Instead of optimizing the empirical loss in the original parameterization (θD), the subspace method ﬁne-tunes the
model via the following re-parameterization in the
lower-dimensional d-dimensions:
where P : Rd →RD projects from a parameter
from a lower-dimensional d to the higher dimensional D and θD
0 is the original model parameterization. Intuitively, we project using an arbitrary
random projection onto a much smaller space; usually, a linear projection, we then solve the optimization problem in that smaller subspace. If we reach
a satisfactory solution, we say the dimensionality
of that subspace is the intrinsic dimension. This
methodology was proposed in the seminal paper
by Li et al. . Concretely Li et al. 
proposed three different parameteric forms for P;
a random linear dense projection (θdW), random
linear sparse projection (θdWsparse) and random linear projection via the Fastfood transform (Le et al.,
We will primarily use the Fastfood transform,
deﬁned as:
The factorization of M consists of H, a Hadamard
matrix, G, a random diagonal matrix with independent standard normal entries, B a random diagonal matrix with equal probability ±1 entries,
and Π a random permutation matrix. Furthermore,
the matrix multiplication with a Hadamard matrix can be computed in O(D log d) via the Fast
Walsh-Hadamard Transform. Everything except θd
is ﬁxed; therefore, the optimization problem lies
only in d-dimensions.1
We use the Fastfood transform due to its computational complexity. Speciﬁcally, using Hadamard
matrices instead of dense matrices allows us to compute a linear projection signiﬁcantly faster than a
dense matrix projection. Furthermore, when working with large models such as RoBERTa, the memory required to store even a low-dimensional dense
matrix to calculate intrinsic dimension is unreasonable (d = 1000, 330, 000, 000 ∗1000 ∗4 bytes
= 1.32 terabytes).
The standard method of measuring the intrinsic dimensionality of an objective as proposed by
 requires searching over various
d, training using standard SGD over the subspace
reparameterization θD and selecting the smallest d
which provides us with a satisfactory solution (d90).
 deﬁned the satisfactory solution as
being 90% of the full training metric. For example,
1If we place a constraint of M being a binary matrix, we
recover the sparsiﬁcation problem; therefore, we can also view
ﬁnding intrinsic dimensionality as a continuous relaxation of
the sparsiﬁcation problem.
if we reach 85% accuracy training a model with all
of its parameters, the goal is to ﬁnd the smallest d,
which would reach 0.9 ∗85% = 76.5% accuracy;
we call this dimension d90.2
The way deﬁne a satisfactory
solution reduces the dependence of the dataset size
on the calculation of intrinsic dimension. For a
small dataset, we will generally have worse end
metrics; therefore, we have a lower d90 cut-off;
inversely, a larger dataset will require a more nontrivial d90 cut-off.
Structure Aware Intrinsic Dimension
the large size of pre-trained language models (generally in the hundreds of millions of parameters),
the only computationally reasonable subspace optimization method is one that utilizes the Fastfood
transform. For example, if we are interested in
subspace training with d = 1000 for the RoBERTa-
Large model using a dense matrix, we would require 1.42 terabytes of memory to store just the
projection matrix.
Unfortunately, the method of ﬁnding the intrinsic
dimension proposed by is unaware
of the layer-wise structure of the function parameterized by θ. Existing literature argues that in
attention-based pre-trained models, individual layers specialize separately ; therefore, it is useful to incorporate a notion of structure
when computing d90. We deﬁne Structure-Aware
Intrinsic Dimension (SAID) as the following
0,i + λiP(θd−m)i
For m layers, we trade m parameters from our subspace parameter θd to allow for layer-wise scaling through jointly learned λ, thus θd becomes
[θd−m, λ]. This allows the SAID method to focus
a larger capacity of θd−m towards speciﬁc layers
what might carry more relevant information for
the task at hand. Conversely, we will refer to the
layer unaware method (Equation 2) as the Direct
Intrinsic Dimension (DID) method.
Intrinsic Dimensionality of Common
Sentence Classiﬁcation
We ﬁrst empirically calculate the intrinsic dimension of various pre-trained models on a set of sentence prediction tasks from the GLUE Benchmark
2Initializing θd = 0 we recover the original parameterization θD
0 which in the context of ﬁne-tuning represents the
original weights of the pre-trained model.
BERT-Large
RoBERTa-Base
RoBERTa-Large
Table 1: Estimated d90 intrinsic dimension computed
with SAID and DID for a set of sentence prediction
tasks and common pre-trained models.
 . We focus on analyzing BERT
 and RoBERTa at both the base and large model sizes.
We chose to experiment with MRPC and QQP as reference examples of small and large tuning datasets.
MRPC is a binary classiﬁcation task for predicting semantic equivalency for two paraphrases with
roughly 3700 training samples, while QQP is a
binary classiﬁcation task for predicting semantic
equality of two questions, with roughly 363k samples. For every dataset and every model, we run
100 subspace trainings with d ranging from 10 to
10000 on a log scale. For every training run, we do
a small hyperparameter search across four learning
rates. We initialize every θd to the zero vector to
allow for our starting point to be the original pretrained model. Our subspace optimization method
also operates over the randomly initialized sentence
classiﬁcation head to ensure we have exactly d parameters to optimize.
We use both the SAID and DID subspace optimization methods, which we implemented in
the Huggingface Transformers library . We present the results in Figure 1.
The ﬁrst takeaway is the incredible low dimensionality of viable solutions. With RoBERTa-Large,
we can reach 90% of the full ﬁne-tuning solution
of MRPC using roughly 200 parameters and 800
parameters for QQP (Table 1). Recall that our approximation of intrinsic dimension is necessarily
crude by using random projections and restricting
them to the use of Fastfood transform; therefore, it
is likely that the true intrinsic dimension is much
Furthermore, RoBERTa consistently outperforms BERT across various subspace dimensions d
while having more parameters. We leave a more indepth analysis of model parameter size on intrinsic
dimensionality to a later section (§5.2).
Lastly, we see that adding a notion of structure in
the computation of intrinsic dimension is beneﬁcial
with the SAID method consistently improving over
the structure unaware DID method.
Intrinsic Dimension, Pre-Training, and
Generalization Gap
One interpretation of the intrinsic parameter vector
is that it encodes the task at hand with respect to the
original pre-trained representations. Therefore, we
can interpret d as the minimal description length of
the task within the framework dictated by the pretrained representations .
Under this interpretation of intrinsic dimensionality, we hypothesize that pre-training is implicitly
lowering the intrinsic dimensionality of the average
NLP task, and therefore compressing the minimal
description length of those same tasks.
What do we more precisely mean by intrinsic
parameter encoding a task within the framework
provided by the pre-trained representations? Traditionally, a ﬁnetuned model (e.g. for a classiﬁcation tasks) simply consists of a classiﬁcation head
g, parameterized by wg applied to ﬁne-tuned representations f, parameterized by wf per sample
x. Therefore, to fully describe a task, we need
to pack together parameterizations and weights
{g, f, wg, wf}.
This model description is completely decoupled from the original weights of the
pre-trained representation wf0, therefore to represent n classiﬁcation tasks, we need to maintain
n {wg, wf}; additionally, the task representation
is incredibly high dimensional. Conversely, ﬁnetuning utilizing SAID in d-dimensions requires
storing only θd per task, a single random seed used
to generate M and the original pre-trained weights
wf0. Therefore, we can represent arbitrary NLP
tasks within a single pre-trained model framework
with d + 1 parameters.
For example, in the last section, we represented
MRPC with roughly 200 parameters, which translates to needing less than a kilobyte of data to encode a complex natural language task within the
framework provided by RoBERTa.
We hypothesize that the better the pre-trained
models are, the fewer bits (description length) are
needed to represent the average NLP task, as we
will demonstrate empirically in the next section.
MRPC Intrinsic Dimension
BERT-Large
RoBERTa-Base
RoBERTa-Large
QQP Intrinsic Dimension
BERT-Large
RoBERTa-Base
RoBERTa-Large
Figure 1: Evaluation accuracy on two datasets and four models across a range of dimensions d for the DID method.
The horizontal lines in each ﬁgure represent the 90% solution of the respective full model.
Pre-Training Intrinsic Dimension
Trajectory
To verify our hypothesis of pre-training optimizing
intrinsic dimension, we retrain a RoBERTa-Base
from scratch and measure the intrinsic dimension of
various NLP tasks at different training checkpoints,
using the SAID method. We completely replicate
the setting as described by Liu et al. apart
from only training for a total of 200k steps (instead of 500k) with half the batch size (1k). To
calculate the intrinsic dimension more efﬁciently,
we reuse the best learning rates discovered in Section 4 for d < 10000 and use a ﬁxed learning
rate for anything else. To ﬁnd d90 we do a binary
search across d per each checkpoint, with a minimum d of 100 and a maximum of 4 million. The
“full solution” that we use when deciding d90 cutoff is computed by ﬁne-tuning the checkpointed
model in the standard way. We compute SAID on
six datasets; MRPC, QQP, Yelp Polarity , SST-2 , MNLI
 and ANLI using all rounds
of data . Although we focus on
bench-marking sentence classiﬁcation tasks the selected set of tasks contains variety, from sentiment
classiﬁcation (Yelp Polarity, SST-2) to Natural Language Inference (MNLI, ANLI) to question similarity (QQP).
We present our results in Figure 2.
The intrinsic dimensionality of RoBERTa-Base monotonically decreases as we continue pre-training.
We do not explicitly optimize for intrinsic dimensionality, speciﬁcally during pre-training (the language model does not have access to downstream
datasets!), but none-the-less the intrinsic dimension
of these downstream tasks continues to decrease.
More so, tasks that are easier to solve consistently show lower intrinsic dimensionality across
all checkpoints, for example, Yelp Polarity vs. the
notoriously tough ANLI dataset. The correlation
between challenging tasks for RoBERTa and their
large intrinsic dimension hints at a connection between generalization and intrinsic dimension. We
will discuss generalization further in Section §5.3.
Given our task representation interpretation of
intrinsic dimensionality, we argue that the large
scale training of Masked Language Models (MLM)
learns generic and distributed enough representations to facilitate downstream learning of highly
compressed task representations. Furthermore, we
argue for another perspective of pre-training learning representations that form a compression framework with respect to various NLP tasks.
Parameter Count and Intrinsic
We also measure the relationships between the parameter count of arbitrary pre-trained models and
RoBERTa Pre-Training Intrinsic Dimension Trajectory
ANLI (R1+R2+R3)
Figure 2: Every 10k updates of RoBERTa-Base that we trained from scratch, we compute d90 for six datasets;
MRPC, QQP, Yelp Polarity, SST-2, MNLI, and ANLI. If we were unable to compute a d90 for a speciﬁc checkpoint,
we do not plot the point, hence some datasets start at later points. Unable to compute means either we could not
ﬁne-tune the full checkpoint to accuracy above majority class or stabilize SAID training.
the intrinsic dimension of downstream NLP tasks.
The optimal experiment to run would be to ﬁx the
pre-training method, e.g., MLM RoBERTa style,
vary the architecture size from small to very big,
and compute the intrinsic dimension of a group of
tasks at every size of the model. Unfortunately,
such an experiment is computationally infeasible
due to the need to train many RoBERTa models.
Instead, we do an empirical study of many existing pre-trained models, regardless of the pretraining method. We show that the trend is strong
enough to overcome differences in training methodology. We select the following models: BERT
 , RoBERTa ,
BART , Electra , Albert , XLNet , T5 , and XLM-R . Furthermore, we selected various sizes of these models, as available publicly
within the HuggingFace Transformers library .
We use the MRPC dataset and compute intrinsic
dimension for every pre-trained model utilizing
the same binary search methodology mentioned in
the previous section with additional small hyperparameter searches across learning rate (due to the
wide range of learning rates needed by various
We present our results in Figure 3. There is
a strong general trend that as the number of parameters increases, the intrinsic dimension of ﬁnetuning on MRPC decreases. We ran this experiment
on other datasets to ensure that this is not an data
artifact. Our experiments showed the same trend;
we refer to the Appendix for all trends per dataset.
Within the same window of number of parameters, the pre-training methodology becomes more
important. For example, in the regime of 108 parameters, RoBERTa pre-training dominates similar sized pre-training methods. However, there
does not seem to be a method that can overcome
the limitations induced by the number of parameters. Interpreting these results through the lens of
learning a compression framework for NLP tasks
is straightforward; the more parameters we have in
the model, the less we need to represent a task.
Generalization Bounds through Intrinsic
We have shown strong empirical evidence connecting pre-training, ﬁne-tuning, and intrinsic dimensionality. However, we have yet to argue the connection between intrinsic dimensionality and generalization. Given that we have seen pre-training
minimize intrinsic dimension, we hypothesize that
generalization improves as the intrinsic dimension
decreases.
To do so, we will empirically experiment with
the connections between d90 and evaluation set performance by looking at various checkpoints from
our RoBERTa experiments in Section §5.1. We also
plot the relative generalization gap (delta between
train time performance and test time performance).
In Figure 4 we plot the evaluation accuracy’s
achieved by our pre-training experiment in Section §5.1. A lower intrinsic dimension is strongly
correlated with better evaluation performance. Additionally we are interested in measuring relative
generalization gap (acctrain−acceval
) across intrinsic dimension. We select the training accuracy that
provides us with the best evaluation metrics when
computing this ﬁgure.
Number of Parameters
Albert-XXL
Figure 3: We calculate the intrinsic dimension for a large set of pre-trained models using the SAID method on the
MRPC dataset.
Eval Accuracy
RoBERTa Pre-Training Generalization Study
ANLI (R1+R2+R3)
Figure 4: The evaluation accuracy of six datasets across various intrinsic dimensionalities. There is a strong general
trend that pre-trained models that are able to attain lower intrinsic dimensions generalize better.
We present our results in Figure 5. Lower intrinsic dimension once again correlates strongly with a
smaller relative generalization gap. If we interpret
the intrinsic dimension as a measure of complexity,
we expect the generalization gap to decrease with
intrinsic dimension.
Generalization Bounds
By applying standard compression based generalization bounds, we can provide theoretical backing
to the empirical connection between intrinsic dimension and generalization .
Consider the following deﬁnition of multi-class
classiﬁcation loss with an optional margin over our
supervised dataset D.
Lγ(f) = P(x,y)∼D
f(x)[y] ≤γ + max
j̸=y f(x)[j]
When γ = 0, L0 recovers the standard classiﬁcation loss. Furthermore, Let ˆLγ(f) be an unbiased
empirical estimate of the margin loss.
Theorem 1. Let f be a function which is parameterized by θD as described in Equation 1 with a total of d trainable intrinsic parameters on a dataset
with m samples. Then with a high probability, we
can state the following asymptotic generalization
L0(f) ≤ˆL0(f) + O
Proof. We defer the proof Section §A.1 in the
Appendix. We note that this is an extension of
the well-known compression based generalization
bound .
This generalization bound is independent of the
underlying parameter count (D) of the pre-trained
model but depends on the ability to compress the
downstream task (d). Moreover, given that our previous section shows larger models compress better,
our bounds are aligned with general intuition and
recent empirical evidence that larger pre-trained
models generalize better. Explicitly, these bounds
only apply to pre-trained methods trained with the
intrinsic dimension subspace method; research has
yet to show that standard SGD optimizes in this
low dimensional space (although experimentally,
Relative Generalization Gap
RoBERTa Pre-Training Generalization Study
ANLI (R1+R2+R3)
Figure 5: The intrinsic dimension and the respective relative generalization gap across a set of varied tasks.
this seems to be conﬁrmed). We leave the theoretical contribution of showing SGD optimizes in this
space, possibly resembling intrinsic subspace, for
future work.
We want to highlight that generalization is not
necessarily measured by the pre-trained model’s
parameter count or measure of complexity but the
pre-trained model’s ability to facilitate the compression of downstream tasks. In some sense, if
we want to compress downstream tasks better, we
must expect pre-trained representations to have a
considerable measure of complexity.
Conclusion
In conclusion, we proposed viewing the various phenomena surrounding ﬁne-tuning and pretraining through the lens of intrinsic dimensionality. We empirically showed that common natural language tasks could be learned with very few
parameters, sometimes in the order of hundreds,
when utilizing pre-trained representations. We provided an interpretation of pre-training as providing
a compression framework for minimizing the average description length of natural language tasks
and showed that pre-training implicitly minimizes
this average description length.
We continued by doing an empirical study of existing pre-training methods and their respective intrinsic dimension, uncovering the phenomena that
intrinsic dimensionality decreases as we increase
the number of pre-trained representation parameters. This phenomenon provides some intuitions
to the trend of growing pre-trained representations.
We connected intrinsic dimensionality with generalization by ﬁrst showing that pre-trained models
with lower intrinsic dimensions across various tasks
achieve higher evaluation accuracies and lower relative generalization gaps. Furthermore, we explain
these empirical results by applying well-known
generalization bounds to the intrinsic dimension to
get generalization bounds that grow on the order of
the intrinsic dimension, not the parameter count.
Intrinsic dimensionality is a useful tool for understanding the complex behavior of large models.
We hope that future work will make explicit theoretical connections between SGD and optimizing
the intrinsic dimension as well as explain exactly
why pre-training methods optimize the intrinsic
dimensionailty of tasks before not seen.