JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 13, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014
Spatial-Temporal Recurrent Neural Network for
Emotion Recognition
Tong Zhang, Wenming Zheng*, Member, IEEE, Zhen Cui*, Yuan Zong and Yang Li
Abstract—Emotion analysis is a crucial problem to endow
artifact machines with real intelligence in many large potential
applications. As external appearances of human emotions, electroencephalogram (EEG) signals and video face signals are widely
used to track and analyze human’s affective information. According to their common characteristics of spatial-temporal volumes,
in this paper we propose a novel deep learning framework named
spatial-temporal recurrent neural network (STRNN) to unify the
learning of two different signal sources into a spatial-temporal
dependency model. In STRNN, to capture those spatially cooccurrent variations of human emotions, a multi-directional recurrent neural network (RNN) layer is employed to capture longrange contextual cues by traversing the spatial region of each
time slice from multiple angles. Then a bi-directional temporal
RNN layer is further used to learn discriminative temporal
dependencies from the sequences concatenating spatial features of
each time slices produced from the spatial RNN layer. To further
select those salient regions of emotion representation, we impose
sparse projection onto those hidden states of spatial and temporal
domains, which actually also increases the model discriminant
ability because of this global consideration. Consequently, such
a two-layer RNN model builds spatial dependencies as well as
temporal dependencies of the input signals. Experimental results
on the public emotion datasets of EEG and facial expression
demonstrate the proposed STRNN method is more competitive
over those state-of-the-art methods.
Index Terms—EEG emotion recognition, emotion recognition,
spatial-temporal recurrent neural network, facial expression
recognition
I. INTRODUCTION
UMAN emotion analysis plays a crucial role in endowing artifact machines with humanized characteristics,
and is arousing more and more attentions due to its potential
applications to human-machine interaction. The recent advances of AlphaGo still lacks of the ability of understanding of human emotions or human-like emotion interaction,
though it is able to beat the apex master. Of course, the
study of emotion analysis has faced signiﬁcant difﬁculties due
to its intrinsic property of less tangibility. Nevertheless, it
is notable that emotions can be conveyed in external signal
forms by utilizing some electric devices. Especially, with the
Tong Zhang and Yang Li are with the Key Laboratory of Child Development
and Learning Science of Ministry of Education, and the Department of
Information Science and Engineering, Southeast University, China. ( e-mail:
 ;yang ).
Wenming Zheng, Zhen Cui and Yuan Zong are with the Key Laboratory
of Child Development and Learning Science of Ministry of Education,
Research Center for Learning Science, Southeast University, Nanjing, Jiangsu
210096, China (e-mail: wenming ; ;
 ).
Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
development of hardware techniques, it is becoming easy to
collect signals reﬂecting human emotions, such as acoustic
waves, facial video sequences, electroencephalogram (EEG)
signals and so on.
Among the various emotion signals, EEG and facial expression images are widely employed for emotion analysis. For
EEG, signals are produced from multiple active electrodes attached on cerebral cortex by arranging a certain spatial layout.
To deal with EEG signals, Zheng et al. concatenated the
multi-channel signals and fed them into deep belief networks
(DBNs) to perform emotion recognition. Likewise, facial expression signals can be collected by using general cameras.
For facial expression recognition, many methods are proposed
to learn more robust features by using the state-of-the-art
deep learning techniques such as convolutional neural network
(CNN) , and recurrent neural network (RNN) .
However, most existing emotion recognition methods based
on EEG signals or facial expression images ignore spatial
dependencies, i.e., the relationship between multiple electrodes
or the relationships between facial local areas. Building these
relationships can actually produce some bundling characteristics reﬂecting human emotions, while the behaviors of
emotions are not usually isolate. Furthermore, these emotion
related signals contain not only spatial components at a single
moment but also contextual dependencies among temporal
slices. In order to better recognize human emotion, the crucial
spatial and temporal dependencies should be well modeled.
However, most of the previous methods consider only either
spatial feature learning or temporal dependency construction.
In this paper, we propose a uniﬁed deep network framework
called spatial-temporal recurrent neural network (STRNN) to
deal with both EEG based emotion recognition and facial
emotion recognition. STRNN can not only learn spatial dependencies of multi-electrode or image context itself, but also
learn a long-term memory information in temporal sequences.
To learn spatial dependencies, a quad-directional spatial RNN
(SRNN) layer is employed to scan each temporal slice by
adopting a certain spatial orders respectively from different
angles, and ﬁnally produce a discriminative dependency sequence in the slice. Then a bi-directional temporal RNN layer
(TRNN) is further stacked on SRNN to capture long-term
temporal dependencies by scanning the temporal sequences
forward and backward. In each RNN layer, the previous states
are connected to the current one so that the sub-network is
inherently deep and able to retain all the past inputs and
discover correlations among the data that might be far away
from each other. The beneﬁt of the hierarchical RNN is that
the two layers may act as two memory units to remember and
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 13, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014
encode all the scanned spatial and temporal area so that the
proposed STRNN is able to globally model the spatial and
temporal dependencies.
As emotion stimuli are usually activated in some local
regions, we expect to discover those salient stimulus regions
expressing human emotions. To this end, we introduce the
sparse projection transformation onto those spatially encoding
states to detect those salient activation points. Besides, as the
global projection is operated on the entire spatial domain, the
learnt STRNN can automatically bundle those co-occurrent
emotion regions, which would bring some gains for the
ﬁnal emotion recognition. Similarly, the sparse projection is
also used for those temporally encoded states in order to
adaptively choose and combine those time slices with more
discriminability.
The main contributions of our work can be summarized as
(1) We propose an end-to-end STRNN to jointly integrate
spatial and temporal dependencies, as well as learn
discriminative features. To the best our knowledge, this
would be the ﬁrst model that utilizes both spatial and
temporal information in RNN.
(2) Two emotion recognition tasks, i.e., EEG based emotion
recognition and facial emotion recognition, are investigated and uniﬁed under a deep network framework by
constructing spatial-temporal volumes, where EEG signals are spatially organized in electrode coordinations.
(3) Salient emotion activation regions can be effectively
captured by introducing sparse projection on those encoding hidden states, which can naturally bundle those
co-occurred emotion activation regions by adaptively
weighting them.
The paper is organized as follows: Section II overview some
approaches related to RNN and human emotion recognition
in EEG signals and videos; in Section III we proposed
the STRNN method for emotion recognition in details; We
present experimental results to evaluate the proposed method
in Section IV and ﬁnally in Section V we conclude the paper.
II. RELATED WORK
Human emotion recognition based on EEG signals or facial
expression images had been extensively investigated during the
past decades, and a lot of algorithms have been proposed in the
literatures to this end. For instances, for EEG based emotion
recognition, descriptors such as high order crossings and
differential entropy (DE) are employed, and popular classiﬁers such as support vector machine (SVM) and group
sparse canonical correlation analysis (GSCCA) are used
to achieve classiﬁcation. In , DBNs are used to learn highlevel features from the extracted DE descriptors. On the other
hand, for facial expression images based emotion recognition,
various hand-crafted facial features has been applied such
as 3D HOG , 3D SIFT , expressionlet-based spatiotemporal manifold (STM-ExpLet) and so on. In addition,
deep learning methods are also employed to deal with the
expression recognition problem from facial image sequences
in recent years, e.g., the 3DCNN method proposed in .
The method named 3DCNN-DAP proposed in employs
3DCNN while using the strong spatial structural constraints
on the dynamic action parts to extract robust representation
from videos.
Recently, RNNs have achieved great success in processing
sequential data such as natural language processing , ,
action recognition , speech recognition and so on.
Then RNN is further improved to deal with images 
by scanning the regions of images into sequences in certain
directions. Due to the ability of retaining information about
the past inputs, RNN is able to learn contextual dependencies
with images, which is advantageous compared to CNN. This is
because CNN may fail to learn the global dependencies due to
the locality of convolution and pooling layers. For this reason,
RNN is usually combined with CNN in order to achieve better
performance of vision tasks such as image segmentation 
and recognition .
In what follows, we will propose our STRNN method,
which uses an end-to-end spatial-temporal learning network of
to simultaneously integrate spatial and temporal dependencies
for co-adaptively dealing with EEG based emotion recognition
and video based facial expression recognition.
III. STRNN MODEL FOR EMOTION RECOGNITION
To specify the proposed STRNN method, we illustrate the
framework of STRNN in Fig. 1, in which the inputs of
networks would be any spatial-temporal style data such as
multi-channel sequence signals (e.g., EEG) or spatial-temporal
cubic volumes (e.g., videos) as long as they could be traversed
in a certain orders in space or time domain. In Fig. 1, we take
cubic videos as an example for the simplicity of description.
The goal of the proposed framework is to capture spatialtemporal information within sequence signals. To realize this
point, we attempt to stack two-layer RNNs, i.e., an SRNN
layer and a TRNN layer, so as to concatenating other layers
for an end-to-end deep neural network. Consequently, STRNN
combines spatial and temporal information simultaneously by
building the dependencies of adjacent and even long-term
elements. Moreover, to detect those salient emotion regions,
sparse projections are further applied to those encoding hidden
states of SRNN and TRNN layers.
To model spatial dependencies on each time slice, i.e., the
relationships between responses of multiple electrodes at a
certain moment for EEG signals, we use RNN to scan all
spatial elements under a predeﬁned order strategy. Unlike
those Markov chain structures frequently used for such a
graph model, RNN simpliﬁes its process by unfolding graph
structures into an order structure, which makes the learning
more controllable. After scanning the time slice element by
element sequentially, RNN can characterize those low-level elements and their complex dependencies if long-term recurrent
units (e.g., long short-term memory, LSTM ) are adopted.
However, it is notable that the data could be contaminated
by signal noises in EEG or partial occlusion in videos, a
single RNN used in a 2D space may not be enough to resist
these variations. For this problem, we use four directional
RNNs to traverse the spatial region at a time slice from four
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 13, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014
Fig. 1. An overview on the proposed STRNN framework. The SRNN and TRNN are elaborately integrated and jointly learnt to capture spatial and temporal
dependencies. The blue arrow indicates the temporal axis. More details can be found in Section III.
speciﬁc angles. The four RNNs are actually complementary for
constructing a complete relationship graph, and thus alleviate
the effect of noises while simplifying those techniques used
for modeling graph structures. Concretely, when modeling
spatial dependencies, we use a graph Gt
= {Rt, Ct} to
represent the spatial elements in the tth slice denoted by Xt,
where Rt = {xtij}(i = 1, · · · , h, j = 1, · · · , w) represents
the vertex set of spatial elements indexed by their spatial
coordinates, and Ct = {etij,tkl} denotes the edges of spatial
neighboring elements in the tth slice. Then we traverse through
Gt with a predeﬁned forward evolution sequence so that the
input state and previous states can be deﬁned for a RNN
unit. Formally, the adopted multidirectional spatial RNNs in
STRNN can be written as
tij = σ1(Urxtij +
tkl × etij,tkl + br)
etij,tkl =
if (k, l) ∈Nij;
otherwise.
where xtij and hr
tij respectively denote the representation
of input and hidden node at the location of (i, j) in the
tth slice, Nij is the set of predecessors of the vertex (i, j)
and r represents a certain traversing direction. Hence, hr
collects information of all the previous scanned elements of
the current state (i, j). The non-linear function denoted by
σ1(·) for hidden layers is ReLU or Sigmoid function. As this
SRNN layer traverses all the vertexes in Rt, the number of
the hidden states equals h×w for a given traversing direction.
For simpliﬁcation, the output hidden states denoted as hr
1, · · · , h, j = 1, · · · , w) are rewritten as hr
tk(k = 1, · · · , K),
where K equals h × w. To further detect those salient regions
of emotion representation, projection matrices are applied to
the spatial hidden states corresponding to different traversing
directions. Assume that a projection matrix for a certain
traversing direction is denoted as Gr = [Gr
ij]K×Kp where
Kp denotes the number of the hidden states after projection,
then the projection can be written as
ti, l = 1, · · · , Kp
tl denotes the lth column vector of the output matrix
of the projection. Let sr
t1)T , · · · , (sr
tKp)T ]T denote the
concatenated vector of the column vectors, then the output of
SRNN layer summarizes the stimulus from all directions D:
where mt denotes the output nodes of SRNN. When traversing
the graph Gt, the learned parameters {Ur, Wr, br, Vr} are
recurrently utilized and they are not related with time. Such a
process is designed as a network layer called SRNN layer to
seamlessly connect other layers.
In SRNN layer, we consider four traversing directions
starting from four angular points to make the traversing
information from traversing processes mutually complementary. For example, the directional traversing from the topleft corner aims to capture contextual cues about the top-left
areas with the adjacent predecessor set Nij = {(i, i −1), (i −
1, j −1), (i −1, j)}. Thus, four directed acyclic chains can
be generated to represent the 2D neighborhood system by
connecting contiguous elements and traversing these elements
respectively from four directions. By doing this, discriminative
spatial dependencies for emotion recognition can be modeled.
The representations learned from the SRNN layer are sequentially concatenated at each time slice and thus form a
temporal sequence. For an entire emotion process, a single
slice cannot reﬂect the characteristic of emotion due to its
small granularity. The better strategy is to build the entire
dynamic process rather than isolating considering each slice.
RNNs can adaptively model such a temporal dynamic process.
Here we employ a bi-directional RNN to simultaneously capture forward and backward dynamic transforms of sequence,
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 13, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014
i.e., two RNNs are respectively used to traverse the temporal
sequence in a forward or backward behavior. Formally, suppose that sequential representations are denoted as mt and the
temporal length is L, then the TRNN layer can be written as
t−1 + bf),
t−1 + bb),
hh, bf} and {Wb
hh, bb} are the learned
parameters for recurrently traversing the sequences scanned
forward and backward respectively, mt, hf
input nodes, hidden nodes for the forward scanned network
and hidden nodes the backward scanned network respectively.
Similar to spatial projection in SRNN layer, projection matrices denoted as Gf = [Gf
ij]L×Lp and Gb = [Gb
ij]L×Lp are
also applied to the temporal hidden states, resulting in the
following expressions:
t = 1, · · · , Lp
where Lp denotes the length after temporal projection and qf
t respectively denote the tth column vectors of the output
matrices of the forward and backward scanned networks.
1)T , · · · , (qf
1)T , · · · , (qb
denote the concatenated vectors for the forward and backward
scanned networks respectively. Then, the output of TRNN
layer denoted as o can be calculated by the following equation
o = Vfqf + Vbqb,
where o = [o1, o2, · · · , oC]T and C equals the number of
emotion types.
Finally, the output nodes of TRNN layer are fed into the
softmax layer for emotion classiﬁcation:
P(i|X) = exp(oi)/
where P(i|X) denotes the probability for the input X being
predicted as the ith class.
In addition, we use cross entropy loss deﬁned as follows to
represent the objective loss function, which can be written as
τ(yi, c) × log P(c|Ii) + λ1
i||1), (10)
τ(yi, c) =
if yi = c;
otherwise.
where E denotes the cross entropy loss, N denotes the number
of the training samples, Ii represents the ith training sample
of the training set, yi is the label of the ith training sample,
i denote the ith column vectors of Gr, Gf, Gb
respectively.
In the loss function, the ﬁrst term calculates the mean
negative logarithm value of the prediction probability of the
training samples. The second and third terms ensure the sparse
structure of the matrices in spatial and temporal projection.
As elements of projection matrices indicate the importance of
the corresponding spatial or temporal hidden states, the sparse
structure is able to endow high weights to the discriminative
hidden states while low weights to others, which achieves the
purpose of selecting salient hidden states.
The proposed STRNN can be effectively optimized by the
classic back propagation through time (BPTT) algorithm. In
BPTT, the recurrent nets can be converted into common feedforward networks after they are unfolded to a sequence with a
limited size. Thus, traditional gradient back-propagation used
in common deep networks can be directly applied.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we ﬁrstly introduce the datasets we use for
testing the performance of our proposed STRNN, then report
and analyze the results of our method on these datasets by
comparing with other state-of-the-art methods.
A. Datasets and feature extraction
The proposed STRNN method is tested on both SJTU
Emotion EEG Dataset (SEED) and the dataset of CK+
facial expression image sequences . SEED contains three
categories of emotions (positive, neutral, and negative) of
ﬁfteen subjects (7 males and 8 females), which are elicited
by showing emotional ﬁlm clips to the participants. The
EEG signals of these subjects were recorded using an ESI
NeuroScan System at a sampling rate of 1000 Hz from 62channel electrode cap according to the international 10-20
system. The CK+ dataset consists of 327 image sequences
with seven emotion labels: anger (An), contempt (Co), disgust
(Di), fear (Fe), happiness (Ha), sadness (Sa), and surprise (Su)
of 118 subjects. In this database, each sequence starts with a
neutral emotion and ends with a peak of the emotion.
To recognize emotion from EEG signals, differential entropy
(DE) descriptors are extracted, which are calculated in ﬁve
frequency bands (delta: 1-3 Hz, theta: 4-7 Hz, alpha: 8-13
Hz, beta: 14-30 Hz, gamma: 31-50 Hz) of 62 channels. For a
speciﬁed continuous EEG sequence, a 256-point Short-Time
Fourier Transform with a nonoverlapped Hanning window of
1s is used to extract ﬁve frequency bands of EEG signals
and differential entropy is calculated for each frequency band.
After this process, discrete sequences in ﬁve bands of 62
channels are generated. Then we use a slicing window of 9s to
temporally scan the sequences by one step. For each step, the
sequences in the slicing window are used as the representation
of the point which is in the center of the slicing window. By
doing this, the temporal dependencies can be involved while
recognizing the human emotion at a speciﬁc moment. This
is quite different from which just focuses on recognizing
the average energy within a short time ignoring the temporal
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 13, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014
THE COMPARISONS ON EEG SIGNAL BASED EMOTION DATASET SEED.
number of channels
frequency bands
accuracy (%)
Fig. 2. Samples of data augmentation of CK+. The ﬁrst row contains four
original frames sampled from a sequence, and the second and third rows
contain the images which are rotated 7o clockwise and 12o counterclockwise
corresponding to the images in the ﬁrst row.
variation information. For CK+, we use the pre-trained model
proposed in to extract features in each image to reduce
the effects of noises or variant face poses so as to improve the
representation ability. As the number of the training samples is
limited, we perform rotation transformation to the sequences to
achieve data augmentation. Each image is rotated with angles
including 7◦, −7◦, 12◦and −12◦so that there are totally 1635
samples. Some examples of this rotation process are shown
in Fig. 2. For each image, the feature maps of the pooling
layer, which is located before the ﬁrst fully connected layer
of the pre-trained model, are used as the representation. For
each input image sequence, the extracted feature maps are
concatenated temporally as the representation of this sequence.
B. EEG Signals Based Emotion Recognition
The basic experiment conﬁguration is the same to the one
in . In this dataset, there are total ﬁfteen subjects and each
subject is conducted with the experiments across two time
sessions. Thus there are totally 30 experiments evaluated here.
Following the same protocol in , the training data and the
testing data are respectively taken from different sessions of
the same experiment. There are nine sessions for training and
the remaining six sessions for testing.
In SRNN layer, the numbers of the input, hidden and output
nodes are set to be 5, 30 and 30 respectively, and the number
of hidden states (Kp in Eqn. (3)) is reduced from 62 to 10
after spatial projection. In TRNN layer, the numbers of hidden
and output nodes are set to be 30 and 3, where the number
of the output nodes is set according to the number of emotion
types. The number of hidden states (Lp in Eqn. (7)) is reduced
from 9 to 5 after temporal projection. These parameters of
our STRNN are roughly set without elaborate traversal. In
SRNN layer, the RNNs scan the electrodes from four angels.
As the distribution of locations of the electrodes is not exactly
a rectangle, we deﬁne the scanning order as shown in Fig. 3
to model intimate interactions existing among those spatially
adjacent electrodes.
The average accuracy of STRNN with the DE features of
all frequency bands in 30 experiments of ﬁfteen subjects is
shown in Table I. This result is also compared with various
existed algorithms under the same protocol of nine sessions
for training and the remaining six sessions for testing, where
these algorithms include linear discriminant analysis (LDA)
 , canonical correlation analysis (CCA) , SVM, DBN
and so on. Most of these methods employ DE features of all 62
channels except SVM , which uses both 62 and 12 channels.
SVM of 62 channels achieves the accuracy of 83.99% while
LDA achieves the accuracy of 80.32%. The performance of
SVM is further improved to be 86.65% by selecting certain
12 channels out of full 62 channels. CCA gets the performance
of 76.16% while GSCCA achieves much higher accuracy
of 82.35% by endowing conventional CCA with the ability
of handling the group feature selection problem from raw
EEG features. DBN achieves the accuracy of 86.08% which is
highest among the existed methods using DE features of full
62 channels. Our STRNN achieves the accuracy of 89.50%
which is 3.42 percent higher than DBN. This performance
gain indicates that our STRNN beneﬁts from modeling the
spatial and temporal dependencies layer by layer while DBN
just concatenates them together without considering the spatiotemporal structure of the EEG signals.
To reveal which frequency oscillation of brain activity is
more related to the emotion processing, the performance of the
DE feature on different frequency bands (Delta, Theta, Alpha,
Beta and Gamma) are compared between DBN and STRNN,
which is shown in Table II. As we can see, the distribution of
the accuracies of STRNN on different frequency bands is quite
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 13, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014
Fig. 3. The scanning order of electrodes in two directions. The other two scanning directions inverse the current scanning orders.
THE PERFORMANCE OF DIFFERENT FREQUENCY BANDS ON SEED.
frequency band
64.32/12.45
60.77/10.42
64.01/15.97
78.92/12.48
79.19/14.58
86.08/8.34
80.9/12.27
83.35/9.15
82.69/12.99
83.41/10.16
69.61/15.65
89.50/7.63
Fig. 4. The experimental results of confusion matrix on SEED.
different from the result of DBN: the accuracies achieved on
four frequency bands ( Delta, Theta, Alpha and Beta ) are all
more than 80% while the accuracy of Gamma is lower. The
highest accuracy is achieved on Beta band. However, for the
results of DBN in , only beta and gamma bands of EEG
signals are more related with emotion processing than other
frequency bands. This difference may be caused by the fact
that the temporal slicing window we use during the feature
extraction process involves temporal dependencies. And according to our results, the spatial-temporal dependencies of
the four frequency bands, i.e. Delta, Theta, Alpha and Beta,
contribute more to the recognition of emotion. Moreover, the
deviations of recognition results of all ﬁve bands are calculated
as well as those of each speciﬁc frequency band. The values
of deviations of STRNN are lower than DBN except Gamma
band, which indicates the performance of our STRNN is more
stable across different experiments of different subjects.
Fig. 4 shows the confusion matrix of all evaluated experiments for SEED. As it is shown, our algorithm performs well
in recognizing all three types of emotion as the accuracies
of them are more than 85.0%. Positive and negative emotion
are easier to be recognized whereas neutral, by contrast, is
relatively difﬁcult to be correctly classiﬁed as it is easily
confused with negative.
C. Video Emotion Recognition
In this experiment, we train and test the CK+ database with
the 10-fold cross validation by following the previous protocol.
The database is divided into 10 subsets by ID of the subjects
in ascending order, where the subjects in any two of subsets
are not overlapped. For each run, 9 subsets were employed
for training and the remaining one subset for testing. Such 10
runs are performed by enumerating the subset used for testing
and the average recognition performance is computed as the
ﬁnal result of the 10 runs.
The parameters of our STRNN are set as follows: the
numbers of the input, hidden and output nodes in SRNN layer
are set to be 512, 50 and 50 respectively, the number of hidden
states (Kp in Eqn. (3)) is reduced from 49 to 10 after spatial
projection. In TRNN layer, the numbers of hidden and output
nodes are set to be 150 and 7. The number of hidden states (Lp
in Eqn. (7)) is reduced from 44 to 5 after temporal projection.
Many state-of-the-art methods adopt different protocols for
CK+ are compared with our algorithm, including Cov3D ,
TMS , STM-ExpLet and so on which are shown in
Table III. Most of these methods adopt 10-fold cross validation
except Cov3D and TMS, which adopt 5-fold and 4-fold cross
validation respectively. 3D SIFT based method achieves the
accuracy of 81.4% while 3D HOG and MSR achive the
accuracy of 91.4%. 3D CNN only gets the accuracy of 85.9%
while 3DCNN-DAP can achieve 92.4% which beneﬁts from
using strong spatial structural constraints on the dynamic
action parts. Deep temporal appearance network (DTAN)
employed in achieves the accuracy of 91.4% by applying
a CNN model which is able to capture temporal changes of
appearance. The STM-ExpLet achieves the best performance
of 94.2% among the compared methods by introducing com-
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 13, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014
plex manifold structures. Our STRNN achieves 95.4% which
is more competitive to these state-of-the-art methods.
Fig. 5 shows the confusion matrix for CK+. In general, our
algorithm performs well in recognizing all types of emotion
as the accuracy of each expression is more than 90%. Among
them, four kinds of expressions including anger, happiness,
sadness and surprise are relatively easy to be recognized with
the accuracies of 97.73%, 97.06%, 96.00% and 96.47%, which
may be attribute to their relatively large muscle deformations.
Next ones are contempt, disgust and fear, respectively with
93.75%, 91.94% and 91.67% recognition rates. Relatively
high confusions appear between three pairs of expressions,
contempt versus angry, contempt versus fear and contempt
versus sadness, which may be intuitively due to the similar
muscle deformations.
THE COMPARISONS ON VIDEO FACE BASED EMOTION DATASET CK+.
cross validation protocol
accuracy(%)
3D SIFT 
3D HOG 
Cov3D 
STM-ExpLet 
3DCNN 
3DCNN-DAP 
Fig. 5. The experimental results of confusion matrix on CK+.
V. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSIONS
In this paper, a novel STRNN method is proposed to deal
with EEG signal based and face image based human emotion
recognition. To well model spatial co-occurrent variations and
time dependent variation of human emotions, a multi-direction
SRNN layer and a bi-direction TRNN layer are hierarchically
employed to learn spatial and temporal dependencies layer
by layer. To adapt the multi-channel EEG signals to the
proposed STRNN framework, the spatial scanning order of
electrodes are speciﬁed by spatial coordinates and temporal
variation information is involved by slicing a window on
the extracted DE feature sequences. To further select those
salient regions of emotion representation as well as increase
the model discriminant ability, we impose sparse projection
onto those hidden states of spatial and temporal domains. The
experimental results on both SEED EEG dataset and CK+
facial expression dataset have demonstrated that the proposed
STRNN method achieves the state-of-the-art performance.
As the STRNN method can be seen as an integration of
both SRNN and TRNN, it is still interesting to see how
much improvement could be obtained by RNN modeling in
the spatial or temporal domains or how much performance
improvement can be gained by adding sparse constraints
in STRNN. In addition, it is also interesting to see what
the salient regions learned by the sparse STRNN would be
located in the facial expression images. To answer all of these
questions, we will also conduct additional experiments in what
1) Comparisons of STRNN with SRNN and TRNN: To compare STRNN with SRNN and TRNN, the STRNN method is
revised into only SRNN and only TRNN, in which process the
other spatial or temporal RNN is merged into a full connection
layer. The results are shown in Table IV. The network which
THE RESULTS OF SRNN, TRNN AND STRNN ON SEED .
frequency bands
accuracy (%)
85.88/9.98
85.20/9.13
89.50/7.63
contains only TRNN achieves the accuracy of 85.20% with
the deviation of 9.13%, while the network containing only
SRNN achieves a little higher accuracy of 85.88% but with
a higher deviation of 9.98%. STRNN achieves the accuracy
of 89.50% which is about 4% higher than SRNN or TRNN
with a lower deviation. The improvement of performance
demonstrates the effectiveness of the hierarchical structure of
spatial and temporal RNN layers which learns both spatial and
temporal dependencies.
2) Comparisons of STRNN with non-sparse STRNN: To
Compare STRNN with non-sparse STRNN, we conduct experiments using the proposed STRNN method and an STRNN
method without sparse constraints on projection matrices. The
results are shown in Table V. As we can see, for both SEED
THE RESULTS OF STRNN AND NON-SPARSE STRNN.
non-sparse STRNN
non-sparse STRNN
and CK+ datasets, the accuracies of STRNN are about more
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 13, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014
than one percent higher than those of non-sparse STRNN,
which veriﬁes the effectiveness of sparse constraints which
improve the performance of the proposed STRNN as well as
achieve salient emotion regions detection.
3) Salient emotion detection: In addition to showing average recognition accuracies, we also visualize the weights
of hidden states of the multi-direction SRNN layer in our
STRNN in the experiment conducted on CK+ dataset. In this
process, the columns of the absolute coefﬁcient values of
projection matrices Gr are averaged over all spatial traversing
directions. Fig. 6 shows the distribution of detected salient
facial regions by mapping the weights of hidden states back
to corresponding spatial regions in a 2D facial image. As
Example of the weight distribution over facial regions.
it is shown, the highlighted parts in the left image of Fig.
6 correspond to the action regions around mouth, eyes and
nose, which are intuitively crucial for human to perceive facial
expression. Moreover, the black regions in Fig. 6 indicate
that most values in projection matrices are near zero, which
veriﬁes the effectiveness of l1-norm terms in the loss function
for ensuring the sparsity of the column vectors of projection