Critiquing Recommenders for Public Taste Products
BC 107 EPFL
CH-1015 Lausanne
Switzerland
 
Maoan Zhou
BC 107 EPFL
CH-1015 Lausanne
Switzerland
 
Sylvain Castagnos
BC 145 EPFL
CH-1015 Lausanne
Switzerland
 
Critiquing-based recommenders do not require users to state all of
their preferences upfront or rate a set of previously experienced
products. Compared to other types of recommenders, they require
relatively little user effort, especially initially, despite potential
accuracy problems. On the other hand, they rely on a set of
critiques to elicit users feedback in order to improve accuracy.
Thus the better the critiques are, the more accurately and
efficiently the system becomes in generating its recommendations.
This method has been successfully applied to high-involvement
products. However, it was never tested on public taste products
such as music, films, perfumes, fashion goods or wine. Indeed our
initial trial adapting traditional critiquing methods to this new
domain led to unsatisfactory results. This has motivated us to
develop a novel approach named "editorial picked critiques"
(EPC) that accounts for users’ needs for popularity information,
editorial suggestions, as well as their needs for personalization
and diversity. Through an empirical study, we demonstrate that
EPC presents a viable recommender approach and is superior on
several dimensions to critiques generated by data mining methods.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and presentation]: User Interfaces -
evaluation/methodology, graphical user interfaces (GUI), usercentered design.
General Terms
Design, Experimentation, Human Factors
Critiquing based recommender system, compound critiques,
public taste products, user acceptance of recommenders
1. INTRODUCTION
A critiquing-based recommender system simulates an artificial
salesperson. At first, it recommends products based on a client’s
current preferences and then elicits her feedback in the form of
critiques such as “I like something cheaper” or “I like something
with faster processor speed”. The critiques were generated with
the aim of collecting users’ preferential feedback in order to
generate more accurate and personalized recommendations in the
next interaction cycle. The simplest form of critiquing is called
unit critiquing . For example, [CPU Speed: faster] is a unit
critique over the CPU speed attribute of the proposed PC. To
make the critiquing process more efficient, compound critiques
can be dynamically generated to enable users to simultaneously
make critiques on several attributes in a given interaction cycle
McCarthy et al. have proposed a method to generate
compound critiques using the Apriori algorithm , which was
originally used in a supermarket management system. Zhang and
Pu presented an approach to generate compound critiques for
conversational recommenders with users’ preference models
multi-attribute
Independently, Chen and Pu proposed a preference-based
critique generation method to organize recommended products
into several clusters of critiques.
Both and generate the critiques based on the structure of a
product catalog using the Apriori algorithm. They function well
for high-involvement products such as PCs, digital cameras, and
travel planning where consumers are more motivated to spend a
significant amount of time in choosing the right product and are
more likely to rely on their own judgment in the selection process
(hence the name high involvement). This is largely due to the fact
that a bad decision can result in significant financial losses.
However, such methods have not been applied to public taste
goods, such as music, films, perfumes and wines, where users
spend less time in choosing the products and are more likely to
rely on public opinion or experts’ advice to make decisions. For
example, Wine.com, a well-recognized wine selling website,
provides editorial picks by combining eight professional ratings
on wines such as “90+ rated wines under $20”. EPSN, one of the
most reputed sports broadcasters, has "Expert Picks" for matches
like NFL to give professional opinions to spectators. The MSN
shopping website1 provides editorial information to help
consumers make purchase decision in a large number of fields,
such as furniture, fragrance, and clothing. Smith at al. showed
that users significantly prefer editorial recommendations,
especially for utilitarian products.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise,
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior
specific permission and/or a fee.
RecSys’09, October 23–25, 2009, New York, New York, USA.
Copyright 2009 ACM 978-1-60558-435-5/09/10...$10.00.
The present research work investigates whether previous work on
critiquing based recommendation methods can be directly applied
to public taste products. The contribution lies in the development
1 Shopping.msn.com
and validation of a new critique generation algorithm, called
editorial picked critiques, or EPC, which is more suitable for
recommendations of public taste products. The new algorithm
combines editorial opinions, popularity information and critiques
which were generated by data mining techniques. In a
comparative user study, we learned that EPC is better in all of the
12 dimensions that were used in the evaluation and 9 of them have
p-values less than 0.05. Users’ average rating for EPC’s ability to
show more attractive items is 21% higher, users’ confidence for
purchase is 29% higher and EPC is 2.42 times more preferred than
a general recommender. These results help establish that EPC is
not only a promising and viable recommender, but also one that
significantly improves users' decision to purchase due to increased
confidence.
2. PERFUME RECOMMENDER
2.1 System Overview
The application for editorial picked critiques (EPC) was
implemented on our group’s product brokering website for finding
perfume, cosmetics, fashion goods, wines, etc. When a particular
product catalog is selected, the website displays a page as shown
in Figure 1. A multi-criteria filtering tool is located at the top of
this page. Users can select any of the five attributes to view a
subset of the perfumes. Alternatively, they can view the entire
catalog by selecting a sorting criterion such as popularity
(default), brand, and price.
When a user clicks on the image of a particular product, she will
be directed to the product detail page (as shown in Figure 2) and
presented with the product’s detailed information, as well as the
results of the editorial picked recommendations on the right hand
side under "You may also like” in different categories.
2.2 Perfume Dataset
In our present research, we have chosen to work with data related
to perfumes. They are relatively easy to obtain, they are public
taste goods, people buy them more frequently than PCs and digital
cameras, and they are sufficiently interesting and complex in
terms of the number of features that describe them (brand, price,
quantity, etc.) We have thus obtained more than 4000 perfume
products with popularity information from a well known ecommerce website. A series of attributes for perfumes from the
resulting data was then put together, taking into account the brand,
gender, price, quantity, category, popularity and description, and
subdivided into 4 categories i.e. "Eau de Parfum", "Eau de
Toilette", "Cologne" or "Aftershave"(only for men).
Figure 2. Perfume detail page and editorial picked
recommendations
Figure 1. Product Listing Page with the Search Panel
3. EDITORIAL PICKED CRITIQUES
Editorial picked critiques are generated by combining editorial
opinions (e.g., from popular magazines), popularity information
and critiques generated by the Apriori algorithm. In the beginning,
we predefine some important unit critique categories that match
users’ attention and needs. These categories are put in a ranked
list with respect to their influence and relevance to users'
preferences. We then produce recommendations for each critique
category based on a combined method of dynamic and preference
based critiquing methods ( and respectively).
3.1.1 Critique Categories
We identified five critique categories for public taste goods. Even
though the current method was developed for perfume data, it can
be generalized for fashion goods, wines, music, and films. Each
category of critiques is engaged in one aspect of the products.
Recommendations are produced from these categories in a top
down order.
1. Price-driven critiques. Price is determined as the most
important critique for our users.
2. Popularity-driven critiques. The second category is associated
with popularity. It is interesting to ask why popularity is put above
many other crucial factors. Kim and Chung analyzed this
question within their study and showed that "popularity can
provide assurance to buyers, particularly when consumers
evaluate products the features of which are not easily compared
among alternatives (e.g. automobiles)". Assuming all other factors
are equal, consumers reduce risk by purchasing popular models
rather than unpopular ones. Second, popularity information,
especially those gathered from e-commerce website with a
significant amount of traffic, offers users a rare opportunity to
observe what other people are buying. Third, quality associated
with popularity will affect the perception of the brand, and this
brand will consequently be more likely to be selected among other
alternatives.
3. Diversity-driven critiques. We define the third category
according to some common features that provide diversification
for the product domain. For perfume data, it is quantity since the
same perfume can exist in different sizes of bottles. Two quantity
related critiques are proposed:
(1) Same product, but less and cheaper.
(2) Same brand, but less and cheaper.
For fashion items, we can use features such as color or occasion.
For movies and files, genre can be used as the diversification
4. Similarity-driven critiques. In this category, we try to propose
something that is similar to the current product. The critique’s
name here is defined as "People who like this may also like ...",
which corresponds to content-based recommendation rather than
social filtering. In the experiment that we present in the next
section, we propose perfume that is similar to the current selected
one according to their attribute distance. We look for items which
have the smallest tradeoff differences in their attributes compared
with the current product.
5. Special recommendation. Similar to an editor’s special picks,
items in this category aim at inspiring users to see more popular
items, but those that are slightly more expensive. They provide
educational value to users especially when they are not yet
familiar with the domain.
Based on these unit critiques, we generated a set of five
compound categories: ``more popular and cheaper'' or if this
former category does not contain any real products we will use
``more popular but more expensive'', ``same brand and cheaper''
or ``same brand but more expensive'', ``just as popular and
cheaper'', ``same price range and just as popular'', and ``people
who like this may also like''.
Table 1. Questions used to compare two recommender
The items under "You may also like" are attractive.
The items under "You may also like" are educational.
The items under "You may also like" appeared to be
good deal.
The items under "You may also like" appeared to be
marketing material.
The items under "You may also like" influence my
selection.
The items under "You may also like" will influence
my future selection.
Names of the categories are useful and adequate.
I am satisfied with the overall quality of the interface.
I found the interface easy to use.
I would buy the perfume recommended to me, given
the opportunity.
If it is a real website, I would use it in the future to
find the perfume.
I would like to introduce this system to my friends.
Table 2. Average scores for each of the 12 evaluation
Attractive
recommender
Educational
recommender
recommender
Marketing material
Influenced my
Influence future
Name of categories
Interface quality
Interface easy to use
Would buy given
opportunities
Would re-use
Would introduce to
To validate whether these categories are attractive to users, we
conducted a small user study with 7 volunteers with the help of an
eye-tracking system. The results show that users indeed paid most
attention to price and popularity attributes. They liked products
that were “more popular and cheaper” the best, followed by the
“same brand and cheaper”, and “similar popularity and cheaper
price”. In addition, they showed interest in products from “People
who like this may also like”. Users also liked information about
products with a higher price but superior popularity.
5. CONCLUSION
4. EXPERIMENT
To validate our work, we decided to conduct a user study to
compare the newly developed algorithm, EPC, with a generalized
version of both dynamic and preference based critiquing serving
as the baseline. We will call the latter the Apriori method. A total
of 22 participants took part in our experiment in a with-in subject
setting. Thus every user experienced both EPC and Apriori in a
randomized order. The user task was to find a perfume that she or
he was ready to buy. Each participant was told that if she won the
lottery of the experiment, she would obtain a 100 Swiss-Franc
voucher to buy the selected perfume.
The initial adaption of both dynamic and preference based
critiquing recommenders to public taste data did not give
satisfactory results in terms of user acceptance. The categories
generated by both methods do not correspond to users’ needs. In
this paper, we presented a novel critiquing system, editorial
picked critiquing, for recommending perfume which is a typical
public taste product. This approach combines popularity scores
and experts’ choice of critiques. It overcomes some of the
limitations of previously developed methods, which all rely on the
Apriori data mining method to generate critiques. The advantages
of EPC are highlighted and validated in a user experiment. More
specifically, EPC can significantly improve the quality of
recommendations, both in terms of recommendation content and
the ease of use of the interface. In addition, the improved quality
seems to inspire users’ trust as well as their confidence in the
system and help them make the purchase decision. In the future,
we like to investigate how this method can be applied to other
public taste goods such as wine, films, music, etc. in order to
develop a set of design guidelines for the identification and testing
of the critique categories.
4.1 Evaluation Criteria
We designed a list of questions to measure users’ subjective
perception of the respective recommenders in terms of users’
satisfaction of the recommendations (content assessment), the
ease of use of the interfaces (interface assessment), and their
intention to purchase recommended products and return to the
website in the future (purchase and loyalty) (Table 1). Every
question was responded on a 5-point Likert scale from “strongly
disagree” to “strongly agree”. At the end of the questionnaire,
users were asked to give their preferences over the two systems:
1) which system was better at recommending perfume to you? and
2) which system did you prefer?
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the Swiss National Science Foundation for sponsoring
the reported research work. We are grateful to the participants of
our user studies for their patience and time. We also like to thank
the reviewers for their suggestions to improve the clarity of the
4.2 Experiment Results
Table 2 shows the average scores and p-values of subjective
variables measured by the questionnaire for the two systems.
Figure 3 depicts the scores of each question used in the post study
questionnaire. In all dimensions, scores for EPC are higher than
those of Apriori and 9 of them have p-values less than 0.05.
Scores for the question on purchase ("I would buy given
opportunities") is 29% higher for EPC than for Apriori. This result
shows that users’ purchasing decision is significantly improved by
the EPC recommender. In addition, EPC is 21% more attractive,
users prefer the names of the categories used in EPC and are more
likely to reuse EPC again and introduce it to their friends, and
EPC is 2.42 times more preferred over a general recommender.
7. REFERENCES
 Agrawal, R., Imielinski,T., and Swami, A. 1993. Mining
association rules between sets of items in large databases. In
Proc. of the 1993 ACM SIGMOD international conference
on Management of data, 207-216
Figure 3. Average scores of each evaluation question
 Burke, R.; Hammond, K.; and Young, B. 1997. The FindMe
Approach to Assisted Browsing. IEEE Expert: Intelligent
Systems and Their Applications 12(4):32-40.
 Chen, L. and Pu, P. 2006. Evaluating Critiquing-based
Recommender Agents. In Proceedings of Twenty-first
National Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-06),
pages 157-162, Boston, USA, July 16-20, 2006.
 Kim, C. and Chun, Y. 1997. Brand Popularity, Country
Image and Market Share: an Empirical Study. Journal of
International Business Studies 28(2), 361-386
 Reilly , J., McCarthy, K., McGinty, L., and Smyth , B.
2004. Dynamic critiquing. In Proc. of the 7th European
Conference on Case-Based Reasoning(ECCBR'04), 763-777.
 Smith, D., Menon, S. and Sivakumar, K. 2005. Online Peer
and Editorial Recommendations, Trust, and Choice in Virtual
Markets. Journal of Interactive Marketing 19(3), 15-37.
 Zhang, J. and Pu, P. 2006. A comparative study of compound
critique generation in conversational recommender systems.
In Proc. of the 4th International Conference on Adaptive
Hypermedia and Adaptive Web-Based Systems (AH'06),