DMCP: Differentiable Markov Channel Pruning for Neural Networks
Shaopeng Guo
Yujie Wang
Quanquan Li
Junjie Yan
SenseTime Research
{guoshaopeng, wangyujie, liquanquan, yanjunjie}@sensetime.com
Recent works imply that the channel pruning can be regarded as searching optimal sub-structure from unpruned
However, existing works based on this observation require training and evaluating a large number of
structures, which limits their application. In this paper, we
propose a novel differentiable method for channel pruning,
named Differentiable Markov Channel Pruning (DMCP),
to efﬁciently search the optimal sub-structure. Our method
is differentiable and can be directly optimized by gradient descent with respect to standard task loss and budget regularization (e.g.
FLOPs constraint).
we model the channel pruning as a Markov process, in
which each state represents for retaining the corresponding channel during pruning, and transitions between states
denote the pruning process.
In the end, our method is
able to implicitly select the proper number of channels in
each layer by the Markov process with optimized transitions. To validate the effectiveness of our method, we perform extensive experiments on Imagenet with ResNet and
MobilenetV2. Results show our method can achieve consistent improvement than state-of-the-art pruning methods in
various FLOPs settings. The code is available at https:
//github.com/zx55/dmcp
1. Introduction
Channel pruning has been widely used for
model acceleration and compression.
The core idea behind is that large CNN models are regarded as overparameterized.
By removing the large model’s unnecessary or less important weights, we can obtain a more efﬁcient and compact model with a marginal performance drop.
Conventional channel pruning methods mainly rely on the
human-designed paradigm. A typical pipeline of conventional pruning method can be summarized as three stages:
pre-train a large model, prune “unimportant” weights of the
large model according to the pre-deﬁned criterion, ﬁne-tune
the pruned model [6, ?, 16, 11].
Recent work showed a new perspective of channel
MobileNetV2
MetaPruning
Figure 1. MFLOPs vs.
Accuracy on the ImageNet classiﬁcation dataset.
The original model is MobileNetV2 .
method outperforms existing pruning methods MetaPruning 
and AMC on mobile settings (<300MFLOPs) at all FLOPs.
See Table 6 for more results. Best viewed in color.
pruning that the structure of the pruned model is the key of
determining the performance of a pruned model, rather than
the inherited “important” weights. Based on this observation, some works try to design a pruning process to directly
search optimal sub-structure from the unpruned structure.
AMC adopted reinforcement learning (RL) to train a
controller to output the pruning ratio of each layer in the
unpruned structure, while MetaPruning used evolution
algorithm to search structures. However, the optimization
of these pruning process need to train and evaluate a large
number of structures sampled from the unpruned network,
thus the scalability of these methods is limited. Although
AMC don’t ﬁne-tune the pruned structures and MetaPruning trained a meta-network to predict network’s weights to
avoid training the searched structures, the limitation of scalability still remains.
A similar problem in neural architecture search (NAS)
has been tackled by differentiable method DARTS .
However, the differentiable method proposed by DARTS
cannot be directly applied to channel pruning. First, the
deﬁnition of search space is different. The search space of
DARTS is a category of pre-deﬁned operations (convolution, max-pooing, etc), while in the channel pruning, the
 
search space is the number of channels in each layer. Second, the operations in DARTS are independent with each
other. But in the channel pruning, if a layer has k + 1 channels, it must have at least k channels ﬁrst, which has a logical implication relationship.
In this paper, we propose a novel differentiable channel pruning method named Differentiable Markov Channel
Pruning (DMCP) to perform efﬁcient optimal sub-structure
searching. Our method makes the channel pruning differentiable by modeling it as a Markov process. In the Markov
process for each layer, the state Sk represents the kth channel is retained, and the transition from Sk to Sk+1 represents the probability of retaining the (k+1)th channel given
that the kth channel is retained. Note that the start state is
always S1 in our method. Then the marginal probability
for state Sk, i.e. the probability of retaining kth channel,
can be computed by the product of transition probabilities
and can also be viewed as a scaling coefﬁcient. Each scaling coefﬁcient is multiplied to its corresponding channel’s
feature map during the network forwarding. So the transition probabilities parameterized by learnable parameters
can be optimized in an end-to-end manner by gradient descent with respect to task loss together with budget regularization (e.g. FLOPs constraint). After the optimization,
the model within desired budgets can be sampled by the
Markov process with learned transition probabilities and
will be trained from scratch to achieve high performance.
The details of our design will be presented in Section 3.
Finally, to demonstrate the effectiveness of our method,
we conduct exhaustive classiﬁcation experiments on ImageNet . At the same FLOPs, our method outperforms
all the other pruning methods both on MobileNetV2 and
ResNet, as shown in Figure 1.
With our method, MobileNetV2 has 0.1% accuracy drop with 30% FLOPs reduction and the FLOPs of ResNet-50 is reduced by 44% with
only 0.4% drop.
2. Related Work
In this section, we discuss related works from network
architecture search (NAS) and channel pruning.
Neural Architecture Search. ﬁrst proposed to search
for neural architectures with reinforcement learning to
achieve competitive accuracy with the given inference cost.
But the searching cost is too expensive to be applied
broadly. Recent works try to reduce the searching cost by
gradient-based methods. DARTS used a set of learnable weights to parameterize the probabilities of each candidate operation, the output of a layer is the linear combination of probabilities and feature maps of corresponding operation. After training, the operation with the highest
probability is chosen to be the ﬁnal architecture. However,
DARTS is performed on a small proxy task (e.g. CIFAR10)
and transfer the searched architecture to large scale target
tasks (e.g. ImageNet). ProxylessNAS avoided using
proxy tasks by only sampling two paths to search for architecture on large scale target tasks. Different from searching
architecture with different types of operations in the NAS
methods mentioned above, our method focuses on searching structures with a different number of channels.
Channel Pruning. Previous works on channel pruning can
be roughly classiﬁed into two categories, i.e. hard pruning
and soft pruning. Hard pruning removes channels during
iterative pruning and ﬁne-tuning process, while soft pruning only makes the pruned channels to be or approach to
zero. Hard pruning methods mainly depend on different
pruning criteria, for example, weight norm , the average percentage of zeros in the output or the inﬂuence
of each channel to the ﬁnal loss . Soft pruning methods mainly make the pruned channels to be or approach to
zero so that those channels’ inﬂuence is decreased. ﬁrst
zero some ﬁlters by intra-layer criterion and a calculated
layer-wise ratio. Then it increases the ratio of pruned ﬁlters
gradually until reaching the given computation budget. [?]
add L1 regularization on Batch Normalization’s coefﬁcients
when training, and after training the channels with small coefﬁcients will be pruned. search for the least important
ﬁlters in a binary search manner. use generative adversarial learning to learn a sparse soft mask to scaled the
output of pruned ﬁlters toward zero.
Our method can be seen as soft pruning. The major difference among DMCP and the above methods is the elimination of duplicated solutions by our Markov modeling. For
example, given a layer with C channels, the solution space
of our method is O(C), but for methods mentioned above,
the solution space is O(2C) for different combinations even
with the same number of channels.
Based on recent work , some work designed a search
process to directly search the optimal sub-structures from
the unpruned net. AMC used reinforcement learning to
determinate the ratio of channels each layer should retain.
MetaPruning used an evolution algorithm to search
network structures and a meta network is trained to predict weights for network structures during searching. These
methods need to train or evaluate a large number structures,
which makes them inefﬁcient, while our method can be optimized by gradient descent and avoid the problem.
In this section, we will give a detailed explanation of the
proposed Differentiable Markov Channel Pruning (DMCP)
method. As illustrated in Section 3.1, the channel pruning is ﬁrst formulated as a Markov process parameterized
by architecture parameters and can be optimized in an endto-end manner.
Then in Section 3.2, the training procedure of DMCP can be divided into two stages: in stage 1,
the unpruned network is updated by our proposed variant
Markov Process Parameterized by Architecture Parameters
Update Weight
Update Arch.
Figure 2. The training pipeline of DMCP. Figure (a) demonstrates the two stages of DMCP. DMCP ﬁrst run stage1 for several iterations to
update weights of the unpruned network to warmup, then run stage1 and stage2 iteratively to update weights and architecture parameters.
In ﬁgure (a), each rectangle represents a convolution block, e.g. Conv-BN-ReLU. Four sub-structures, represented by the blue parts of
the rectangle, are sampled from the unpruned net: (1) the whole unpruned net (Max. Arch.), (2) structure with the minimum number of
channels (Min. Arch.), (3) two structures randomly sampled by Markov process (Rand. Arch.). Each of these structures is forwarded
independently, and the gradients in four sub-structure are accumulated to update the weights. Figure (b) is a detail illustration of the
wrapped block in ﬁgure (a). The “Fuse” layer shows the incorporate details of architecture parameters α and outputs of unpruned networks
O. Notations in Figure (b) are explained in Section 3. Best viewed in color.
sandwich rule, while in stage 2, the architecture parameters
are wrapped into the unpruned network and get updated, as
shown in Figure 2 (a). After the optimization, we propose
two ways to sample the pruned network in Section 3.3.
3.1. Deﬁnition of Pruning Process
Let M(L(1), L(2), ..., L(N)) denote the N-layer unpruned network, where L(i) is the ith layer. In layer L(i)
out convolutional ﬁlters (i.e. channels), given input
x, the output O(i) can by computed by:
k ⊙x, k = 1, 2, ..., C(i)
where O(i)
is the kth channel of O(i), w(i)
is the kth ﬁlter in L(i), and ⊙denote the convolution operation. If not
explicitly stated, the superscript which represents the layer
index will be omitted below for simplicity.
As illustrated in Section 1, we perform the channel pruning in a reversed way, which can be represented by a directed ascyclic graph, as shown in Figure 3, where the state
Sk(1 ≤k ≤Cout) represent kth channel is retained during the pruning process, and the transition pk from Sk to
Sk+1 means (k + 1)th channel is retained if kth channel is
retained. The pruning process can be ended by transferring
to the terminal state T from any other state. This process
has the property that if k out of Cout channels are retained
in layer L, they must be ﬁrst k channels. In other words,
given kth channel is retained, then ﬁrst (k −1) channels
must be retained, and we can further conclude that retaining (k + 1)th channel is conditional independent of ﬁrst
(k −1) channels give kth channel is retained, which follows the Markov property.
Channel Pruning via Markov Process
We model transition in aforementioned ascyclic graph
as a stochastic process and parameterized the transition probabilities by a set of learnable parameters.
name the learnable parameters as architecture parameters for distinguishing them from network weights.
p(w1, w2, ..., wk−1) be the probability that ﬁrst k −1 channels are retained. The probability of retaining ﬁrst k channels can be represented as:
p(w1, ..., wk) = p(wk|w1, ..., wk−1)p(w1, ..., wk−1) (2)
where p(wk|w1, ..., wk−1) is the probability of retaining kth channel given ﬁrst (k −1) channels are retained. Since retaining wk is conditionally independent of
{w1, w2, ...wk−2} given wk−1 is retained, hence we can
rewrite Equation 2 as:
pk = p(wk|w1, w2, ..., wk−1) = p(wk|wk−1)
p(wk|¬wk−1) = 0
in which ¬wk−1 means (k −1)th channel is discarded.
Therefore, in Figure 3, the transitions can be represented
by a set of transition probabilities P = {p1, p2, ..pCout}
that deﬁned by Equation 3.
Figure 3. The Modeling of channel pruning as a Markov process.
State Sk(k = 1, 2, ....) means kth channel is retained, and transition pk is the probability of retaining kth channel given (k −1)th
channel is retained, while 1 −pk is the probability of terminating the process. State T means the terminal state and Cout is the
maximum number of channels in each layer.
We use a set of architecture parameters A
{α1, α2, ..., αcout} to parameterize P, therefore pk can be
computed as follows:
sigmoid(αk) =
k = 2, ..., Cout, αk ∈A
Note that we leave at least one channel for each layer, so
p1 = p(w1) = 1.
The marginal probability of sampling channel wk denoted by p(wk) can be computed as:
p(wk) = p(wk|wk−1)p(wk−1) + p(wk|¬wk−1)p(¬wk−1)
= p(wk|wk−1)p(wk−1) + 0
p(wi|wi−1) =
Then the architecture parameters are wrapped into the unpruned network by following equation:
Ok = Ok × p(wk)
Ok is the actual output of kth channel. Therefore,
pruning wk can be represented by setting p(wk) to zero.
However, we cannot directly implement Equation 7 right
after the convolutional layer, because the batch normalization layer can scale up the value of ith channel such that
the latter layer will not be affected. So the pruning process
should be put after the batch normalization layer. An example of how to combine architecture parameters with an
unpruned network is given in Figure 2 (b).
By the above deﬁnition, the pruned model can be sampled by the Markov process, while the transitions can be
optimized by gradient descent, which will be illustrated in
Section 3.2.
Solution to Shortcut Issue
Note that both MobilenetV2 and ResNet have residual
blocks with shortcut connections. For the residual blocks
with identity shortcuts, the number of channels in the last
convolutional layer must be the same as the one in previous
blocks due to the element-wise summation. Many previous works don’t prune the last convolutional layer of
the residual block. In our method, we adopt a weight sharing strategy to solve this issue such that the layers, whose
output channels must be equal, will share the same set of
architecture parameters.
Budget Regularization
FLOPs and latency are commonly used in evaluating
pruning methods. To perform an easy-to-implement and
fair comparison, we use accuracy at certain FLOPs as budget regularization.
However, budget regularization like
FLOPs cannot be naturally optimized by gradient descent.
In this section, we introduce our solution to handle the nondifferentiable budget regularization problem.
In layer L, the expected channel E(channel) can be
computed as:
E(channel) =
where Cout is the number of output channels in L and p(wi)
is the marginal probability deﬁned in Equation 6.
In layer L, given expected input channels E(in) and output channels E(out) computed as Equation 8, the expected
FLOPs E(LF LOP s) can be computed by:
E(LF LOP s) =
E(out) × E(kernel op)
E(kernel op) =
groups × #channel op
#channel op = (SI + SP −SK
+ 1) × SK × SK(11)
where groups = 1 for normal convolution and groups =
E(in) for depth-wise convolution. SI and SK indicate input width/height and kernel width/height respectively, while
SP is padding size and stride is convolution stride.
Then the expected ﬂops of the model E(NF LOP s) is:
E(NF LOP s) =
E(l)(LF LOP s)
in which N is the number of convolutional layers. With
Equation 12, we can optimize FLOPs by gradient descent.
Loss Function
Given target FLOPs FLOPstarget, we formulated the
differentiable budget regularization loss lossreg as follows:
lossreg = log(|E(NF LOP s) −FLOPstarget|)
To make E(NF LOP s) strictly lower than FLOPstarget but
not too sensitive around the target, we add single side margin to the loss function, i.e. when γ × FLOPstarget ≤
E(NF LOP s) ≤FLOPstarget is satisﬁed, the loss will be
zero. γ < 1 is the tolerance ratio that can be adjusted by
When updating weights, the FLOPs loss has no effect on
weights, so the loss function is:
Lossweight = losscls
where losscls is cross entropy loss for classiﬁcation. When
updating the architecture parameters, the loss function is
formulated as below:
Lossarch = losscls + λreglossreg
where λreg is hyper-parameters to balance two loss terms.
Note that we don’t add weight decay to architecture parameters. Because when the probability of keeping some
channels approaching to zero or one, the norm of learnable
parameters α will become very large, which will make them
move forward to zero and hinge the optimization.
3.2. Training Pipeline
As illustrated in Figure 2 (a), the training procedure of
DMCP can be divided into two stages, i.e. weight updating
of the unpruned network and architecture parameters updating. The stage 1 and stage 2 are called iteratively during the
Stage 1: Weight updating of the unpruned network. In
the ﬁrst stage, we only update weights in the unpruned network. As deﬁned in Equation 6, the probability of retaining
the kth channel can also be regarded as the probability of
retaining the ﬁrst k channels. Then our method can be seen
as soft sampling all sub-structures in a single forwarding
when updating architecture parameters. In general, all channels in a layer are equal and it is not intuitive to modeling
the channel selection as Markov process. Inspired by previous work , which proposed a “sandwich rule” training
method that the 0.75× parts of the trained MobileNetV2
1.0× can get similar performance to it trained from scratch.
, we introduce a variant sandwich rule, into the training
scheme to make the channel groups in the unpruned model
more “important” than the channel groups right after it. So
that channels in a layer are not equal. The best choice of a
layer with k channels will be the ﬁrst k channels instead of
other possible combinations. Based on this channel importance ranking property in the unpruned model, when sampling a sub-network with k(k < C) channels, selecting the
ﬁrst k channels can better indicate the true performance of
the sub-network (trained from scratch individually). Therefore, it is reasonable to introduce Markov modeling.
There are two differences between our variation and
the original “sandwich rule”. First, the randomly sampled
switch (the ratio of retained channels) in each layer is not
the same. Because the pruned network may have different
switches in different layers. Second, the random sampling
of switches obeys distribution from architecture parameters
with the Markov process, instead of uniform distribution.
Because the possible number of architecture in our method
is much more than . And to make all architectures re-
ﬂect their true performance will need too much costs. Thus
we only focus on the frequently sampled architectures.
Stage 2: Architecture parameter updating. In the second stage, we only update architecture parameters. For each
convolutional layer in the unpruned net, an architecture parameter is incorporated with its original output tensors by
Equation 7. So that gradients could be backpropagated to
the architecture parameters. And the gradients will be backpropagated to α by following formulas:
r∈{r|r̸=j and r≤k} pr
= (1 −pk)pk
Such that all components of our method can be trained in an
end-to-end manner. To further reduce the search space, we
divide the channels into groups (≥10 groups) uniformly
and each architecture parameter α is responsible for one
group instead of only one channel. Each layer has the same
number of groups.
Warmup process.
Before iteratively called stage 1 and
stage 2, DMCP ﬁrst runs stage 1 for several epochs to warm
up, in which the sub-networks are sampled by Markov process with randomly initialized architecture parameters. This
process aims to avoid the network dropping into bad local minima when updating architecture parameters caused
by weights’ insufﬁcient training.
We also conduct ablation study in section 4.2 to show the effectiveness of using
3.3. Pruned Model Sampling
After DMCP training done, we then produce models that
satisfy the given cost constrain from it. In this section, we
will introduce two producing methods. The ﬁrst method,
named Direct Sampling (DS), is to sample in each layer
independently by the Markov process with optimized transition probabilities. We sample several structures and only
keep the structures that lie in the target FLOPs budget.
The second method, named Expected Sampling (ES),
is to set the number of channels in each layer to be the expected channels computed by Equation 8. In our experiment, lossreg is always optimized to zero, so the FLOPs of
the expected network is equal or less than the given FLOPs
constraint. Thus the expected network also satisﬁes the requirements.
In Section 4, we perform plenty of experiments to compare these two methods.
The best performance of the
pruned model sampled from Direct Sampling is a little
bit higher than the one produced by Expected Sampling
method, but it takes a much longer time to ﬁnd such a
model. So in our experiments, we use the Expected Sampling method to produce the ﬁnal pruned model.
4. Experiments
In this section, we perform a large number of experiments to validate and analyze our method. We ﬁrst describe
the implementation details of DMCP in Section 4.1. To
study the effectiveness of each component in our method,
we conduct ablation experiments in Section 4.2. Finally
in Section 4.3, we compare our results with state-of-the-art
channel pruning methods. More visualizations and experiments will be shown on Supplemental Materials.
4.1. Implementation Details
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed differentiable pruning method on ImageNet classiﬁcation ,
which contains 1000 classes.
We perform experiments
on both light (MobileNetV2 ) and heavy (ResNet )
models. For MobilenetV2, we use MobilenetV2 1.5x as the
unpruned net, and the channels in each layer are divided
into 15 groups (0.1x for each group). While for ResNet,
we use standard ResNet50 (1.0x) and ResNet18 (1.0x) as
unpruned structures, the channels in each layer are divided
into 10 groups (0.1x for each group).
DMCP training. As described in Section 3.2, the training pipeline of DMCP contains two phases: warmup and
iterative training. The training is conducted on 16 Nvidia
GTX 1080TI GPUs with a batch size of 1024. Both MobileNetV2 and ResNet are trained for 40 epochs in total, the
initial learning rate for both unpruned net and architecture
parameters updating is 0.2 and reduced to 0.02 by cosine
scheduler ﬁnally.
In the warmup phase, only the network weights are
trained for 20 epochs using a variant of “sandwich rule”.
In the iterative training phase, architecture parameters and
unpruned net are both trained in a total of 20 epochs. The
λreg of budget regularization is set to 0.1 in all experiments.
The tolerance ratio γ is set to be 0.95 in all the experiments.
To make the explanation brief in the following sections, we
use the shortened form of experiment settings. For example,
MBV2 1.0x-59M means the unpruned net is MobileNetV2
1.0x with target FLOPs equals to 59M.
Pruned network training. The pruned networks are produced by Direct Sampling or Expected Sampling. The details of the pruned model producing methods are illustrated
in Section 3.3. Note that all pruned models are trained from
scratch. The training of pruned models is performed on 32
Nvidia GTX 1080TI GPUs with a batch size of 2048. The
pruned MobileNetV2 is trained for 250 epochs and pruned
ResNet is trained for 100 epochs. The initial learning rate
for training all pruned models is ﬁrst warming up from 0.2
to 0.8 within one epoch, then is reduced to 0 by cosine
scheduler.
4.2. Ablation Study
Recoverability veriﬁcation. One property of our method
should have is that it should retain nearly all channels when
searching on a pre-trained model without FLOPs constraint.
We use pre-trained MobileNetV2 1.0x and randomly initialize the architecture parameters. Note that only the iterative training phase is performed. We freeze the weight of
MobileNetV2 1.0x and trained architecture parameters with
only task loss. The result in Figure 4 shows that the FLOPs
and top-1 training accuracy of our method can recover to
those of the pre-trained model within 500 iterations.
Figure 4. The recoverability of DMCP with pre-trained MobileNetV2 1.0x and randomly initialized architecture parameters.
Expected sampling and Direct Sampling. As described
in Section 3.3, we can sample pruned models by Direct Sampling (DS) and Expected Sampling (ES). We verify the effectiveness of two model producing methods on
MobileNetV2-210M and ResNet50-1.1G. We also train
MobilenetV2 0.75x and ResNet50 0.5x, whose FLOPS is
210M and 1.1G respectively, as baselines for comparison.
The performance of these two baselines are 70.4% and
71.9% separately. For DS, we sample ﬁve models and the
results are reported in Table 1. The table shows that the
performance of all models produced by DS is better than
baseline models, which means the architecture parameters
converge to a high-performance sub-space. And the performance of model produced by ES is very close to the best
model produced by DS, which shows the effectiveness of
ES. Besides, results from Table 2 and Table 3 also show the
robustness of the ES. For saving the cost of ﬁne-tuning, we
use the ES to produce a model if not indicated.
MBV2 1.5x-210M
Res50 1.0x-1.1G
Table 1. Performance of pruned model produced by Direct Sampling (DS) and Expected Sampling (ES). “Highest” and “Lowest”
means the best and worst performance among 5 models sampled
by Direct Sampling. MBV2 is short for MobileNetV2 and Res50
is short for ResNet 50.
The scale of the unpruned network. In this section, we
evaluated the inﬂuence of scaling the unpruned network.
We use two scales of MobileNetV2, i.e. MobileNetV2 1.0x
and MobileNetV2 1.5x, as unpruned network, and prune
them into 59M and 210M FLOPs. Note that in the experiments, the channels in each layer are divided into 10 groups
to maintain the same group size. The results showed in Table 2 indicate that our method is not sensitive to the unpruned network scale. Using the larger unpruned network
can lead to a little bit better performance. So we use MobileNetV2 1.5x and ResNet50 1.0x as our default unpruned
network in the remaining paper.
We also visualize the difference computed by subtracting the number of channels each layer in MBV2 1.0x-210M
from that in MBV2 1.5x-210M in Figure 5. From the ﬁgure,
we can observe that MBV2 1.0x-210M tends to retain more
channels in shallow layers while MBV2 1.5x-210M retains
more channels in deep layers, even they only have a tiny difference in accuracy. This indicates that there exist multiple
local minima in the search space of channel pruning.
MBV2 1.5x-59M
MBV2 1.0x-59M
MBV2 1.5x-210M
MBV2 1.0x-210M
Table 2. The performance of pruned models in 59M and 210M
FLOPs level on MobileNetV2 (MBV2) with different unpruned
network scale.
Inﬂuence of warmup phase.
We train MobileNetV2-
210M with and without the warmup phase and evaluate their
performance of the corresponding pruned models. To keep
other settings the same, we double the epochs of the iterative training phase for the experiment without warming up.
In the setting without warming up, the models are trained
for 100 epochs, the initial learning rate and the scheduler in
the ﬁrst 50 epochs are the same as the warmup phase. The
results in Table 3 shows that using warmup leads to better performance. One possible reason is that using warmup
makes the weights trained more sufﬁciently before updating architecture parameters, which makes weights more discriminable and prevents architecture parameters from trapping into bad local minima.
Table 3. The inﬂuence of using warmup or not. MBV2 is short for
MobileNetV2.
Channel Index
MBV2 1.5x-210M - MBV2 1.0x-210M
Figure 5. The difference between two pruned models from MBV2
1.5x-210M and MBV2 1.0x-210M. The x-axis indicates the layer
index and the y-axis is the difference computed by subtracting the
number of channels each layer in MBV2 1.0x-210M from that in
MBV2 1.5x-210M.
Impact of the variant sandwich rule. We ablate the impact of the sandwich rule in the MobileNetV2-210M setting. The original sandwich rule and our variant sandwich
rule are adopted solely in DMCP for comparison. The results are tabulated in Table 4. We can see that using the variant sandwich rule leads to better performance. The possible
reason is that the weights corresponding to higher probability will be optimized better by the variant sandwich rule.
And in these weights, each of them will be optimized better to represent their true importance with less inﬂuence of
other weights. Thus, when updating architecture parameters, the “competition” is mainly centered on them, which
makes updating more accurate.
Sandwich rule
our variant
Table 4. The inﬂuence of using the variant sandwich rule or not.
Training scheme.
We verify the effectiveness of the
updating scheme.
We conduct three experiments on
MobileNetV2-59M. All experiments use the same setting in
the warmup phase, while the settings in the iterative training phase are as follows: In the ﬁrst experiment, we only
update architecture parameters with respect to budget regularization (FLOPs loss); in the second experiment, we only
update architecture parameters with respect to both budget
regularization and task loss; and in the last experiment, we
update both unpruned net and architecture parameters with
Arch. Params. updating
Weight updating
FLOPs loss
Table 5. The inﬂuence of different components in iterative training
phase. The experiments are conducted with MobileNetV2 and all
the target FLOPs are 59M. The cell without check-mark means the
corresponding component is not used during training.
respect to the full loss function. The results are shown in
Table 5. The ﬁrst experiment is a naive baseline of FLOPs
guided pruning. The layers with the same FLOPs may be
pruned to the same extent. The result is far worse than the
other experiments. Comparing with the ﬁrst experiment and
the second experiment, we know that the task loss can help
to discriminate the importance of different layer even they
have same FLOPs. Finally, by comparing with the last two
experiments, we can conclude that when architecture parameters changed, the weights should also be adapted.
4.3. Comparison with state-of-the-art
In this section, we compare our method with various
pruning methods, including reinforcement learning method
AMC , evolution method MetaPruning , one-shot
method AutoSlim , and traditional channel pruning
methods SFP and FPGM . The training settings of our
method in all FLOPs settings are illustrated in Section 4.1,
and our pruned models are sampled by Expected Sampling.
All methods are evaluated on MobileNetV2, ResNet18,
and ResNet50, in each type of model, we trained a set of
baseline model with setting 4.1 for comparison.
From the Table 6, we can see that our method outperforms all other methods under the same settings, which
show the superiority of our method.
Note that AMC,
MetaPruning and our method train the pruned model from
scratch by standard hard label loss. While AutoSlim adopts
a in-place distillation method in which the pruned network
share weights with unpruned net and mimic the output of
the unpruned net. To fairly compare with AutoSlim, we also
train our pruned model with the slimmable training method.
Results show that this training method can further boost the
performance, and our method surpasses AutoSlim in different FLOPs models.
5. Conclusion
In this paper, we propose a novel differentiable method
for channel pruning, named Differentiable Markov Channel
Pruning (DMCP), to solve the defect of existing methods
that they need to train and evaluate a large number of substructures. The proposed method is differentiable by modeling the channel pruning as the Markov process, thus can be
1Training settings of baseline and pruned models are different.
Uniform 1.0x
Uniform 0.75x
Uniform 0.5x
Uniform 0.35x
MetaPruning 
AutoSlim1 *
Uniform 1.0x
Uniform 1.0x
Uniform 0.85x
Uniform 0.75x
Uniform 0.5x
Uniform 0.25x
MetaPruning 
AutoSlim *
Table 6. Performance of different models on ImageNet dataset
with different FLOPs settings.
∆Top-1 column list the accuracy improvement compared with unpruned baseline model (1.0×)
reported in their original work, and our baseline is indicated by
“-”. “α×” means each layer in baseline model is scaled by α.
The groups marked by * indicate the pruned model is trained by
slimmable method proposed in 
optimized with respect to task loss by gradient descent. After optimization, the required model can be sampled from
the optimized transitions by a simple Expected Sampling
and trained from scratch. Our method achieves state-of-theart performance with ResNet and MobileNet V2 on ImageNet in various FLOPs settings.