Social selection and peer inﬂuence in an online
social network
Kevin Lewisa,b,1, Marco Gonzaleza,c, and Jason Kaufmanb
aDepartment of Sociology and bBerkman Center for Internet and Society, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138; and cBehavioral Sciences Department,
Santa Rosa Junior College, Santa Rosa, CA 95401
Edited by Kenneth Wachter, University of California, Berkeley, CA, and approved November 15, 2011 
Disentangling the effects of selection and inﬂuence is one of social
science’s greatest unsolved puzzles: Do people befriend others
who are similar to them, or do they become more similar to their
friends over time? Recent advances in stochastic actor-based modeling, combined with self-reported data on a popular online social
network site, allow us to address this question with a greater degree of precision than has heretofore been possible. Using data on
the Facebook activity of a cohort of college students over 4 years,
we ﬁnd that students who share certain tastes in music and in
movies, but not in books, are signiﬁcantly likely to befriend one
another. Meanwhile, we ﬁnd little evidence for the diffusion of
tastes among Facebook friends—except for tastes in classical/jazz
music. These ﬁndings shed light on the mechanisms responsible
for observed network homogeneity; provide a statistically rigorous
assessment of the coevolution of cultural tastes and social relationships; and suggest important qualiﬁcations to our understanding of
both homophily and contagion as generic social processes.
he homogeneity of social networks is one of the most striking
regularities of group life (1–4). Across countless social settings—from high school to college, the workplace to the Internet
(5–8)—and with respect to a wide variety of personal attributes—
from drug use to religious beliefs, political orientation to tastes
in music (1, 6, 9, 10)—friends tend to be much more similar than
chance alone would predict. Two mechanisms are most commonly cited as explanations. First, friends may be similar due to
social selection or homophily: the tendency for like to attract
like, or similar people to befriend one another (11, 12). Second,
friends may be similar due to peer inﬂuence or diffusion: the
tendency for characteristics and behaviors to spread through
social ties such that friends increasingly resemble one another
over time (13, 14). Though many prior studies have attempted to
disentangle these two mechanisms, their respective importance is
still poorly understood. On one hand, analytically distinguishing
social selection and peer inﬂuence requires detailed longitudinal
data on social relationships and individual attributes. These data
must also be collected for a complete population of respondents,
because it is impossible to determine why some people become
friends (or change their behaviors)* unless we also know something about the people who do not. On the other hand, modeling
the joint evolution of networks and behaviors is methodologically
much more complex than nearly all past work has recognized.
Not only should such a model simulate the ongoing, bidirectional
causality that is present in the real world; it must also control
for a number of confounding mechanisms (e.g., triadic closure,
homophily based on other attributes, and alternative causes of
behavioral change) to prevent misdiagnosis of selection or in-
ﬂuence when another social process is in fact at work (15).
Using a unique social network dataset (5) and advances in
actor-based modeling (16), we examine the coevolution of
friendships and tastes in music, movies, and books over 4 years.
Our data are based on the Facebook activity of a cohort of
students at a diverse US college (n = 1,640 at wave 1). Beginning
in March 2006 (the students’ freshman year) and repeated annually through March 2009 (the students’ senior year), we
recorded network and proﬁle information from Facebook and
supplemented it with academic and housing data from the college (SI Materials and Methods, Study Population and Proﬁle
Data). Our research was approved by both Facebook and the
college in question; no privacy settings were bypassed (i.e., students with “private” proﬁles were considered missing data); and
all data were immediately encoded to preserve student anonymity. Because data on Facebook are naturally occurring, we
avoided interviewer effects, recall limitations, and other sources
of measurement error endemic to survey-based network research
(17). Further, in contrast to past research that has used interaction “events” such as e-mail or instant messaging to infer an
underlying structure of relationships (7, 18), our data refer to
explicit and mutually conﬁrmed “friendships” between students.
Given that a Facebook friendship can refer to a number of
possible relationships in real life, from close friends or family to
mere acquaintances, we conservatively interpret these data as
documenting the type of “weak tie” relations that have long been
of interest to social scientists (19).
Though network homogeneity has been a perennial topic of
academic research, prior attempts to separate selection and in-
ﬂuence suffer from three limitations that cast doubt on the validity of past ﬁndings. These limitations are summarized by
Steglich et al. (15), who introduce the modeling framework we
use. First, prior approaches to network and behavioral coevolution inappropriately use statistical techniques that assume
all observations are independent—an assumption that is clearly
violated in datasets of relational data. Second, prior approaches
do not adequately control for alternative mechanisms of network
and behavioral change that could also produce the same ﬁndings.
For instance, two individuals who share a certain behavior may
decide to become friends for other reasons (e.g., because they
have a friend in common or because they share some other behavior with which the ﬁrst is correlated), and behaviors may
change for many other reasons besides peer inﬂuence (e.g., because of demographic characteristics or because all individuals
share some baseline propensity to adopt the behavior). Third,
prior approaches do not account for the fact that the underlying
processes of friendship and behavioral evolution operate in
continuous time, which could result in any number of unobserved
changes between panel waves. In response, Snijders and colleagues (16, 20, 21) propose a stochastic actor-based modeling
framework. This framework considers a network and the collective state of actors’ behaviors as a joint state space, and
models simultaneously how the network evolves depending on
the current network and current behaviors, and how behaviors
Author contributions: K.L., M.G., and J.K. designed research, performed research, analyzed data, and wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: .
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1109739109/-/DCSupplemental.
*Throughout, we use the term “behavior” to refer to any type of endogenously changing
individual attribute.
January 3, 2012
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1109739109
evolve depending on the same current state. The framework also
respects the network dependence of actors, is ﬂexible enough to
incorporate any number of alternative mechanisms of change,
and models the coevolution of relationships and behaviors in
continuous time. In other words, it is a family of models capable of
assessing the mutual dependence between networks and behaviors
in a statistically adequate fashion (see Materials and Methods and
SI Materials and Methods for additional information).
We report the results of three analyses of students’ tastes and
social networks. First, we identify cohesive groupings among
students’ preferences; second, we model the evolution of the
Facebook friend network; and third, we examine the coevolution
of tastes and ties using the modeling framework described above.
Cultural preferences have long been a topic of academic, corporate, and popular interest. Sociologists have studied why we
like what we like (9, 22) and the role of tastes in social stratiﬁcation (23, 24). Popular literature has focused on the diffusion
of consumer behaviors and the role of trendsetters therein (25,
26). To date, however, most evidence of taste-based selection
and inﬂuence is either anecdotal or methodologically problematic according to the aforementioned standards (15). Further,
the majority of research on tastes has relied on closed-ended
surveys—commonly only about music, and typically measuring
these preferences in terms of genres. In contrast, Facebook
provides users with open-ended spaces in which to list their
“favorite” music, movies, and books, offering an unprecedented
opportunity to examine how tastes are structured as well as how
they coevolve with social ties (5). Additionally, unlike experimental studies of inﬂuence that use a ﬁxed network structure
(14), we also assess the reciprocal impact of tastes on networks;
and unlike dynamic studies of diffusion that focus on adoption of
a single product or taste (18), we compare how the coevolution
process varies across three domains of preferences.
Though our dataset contains a total of 10,387 unique tastes, most
of these (64%) are never expressed by more than a single student
and cannot plausibly contribute to selection or inﬂuence dynamics. We therefore focus only on those tastes that appeared
among the 100 most popular music, movie, and book preferences
for at least one wave of data, collectively accounting for 49% of
students’ actual taste expressions. Fig. 1 presents a visualization
of students’ music tastes, where similar tastes are positioned
closer together in 3D space. We deﬁne the “similarity” between
two tastes as the proportion of students they share in common,
i.e., the extent to which they co-occur. We then used a hierarchical clustering algorithm to identify more or less cohesive
groupings of co-occurring tastes. Rather than assuming a priori
that tastes are patterned in a certain way, this inductive approach
reveals those distinctions among items that students themselves
ﬁnd subjectively meaningful (SI Materials and Methods, Cluster
Analysis of Students’ Tastes).
Next, we examine the determinants of Facebook friend network
evolution. Fig. 2 displays select parameter estimates β and 95%
conﬁdence intervals for a model of Facebook friend network
evolution estimated over the entire 4 years of college (Materials
and Methods and SI Materials and Methods, Evolution of Facebook Friendships). We included all those students for whom
friendship data were available at all four waves based on students’ privacy settings (n = 1,001). Though we use a very different relationship measure (friendships documented online)
compared with traditional surveys, our ﬁndings largely coincide
with past research (11, 27, 28). The dominant inﬂuence on
friendship evolution is mere propinquity: the log-odds of two
students becoming and remaining Facebook friends increases by
0.98 if the students live in the same building and by 0.56 if they
share the same academic ﬁeld (and thus enroll in many of the
same classes). Friendships—even on Facebook—are also powerfully inﬂuenced by social proximity; sharing only a single friend
in common (triadic closure) increases the log-odds of two students becoming and remaining friends by 0.10—an effect that
multiplies with each additional shared friend. Finally, students
tend to self-segregate on the basis of gender, racial background,
region of origin, and socioeconomic status.
Lite/classic rock
Hip hop/R&B
Classical/jazz
Visualization of the distribution of students’ music preferences on Facebook, featuring all items that appeared among the 100 most popular music
tastes in at least one wave of data (n = 145). Similar tastes appear closer together in 3D space, where similarity is deﬁned as the rate of co-occurrence between
two tastes, and coordinates are determined by multidimensional scaling. Node size is proportionate to taste popularity, and colors refer to the ﬁve largest
clusters of tastes identiﬁed by a hierarchical clustering algorithm. Cluster names are generalizations for illustrative purposes only. Visualizations for movies
and books are provided in the Supporting Information, as well as animations of all three “taste spaces” for closer inspection.
Lewis et al.
January 3, 2012
SOCIAL SCIENCES
Finally, to disentangle the importance of selection vs. inﬂuence,
we combine data on tastes and friendships into a single analysis of
network and behavioral coevolution (Materials and Methods and SI
Materials and Methods, Coevolution of Tastes and Friendships).
Models were again estimated over the entire study period and
limited to students for whom both taste and network data were
available at all four waves (n = 211 for music, n = 201 for movies,
n = 191 for books). Results for selection and inﬂuence parameters
are presented in Fig. 3. Controlling for peer inﬂuence and over
a dozen alternative determinants of network evolution, we ﬁnd
that students who like artists in the “lite/classic rock” or “classical/
jazz” clusters display a signiﬁcant tendency to form and maintain
friendships with others who express tastes in the same cluster. We
also ﬁnd that students self-segregate on the basis of movie preferences: two students who like movies in the “dark satire” or
“raunchy comedy/gore” clusters are signiﬁcantly more likely than
chance to become and remain friends. Social selection effects are
not statistically signiﬁcant for any of the other clusters of music and
movie tastes, however—nor are they signiﬁcant for any of the ﬁve
book clusters considered here. Meanwhile, results on the behavioral evolution side of the model tell a very different story. Controlling for social selection and several alternative determinants of
taste evolution, we ﬁnd signiﬁcant evidence for peer inﬂuence with
respect to only one of the 15 taste clusters: students whose friends
express tastes in the “classical/jazz” music cluster are signiﬁcantly
more likely to adopt such tastes themselves. Outside of this ﬁnding,
preferences do not in any way appear to be “contagious” among
Facebook friends over the duration of college. In fact, students
whose friends list tastes in the “indie/alt” music cluster are significantly likely to discard these tastes in the future—an instance of
peer inﬂuence operating in the opposite direction as predicted by
prior research.
Discussion
Tastes are central to human identity, and are commonly viewed
as an important source of interpersonal afﬁnity and group solidarity. Our ﬁndings suggest important qualiﬁcations to this
perspective: the social impact of a taste may depend ﬁrst on its
medium (e.g., tastes in music and in movies appear to be more
consequential than tastes in books), and second on the particular
content of the preference. Notably, tastes shared by “everyone”
may be so banal that they no longer serve as effective markers of
social differentiation: We ﬁnd the least evidence for social selection, positive or negative, among students who like “pop”
music, “hit” movies, and books on “the college bookshelf”.
Cultural diffusion—the spread of tastes through social ties—is
also an intuitively plausible mechanism commonly invoked to
explain changes in fashion. Such claims are rarely substantiated
by rigorous empirical research, however; and examples of “successful” diffusion may be more accessible to memory (29),
whereas ubiquitous instances of “failed” diffusion are routinely
ignored (30). Our ﬁndings suggest that friends tend to share
some tastes not because they inﬂuence one another, but because
this similarity was part of the reason they became and remained
friends in the ﬁrst place. Further, the one type of preference that
does “spread” among Facebook friends—classical/jazz music—
may be especially “contagious” due to its unique value as a highstatus cultural signal (31);† whereas students whose friends like
“indie” or alternative bands may try to symbolically distance
themselves from these peers (32). Future research should focus
more on the motives and mechanisms of cultural diffusion, including how the likelihood of transmission varies across different
types of preferences, people, and contexts, rather than viewing
it as an undifferentiated social process akin to ﬂuid churning
through a pipeline (14, 18).
Our analyses are limited in a number of ways. Selection and
inﬂuence may play very different roles in relationships that are
stronger than “Facebook friendship,” and tastes expressed online
may reﬂect not only genuine psychological preference but also
“presentation of self” or the desire to ﬁt in. We also do not have
data on environmental inﬂuences such as concerts, movie nights,
or assigned reading that may inﬂuence students’ preferences and
contribute to network homogeneity. Most importantly, our
models of selection and inﬂuence focus only on a small subset of
students (i.e., those who provided complete taste and network
data at all four waves) in a single college cohort. Though the
software we use is capable of handling some degree of missing
data (33), >70% of the original study cohort provided no tastes
at all during their senior year alone (either due to privacy settings
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
Shared academic ﬁeld
Shared residence
Regional homophily
Socioeconomic homophily
Racial homophily
Gender homophily
Triadic closure
Parameter estimates β and 95% conﬁdence intervals for a stochastic
actor-based model of the evolution of Facebook friendships over 4 years (n =
1,001). Signiﬁcant coefﬁcients are labeled with an asterisk, where a coefﬁcient is considered signiﬁcant if the 95% conﬁdence interval does not
contain β = 0. Coefﬁcients generally correspond to the change in log-odds of
a tie being present vs. absent if the given criterion is met (e.g., the friendship
is between two friends-of-friends or two students who share the same
gender), although the case for socioeconomic homophily—a continuous
variable—is more complex (SI Materials and Methods, Evolution of Facebook
Friendships).
Existenal
Pointed allegory
Children's/young adult
The college bookshelf
Old favorites
Raunchy comedy/gore
Twists/thrills
Romance/family fare
Dark sare
Classical/jazz
Hip hop/R&B
Lite/classic rock
Parameter estimates β and 95% conﬁdence intervals for selection
and inﬂuence effects from 15 models of the coevolution of friendships and
tastes (n = 211 for music, n = 201 for movies, n = 191 for books). Signiﬁcant
coefﬁcients are labeled with an asterisk, where a coefﬁcient is considered
signiﬁcant if the 95% conﬁdence interval does not contain β = 0. Selection
effects measure the tendency for a tie to develop between two students
who both express tastes in the given cluster; inﬂuence effects measure the
tendency for students whose friends express tastes in the given cluster to
themselves adopt tastes in that cluster (SI Materials and Methods, Coevolution of Tastes and Friendships).
†An alternative explanation for this ﬁnding is that classical/jazz music is a “difﬁcult”
genre that one must learn to appreciate—learning that often takes place through
friendship ties. We thank an anonymous reviewer for this suggestion.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1109739109
Lewis et al.
or nonreport); and even permitting a single wave of missing data
led to intractable models. We therefore acknowledge that our
results are not necessarily generalizable to the students who did
not report both tastes and ties at all four waves, much less other
populations of students elsewhere.‡
Despite these limitations, our models provide an analytically
rigorous assessment of a process of long-standing scientiﬁc and
popular interest—an assessment that we hope will spur additional research in other settings using alternative measures of
friendships and tastes. Given that we conduct this assessment in
an online context (Facebook) that is increasingly signiﬁcant for
the conduct of everyday life (34), using a relationship type (“weak
ties”) considered particularly conducive to the diffusion of information (19), our data show surprisingly little evidence for the
common notion that what we like rubs off on those around us.
Rather, our ﬁndings would support a view of contemporary
online interaction as having less to do with inﬂuencing our
neighbors and more to do with strengthening social ties among
those whom we already resemble.
Materials and Methods
Here, we provide an overview of the stochastic actor-based modeling approach. Additional details and full model results are presented in SI Materials
and Methods. Further information and context is provided in the comprehensive publications by Snijders and colleagues (15, 16, 20, 21).
As described previously, stochastic actor-based models are the ﬁrst statistical framework to overcome three signiﬁcant limitations of prior
approaches to social selection and peer inﬂuence. These models conceive of
global transformations in network structure (and global trends in behavior)
as the accumulation of microlevel decisions on the part of individual actors.
Though prior approaches to modeling networks and behavior consider each
wave of observation as a discrete “event” to be explained directly by the
prior wave, panel waves are here considered merely “snapshots” of an underlying process of continuous social change. In other words, the difference
between two successive observations could be explained by any number of
possible network/behavior trajectories over time. The change process is
decomposed into its smallest possible components, or “microsteps.” At any
given “moment,” a single probabilistically selected actor is given the opportunity to modify either a social tie (create a tie, dissolve a tie, or do
nothing) or her behavior (adopt a taste, discard a taste, or do nothing). No
more than one network or behavioral change can be made at any one
moment; each actor’s decisions thus constitute the surrounding social context in which subsequent decisions by other actors will occur. The network
component of the model is also here estimated in such a fashion as to mimic
the process whereby Facebook friendships actually develop: a tie is created if
and only if a request is sent and then conﬁrmed, and it may be dissolved by
either actor at any time.
Though theprobability ofreceiving theopportunitytomakeatiechangeor
behavior change can depend on individual attributes or network position
(according to the network and behavioral “rate functions,” respectively), we
here assume these opportunities are equally distributed for all actors for each
distinct transition period between two waves. Therefore, the sole functions that
need to be speciﬁed are the “objective functions” for network and behavioral
change—in other words, the functions that determine the short-term “objectives”eachactor will tendtopursuewhen theopportunityforchangearises. The
network component of the objective function has the following general shape:
i ðβ; x; zÞ ¼
ki ðx; zÞ:
In Eq. 1, fX
i ðβ; x; zÞ is the value of the objective function for actor i depending
on state x of the network and state z of all network members’ behavior.
Effects sX
kiðx; zÞ correspond to possible reasons an actor might have for
changing a network tie (i.e., micromechanisms of network evolution), and
weights βX
k are effect strengths. Following past research, we consider “relational” effects such as triadic closure (the tendency of friends-of-friends to
become friends); “assortative” effects reﬂecting homophily according to
gender, race, socioeconomic status, and region of origin; and “proximity”
effects such as coresidence in the same building and sharing the same academic ﬁeld of study (7, 27, 35). We also control for preferential attachment
(the tendency of popular students to become more popular) and the baseline tendency of students from different backgrounds to form more or fewer
ties overall. Formulae for all effects are presented in SI Materials and
For our pure model of network evolution (Fig. 2), Eq. 1 and effects are
sufﬁcient because only network evolution is modeled without consideration
for students’ coevolving tastes. In other words, the z component of the
model is presumed to be absent. To move from this model to our models of
network and behavioral coevolution (Fig. 3), we must not only add effects
specifying how network evolution depends on students’ preferences (speciﬁcally, a “sociality” effect for the tendency of students with certain tastes
to form more or fewer ties overall, and the focal social selection effect for
the tendency of students with similar tastes to become friends), we must also
incorporate a second, behavioral component of the objective function with
the following general shape:
i ðβ; x; zÞ ¼
ki ðx; zÞ:
Rather than determining the rules by which actors make decisions about
their network ties, Eq. 2 governs actors’ choices with respect to a focal behavior z—here, the quantity of “favorites” a student listed in a given taste
cluster. Effects sZ
kiðx; zÞ now correspond to the various reasons an actor might
choose to change her tastes, and βZ
k are again effect strengths. These effects
include two terms (one linear, one quadratic) specifying the baseline distribution of the given taste cluster among the study population: a term
controlling for the tendency of students with different demographic characteristics (men compared with women, white students compared with
black, Asian, “mixed” race, or Hispanic students, and students from varying
socioeconomic backgrounds) to express more or fewer tastes in the given
cluster, a term controlling for the tendency of more popular students to
express more or fewer tastes in the given cluster, and the focal peer in-
ﬂuence effect representing students’ tendency to “assimilate” to the preferences expressed by their friends.
In sum, upon receiving the opportunity to make a change, actors will tend
to pursue short-term goals that will maximize the value of the relevant
objective function (plus a random residual representing nonmodeled inﬂuences). In the case of the network function, they do this by forming a tie,
dissolving a tie, or doing nothing; and in the case of the behavioral function,
they do this by adopting a taste, discarding a taste, or maintaining their
current set of preferences. Because of the complex dependencies between
ties and behavior implied by the above processes, these models are too
complicated for the calculation of likelihoods or estimators in closed form.
Maximum-likelihood estimation has recently been developed for these
models, but it is currently feasible only for much smaller networks (36). We
therefore estimate parameter values using an approach called “method of
moments,” which depends on computer simulations of the change process
(21, 37). In short, this approach conditions on the ﬁrst wave of observation,
and it is the subsequent transition periods between waves that are the focus
of parameter estimation. For a given set of initial parameter values, the
model is implemented as a stochastic simulation algorithm used to generate
dynamic network and behavioral data. The simulated data are then compared against the actually observed change patterns, and parameters iteratively adjusted until the observed values for a set of relevant statistics are
reproduced well by the simulations according to the ﬁnal parameter values.
T ratios for all parameters, quantifying the deviations between simulated
values of the statistics and their observed values, are used to assess model
convergence. (Convergence was excellent for all models presented here.)
Full model results for the model of network evolution and each of the 15
models of network and behavioral coevolution are presented in the Supporting Information.
Finally, a word on parameter interpretation. As noted previously, the
objective functions can be used to compare how attractive various tie and
behavioral changes are for a given actor, where the probability of a given
change is higher as the objective function for that change is higher (subject to
the constraints of the current network/behavior structure as well as random
inﬂuences). Parameters can therefore be interpreted similarly to those
obtained by logistic regression, i.e., in terms of the likelihood of somewhat
‡An additional question is whether selection and inﬂuence dynamics vary over time. Due
to the small proportion of students who reported both taste and network data at all four
waves, this question is difﬁcult to assess with our dataset and we have here focused on
identifying enduring effects that operate throughout the duration of college. However,
supplementary analyses suggest that certain selection and inﬂuence effects may indeed
be particularly pronounced among certain subsets of students and/or during certain
phases in the college experience; and in fact, when we limit attention to the ﬁrst period
only (i.e., freshman to sophomore year)—and all students who reported data for this
period—we do ﬁnd some evidence for selection and inﬂuence with respect to book
tastes during this early phase of college. Full results are presented in SI Materials
and Methods, Robustness Checks.
Lewis et al.
January 3, 2012
SOCIAL SCIENCES
idealized microsteps. A parameter estimate of 0.56 for the “shared academic
ﬁeld” effect, for instance, means that a tie between two students who share
the same major will have a log-probability of being created that is 0.56
greater than the log-probability of an otherwise identical tie between two
students who do not share the same major. Interpretation of selection and
inﬂuence parameters is slightly more complex given that behavior variables
are ordinal rather than nominal and (in the case of peer inﬂuence) depend
not just on the correspondence between two potential friends’ tastes, but
on the correspondence between a given student’s tastes and the tastes of all
of her friends. The effect for social selection is here deﬁned by the product
of two potential friends’ tastes, such that a positive effect means that actors
who express relatively many tastes in a given cluster will prefer ties to others
who also express relatively many tastes in that cluster. The effect for peer
inﬂuence is here deﬁned by the average value of tastes among a focal
student’s friends, such that a positive effect means that actors whose friends
express relatively many tastes in a given cluster will themselves have
a stronger tendency to adopt tastes in that cluster. Formulae for all effects
are provided in SI Materials and Methods.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Cheri Minton for assistance with data
processing; Andreas Wimmer and Nicholas Christakis for their collaboration
in compiling the dataset on which this research is based; and two
anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments and suggestions. This
research was supported by National Science Foundation Grant SES-0819400.
1. Marsden PV Homogeneity in conﬁding relations. Soc Networks 10:57–76.
2. Blau PM, Schwartz JE Crosscutting Social Circles: Testing a Macrostructural
Theory of Intergroup Relations (Academic, Orlando, FL).
3. Fischer CS To Dwell Among Friends: Personal Networks in Town and City (Univ
of Chicago Press, Chicago).
4. Ennett ST, Bauman KE The contribution of inﬂuence and selection to adolescent peer group homogeneity: The case of adolescent cigarette smoking. J Pers Soc
Psychol 67:653–663.
5. Lewis K, Kaufman J, Gonzalez M, Wimmer A, Christakis N Tastes, ties, and time:
A new social network dataset using Facebook.com. Soc Networks 30:330–342.
6. Kandel DB Homophily, selection, and socialization in adolescent friendships.
Am J Sociol 84:427–436.
7. Kossinets G, Watts DJ Empirical analysis of an evolving social network. Science
311(5757):88–90.
8. Ibarra H Homophily and differential returns: Sex differences in network
structure and access in an advertising ﬁrm. Adm Sci Q 37:422–447.
9. Mark N Birds of a feather sing together. Soc Forces 77:453–485.
10. Knoke D Networks of political action: Toward theory construction. Soc Forces
68:1041–1063.
11. McPherson M, Smith-Lovin L, Cook JM Birds of a feather: Homophily in social
networks. Annu Rev Sociol 27:415–444.
12. Currarini S, Jackson MO, Pin P Identifying the roles of race-based choice and
chance in high school friendship network formation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107:
4857–4861.
13. Rogers EM Diffusion of Innovations (Free Press, New York).
14. Centola D The spread of behavior in an online social network experiment.
Science 329:1194–1197.
15. Steglich C, Snijders TAB, Pearson M Dynamic networks and behavior: Separating selection from inﬂuence. Sociol Methodol 40:329–393.
16. Snijders TAB, van de Bunt G, Steglich C Introduction to stochastic actor-based
models for network dynamics. Soc Networks 32:44–60.
17. Marsden PV Network data and measurement. Annu Rev Sociol 16:435–463.
18. Aral S, Muchnik L, Sundararajan A Distinguishing inﬂuence-based contagion
from homophily-driven diffusion in dynamic networks. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106:
21544–21549.
19. Granovetter M The strength of weak ties. Am J Sociol 78:1360–1380.
20. Snijders
Carrington PJ, Scott J, Wasserman S (Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge), pp 215–247.
21. Snijders TAB The statistical evaluation of social network dynamics. Sociol
Methodol 31:361–395.
22. Lieberson S A Matter of Taste: How Names, Fashions, and Culture Change (Yale
Univ Press, New Haven).
23. Bourdieu P Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste (Harvard
Univ Press, Cambridge, MA).
24. Lizardo O How cultural tastes shape personal networks. Am Sociol Rev 71:
25. Gladwell M The Tipping Point: How Little Things Can Make a Big Difference
(Little, Brown, New York).
26. Keller E, Berry J The Inﬂuentials: One American in Ten Tells the Other Nine
How to Vote, Where to Eat, and What to Buy (Free Press, New York).
27. Rivera MT, Soderstrom SB, Uzzi B Dynamics of dyads in social networks: Assortative, relational, and proximity mechanisms. Annu Rev Sociol 36:91–115.
28. Goodreau SM, Kitts JA, Morris M Birds of a feather, or friend of a friend? Using
exponential random graph models to investigate adolescent social networks. Demography 46(1):103–125.
29. Tversky A, Kahneman D Availability: A heuristic for judging frequency and
probability. Cognit Psychol 5:207–232.
30. Kaufman J, Patterson O Cross-national cultural diffusion: The global spread of
cricket. Am Sociol Rev 70:82–110.
31. DiMaggio P, Mohr J Cultural capital, educational attainment, and marital selection. Am J Sociol 90:1231–1261.
32. Bryson B “Anything but heavy metal”: Symbolic exclusion and musical dislikes.
Am Sociol Rev 61:884–899.
33. Huisman M, Steglich C Treatment of non-response in longitudinal network
studies. Soc Networks 30:297–308.
34. Ellison NB, Steinﬁeld C, Lampe C The beneﬁts of Facebook “friends”: Social
capital and college students’ use of online social network sites. J Comput Mediat
Commun 12:1143–1168.
35. Wimmer A, Lewis K Beyond and below racial homophily: ERG models of
a friendship network documented on Facebook. AJS 116:583–642.
36. Snijders TAB, Koskinen J, Schweinberger M Maximum likelihood estimation for
social network dynamics. Ann Appl Stat 4:567–588.
37. Snijders TAB, Steglich C, Schweinberger M Longitudinal Models in the Behavioral and Related Sciences, eds van Montfort K, Oud H, Satorra A (Erlbaum,
Mahwah, NJ), pp 41–71.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1109739109
Lewis et al.