Stacked Generative Adversarial Networks
Xun Huang1
Yixuan Li2
Omid Poursaeed2
John Hopcroft1
Serge Belongie1,3
1Department of Computer Science, Cornell University
2School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Cornell University
3Cornell Tech
{xh258,yl2363,op63,sjb344}@cornell.edu 
In this paper, we propose a novel generative model
named Stacked Generative Adversarial Networks (SGAN),
which is trained to invert the hierarchical representations
of a bottom-up discriminative network.
Our model consists of a top-down stack of GANs, each learned to generate
lower-level representations conditioned on higher-level representations. A representation discriminator is introduced
at each feature hierarchy to encourage the representation
manifold of the generator to align with that of the bottomup discriminative network, leveraging the powerful discriminative representations to guide the generative model. In
addition, we introduce a conditional loss that encourages
the use of conditional information from the layer above,
and a novel entropy loss that maximizes a variational lower
bound on the conditional entropy of generator outputs. We
ﬁrst train each stack independently, and then train the whole
model end-to-end. Unlike the original GAN that uses a single noise vector to represent all the variations, our SGAN
decomposes variations into multiple levels and gradually
resolves uncertainties in the top-down generative process.
Based on visual inspection, Inception scores and visual Turing test, we demonstrate that SGAN is able to generate images of much higher quality than GANs without stacking.
1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed tremendous success of deep
neural networks (DNNs), especially the kind of bottom-up
neural networks trained for discriminative tasks. In particular, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have achieved
impressive accuracy on the challenging ImageNet classiﬁcation benchmark . Interestingly, it has
been shown that CNNs trained on ImageNet for classiﬁcation can learn representations that are transferable to other
tasks , and even to other modalities .
bottom-up discriminative models are focused on learning
useful representations from data, being incapable of capturing the data distribution.
Learning top-down generative models that can explain
complex data distribution is a long-standing problem in machine learning research. The expressive power of deep neural networks makes them natural candidates for generative
models, and several recent works have shown promising results . While state-of-the-art DNNs
can rival human performance in certain discriminative tasks,
current best deep generative models still fail when there are
large variations in the data distribution.
A natural question therefore arises: can we leverage
the hierarchical representations in a discriminatively trained
model to help the learning of top-down generative models?
In this paper, we propose a generative model named Stacked
Generative Adversarial Networks (SGAN). Our model consists of a top-down stack of GANs, each trained to generate “plausible” lower-level representations conditioned on
higher-level representations. Similar to the image discriminator in the original GAN model which is trained to distinguish “fake” images from “real” ones, we introduce a set of
representation discriminators that are trained to distinguish
“fake” representations from “real” representations. The adversarial loss introduced by the representation discriminator forces the intermediate representations of the SGAN to
lie on the manifold of the bottom-up DNN’s representation space. In addition to the adversarial loss, we also introduce a conditional loss that imposes each generator to
use the higher-level conditional information, and a novel
entropy loss that encourages each generator to generate diverse representations. By stacking several GANs in a topdown way and using the top-most GAN to receive labels and
the bottom-most GAN to generate images, SGAN can be
trained to model the data distribution conditioned on class
labels. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that
our SGAN is able to generate images of much higher quality
than a vanilla GAN. In particular, our model obtains stateof-the-art Inception scores on CIFAR-10 dataset.
2. Related Work
Deep Generative Image Models. There has been a large
body of work on generative image modeling with deep
 
learning. Some early efforts include Restricted Boltzmann
Machines and Deep Belief Networks .
recently, several successful paradigms of deep generative
models have emerged, including the auto-regressive models
 , Variational Auto-encoders (VAEs)
 , and Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) .
Our work builds upon
the GAN framework, which employs a generator that transforms a noise vector into an image and a discriminator that
distinguishes between real and generated images.
However, due to the vast variations in image content, it is
still challenging for GANs to generate diverse images with
sufﬁcient details. To this end, several works have attempted
to factorize a GAN into a series of GANs, decomposing
the difﬁcult task into several more tractable sub-tasks. Denton et al. propose a LAPGAN model that factorizes the
generative process into multi-resolution GANs, with each
GAN generating a higher-resolution residual conditioned
on a lower-resolution image. Although both LAPGAN and
SGAN consist of a sequence of GANs each working at one
scale, LAPGAN focuses on generating multi-resolution images from coarse to ﬁne while our SGAN aims at modeling multi-level representations from abstract to speciﬁc.
Wang and Gupta propose a S2-GAN, using one GAN
to generate surface normals and another GAN to generate
images conditioned on surface normals. Surface normals
can be viewed as a speciﬁc type of image representations,
capturing the underlying 3D structure of an indoor scene.
On the other hand, our framework can leverage the more
general and powerful multi-level representations in a pretrained discriminative DNN.
There are several works that use a pre-trained discriminative model to aid the training of a generator. add
a regularization term that encourages the reconstructed image to be similar to the original image in the feature space of
a discriminative network. use an additional “style
loss” based on Gram matrices of feature activations. Different from our method, all the works above only add loss
terms to regularize the generator’s output, without regularizing its internal representations.
Matching Intermediate Representations Between Two
There have been some works that attempt to
“match” the intermediate representations between two
DNNs. use the intermediate representations of one
pre-trained DNN to guide another DNN in the context of
knowledge transfer. Our method can be considered as a special kind of knowledge transfer. However, we aim at transferring the knowledge in a bottom-up DNN to a top-down
generative model, instead of another bottom-up DNN. Also,
some auto-encoder architectures employ layer-wise reconstruction loss . The layer-wise loss is usually
accompanied by lateral connections from the encoder to the
decodery. On the other hand, SGAN is a generative model
and does not require any information from the encoder once
training completes.
Another important difference is that
we use adversarial loss instead of L2 reconstruction loss
to match intermediate representations.
Visualizing Deep Representations. Our work is also related to the recent efforts in visualizing the internal representations of DNNs. One popular approach uses gradientbased optimization to ﬁnd an image whose representation
is close to the one we want to visualize . Other approaches, such as , train a top-down deconvolutional network to reconstruct the input image from a feature representation by minimizing the Euclidean reconstruction error in image space. However, there is inherent uncertainty
in the reconstruction process, since the representations in
higher layers of the DNN are trained to be invariant to irrelevant transformations and to ignore low-level details. With
Euclidean training objective, the deconvolutional network
tends to produce blurry images. To alleviate this problem,
Dosovitskiy abd Brox further propose a feature loss and
an adversarial loss that enables much sharper reconstructions. However, it still does not tackle the problem of uncertainty in reconstruction. Given a high-level feature representation, the deconvolutional network deterministically
generates a single image, despite the fact that there exist
many images having the same representation. Also, there is
no obvious way to sample images because the feature prior
distribution is unknown. Concurrent to our work, Nguyen et
al. incorporate the feature prior with a variant of denoising auto-encoder (DAE). Their sampling relies on an
iterative optimization procedure, while we are focused on
efﬁcient feed-forward sampling.
3. Methods
In this section we introduce our model architecture. In
Sec. 3.1 we brieﬂy overview the framework of Generative
Adversarial Networks. We then describe our proposal for
Stacked Generative Adversarial Networks in Sec. 3.2. In
Sect. 3.3 and 3.4 we will focus on our two novel loss functions, conditional loss and entropy loss, respectively.
3.1. Background: Generative Adversarial Network
As shown in Fig. 1 (a), the original GAN is trained
using a two-player min-max game:
a discriminator D
trained to distinguish generated images from real images,
and a generator G trained to fool D. The discriminator loss
LD and the generator loss LG are deﬁned as follows:
LD = Ex∼Pdata[−log D(x)]+Ez∼Pz[−log(1−D
LG = Ez∼Pz[−log(D
In practice, D and G are usually updated alternately. The
training process matches the generated image distribution
Encoder forward path
Generator forward path
Conditional loss
Adversarial loss
Entropy loss
Discriminator
(b) SGAN Train
(c) SGAN Test
(a) A vanilla GAN
Independent training path
Joint training path
Figure 1: An overview of SGAN. (a) The original GAN in . (b) The workﬂow of training SGAN, where each generator
Gi tries to generate plausible features that can fool the corresponding representation discriminator Di. Each generator
receives conditional input from encoders in the independent training stage, and from the upper generators in the joint training
stage. (c) New images can be sampled from SGAN (during test time) by feeding random noise to each generator Gi.
PG(x) with the real image distribution Pdata(x) in the training set. In other words, The adversarial training forces G to
generate images that reside on the natural images manifold.
3.2. Stacked Generative Adversarial Networks
Pre-trained Encoder. We ﬁrst consider a bottom-up DNN
pre-trained for classiﬁcation, which is referred to as the encoder E throughout. We deﬁne a stack of bottom-up deterministic nonlinear mappings: hi+1 = Ei(hi), where
i ∈{0, 1, ..., N −1}, Ei consists of a sequence of neural layers (e.g., convolution, pooling), N is the number of
hierarchies (stacks), hi(i ̸= 0, N) are intermediate representations, hN = y is the classiﬁcation result, and h0 = x
is the input image. Note that in our formulation, each Ei
can contain multiple layers and the way of grouping layers
together into Ei is determined by us. The number of stacks
N is therefore less than the number of layers in E and is
also determined by us.
Stacked Generators. Provided with a pre-trained encoder
E, our goal is to train a top-down generator G that inverts
E. Speciﬁcally, G consists of a top-down stack of generators Gi, each trained to invert a bottom-up mapping Ei.
Each Gi takes in a higher-level feature and a noise vector
as inputs, and outputs the lower-level feature ˆhi. We ﬁrst
train each GAN independently and then train them jointly
in an end-to-end manner, as shown in Fig. 1. Each generator receives conditional input from encoders in the independent training stage, and from the upper generators in the
joint training stage. In other words, ˆhi = Gi(hi+1, zi) during independent training and ˆhi = Gi(ˆhi+1, zi) during joint
training. The loss equations shown in this section are for independent training stage but can be easily modiﬁed to joint
training by replacing hi+1 with ˆhi+1.
Intuitively, the total variations of images could be decomposed into multiple levels, with higher-level semantic
variations (e.g., attributes, object categories, rough shapes)
and lower-level variations (e.g., detailed contours and textures, background clutters). Our model allows using different noise variables to represent different levels of variations.
The training procedure is shown in Fig. 1 (b). Each generator Gi is trained with a linear combination of three loss
terms: adversarial loss, conditional loss, and entropy loss.
LGi = λ1Ladv
Gi + λ2Lcond
where Ladv
Gi , Lcond
Gi denote adversarial loss, conditional loss, and entropy loss respectively. λ1, λ2, λ3 are the
weights associated with different loss terms. In practice, we
ﬁnd it sufﬁcient to set the weights such that the magnitude
of different terms are of similar scales. In this subsection
we ﬁrst introduce the adversarial loss Ladv
Gi . We will then
introduce Lcond
Gi in Sec. 3.3 and 3.4 respectively.
For each generator Gi, we introduce a representation
discriminator Di that distinguishes generated representations ˆhi, from “real” representations hi. Speciﬁcally, the
discriminator Di is trained with the loss function:
LDi = Ehi∼Pdata,E[−log Di
Ezi∼Pzi, hi+1∼Pdata,E[−log
 1 −Di(Gi(hi+1, zi))
And Gi is trained to “fool” the representation discriminator Di, with the adversarial loss deﬁned by:
Gi = Ehi+1∼Pdata,E, zi∼Pzi[−log(Di(Gi(hi+1, zi)))]
During joint training, the adversarial loss provided by
representational discriminators can also be regarded as a
type of deep supervision , providing intermediate supervision signals. In our current formulation, E is a discriminative model, and G is a generative model conditioned on
labels. However, it is also possible to train SGAN without
using label information: E can be trained with an unsupervised objective and G can be cast into an unconditional
generative model by removing the label input from the top
generator. We leave this for future exploration.
To sample images, all Gis are stacked together in a top-down manner, as shown in Fig. 1 (c). Our
SGAN is capable of modeling the data distribution conditioned on the class label: pG(ˆx|y) = pG(ˆh0|ˆhN) ∝
pG(ˆh0, ˆh1, ..., ˆhN−1|ˆhN) =
pGi(ˆhi|ˆhi+1), where
each pGi(ˆhi|ˆhi+1) is modeled by a generator Gi. From
an information-theoretic perspective, SGAN factorizes
the total entropy of the image distribution H(x) into
multiple (smaller) conditional entropy terms:
H(h0, h1, ..., hN) = PN−1
i=0 H(hi|hi+1) + H(y), thereby
decomposing one difﬁcult task into multiple easier tasks.
3.3. Conditional Loss
At each stack, a generator Gi is trained to capture the
distribution of lower-level representations ˆhi, conditioned
on higher-level representations hi+1. However, in the above
formulation, the generator might choose to ignore hi+1, and
generate plausible ˆhi from scratch. Some previous works
 tackle this problem by feeding the conditional information to both the generator and discriminator. This approach, however, might introduce unnecessary complexity
to the discriminator and increase model instability .
Here we adopt a different approach: we regularize the
generator by adding a loss term Lcond
named conditional
We feed the generated lower-level representations
ˆhi = Gi(hi+1, zi) back to the encoder E, and compute the
recovered higher-level representations. We then enforce the
recovered representations to be similar to the conditional
representations. Formally:
= Ehi+1∼Pdata,E, zi∼Pzi[f(Ei(Gi(hi+1, zi)), hi+1)]
where f is a distance measure. We deﬁne f to be the Euclidean distance for intermediate representations and crossentropy for labels. Our conditional loss Lcond
is similar to
the “feature loss” used by and the “FCN loss” in .
3.4. Entropy Loss
Simply adding the conditional loss Lcond
leads to another issue: the generator Gi learns to ignore the noise zi,
and compute ˆhi deterministically from hi+1. This problem has been encountered in various applications of conditional GANs, e.g., synthesizing future frames conditioned
on previous frames , generating images conditioned on
label maps , and most related to our work, synthesizing
images conditioned on feature representations . All the
above works attempted to generate diverse images/videos
by feeding noise to the generator, but failed because the conditional generator simply ignores the noise. To our knowledge, there is still no principled way to deal with this issue.
It might be tempting to think that minibatch discrimination
 , which encourages sample diversity in each minibatch,
could solve this problem.
However, even if the generator generates ˆhi deterministically from hi+1, the generated
samples in each minibatch are still diverse since generators
are conditioned on different hi+1. Thus, there is no obvious way minibatch discrimination could penalize a collapsed conditional generator.
Variational Conditional Entropy Maximization.
tackle this problem, we would like to encourage the generated representation ˆhi to be sufﬁciently diverse when conditioned on hi+1, i.e., the conditional entropy H(ˆhi|hi+1)
should be as high as possible.
Since directly maximizing H(ˆhi|hi+1) is intractable, we propose to maximize instead a variational lower bound on the conditional entropy.
Speciﬁcally, we use an auxiliary distribution Qi(zi|ˆhi) to
approximate the true posterior Pi(zi|ˆhi), and augment the
training objective with a loss term named entropy loss:
Gi = Ezi∼Pzi[Eˆhi∼Gi(ˆhi|zi)[−log Qi(zi|ˆhi)]]
Below we give a proof that minimizing Lent
Gi is equivalent
to maximizing a variational lower bound for H(ˆhi|hi+1).
H(ˆhi|hi+1) = H(ˆhi, zi|hi+1) −H(zi|ˆhi, hi+1)
≥H(ˆhi, zi|hi+1) −H(zi|ˆhi)
= H(zi|hi+1) + H(ˆhi|zi, hi+1)
−H(zi|ˆhi)
= H(zi|hi+1) −H(zi|ˆhi)
= H(zi) −H(zi|ˆhi)
= Eˆhi∼Gi[Ez′
i|ˆhi)[log Pi(z′
i|ˆhi)]] + H(zi)
= Eˆhi∼Gi[Ez′
i|ˆhi)[log Qi(z′
+ KLD(Pi∥Qi)
≥Eˆhi∼Gi[Ez′
i|ˆhi)[log Qi(z′
i|ˆhi)]] + H(zi)
i[Eˆhi∼Gi(ˆhi|z′
i)[log Qi(z′
i|ˆhi)]] + H(zi)
Gi + H(zi)
In practice, we parameterize Qi with a deep network that
predicts the posterior distribution of zi given ˆhi. Qi shares
most of the parameters with Di. We treat the posterior as
a diagonal Gaussian with ﬁxed standard deviations, and use
the network Qi to only predict the posterior mean, making
Gi equivalent to the Euclidean reconstruction error. In
each iteration we update both Gi and Qi to minimize Lent
Our method is similar to the variational mutual information maximization technique proposed by Chen et al. .
A key difference is that uses the Q-network to predict
only a small set of deliberately constructed “latent code”,
while our Qi tries to predict all the noise variables zi in
each stack. The loss used in therefore maximizes the
mutual information between the output and the latent code,
while ours maximizes the entropy of the output ˆhi, conditioned on hi+1. also train a separate network to map
images back to latent space to perform unsupervised feature
learning. Independent of our work, proposes to regularize EBGAN with entropy maximization in order
to prevent the discriminator from degenerating to uniform
prediction. Our entropy loss is motivated from generating
multiple possible outputs from the same conditional input.
4. Experiments
In this section, we perform experiments on a variety of datasets including MNIST , SVHN , and
CIFAR-10 . Code and pre-trained models are available
 
Readers may refer to our code repository for more details
about experimental setup, hyper-parameters, etc.
convolutional
conv1-pool1-conv2-pool2-fc3-fc4,
fc3 is a fully connected layer and fc4 outputs classiﬁcation scores before softmax.
On CIFAR-10 we
apply horizontal ﬂipping to train the encoder.
augmentation is used on other datasets.
Generator: We use generators with two stacks throughout our experiments. Note that our framework is generally
applicable to the setting with multiple stacks, and we hypothesize that using more stacks would be helpful for largescale and high-resolution datasets. For all datasets, our top
GAN G1 generates fc3 features from some random noise
z1, conditioned on label y. The bottom GAN G0 generates
images from some noise z0, conditioned on fc3 features
generated from GAN G1. We set the loss coefﬁcient parameters λ1 = λ2 = 1 and λ3 = 10.1
4.1. Datasets
We thoroughly evaluate SGAN on three widely adopted
datasets: MNIST , SVHN , and CIFAR-10 .
The details of each dataset is described in the following.
MNIST: The MNIST dataset contains 70, 000 labeled images of hand-written digits with 60, 000 in the training set
and 10, 000 in the test set. Each image is sized by 28 × 28.
SVHN: The SVHN dataset is composed of real-world color
images of house numbers collected by Google Street View
 . Each image is of size 32×32 and the task is to classify
the digit at the center of the image. The dataset contains
73, 257 training images and 26, 032 test images.
CIFAR-10: The CIFAR-10 dataset consists of colored natural scene images sized at 32 × 32 pixels. There are 50,000
training images and 10,000 test images in 10 classes.
1 The choice of the parameters are made so that the magnitude of each
loss term is of the same scale.
(a) SGAN samples (conditioned on
(b) Real images (nearest neighbor)
(c) SGAN samples (conditioned on
generated fc3 features)
(conditioned
on generated fc3 features, trained
without entropy loss)
Figure 2: MNIST results. (a) Samples generated by SGAN
when conditioned on class labels. (b) Corresponding nearest neighbor images in the training set. (c) Samples generated by the bottom GAN when conditioned on a ﬁxed fc3
feature activation, generated by the top GAN. (d) Same as
(c), but the bottom GAN is trained without entropy loss.
4.2. Samples
In Fig. 2 (a), we show MNIST samples generated by
SGAN. Each row corresponds to samples conditioned on
a given digit class label. SGAN is able to generate diverse
images with different characteristics. The samples are visually indistinguishable from real MNIST images shown in
Fig. 2 (b), but still have differences compared with corresponding nearest neighbor training images.
We further examine the effect of entropy loss. In Fig. 2
(c) we show the samples generated by bottom GAN when
conditioned on a ﬁxed fc3 feature generated by the top
GAN. The samples (per row) have sufﬁcient low-level variations, which reassures that bottom GAN learns to generate images without ignoring the noise z0. In contrast, in
Fig. 2 (d), we show samples generated without using entropy loss for bottom generator, where we observe that the
bottom GAN ignores the noise and instead deterministically
generates images from fc3 features.
An advantage of SGAN compared with a vanilla GAN is
(a) SGAN samples (conditioned on
(b) Real images (nearest neighbor)
(c) SGAN samples (conditioned on
generated fc3 features)
(conditioned
on generated fc3 features, trained
without entropy loss)
Figure 3: SVHN results. (a) Samples generated by SGAN
when conditioned on class labels. (b) Corresponding nearest neighbor images in the training set. (c) Samples generated by the bottom GAN when conditioned on a ﬁxed fc3
feature activation, generated by the top GAN. (d) Same as
(c), but the bottom GAN is trained without entropy loss.
its interpretability: it decomposes the total variations of an
image into different levels. For example, in MNIST it decomposes the variations into y that represents the high-level
digit label, z1 that captures the mid-level coarse pose of the
digit and z0 that represents the low-level spatial details.
The samples generated on SVHN and CIFAR-10
datasets can be seen in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4, respectively. Provided with the same fc3 feature, we see in each row of
panel (c) that SGAN is able to generate samples with similar coarse outline but different lighting conditions and background clutters. Also, the nearest neighbor images in the
training set indicate that SGAN is not simply memorizing
training data, but can truly generate novel images.
4.3. Comparison with the state of the art
Here, we compare SGAN with other state-of-the-art generative models on CIFAR-10 dataset. The visual quality of
generated images is measured by the widely used metric,
Inception score . Following , we sample 50, 000
images from our model and use the code provided by 
(a) SGAN samples (conditioned on
(b) Real images (nearest neighbor)
(c) SGAN samples (conditioned on
generated fc3 features)
(conditioned
on generated fc3 features, trained
without entropy loss)
Figure 4: MNIST results. (a) Samples generated by SGAN
when conditioned on class labels. (b) Corresponding nearest neighbor images in the training set. (c) Samples generated by the bottom GAN when conditioned on a ﬁxed fc3
feature activation, generated by the top GAN. (d) Same as
(c), but the bottom GAN is trained without entropy loss.
to compute the score.
As shown in Tab. 1, SGAN obtains a score of 8.59 ± 0.12, outperforming AC-GAN 
(8.25 ± 0.07) and Improved GAN (8.09 ± 0.07). Also,
note that the 5 techniques introduced in are not used in
our implementations. Incorporating these techniques might
further boost the performance of our model.
4.4. Visual Turing test
To further verify the effectiveness of SGAN, we conduct
human visual Turing test in which we ask AMT workers
to distinguish between real images and images generated
by our networks. We exactly follow the interface used in
Improved GAN , in which the workers are given 9 images at each time and can receive feedback about whether
their answers are correct. With 9, 000 votes for each evaluated model, our AMT workers got 24.4% error rate for
samples from SGAN and 15.6% for samples from DC-
GAN (Ladv +Lcond +Lent). This further conﬁrms that our
stacked design can signiﬁcantly improve the image quality
over GAN without stacking.
Infusion training 
4.62 ± 0.06
ALI (as reported in )
5.34 ± 0.05
GMAN (best variant)
6.00 ± 0.19
EGAN-Ent-VI 
7.07 ± 0.10
LR-GAN 
7.17 ± 0.07
Denoising feature matching 
7.72 ± 0.13
DCGAN† (with labels, as reported in )
SteinGAN† 
Improved GAN† (best variant)
8.09 ± 0.07
AC-GAN† 
8.25 ± 0.07
DCGAN (Ladv)
6.16 ± 0.07
DCGAN (Ladv + Lent)
5.40 ± 0.16
DCGAN (Ladv + Lcond)†
5.40 ± 0.08
DCGAN (Ladv + Lcond + Lent)†
7.16 ± 0.10
SGAN-no-joint†
8.37 ± 0.08
8.59 ± 0.12
11.24 ± 0.12
† Trained with labels.
Table 1: Inception Score on CIFAR-10. SGAN and SGANno-joint outperform previous state-of-the-art approaches.
4.5. More ablation studies
In Sec. 4.2 we have examined the effect of entropy loss.
In order to further understand the effect of different model
components, we conduct extensive ablation studies by evaluating several baseline methods on CIFAR-10 dataset. If
not mentioned otherwise, all models below use the same
training hyper-parameters as the full SGAN model.
(a) SGAN: The full model, as described in Sec. 3.
(b) SGAN-no-joint: Same architecture as (a), but each
GAN is trained independently, and there is no ﬁnal
joint training stage.
(c) DCGAN (Ladv +Lcond +Lent): This is a single GAN
model with the same architecture as the bottom GAN
in SGAN, except that the generator is conditioned on
labels instead of fc3 features. Note that other techniques proposed in this paper, including conditional
loss Lcond and entropy loss Lent, are still employed.
We also tried to use the full generator G in SGAN as
the baseline, instead of only the bottom generator G0.
However, we failed to make it converge, possibly because G is too deep to be trained without intermediate
supervision from representation discriminators.
(d) DCGAN (Ladv +Lcond): Same architecture as (c), but
trained without entropy loss Lent.
(b) SGAN-no-joint
(c) DCGAN(Ladv+Lcond+Lent)
(d) DCGAN (Ladv + Lcond)
(e) DCGAN (Ladv + Lent)
(f) DCGAN (Ladv)
Figure 5: Ablation studies on CIFAR-10. Samples from
(a) full SGAN (b) SGAN without joint training. (c) DC-
GAN trained with Ladv +Lcond+Lent (d) DCGAN trained
with Ladv + Lcond (e) DCGAN trained with Ladv + Lent
(f) DCGAN trained with Ladv.
(e) DCGAN (Ladv + Lent): Same architecture as (c), but
trained without conditional loss Lcond.
This model
therefore does not use label information.
(f) DCGAN (Ladv): Same architecture as (c), but trained
with neither conditional loss Lcond nor entropy loss
This model also does not use label information. It can be viewed as a plain unconditional DC-
GAN model and serves as the ultimate baseline.
We compare the generated samples (Fig. 5) and Inception scores (Tab. 1) of the baseline methods. Below we
summarize some of our results:
1) SGAN obtains slightly higher Inception score than
SGAN-no-joint.
Yet SGAN-no-joint also generates
very high quality samples and outperforms all previous methods in terms of Inception scores.
2) SGAN, either with or without joint training, achieves
signiﬁcantly higher Inception score and better sample
quality than the baseline DCGANs. This demonstrates
the effectiveness of the proposed stacked approach.
3) As shown in Fig. 5 (d), DCGAN (Ladv + Lcond) collapses to generating a single image per category, while
adding the entropy loss enables it to generate diverse
images (Fig. 5 (c)). This further demonstrates that entropy loss is effective at improving output diversity.
4) The single DCGAN (Ladv + Lcond + Lent) model obtains higher Inception score than the conditional DC-
GAN reported in . This suggests that Lcond+Lent
might offer some advantages compared to a plain conditional DCGAN, even without stacking.
5) In general, Inception score correlates well with
visual quality of images. However, it seems to be insensitive to diversity issues . For example, it gives the
same score to Fig. 5 (d) and (e) while (d) has clearly
collapsed. This is consistent with results in .
5. Discussion and Future Work
This paper introduces a top-down generative framework
named SGAN, which effectively leverages the representational information from a pre-trained discriminative network. Our approach decomposes the hard problem of estimating image distribution into multiple relatively easier
tasks – each generating plausible representations conditioned on higher-level representations. The key idea is to
use representation discriminators at different training hierarchies to provide intermediate supervision.
propose a novel entropy loss to tackle the problem that
conditional GANs tend to ignore the noise. Our entropy
loss could be employed in other applications of conditional
GANs, e.g., synthesizing different future frames given the
same past frames , or generating a diverse set of images
conditioned on the same label map . We believe this is
an interesting research direction in the future.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Danlu Chen for the help with Fig. 1.
Also, we want to thank Danlu Chen, Shuai Tang, Saining Xie, Zhuowen Tu, Felix Wu and Kilian Weinberger for
helpful discussions. Yixuan Li is supported by US Army
Research Ofﬁce W911NF-14-1-0477.
Serge Belongie is
supported in part by a Google Focused Research Award.