Learning Data Augmentation Strategies for Object Detection
Barret Zoph∗, Ekin D. Cubuk∗, Golnaz Ghiasi, Tsung-Yi Lin, Jonathon Shlens, Quoc V. Le
Google Research, Brain Team
{barretzoph, cubuk, golnazg, tsungyi, shlens, qvl}@google.com
Data augmentation is a critical component of training
deep learning models.
Although data augmentation has
been shown to signiﬁcantly improve image classiﬁcation,
its potential has not been thoroughly investigated for object detection.
Given the additional cost for annotating
images for object detection, data augmentation may be of
even greater importance for this computer vision task. In
this work, we study the impact of data augmentation on object detection. We ﬁrst demonstrate that data augmentation operations borrowed from image classiﬁcation may be
helpful for training detection models, but the improvement
is limited. Thus, we investigate how learned, specialized
data augmentation policies improve generalization performance for detection models. Importantly, these augmentation policies only affect training and leave a trained model
unchanged during evaluation. Experiments on the COCO
dataset indicate that an optimized data augmentation policy
improves detection accuracy by more than +2.3 mAP, and
allow a single inference model to achieve a state-of-the-art
accuracy of 50.7 mAP. Importantly, the best policy found
on COCO may be transferred unchanged to other detection
datasets and models to improve predictive accuracy. For example, the best augmentation policy identiﬁed with COCO
improves a strong baseline on PASCAL-VOC by +2.7 mAP.
Our results also reveal that a learned augmentation policy is superior to state-of-the-art architecture regularization methods for object detection, even when considering
strong baselines. Code for training with the learned policy
is available online. 1
1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are powerful machine learning
systems that work best when trained on vast amounts of
data. To increase the amount of training data for neural
networks, much work was devoted to creating better data
∗Equal contribution.
1github.com/tensorflow/tpu/tree/master/models/
official/detection
training examples
mean average precision
Figure 1: Learned augmentation policy systematically
improves object detection performance. Left: Learned
augmentation policy applied to example from COCO
dataset . Right: Mean average precision for RetinaNet
 with a ResNet-50 backbone on COCO with and
without learned augmentation policy (red and black, respectively).
augmentation strategies . In the image domain,
common augmentations include translating the image by a
few pixels, or ﬂipping the image horizontally. Most modern
image classiﬁers are paired with hand-crafted data augmentation strategies .
Recent work has shown that instead of manually designing data augmentation strategies, learning an optimal policy
from data can lead to signiﬁcant improvements in generalization performance of image classiﬁcation models . For image classiﬁcation models,
data can be augmented either by learning a generator that
can create data from scratch , or by learning a set of transformations as applied to already existing
training set samples . For object detection models,
the need for data augmentation is more crucial as collecting labeled data for detection is more costly and common
detection datasets have many fewer examples than image
classiﬁcation datasets. It is, however, unclear how to augment the data: Should we directly reuse data augmentation
strategies from image classiﬁcation? What should we do
 
with the bounding boxes and the contents of the bounding
In this work, we create a set of simple transformations
that may be applied to object detection datasets and then
transfer these transformations to other detection datasets
and architectures. These transformations are only used during training and not test time. Our transformations include
those that can be applied to the whole image without affecting the bounding box locations (e.g. color transformations borrowed from image classiﬁcation models), transformations that affect the whole image while changing the
bounding box locations (e.g., translating or shearing of the
whole image), and transformations that are only applied to
objects within the bounding boxes. As the number of transformations becomes large, it becomes non-trivial to manually combine them effectively. We therefore search for
policies speciﬁcally designed for object detection datasets.
Experiments show that this method achieves very good performance across different datasets, dataset sizes, backbone
architectures and detection algorithms. Additionally, we investigate how the performance of a data augmentation policy depends on the number of operations included in the
search space and how the effective of the augmentation
technique varies as dataset size changes.
In summary, our main contributions are as follows:
• Design and implement a search method to combine
and optimize data augmentation policies for object detection problems by combining novel operations speciﬁc to bounding box annotations.
• Demonstrate consistent gains in cross-validated accuracy across a range of detection architectures and
datasets. In particular, we exceed state-of-the-art results on COCO for a single model and achieve competitive results on the PASCAL VOC object detection.
• Highlight how the learned data augmentation strategies are particularly advantageous for small datasets by
providing a strong regularization to avoid over-ﬁtting
on small objects.
2. Related Work
Data augmentation strategies for vision models are often speciﬁc dataset or even machine learning architectures.
For example, state-of-the-art models trained on MNIST use
elastic distortions which effect scale, translation, and rotation . Random cropping and image mirroring are commonly used in classiﬁcation models trained
on natural images . Among the data augmentation
strategies for object detection, image mirror and multi-scale
training are the most widely used . Object-centric cropping is a popular augmentation approach . Instead of
cropping to focus on parts of the image, some methods randomly erase or add noise to patches of images for improved
accuracy , robustness , or both . In
the same vein, learns an occlusion pattern for each object to create adversarial examples. In addition to cropping
and erasing, adds new objects on training images by
cut-and-paste.
To avoid the data-speciﬁc nature of data augmentation,
recent work has focused on learning data augmentation
strategies directly from data itself.
For example, Smart
Augmentation uses a network that generates new data by
merging two or more samples from the same class .
Tran et al. generate augmented data, using a Bayesian approach, based on the distribution learned from the training
set . DeVries and Taylor used simple transformations
like noise, interpolations and extrapolations in the learned
feature space to augment data . Ratner et al., used generative adversarial networks to generate sequences of data
augmentation operations . More recently, several papers used the AutoAugment search space with improved
the optimization algorithms to ﬁnd AutoAugment policies
more efﬁciently .
While all of the above approaches have worked on classiﬁcation problems, we take an automated approach to ﬁnding optimal data augmentation policies for object detection.
Unlike classiﬁcation, labeled data for object detection is
more scarce because it is more costly to annotate detection
data. Compared to image classiﬁcation, developing a data
augmentation strategy for object detection is harder because
there are more ways and complexities introduced by distorting the image, bounding box locations, and the sizes of the
objects in detection datasets. Our goal is to use the validation set accuracy to help search for novel detection augmentation procedures using custom operations that generalize across datasets, dataset sizes, backbone architectures
and detection algorithms.
3. Methods
We treat data augmentation search as a discrete optimization problem and optimize for generalization performance.
This work expands on previous work to focus on augmentation policies for object detection. Object detection
introduces an additional complication of maintaining consistency between a bounding box location and a distorted
image. Bounding box annotations open up the possibility of
introducing augmentation operations that uniquely act upon
the contents within each bounding box. Additionally, we
explored how to change the bounding box locations when
geometric transformations are applied to the image.
We deﬁne an augmentation policy as a unordered set of
K sub-policies. During training one of the K sub-policies
will be selected at random and then applied to the current image. Each sub-policy has N image transformations
Sub-policy 1. (Color, 0.2, 8), (Rotate, 0.8, 10)
Sub-policy 2. (BBox Only ShearY, 0.8, 5)
Sub-policy 3. (SolarizeAdd, 0.6, 8), (Brightness, 0.8, 10)
Sub-policy 4. (ShearY, 0.6, 10), (BBox Only Equalize,0.6, 8)
Sub-policy 5. (Equalize, 0.6, 10), (TranslateX, 0.2, 2)
Figure 2: Examples of learned augmentation sub-policies. 5 examples of learned sub-policies applied to one example
image. Each column corresponds to a different random sample of the corresponding sub-policy. Each step of an augmentation
sub-policy consists of a triplet corresponding to the operation, the probability of application and a magnitude measure. The
bounding box is adjusted to maintain consistency with the applied augmentation. Note the probability and magnitude are
discretized values (see text for details).
which are applied sequentially. We turn this problem of
searching for a learned augmentation policy into a discrete
optimization problem by creating a search space . The
search space consists K = 5 sub-policies with each subpolicy consisting of N = 2 operations applied in sequence
to a single image. Additionally, each operation is also associated with two hyperparameters specifying the probability
of applying the operation, and the magnitude of the operation. Figure 2 (bottom text) demonstrates 5 of the learned
sub-policies. The probability parameter introduces a notion
of stochasticity into the augmentation policy whereby the
selected augmentation operation will be applied to the image with the speciﬁed probability.
In several preliminary experiments, we identiﬁed 22 operations for the search space that appear beneﬁcial for object detection. These operations were implemented in TensorFlow . We brieﬂy summarize these operations, but
reserve the details for the Appendix:
• Color operations.
Distort color channels, without
impacting the locations of the bounding boxes (e.g.,
Equalize, Contrast, Brightness). 2
• Geometric operations. Geometrically distort the image, which correspondingly alters the location and
size of the bounding box annotations (e.g., Rotate,
ShearX, TranslationY, etc.).
• Bounding
operations.
annotations
BBox Only Equalize,
BBox Only Rotate, BBox Only FlipLR).
Note that for any operations that effected the geometry
of an image, we likewise modiﬁed the bounding box size
and location to maintain consistency.
We associate with each operation a custom range of parameter values and map this range on to a standardized
range from 0 to 10. We discretize the range of magnitude
into L uniformly-spaced values so that these parameters are
amenable to discrete optimization. Similarly, we discretize
the probability of applying an operation into M uniformlyspaced values. In preliminary experiments we found that
setting L = 6 and M = 6 provide a good balance between computational tractability and learning performance
with an RL algorithm. Thus, ﬁnding a good sub-policy becomes a search in a discrete space containing a cardinality
of (22LM)2. In particular, to search over 5 sub-policies, the
search space contains roughly (22×6×6)2×5 ≈9.6×1028
possibilities and requires an efﬁcient search technique to
navigate this space.
2The color transformations largely derive from transformation in the
Python Image Library (PIL). 
Many methods exist for addressing the discrete optimization problem including reinforcement learning ,
evolutionary methods and sequential model-based optimization . In this work, we choose to build on previous work by structuring the discrete optimization problem
as the output space of an RNN and employ reinforcement
learning to update the weights of the model . The training setup for the RNN is similar to . We employ
the proximal policy optimization (PPO) for the search
algorithm. The RNN is unrolled 30 steps to predict a single augmentation policy. The number of unrolled steps, 30,
corresponds to the number of discrete predictions that must
be made in order to enumerate 5 sub-policies. Each subpolicy consists of 2 operations and each operation consists
of 3 predictions corresponding to the selected image transformation, probability of application and magnitude of the
transformation.
In order to train each child model, we selected 5K images from the COCO training set as we found that searching directly on the full COCO dataset to be prohibitively
expensive. We found that policies identiﬁed with this subset of data generalize to the full dataset while providing
signiﬁcant computational savings. Brieﬂy, we trained each
child model3 from scratch on the 5K COCO images with
the ResNet-50 backbone and RetinaNet detector 
using a cosine learning rate decay . The reward signal
for the controller is the mAP on a custom held-out validation set of 7392 images created from a subset of the COCO
training set.
The RNN controller is trained over 20K augmentation
The search employed 400 TPU’s over 48
hours with identical hyper-parameters for the controller as
 . The search can be sped up using the recently developed, more efﬁcient search methods based on population
based training or density matching . The learned
policy can be seen in Table 7 in the Appendix.
4. Results
We applied our automated augmentation method on the
COCO dataset with a ResNet-50 backbone with RetinaNet in order to ﬁnd good augmentation policies to
generalize to other detection datasets. We use the top policy
found on COCO and apply it to different datasets, dataset
sizes and architecture conﬁgurations to examine generalizability and how the policy fares in a limited data regime.
4.1. Learning a data augmentation policy
Searching for the learned augmentation strategy on 5K
COCO training images resulted in the ﬁnal augmentation
3We employed a base learning rate of 0.08 over 150 epochs; image size
was 640 × 640; α = 0.25 and γ = 1.5 for the focal loss parameters;
weight decay of 1e −4; batch size was 64
policy that will be used in all of our results. Upon inspection, the most commonly used operation in good policies is
Rotate, which rotates the whole image and the bounding
boxes. The bounding boxes end up larger after the rotation,
to include all of the rotated object. Despite this effect of the
Rotate operation, it seems to be very beneﬁcial: it is the
most frequently used operation in good policies. Two other
operations that are commonly used are Equalize and
BBox Only TranslateY. Equalize ﬂattens the histogram of the pixel values, and does not modify the location
or size of each bounding box. BBox Only TranslateY
translates only the objects in bounding boxes vertically, up
or down with equal probability.
4.2. Learned augmentation policy systematically
improves object detection
We assess the quality of the top augmentation policy on
the competitive COCO dataset on different backbone
architectures and detection algorithms. We start with the
competitive RetinaNet object detector 4 employing the same
training protocol as . Brieﬂy, we train from scratch with
a global batch size of 64, images were resized to 640×640,
learning rate of 0.08, weight decay of 1e −4, α = 0.25
and γ = 1.5 for the focal loss parameters, trained for 150
epochs, used stepwise decay where the learning rate was
reduced by a factor of 10 at epochs 120 and 140. All models
were trained on TPUs .
The baseline RetinaNet architecture used in this and
subsequent sections employs standard data augmentation
techniques largely tailored to image classiﬁcation training
 . This consists of doing horizontal ﬂipping with 50%
probability and multi-scale jittering where images are randomly resized between 512 and 786 during training and
then cropped to 640x640.
Our results using our augmentation policy on the above
procedures are shown in Tables 1 and 2.
In Table 1
the learned augmentation policy achieves systematic gains
across a several backbone architectures with improvements
ranging from +1.6 mAP to +2.3 mAP. In comparison, a
previous state-of-the-art regularization technique applied to
ResNet-50 achieves a gain of +1.7% mAP (Table 2).
To better understand where the gains come from, we
break the data augmentation strategies applied to ResNet-
50 into three parts: color operations, geometric operations,
and bbox-only-operations (Table 2). Employing color operations only boosts performance by +0.8 mAP. Combining
the search with geometric operations increases the boost in
performance by +1.9 mAP. Finally, adding bounding boxspeciﬁc operations yields the best results when used in conjunction with the previous operations and provides +2.3%
mAP improvement over the baseline. Note that the policy
4 
Our result
Difference
ResNet-101
ResNet-200
Table 1: Improvements with learned augmentation policy across different ResNet backbones. All results employ
RetinaNet detector on the COCO dataset .
baseline + DropBlock 
Augmentation policy with color operations
+ geometric operations
+ bbox-only operations
Table 2: Improvements in object detection with learned
augmentation policy. All results employ RetinaNet detector with ResNet-50 backbone on COCO dataset .
DropBlock shows gain in performance employing a stateof-the-art regularization method .
found was only searched using 5K COCO training examples and still generalizes extremely well when trained on
the full COCO dataset.
Exploiting
augmentation
achieves state-of-the-art object detection
A good data augmentation policy is one that can transfer between models, between datasets and work well for
models trained on different image sizes. Here we experiment with the learned augmentation policy on a different backbone architecture and detection model.
how the learned policy transfers to a state-of-the-art detection model, we replace the ResNet-50 backbone with the
AmoebaNet-D architecture . The detection algorithm
was changed from RetinaNet to NAS-FPN . Additionally, we use ImageNet pre-training for the AmoebaNet-
D backbone as we found we are not able to achieve competitive results when training from scratch. The model was
trained for 150 epochs using a cosine learning rate decay
with a learning rate of 0.08. The rest of the setup was identical to the ResNet-50 backbone model except the image
size was increased from 640 × 640 to 1280 × 1280.
Table 3 indicates that the learned augmentation policy
improves +1.5% mAP on top of a competitive, detection architecture and setup. These experiments additionally show
that the augmentation policy transfers well across a different backbone architecture, detection algorithm, image sizes
(i.e. 640 →1280 pixels), and training procedure (training from scratch →using ImageNet pre-training) . We can
extend these results even further by increasing the image
resolution from 1280 to 1536 pixels and likewise increasing
the number of detection anchors5 following . Since this
model is signiﬁcantly larger than the previous models, we
increase the number of sub-policies in the learned policy by
combining the top 4 policies from the search, which leads
to a 20 sub-policy learned augmentation.
This result of these simple modiﬁcations is the ﬁrst
single-stage detection system to achieve state-of-the-art,
single-model results of 50.7 mAP on COCO. We note that
this result only requires a single pass of the image, where
as the previous results required multiple evaluations of the
same image at different spatial scales at test time . Additionally, these results were arrived at by increasing the
image resolution and increasing the number of anchors both simple and well known techniques for improving object detection performance . In contrast, previous
state-of-the-art results relied on roughly multiple, custom
modiﬁcations of the model architecture and regularization
methods in order to achieve these results . Our method
largely relies on a more modern network architecture paired
with a learned data augmentation policy.
4.4. Learned augmentation policies transfer to
other detection datasets.
To evaluate the transferability of the learned policies to
an entirely different dataset and another different detection algorithm, we train a Faster R-CNN model with
a ResNet-101 backbone on PASCAL VOC dataset . We
combine the training sets of PASCAL VOC 2007 and PAS-
CAL VOC 2012, and test our model on the PASCAL VOC
2007 test set (4952 images). Our evaluation metric is the
mean average precision at an IoU threshold of 0.5 (mAP50).
For the baseline model, we use the Tensorﬂow Object Detection API with the default hyperparameters: 9 GPU
workers are utilized for asynchronous training where each
worker processes a batch size of 1. Initial learning rate is set
to be 3 × 10−4, which is decayed by 0.1 after 500K steps.
Training is started from a COCO detection model checkpoint. When training with our data augmentation policy, we
do not change any of the training details, and just add our
policy found on COCO to the pre-processing. This leads to
a 2.7% improvement on mAP50 (Table 4).
4.5. Learned augmentation policies mimic the performance of larger annotated datasets
In this section we conducted experiments to determine
how the learned augmentation policy will perform if there
is more or less training data. To conduct these experiments
we took subsets of the COCO dataset to make datasets with
5Speciﬁcally, we increase the number of anchors from 3 × 3 to 9 × 9
by changing the aspect ratios from {1/2, 1, 2} to {1/5, 1/4, 1/3, 1/2, 1,
2, 3, 4, 5}. When making this change we increased the strictness in the
IoU thresholding from 0.5/0.5 to 0.6/0.5 due to the increased number of
anchors following . The anchor scale was also increased from 4 to 5 to
compensate for the larger image size.
the following number of images: 5000, 9000, 14000, 23000
(see Table 5). All models trained in this experiment are
using a ResNet-50 backbone with RetinaNet and are trained
for 150 epochs without using ImageNet pretraining.
As we expected, the improvements due to the learned
augmentation policy is larger when the model is trained on
smaller datasets, which can be seen in Fig. 3 and in Table 5.
We show that for models trained on 5,000 training samples,
the learned augmentation policy can improve mAP by more
than 70% relative to the baseline. As the training set size is
increased, the effect of the learned augmentation policy is
decreased, although the improvements are still signiﬁcant.
It is interesting to note that models trained with learned augmentation policy seem to do especially well on detecting
smaller objects, especially when fewer images are present in
the training dataset. For example, for small objects, applying the learned augmentation policy seems to be better than
increasing the dataset size by 50%, as seen in Table. 5. For
small objects, training with the learned augmentation policy
with 9000 examples results in better performance than the
baseline when using 15000 images. In this scenario using
our augmentation policy is almost as effective as doubling
your dataset size.
Figure 3: Percentage improvement in mAP for objects of
different sizes due to the learned augmentation policy.
Another interesting behavior of models trained with the
learned augmentation policy is that they do relatively better
on the harder task of AP75 (average precision IoU=0.75). In
Fig. 4, we plot the percentage improvement in mAP, AP50,
and AP75 for models trained with the learned augmentation policy (relative to baseline augmentation). The relative
improvement of AP75 is larger than that of AP50 for all
training set sizes. The learned data augmentation is particularly beneﬁcial at AP75 indicating that the augmentation
policy helps with more precisely aligning the bounding box
Architecture
MegDet 
AmoebaNet + NAS-FPN
baseline 
+ learned augmentation
+ ↑anchors, ↑image size
Table 3: Exceeding state-of-the-art detection with learned augmentation policy. Reporting mAP for COCO validation set.
Previous state-of-the-art results for COCO detection evaluated a single image at multiple spatial scales to perform detection
at test time . Our current results only require a single inference computation at single spatial scale. Backbone model
is AmoebaNet-D and the NAS-FPN detection system . For the 50.7 result, in addition to using the learned data
augmentation policy, we increase the image size from 1280 to 1536 and the number of detection anchors from 3x3 to 9x9.
plane bike bird boat bottle bus
chair cow table dog horse mbike person plant sheep sofa train tv
baseline 86.6
82.2 75.9 63.4 62.3
84.7 86.8 92.0 55.5 83.3 63.1 89.2 89.4
73.0 86.6 76.3 76.0
83.3 78.0 65.9 63.5
85.5 87.4 93.1 58.5 83.9 65.2 90.1 90.2
76.6 88.6 80.3 78.7
Table 4: Learned augmentation policy transfer to other object detection tasks. Mean average precision (%) at IoU
threshold 0.5 on a Faster R-CNN detector with a ResNet-101 backbone trained and evaluated on PASCAL VOC 2007
 . Note that the augmentation policy was learned from the policy search on the COCO dataset.
Our results
Table 5: Learned augmentation policy is especially beneﬁcial for small datasets and small objects. Mean average
precision (mAP) for RetinaNet model trained on COCO with varying subsets of the original training set. mAPS, mAPM
and mAPL denote the mean average precision for small, medium and large examples. Note the complete COCO training set
consists of 118K examples.The same policy found on the 5000 COCO images was used in all of the experiments. The models
in the ﬁrst row were trained on the same 5000 images that the policies were searched on.
prediction. This suggests that the augmentation policy particularly helps with learned ﬁne spatial details in bounding
box position – which is consistent with the gains observed
with small objects.
4.6. Learned data augmentation improves model
regularization
In this section, we study the regularization effect of the
learned data augmentation. We ﬁrst notice that the ﬁnal
training loss of a detection models is lower when trained
on a larger training set (see black curve in Fig. 5). When
we apply the learned data augmentation, the training loss is
increased signiﬁcantly for all dataset sizes (red curve). The
regularization effect can also be seen by looking at the L2
norm of the weights of the trained models. The L2 norm of
the weights is smaller for models trained on larger datasets,
and models trained with the learned augmentation policy
have a smaller L2 norm than models trained with baseline
augmentation (see Fig. 6).
5. Discussion
In this work, we investigate the application of a learned
data augmentation policy on object detection performance.
We ﬁnd that a learned data augmentation policy is effective
across all data sizes considered, with a larger improvement
when the training set is small. We also observe that the
improvement due to a learned data augmentation policy is
larger on harder tasks of detecting smaller objects and detecting with more precision.
We also ﬁnd that other successful regularization techniques are not beneﬁcial when applied in tandem with a
learned data augmentation policy. We carried out several
experiments with Input Mixup , Manifold Mixup 
and Dropblock . For all methods we found that they
either did not help nor hurt model performance. This is
an interesting result as the proposed method independently
outperforms these regularization methods, yet apparently
these regularization methods are not needed when applying
a learned data augmentation policy.
Future work will include the application of this method
Figure 4: Percentage improvement due to the learned augmentation policy on mAP, AP50, and AP75, relative to
models trained with baseline augmentation.
Figure 5: Training loss vs. number of training examples for
baseline model (black) and with the learned augmentation
policy (red).
to other perceptual domains. For example, a natural extension of a learned augmentation policy would be to semantic and instance segmentation . Likewise, point
cloud featurizations are another domain that has
a rich set of possibilities for geometric data augmentation
operations, and can beneﬁt from an approach similar to the
one taken here. Human annotations required for acquiring
training set examples for such tasks are costly. Based on
our ﬁndings, learned augmentation policies are transferable
and are more effective for models trained on limited training
data. Thus, investing in libraries for learning data augmentation policies may be an efﬁcient alternative to acquiring
Figure 6: L2 norm of the weights of the baseline (black)
and our (red) models at the end of training. Note that the L2
norm of the weights decrease with increasing training set
size. The learned augmentation policy further decreases the
norm of the weights.
additional human annotated data.
Acknowledgments
We thank Ruoming Pang and the rest of the Brain team
for their help.