The Journal
of Neuroscience,
Visuotopic
Organization
and Extent of V3 and V4 of the Macaque
R. Gattass,
A. P. B. Sousa,
and C. G. Gross’
lnstituto de Biofkica
da UFRJ, Rio de Janeiro, RJ. Brazil. and ‘Department
of Psychology,
Princeton University,
Princeton,
New Jersey
The representation
of the visual
field in areas
V3 and V4 of
the macaque
was mapped
with multiunit
electrodes.
fascicularis
in repeated
immobilized
and anesthetized.
V3 is a narrow
of myeloarchitectoni-
immediately
a systematic
representation
of the central
of the contralateral
the representation
is located
in the hemisphere
that of the lower
is a small
the dorsal
and ventral
The representation
of the horizontal
is adjacent
that in V2 and forms
the posterior
V3v. Most or all of the anterior
of V3d consists
representation
of the lower
The entire
of V3v consists
of the representation
V4 is a strip
of myeloarchitectonically
immediately
to V3. It contains
but systematic,
representation
of approximately
the central
of the contralateral
representation
of the upper
is located
of the representation
of the lower
is located
The posterior
of V4 corresponds
to the representation
of the vertical
and the rep-
resentation
of the horizontal
is located
at or near
its anterior
In both V3 and V4, the representation
of the central
is magnified
to that of the periphery.
the size of receptive
with increasing
eccentricity;
at a given eccentricity,
the receptive
of V4 are larger
than those
In primates, more than half of the cerebral cortex is visual in
function. This visual cortex consists of over a dozen areas, which
are distinguishable on the basis of such criteria as connections,
myeloarchitecture, and neuronal response properties , the National Science Foundation (BNS 79-05589), the Conselho
National de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnol6gico (CNPq, Procs. 30.5654/
76, 30.0188/80, 40.2829184, and 40.2577/85), Conselho de Ensino para Grad-
uados e Pesquisa (CEPG), and Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos (FINEP,
4 1.85.0245.00) for financial assistance.
Correspondence should be addressed to Dr. Gattass Instituto de Biofisica da
UFRJ, Centro de Ciencias da Satide-Bloco G, 2 194 1 iio de Janeiro, RJ, Brasil.
Copyright 0 1988 Society for Neuroscience 0270-6474188106 183 l-l 5$02.00/O
man, 198 1; Gross et al., 198 1; Weller and Kaas, 198 1; and Van
Essen, 1985). Many of these areas contain a topographically
organized representation of the visual field, but in the macaque
this organization is known in detail for only a few areas, namely
Vl, or striate cortex, V2, and middle temporal (MT) . In this paper we describe the
visuotopic organization of 2 additional visual cortical areas, V3
and V4, as determined by multineuron recordings in chronically
implanted, immobilized, and anesthetized macaques.
V3 was first described by Zeki as a cortical band
anterior to V2, with a representation of the inferior visual field
located dorsally and a representation of the superior visual field
located ventrally. The cortex anterior to V3, including part of
the prelunate gyrus, was named “V4” or “V4 complex” by Zeki
and his collaborators .
The results reported here are, in part, a confirmation of Zeki’s
proposals for V3, but present a somewhat different view of the
visuotopic organization within V4.
Materials and Methods
Recording. Twelve Macaca fascicularis, weighing between 3.0 and 4.8
kg, were each recorded on 4-8 occasions.
Prior to the first recording
a recording well and a bolt for holding the head were implanted
under anesthesia and aseptic conditions.
The preanesthetic medication,
induction,
and maintenance of anes-
thesia, immobilization,
monitoring of physiological status, recovery from
immobilization, and electrode characteristics
have all been described
in detail previously (Gattass and Gross, 198 1). Briefly, during recording,
the animals were maintained
under 70% nitrous oxide and 30% oxygen
and immobilized
with pancuronium
microelec-
trodes with an impedance of about 0.7 MCl were used. They usually
recorded the activity of several neurons (multiunits)
simultaneously.
In each monkey, 2643 vertical penetrations were made over a 4-week
period. The penetrations
were placed approximately
forming a grid extending throughout prestriate cortex and adjacent areas.
Along each penetration, recording sites were separated
by a minimum
of 300 urn.
Visual stimuli. The details of the treatment of the eyes and of the
visual stimuli used have been meviouslv described
and Gross,
198 1). Briefly, white, colored; and black stimuli Gere presented on a
translucent hemisphere located 60 cm from the contralateral
eye was focused at 60 cm by means of an appropriate contact lens.
Visual stimuli could be presented up to 90” out along the horizontal
up to elevations of 55” in the upper quadrant, and down to
60” in the lower quadrant.
Histology. Histological
procedures have been described in detail pre-
viously . Electrolytic lesions were made at
several sites along each penetration.
33 pm frozen sections,
either coronal or parasagittal, were stained for cell bodies with cresyl
violet or for myeli; witha modified Heidenhain-Woelcke
stain .
Unfolding of the cortical surface and visual maps. In order to obtain
a “map” of the visual topography of V3 and V4 for each animal, we
unfolded the prestriate cortex by building
a S-dimensional
et al. * Areas
Fig-we 1. Flattened map of V3, V4, and vicinity showing recording
sites and myeloarchitectonic
borders between areas in animal 482. The
map was constructed, as described in the text, from tracings of sagittal
sections A-L at the levels indicated with dashed lines on the dorsolateral
(top left) and ventrolateral (top right) views of the hemisphere, with sulci
partially open. On the flattened map the myeloarchitectonically
mined borders of areas V 1, V2, V3, V3A, V4, V4T, MT, and TEO are
with dashed lines. The border between V3 and V3A was
determined
only on electrophysiological
grounds. Symbols indicate the
sites at which receptive fields were recorded. IO, inferior occipital sulcus;
ZP, intraparietal
s.; Lu, lunate s., OT, occipitotemporal
s.; STS, superior
temporal s.
then flattening it. First, myelin-stained
sections through the occipital,
parietal and temporal lobes, spaced 0.5 mm apart, were traced at 5 x
magnification.
Then wires were bent to conform to layer IV of each
section and connected with scaled cross pieces to form a 3-dimensional
model of the posterior cortex. The model was then flattened, cutting
the minimum
number of cross pieces, to form a 2-dimensional
sentation. This method is equivalent
to that of Van Essen and Z&i
 and Van Essen and Maunsell
 . The myeloarchitectonic
borders were marked on tracings of the flattened model, along with the
recording sites projected onto layer IV, as shown in Figure 1. The rep-
resentations of the visual field in the areas of interest were determined
by marking the eccentricity of the receptive-field
centers at each re-
cording site on the flattened model and then fitting “isoeccentricity
lines” by eye, as shown in Figure 2. We followed a similar procedure
to determine the positions of the representations
of the horizontal
vertical meridians. An example of a map with the meridians and isoec-
centricity lines is shown in Figure 3.
Visual topography
first summarize
the location
and visuotopic
tion of V3 and V4, and then illustrate this organization with
examples of the relationship between recording sites and the
location of the receptive fields recorded at those sites. In sub-
sequent Results’ sections, we consider receptive-field size and
cortical magnification as a function of eccentricity, and describe
the myeloarchitectonic characteristics of V3 and V4.
Area V3. Anterior to V2 there is a thin strip (4-5 mm) of
cortex containing an organized representation of the contralat-
era1 visual field (Figs. 4, 5). Following Zeki , who
first proposed its existence in the macaque, we call this V3. The
dorsal and ventral portions of V3 are discontinuous and, fol-
lowing the suggestion of Van Essen and his colleagues and the usage of Unger-
leider and Desimone , we call the dorsal portion V3d
and the ventral portion V3v. V3d lies in the fundus of the lunate
sulcus and in the posterior portion of the annectant gyrus. In
most, but not all, animals, it does not reach the medial surface,
but terminates in the parietooccipital cleft (Fig. 6, left). V3v
extends across both banks of the inferior occipital and occipi-
totemporal sulci (Fig. 6, right). Several different visual areas lie
anterior to V3, as shown in Figures 4 and 6. On the anterior
border of V3d, moving lateral to dorsal, are areas V4, V3A, and
PO .
Anterior to V3v lies the ventral portion of V4 . As described in detail below, V3 can
be distinguished myeloarchitectonically from all its neighbors
except for parts of V3A.
We consider the visuotopic organization of V3v first because
it is somewhat more consistent across animals and simpler than
that of V3d. V3v contains a representation of about the central
35” of the upper visual field (see Fig. 7). The representation of
the horizontal meridian forms the posterior border of V3v and
is congruent with the representation of the horizontal meridian
at the anterior border of the ventral portion of V2. The repre-
sentation of the vertical meridian forms the anterior border and
is congruent with the posterior border of the ventral portion of
V4. This organization was found in the 6 animals studied; the
interanimal variation in the location of V3v is shown in Fig-
The visuotopic organization of V3d was both more variable
and more complex than that of V3v. V3d contains a represen-
tation of about the central 40” of the lower visual field (see Fig.
7). In all animals, the representation of the horizontal meridian
forms the posterior border of V3d, and is congruent with that
in V2, as is the case in V3v. In 2 animals, the representation of
the lower vertical meridian forms the anterior border of V3d
(Fig. 8, left). However, in the 3 other animals, the situation at
the anterior border of V3d is less straightforward. In these cases
there is a partial split in the representation of the lower quadrant
along a line that starts at the vertical meridian and is oblique
to the horizontal meridian, and whose exact location varies from
animal to animal. Thus, the anterior border of V3d consists of
the representation of the vertical meridian divided into 2 por-
tions, with a piece of the visual field intercalated between these
portions (Figs. 8, right; 22, middle). A representation of the
central 4”-8” of the vertical meridian abuts dorsal V4; the rep-
resentation of the displaced portion of the visual field abuts
V3A; and the remainder of the representation of the vertical
meridian abuts area PO. The variability in the width of V3d
observed from animal to animal appears to be a consequence
of this arrangement (Figs. 6, 8). In fact, in one case V3d was so
narrow at one point as to be almost divided into 2 portions.
The Journal
of Neuroscience,
On the lateral surface, anterior to the fovea1 representation
in V 1, where V2, V3d, and V4 meet, the receptive fields are
located within a few degrees of the center of gaze, and it is not
possible to differentiate these areas on the basis of receptive-
field topography or receptive-field size. In this region, the bor-
ders between the areas could be drawn only on a myeloarchi-
tectonic basis. By these criteria, V4 abuts V2, thereby separating
V3d from V3v, as shown in Figure 2, lower left.
As discussed below, receptive-field size in V3 increases mark-
edly with increasing eccentricity. However, even at the more
peripheral eccentricities, the nasal borders of the receptive fields
do not extend across the vertical meridian into the ipsilateral
field by more than about 3O-4”. A consequence of this is that,
with increasing eccentricity, the vertical meridian is not rep-
resented by fields centered at the meridian; instead, it is rep-
resented by the nasal portion of the receptive fields whose cen-
ters are located away from the meridian (see Fig. 14). This is
also true in peripheral V2 , MT and V4.
Area V4. Anterior to V3 there is a strip of myeloarchitecton-
ically distinct cortex 5-8 mm wide (Figs. 4, 5). It contains an
organized representation of the contralateral visual field. We
call it V4 because it has about the same location, at least dorsally,
as the area called V4 or the V4 complex by Zeki .
Dorsally, V4 extends from the anterior bank of the lunate sulcus
across the prelunate gyrus onto the lip of the posterior bank of
the superior temporal sulcus (Fig. 6, left). Ventrally, it extends
across the inferior occipital and occipitotemporal sulci (Fig. 6,
Flattened map ofV3, V4 and
isoeccentricity
lines were constructed. The map is the
same as that shown in Figure 1 (bot-
tom). At each recording site, the eccen-
tricity of the receptive-field
center re-
at that site is indicated
degrees. (Values of 3” or higher are
rounded to the nearest degree). Dashed
lines represent isoeccentricity lines fit-
ted by eye to these values. Dotted lines
show the open sulci, and solid lines the
area boundaries, as in Figure 1. Inset
shows the same flattened map with V3
and V4 shaded differentially
area boundaries
more clearly.
Figure 3. Visual topography of V3, V4, and neighboring
areas of an-
imal 482, showing the representation
of the upper field (+), lower field
(p), vertical meridian (black circles), horizontal meridian (squares), cen-
ter of gaze (hatched), and isoeccentricity
(dashed) lines. Dotted lines
represent myeloarchitectonic
borders. The anterior border of V3d (stars)
corresponds to the region of the visual field shown with stars in the
representation
of the contralateral
hemifield in the inset in the lower
et al. * Areas
V4 of the Macaque
Summary of location
visual topography of V3 and V4 based
on data from 12 animals. A, Lateral and
medial views with sulci partially opened
up. The regions in the rectangles are
shown enlarged in B. B, Lateral and me-
dial views showing representations
the vertical meridian (black circles), the
horizontal
(squares), the cen-
ter ofgaze (hatched), isoeccentricity lines
(dashed), and the myeloarchitectonic
borders (dotted lines) for V2, V3, V3A,
V4T, and MT. Ca, calcarine sulcus. See
also legends for Figures 1 and 3.
V4 contains a representation of about 3Y-40” of the visual
field, as shown in Figure 7. The representation of the upper
visual field is located ventrally. Most of the representation of
the lower visual field is located dorsally, but a small and variable
portion is located close to the anterior border of ventral V4.
This portion of the lower field located ventrally includes the
region adjacent to the horizontal meridian beyond an eccen-
tricity of about So, as shown in Figures 9, 14, 15, and 18. Thus,
in V4 the split of the representation of the contralateral visual
field does not take place entirely along the horizontal meridian,
as it does in V2 and V3; rather, beyond an eccentricity of about
Flattened map showing the visual topography of V3 and V4,
based on data from 12 animals. See also legend to Figure 3.
5,‘o u o-4 -
5” it takes place along a line oblique to the horizontal meridian,
as diagrammed in the lower part of Figure 22.
The posterior border of V4 corresponds to the representation
ofthe vertical meridian (Figs. 4,5). Ventrally, the representation
of the vertical meridian in V4 is adjacent to and congruent with
that in V3, up to an eccentricity of about 20”. Dorsally, the
posterior border of V4 corresponds to the representation of the
central portion of the vertical meridian (2”‘8”) abutting V3 and,
more medially, V3A. As was the case for V3, with increasing
eccentricity the centers of the receptive fields are not located on
the vertical meridian, although their borders are located near
or on this meridian (cf. Fig. 10).
In V4, the visuotopic organization of the dorsal portion was
more complex and more variable among animals than that of
the ventral surface. Overall, the visuotopic organization of V4
was “cruder” and “noisier” than that in V3, and more so than
in either V2 or Vl. For example, there were reversals in the
systematic progression of receptive fields, and receptive fields
in the same location in the visual field could be found at re-
cording sites 1 mm or further apart (see Figs. 16, 18).
Several areas border V4 anteriorly (Figs. 4, 5). The anterior
border of dorsal V4 abuts area V4T. Area V4T (T for transi-
tional) is an approximately 2-mm-wide strip that lies along part
of the posterior border of area MT. It is myeloarchitectonically
distinct from both V4 and MT and contains a representation
of the lower visual field. Area V4T appears to correspond to
part of the “colour coding area of the superior temporal sulcus”
described by Zeki . This transitional area between V4 and
MT was subsequently noted by Schein et al. , Maguire
and Baizer , and Ungerleider and Desimone . The latter showed that this area
receives a projection from MT (which V4 does not). At the
border of V4 and V4T, there is a representation of the horizontal
meridian with receptive-field centers located at 4”-8”, and tem-
poral borders at up to 18” along the horizontal meridian.
It was usually difficult to delimit precisely the dorsal border
of V4 by myeloarchitectonic methods alone. In Figure 10 the
approximate region of the dorsal border of V4 is marked with
The Journal
of Neuroscience,
among 4 animals
(482,48 1,428 and 467) in the location
of V3 and V4 shown in dorsal views in
which sulci have been opened (left) and
in ventral views Cri,chtl. For abbrevia-
tions, see Figure l.-
a dashed line and a question mark. Note that in section B in
moving from site 6 (which is clearly in myeloarchitectonic V4)
to sites I and 8 in the border region, there is both a discontinuity
in the location of the receptive-field centers and a marked in-
crease in receptive-field size. Thus, the dorsal border of V4 at
this point appears to be between site 6 and sites 7 and 8.
Ventrolaterally, V4 borders area TEO. This area extends from
the ventral bank of the superior temporal sulcus to the lateral
bank of the occipitotemporal sulcus. It is distinguishable from
its neighbors on the basis ofcytoarchitecture, myeloarchitecture,
connections, visuotopic organization, and the behavioral effects
of lesions . There is a representation of the hor-
izontal meridian at or near the border of V4 and TEO. However,
as mentioned above, in all 4 cases there was a representation
of part of the inferior visual field in ventral V4. This represen-
tation, along with a varying amount of representation of the
horizontal meridian, forms the anterior border of ventral V4.
Owing to the partial representation of the inferior visual field
in ventral V4, the entire horizontal meridian is not represented
in both dorsal and ventral V4, as it is in dorsal and ventral V2
and V3. Rather, the entire horizontal meridian is represented
in ventral V4, except for the central portion, which is also rep-
resented in dorsal V4.
Medial to the occipitotemporal sulcus, V4 borders on visual
cortex that we previously named area VF .
VF includes a representation of at least part of the lower visual
field. In addition, at the anterior border of V4, in the region of
the occipitotemporal sulcus, there appears to be at least one
representation of the upper quadrant that is separable from both
TEO and VF (R. Gattass and A. P. B. Sousa, unpublished ob-
servations). One or more of these areas may correspond to area
PT, described by Felleman et al. .
Receptive-jield sequences
in V3 and V4
In this section we illustrate the visuotopic organization of V3
and V4 by showing the relationship between receptive-field lo-
cation and recording sites in representative parasagittal sections.
11, the recording
sites are in V2, V3d,
and MT. Starting in V2 near the border with Vl (site 1) and
moving down the posterior bank of the lunate sulcus, the fields
move from the vertical meridian to the horizontal meridian
(sites l-4). Crossing the myeloarchitectonic border into V3d
(site 5) and moving toward the anterior border of V3d (sites 6-
10), the progression of receptive fields reverses and the field
centers move from the horizontal meridian towards the vertical
Extent of the visual-field representation
in V3 and V4. The
shaded areas were obtained by delineating
the external borders of su-
perimposed receptive fields recorded from 11 animals.
et al. * Areas
Figure 8. Visual topography of V3d. Top, Flattened maps showing the
visual topography
of V3d in a case (animal 437) where the anterior
border of V3d consists only of the representation of the vertical meridian
(left), and in one (481) in which the anterior border is more complex
(right). Bottom, Dorsal views showing the 2 variants of V3d. For sym-
bols see Figure 3.
meridian. Crossing the myeloarchitectonic border into V4 (sites
11 and 12) and moving dorsally onto the prelunate gyrus, the
receptive fields move from the center of gaze out into the pe-
riphery (sites 1 l-22). Crossing the myeloarchitectonic border
into V4T (site 23), the field progression reverses again and the
centers move in from the periphery (sites 23-24). Moving
the lower bank of STS and crossing the myeloarchitectonic bor-
der of MT, the fields move from the periphery of the inferior
visual field (site 25) across the horizontal meridian into the
superior visual field (sites 25-29), as has been previously de-
scribed .
More ventrally, at the V4/V4T border the centers of the re-
ceptive fields are found at the horizontal meridian, and at the
V4T/MT border they are found at the vertical meridian. How-
ever, at the level of this section the receptive fields in V4, V4T,
and MT are so large that the receptive-field centers at these
borders are displaced from the meridians. Moreover, at all levels
the representations of the visual field remain congruent across
both the V4/V4T and the V4T/MT borders.
Figure 12 presents data from a more medial section from the
same animal. The section now passes through V3A as well as
V2 and V3d. Starting again in V2, near its border with Vl (site
l), and moving down the posterior bank of the lunate sulcus,
the fields move from the vertical meridian toward the horizontal
meridian (sites l-9). Crossing the myeloarchitectonic border
into V3d, we begin near the representation of the horizontal
meridian at site 10 (asterisk). Moving anteriorly within V3d
from site 11 to site 14, the receptive fields move from the hor-
izontal to the vertical meridian at the anterior border of V3d.
Moving dorsally within V3d from site 10 to sites 15-21, the
receptive fields move toward the periphery. At site 22, the field
progression reverses and the fields move back toward the center
Figure 9. Asymmetry of representation
of the visual field in dorsal
and ventral V4. The shaded areas were obtained
by delineating
external borders of superimposed receptive fields recorded in dorsal and
ventral V4 in animals 482 and 467. Note that part of the inferior visual
field (beyond approximately
5”) is represented in ventral V4.
of gaze (sites 22-27). Starting with site 22 or nearby, we are
presumably in V3A. We could discern no consistent myeloar-
chitectonic border in this vicinity; thus, the sole evidence that
we are in a new area is the reversal of field progression and the
re-representation of the visual field.
Figure 13 is a section from a different animal, located more
medially than the section illustrated in Figure 12. It again in-
cludes parts of V2, V3d, and V4, but now it passes through the
regions of representation of both the inferior and superior visual
fields in V3A. As in the previous sections, we start in V2 at the
vertical meridian (site 1) and move toward the horizontal me-
ridian (site 8) at the border with V3d. At this level V3d is narrow
(and is even narrower at more medial levels). Within V3d there
are only 2 recording sites (9 and lo), and the tendency, moving
anteriorly, is for the receptive-field centers to move away from
the horizontal meridian. Starting at site 11, the receptive-field
progression reverses and, as we move dorsally up the anterior
bank of the lunate sulcus, the receptive fields move across the
horizontal meridian into the superior visual field. We are now
in V3A and presumably its border with V3d is in the vicinity
of sites 10 and 11. Sites 18-22 are in more anterior regions of
V3A in the lateral bank of the intraparietal sulcus, where the
periphery of the superior visual field is represented (R. Gattass,
unpublished observations). The myeloarchitectonic border of
V3A and V4 is between sites 17 and 23. Starting at site 23 in
V4 and moving dorsally onto the prelunate gyrus, the receptive
fields move into the periphery.
Figures 14 and 15 illustrate the borders of V3v and V4 on
the ventral surface. In Figure 14, site 1 is near the V2/V3v border
and its receptive field is on the horizontal meridian. Moving
anteriorly through the occipitotemporal sulcus, the receptive
fields move toward the vertical meridian (sites l-9). Crossing
the myeloarchitectonic border with V4 between sites 9 and 10,
the field progression reverses and the fields move from the ver-
tical meridian (site 10) to below the horizontal meridian (site
14). Note that the centers of the receptive fields located at the
border between V3v and V4, which is the representation of the
vertical meridian (sites 9 and lo), are not actually on the vertical
The Journal
of Neuroscience,
meridian, although the receptive fields do include the vertical
meridian. As described above, this is usually the situation at
eccentricities
beyond about 5”. Furthermore,
note that at site
14, near the anterior border of V4, as determined by myeloar-
chitectonic criteria, the entire receptive field is in the inferior
visual field. As mentioned above, some representation
peripheral inferior visual field at the anterior border of ventral
V4 was characteristic
of all the cases examined.
Figure 15 illustrates results from a more lateral section from
the same animal. At site 1, located in V3v near its border with
V2, the receptive field is near the horizontal meridian. Moving
anteriorly, along the anterior bank of the inferior occipital sul-
cus, the fields shift toward
the vertical meridian (sites l-7) but
remain near the center of gaze. Moving across the myeloarchi-
tectonic border into V4, the field progression
reverses and the
fields move from the vertical meridian (site 8) to below the
horizontal meridian (site 16) at the anterior border of V4. Mov-
ing across the border with TEO, there is another reversal of field
progression (sites 17-l 9).
Figure 16 shows the overall visual topography of the dorsal
portion of V4 in a series of parasagittal sections from animal
482. In each section, moving anteriorly up the anterior bank of
the lunate sulcus from the border of V3 and V3A with V4 onto
the prelunate gyrus toward
the anterior border of V4, the re-
ceptive fields shift from the vertical meridian toward
Figure IO.
Location ofreceptive fields
in dorsal V4 and adjacent cortex in an-
imal 369 recorded at sites indicated on
the enlarged portions
(shaded) of the
coronal sections cut at the levels indi-
cated on the lateral view of the brain
shown in the upper right. Sites 1-6, 10
and 11 are within V4, and sites I-9 are
dorsal to V4. The borders of V4 in the
sections are shown with dashed lines;
the question marks indicate that the
dorsal border could not be defined pre-
cisely on myeloarchitectonic
Lower right, Receptive-field centers re-
corded in V4 at sites indicated in sec-
tions A, B, and C. Lower left, Receptive
fields and receptive-field
centers re-
corded at sites indicated in section B.
The fields and centers recorded within
V4 (at sites 2-6) are shown with solid
lines and circles, respectively, and those
recorded outside of V4 (at sites 7-9) are
shown with crosses and dashed lines.
Abbreviations
as in Figure 1.
V4 ,V~T,MT
Figure Il.
of receptive-field
centers in V3d and V4 and
adjacent areas recorded at sites indicated
in the parasagittal
(animal 482). The drawing in the upper right is a schematic represen-
tation of the visual topography of V3, V4, and adjacent areas showing
the level of the section (dashed line). See also legends to Figures 1 and 3.
et al. - Areas
V4 of the Macaque
Figure 12.
of receptive-field
centers in V3d and adjacent
areas, recorded at sites indicated
in the parasagittal section from the
same animal (482) illustrated in Figure 11. See also legend to Figures
izontal meridian. Furthermore, moving from lateral sections to
the medial sections (A to I!‘), the receptive fields shift from near
the center of gaze into the periphery. As in ventral V4, the
centers of the receptive fields recorded at the posterior border
of V4 (which corresponds to the representation of the vertical
meridian) do not lie on the vertical meridian, but the borders
of the fields do include this meridian. The area covered by the
receptive fields recorded in dorsal V4 for this animal is shown
in Figure 9, left. An example of the crudeness of the visuotopic
organization of V4 is that sites as much as 1.5 mm apart may
have receptive fields at similar locations in the visual field (e.g.,
sites 13-16 in section C and sites 26-29 in section D).
Figure 17 illustrates the visual topography of dorsal V4 in a
series of parasagittal sections from another animal (467). Again,
the centers of the receptive fields recorded at the posterior border
of V4 lie near, but not on, the vertical meridian. In this animal
the representation of a significant part of the inferior quadrant
is located in ventral V4 rather than in dorsal V4 (cf. Fig. 9,
right, with Fig. 17).
Figure 18 shows the overall visual topography of the ventral
portion of V4 in a series of parasagittal sections from the same
animal illustrated in Figure 17. Moving anteriorly from the
border of V3 with V4 to the anterior border of V4, the receptive-
field centers move from the vertical meridian toward the hor-
izontal meridian. In fact, near the anterior border of V4, as
noted previously, the receptive-field centers actually lie in the
Figure 13.
of receptive-field
centers in V3d and V4 and
adjacent areas recorded at the sites indicated in the parasagittal section
from animal 48 1. See also legend to Figures 1 and 3.
Figure 14.
Location of receptive-field centers in V3v and V4 recorded
at the sites indicated in the parasagittal section, cut at the level indicated
in the ventral view ofthe brain (animal 467). The entire receptive fields,
as well as the receptive-field
centers, are shown for sites 1, 9, 10, and
The Journal
of Neuroscience,
Location of receptive-field centers in V3v and V4 and area
TEO recorded at the sites indicated in the parasagittal section from the
same animal (467) shown in Figure 14.
inferior visual field. Moving from the lateral to the medial sec-
tions (D to A), the receptive-field centers move from the center
of the visual field to the periphery. Note that the progressions
are more orderly and there are less re-representations
dorsal V4 (Fig. 16). This may reflect both a more orderly vi-
suotopic organization in ventral than in dorsal V4 and the fact
that the penetrations
in ventral V4 are more orthogonal to the
cortical surface.
Changes in neuronal properties with eccentricity
Receptive-field size. Receptive-field
size, i.e., the square root of
receptive-field
area, is plotted as a function of the eccentricity
of the receptive field-center for V3d and V3v in Figure
and for dorsal and ventral V4 in Figure 19B. These measure-
ments of multiunit receptive-field size were carried out with one
electrode with a constant impedance (0.7 MO), since the size of
receptive fields varies with electrode impedance. A
straight line was fitted to each set of data using the method of
least squares. We found that in both areas, receptive-field
increase markedly with increasing eccentricity.
There was no significant difference between the y-intercepts
(t = 0.16, p > 0.2) or the slopes (t = 1.15, p > 0.2) of the
regression lines for V3d and V3v. Similarly, there was no sig-
nificant difference between the y-intercepts
(t = 1.46, p > 0.1)
Location of receptive-field
centers in dorsal V4 (shaded) recorded
at the sites indicated in a series of para-
sagittal sections (A-F), cut at the levels
indicated in the dorsal view of the brain
(animal 482). For abbreviations see
Figures 1 and 5.
et al. - Areas
of receptive-field
centers in dorsal V4 (shaded)
recorded at sites indicated in parasagittal sections (A-D) cut at the levels
indicated in the dorsal view of the brain (animal 467). Flattened map
shows the visual topography
of dorsal V4 for this animal. See also
legends to Figures 1 and 3.
or the slopes (t = 0.34, p > 0.5) for dorsal and ventral V4.
However, the slope of the function for V3 was significantly
different from that for V4 (t = 7.86, p < 0.001). That is, recep-
tive-field size increased with increasing eccentricity more rap-
idly in V4 than in V3.
The size of receptive fields in V3 was significantly larger than
in Vl (t = 3.4, p < O.OOl), but did not differ significantly from
those in V2 (t = 1.9, p > 0.05).
Previously we found, for both Vl and MT, that the slope of
the functions relating field size and eccentricity was slightly
larger when obtained with multiunit recordings than with single-
unit recordings . Presumably,
therefore, the present curves also slightly overestimate recep-
tive-field size, but equally so for the different regions.
Cortical magn&ation. The cortical magnification factor, i.e.,
the distance in millimeters between 2 recording sites (separated
by 0.5-3 mm) divided by the distance in degrees between the
centers of the receptive fields recorded at those sites, decreases
with increasing eccentricity in both V3 and V4. Cortical mag-
nification is plotted as a function of the mean of the eccentricities
of the pairs of receptive fields for V3d and V3v in Figure 2OA.
Best-fitting power functions were obtained with the method of
least squares for each set of data. There was no significant or
even suggestive difference in either the slope or intercept of these
Location of receptive-field centers in ventral V4 (shaded)
recorded at the sites indicated in a series of parasagittal sections (A-D)
cut at the levels indicated in the ventral view of the brain (animal 467).
For abbreviations
see Figures 1 and 5.
functions for V3d and V3v (slope, t = 1.05, p > 0.2; intercept,
t = - 1.95, p > 0.05). The equation for dorsal and ventral V3
combined was M= 1 .82E-0.74, where Mis cortical magnification
and E is mean eccentricity of pairs of receptive-field centers.
Cortical magnification factor is plotted as a function of mean
eccentricity for dorsal and ventral V4 in Figure 20B. Again,
there was no difference in either the slope or intercept for dorsal
and ventral V4 (slope, t = 1.41, p > 0.1; intercept, t = 1.80,
p > 0.05). The equation for the power function relating cortical
magnification and eccentricity for V4 was M = 3.0 1E-0.90. Al-
though there was a tendency for magnification to be greater in
the central region of V4 as compared to V3, neither the slope
nor the y-intercept of the curves for V3 (combining V3d and
V3v) and V4 (combining dorsal and ventral) was significantly
different (slope, t = 1.17, p > 0.2; y-intercept, t = 1.88, p >
Myeloarchitecture
In sections stained for myelin with the Heidenhain-Woelcke
method, we were usually able to distinguish V3 and V4 from
each other and from most of the surrounding areas (Fig. 21).
However, the stain is sometimes variable from section to sec-
tion. Thus, in a particular section, a given border was sometimes
impossible to discern, and we had to use adjacent sections to
do so. In general, myeloarchitectonic borders could be deter-
mined to within 1 mm, but the uncertainty could be greater
when the border fell in a section that was cut tangentially through
the relevant cortex. It should be stressed that the myeloarchi-
tectonic descriptions given below apply only to the Heidenhain-
Woelcke stain and not to the Gallyas stain, although most of
these areas also appear differentiable with the Gallyas stain . In our experience, when the borders of the areas are
discernible with both stains, they coincide .
Area V3. The myeloarchitectonic pattern of V3 differs from
The Journal
of Neuroscience,
ECCENTRICITY
l v4ventra1
Receptive-field size (v’Z&)
as a function of retinal eccen-
tricity for V3 (A) and V4 (B). Data for both areas were obtained from
the same animal (482) with the same electrode. The straight
lines were
fitted by the method of least squares.
that ofV2. V2 shows a homogeneous,
broad, dark band of fibers
that extends
from layer VI through
layer IV and fades out in
the bottom
of layer III . In V3 this band
becomes less homogeneous,
more stratified,
and the inner band
of Baillarger becomes visible. In the region of representation of
the center of gaze, however, it was often difficult to distinguish
V3 and V2. Area V3 could not be distinguished from V3A with
the Heidenhain-Woelcke stain.
Area V4. V4 is distinguishable from V2, V3, and V3A by the
Baillarger. The inner band is thicker than the outer band. The
bands are quite distinct because the intermediate region is pale
and the region between the white matter and the inner band of
Baillarger is also pale.
Bordering V4 anteriorly are areas V4T, TEO, and VF, which
differ from V4 in their myeloarchitecture. V4T is similar to V4
except that there is no pale region between the white matter and
the inner band of Baillarger. TEO is characterized by an inner
band of Baillarger that is broader and paler than that observed
in V4, and the outer band of Baillarger is thicker and more
than that in V4. As in V4T,
there is no pale region
between white matter and the inner band of Baillarger in TEO.
With the Heidenhain-Woelcke stain, VF appears much paler
than the adjacent V4, and the inner band of Baillarger that is
prominent in V4 is virtually absent in VF.
E&NTRlCl?Y(deg)
n V4dorsal
0 V4ventral
ECCENTRICITY(deg)
Magnification
factor in mm/deg as a function of eccentricity
for V3 (A) and V4 (B). Data for both areas were obtained from the same
animal (482). The power functions were fitted with the method of least
Discussion
Visual area V3
Anterior to V2, we found a narrow strip of myeloarchitecton-
ically distinguishable cortex in which the lower visual field is
represented dorsally, the upper visual field ventrally, and the
center of gaze laterally. The posterior border is the represen-
tation of the horizontal meridian, and most or all of the anterior
border is the representation of the vertical meridian. There is
a discontinuity of a few millimeters between the dorsal portion,
or V3d, and the ventral portion, or V3v. We found 2 types of
organization along the anterior border of V3d, as illustrated in
Figure 22, middle. In one type, this border is simply the rep-
resentation of the lower vertical meridian. In the other, at the
anterior border the representation of the lower vertical meridian
is divided into 2 portions by a representation of a portion of
the lower visual field lying between the meridians.
The existence of a strip of visuotopically organized cortex
anterior to V2 in the macaque was first proposed by Zeki . Zeki called this strip V3, and we use this name for the
area described here. However, it should be noted that Zeki never
published any physiological evidence for the ventral portion of
V3. Furthermore, his original anatomical evidence for a ventral
V3, namely, a topographic projection from ventral Vl, has not
been confirmed and ventral (II) portions of 3
parasagittal sections stained for myelin
(Heidenhain-Woelke
method) showing
V3, V4, and neighboring
areas (animal
467). Borders (or transition
zones) are
indicated with squares.
The Journal
of Neuroscience,
June 1988, 8(E)
Ungerleider,
1985). Subsequently, however, Gattass et al. (198 1)
and Van Essen et al. reported physiological evidence for
a visuotopically
organized strip of cortex immediately anterior
to the ventral portion of V2. This area was shown to receive a
topographically
organized projection from V2 .
Van Essen and his colleagues have pointed out that the dorsal
and ventral portions of V3 differ in several ways, including their
different afferent and efferent connections, a more variable and
irregular visuotopic organization for dorsal V3 than for ventral
V3 (which we also found), and more directionally
selective and
fewer color-selective
cells in the dorsal region compared to the
ventral one . They have suggested that
these differences be indicated by giving the 2 portions different
or V3d for the dorsal area, and VP or V3v for the
ventral. We have adopted the terms V3d and V3v , since this terminology rec-
ognizes the differences between the 2 regions without
replacing the original terminology
or implying that the dorsal
and ventral portions are different visual areas in the sense that
Vl, V2, V3, and V4 are clearly different from one another.
Since we carried out the above studies, Van Essen and his
collaborators
have reported on the location and visuotopic
ganization of V3d and V3v on the basis of studies of myeloar-
chitecture, the topography of afferent, efferent, and callosal con-
nections, and the location of receptive fields . In all respects, our conclusions
on the visual topography
of V3d and V3v appear identical to
theirs, including those concerning the discontinuity between V3d
and V3v and the greater variability
of V3d. As to Zeki’s 
original proposal for V3, it corresponds
closely to the V3v and
to the simpler topographical variant of V3d found in the current
Visual area V4
to V3, we found a myeloarchitectonically
distinguish-
able area extending across the prelunate and preoccipital gyri
that contained a single, and somewhat disorderly, representation
of the visual field. Since this area corresponds
to the area des-
ignated “V4”
by Zeki (197 1) and by Van
Essen and Zeki we used that designation, although all
their physiological and most of their anatomical data were only
from the dorsal portion of this region.
We found that the posterior border of V4 corresponds
representation
of the vertical meridian and that the represen-
tation of the horizontal
meridian forms, in part, its anterior
border. The upper visual field is represented ventrally, the center
of gaze on the lateral surface and the lower visual field dorsally.
unlike in V3, the small portion of the inferior visual
field beyond 5” is represented on the ventral surface near the
anterior border of V4.
In general, the representation
of the visual field in the dorsal
portion of V4 is somewhat
more disorderly
and more variable
among animals than in its ventral portion, and both are less
consistently
organized than V3 or V2. Another
peculiarity
the organization of V4 is that the representation
of the center
of gaze corresponds
to what Palmer et al. have termed
a point-to-line
transformation,
as opposed to the point-to-point
organization found in primate Vl . That is, the center of gaze is
represented by an elongated strip of cortex rather than by a
circular region (Fig. 22, lower). One consequence of this, shown
in the flattened maps of Figures 3 and 5 and in Figure 4, is that
Diagram showing hypothetical
transformations
(splits) in
the representation
of the visual field in V2, in the 2 variants of V3, and
in V4. In V2, and in one variant of V3, the representation
is split along
the horizontal
meridian. In the other variant ofV3, there is an additional
split in the inferior field. In V4, rather than at the horizontal
the split starts in the lower field along a line oblique to the horizontal
and then coincides with the horizontal
all splits take place in the anterior portion of the areas. Symbols as in
the representations of the center of gaze in V4, V3d, V3v, and
V2 are contiguous to each other.
In their study of this region, Van Essen and Zeki failed
to find a systematic representation of the visual field. However,
virtually all their recordings were in the central S-10” of the
visual field. Because of the large size of receptive fields in V4
and the considerable scatter, it is indeed difficult or impossible
to discern the organization of V4 if only such a small portion
of it is sampled.
In another study of the visuotopic organization of the pre-
lunate gyrus, Maguire and Baizer reported 2 represen-
tations of the inferior quadrant on the prelunate gyms, separated
by a representation of the vertical meridian, in contrast to the
single representation found in the present study. One possible
reason for the discrepancies between our results and theirs is
et al. * Areas
that they studied awake, behaving animals over a long period
of time and, thus, were presumably
unable to detect all the
penetration tracks.
Indeed, they state that some penetrations
were unmarked
and “their positions were reconstructed
basis oftheir position in the recording chamber relative to marked
tracks and marking pins,” a procedure likely to introduce error
into the location of the recording sites. This problem, plus the
large size and scatter of V4 receptive fields, the interanimal
variability,
and the fact that a portion of the inferior visual field
is located ventrally
rather than dorsally, may account for the
discrepancies
between our results and theirs. Furthermore,
though we found that the organization of dorsal V4 varies from
animal to animal (cf. flattened maps in Figs. 3 and 17) we always
found a single representation of part of the inferior visual quad-
rant in dorsal V4. Moreover, of the 3 visuotopic maps illustrated
by Maguire and Baizer 
in one there is only a single
representation
of the inferior quadrant (their fig. 5B), and, in-
deed, it is quite similar to the one found in all our animals.
Finally, it should be noted that the pattern of collosal input to
the prelunate gyrus described by Van Essen et al. is fully
compatible with our interpretation
and quite incompatible with
Maguire and Baizer’s.
The somewhat
or “disorderly”
representation
visual field in V4 compared to that in V3, V2, or Vl may have
been due to one or both of the following factors. The first is the
large receptive fields in V4, since both in Vl and in MT, the
scatter in the visuotopic
organization is proportional
to the re-
ceptive-field size . A second is that V4 receives a variety of different inputs,
including from visuotopically
organized areas (V2 and V3), a
crudely visuotopically
organized area (TEO), and a nonvisuo-
topically organized area (inferior temporal cortex).