Using Dimensionality Reduction to Exploit Constraints in
Reinforcement Learning
Sebastian Bitzer
Matthew Howard
Sethu Vijayakumar
Abstract— Reinforcement learning in the high-dimensional,
continuous spaces typical in robotics, remains a challenging
problem. To overcome this challenge, a popular approach has
been to use demonstrations to ﬁnd an appropriate initialisation
of the policy in an attempt to reduce the number of iterations
needed to ﬁnd a solution. Here, we present an alternative
way to incorporate prior knowledge from demonstrations of
individual postures into learning, by extracting the inherent
problem structure to ﬁnd an efﬁcient state representation.
In particular, we use probabilistic, nonlinear dimensionality
reduction to capture latent constraints present in the data. By
learning policies in the learnt latent space, we are able to solve
the planning problem in a reduced space that automatically
satisﬁes task constraints. As shown in our experiments, this
reduces the exploration needed and greatly accelerates the
learning. We demonstrate our approach for learning a bimanual reaching task on the 19-DOF KHR-1HV humanoid.
I. INTRODUCTION
The application of reinforcement learning (RL) to continuous, high-dimensional systems such as anthropomorphic
robots (Fig. 8) remains a challenging problem. While a
large variety of RL algorithms exist for solving complex
planning problems , typically the scalability of these
is limited to applications involving small, discrete worlds.
Continuous state spaces necessitate discretisation, or the use
of function approximators, but both are affected by the
curse of dimensionality, that states that the resources needed
to solve a learning problem scale exponentially with the
dimensionality of the state space.
In this context, recent attention in the robotics community has focused on this issue of scaling RL to higherdimensional problems. For example, in a programming by
demonstration framework, demonstrated trajectories can be
used to initialise a parametrised policy . Because such an
initial policy is assumed to be close to the optimal policy,
only a limited number of policy updates may be needed to
ﬁnd an acceptable solution. Hierarchical RL is a more
general approach in which the RL problem is broken down
into a hierarchy of sub-problems, solutions of which are
combined to solve the high-level problem. This divide and
conquer approach is intuitively plausible, but the difﬁculty is
then shifted towards selection and learning of the hierarchy.
Despite recent advances , problems remain, in particular
with large state spaces. Abstractions have been suggested
as a general term describing a mapping of state space to a
S. Bitzer ( ), M. Howard and S. Vijayakumar
are with the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Informatics
Forum, 10 Crichton Street, EH8 9AB, UK. This work was funded under
the EC FP6 project SENSOPAC (www.sensopac.org).
more compact, abstract space which beneﬁts learning. The
simplest abstraction, for example, just selects a subset of the
state dimensions, but any transformation of the state space
is possible. If an insight into the control problem exists a
priori, an abstraction can be chosen by hand , but ideally
we would like to learn suitable abstractions from experience.
In this paper, we investigate the suitability of dimensionality reduction (DR) as a method for automatically determining
abstractions for RL from demonstrations and the conditions
for the success of this approach. While the idea of using
DR to aid RL has recently been explored by Morimoto
et al. , to ﬁnd a low dimensional state representation
that preserves the reward structure, unfortunately, using their
approach only uses a DR technique (i.e., Kernel DR) which,
in many problems, is not sufﬁcient to represent the state
space faithfully (see Sec. IV). In contrast, our contribution
shows that the GPLVM, as a non-linear DR method based
on Gaussian Processes (GPs) , can produce much more
faithful state representations for simplifying the learning
problem. Using such an approach, we show the feasibility
of RL for very high-dimensional robotic systems, even when
no initialisation of the policy is available. We illustrate our
approach for learning a bi-manual reaching task on the 19-
DOF KHR-1HV humanoid robot.
II. PROGRAMMING BY DEMONSTRATION FRAMEWORK
The idea of our approach is to use data acquired from expert
demonstrations to extract a non-linear manifold capturing
the inherent structure of the data. The latter is then used
as a reduced representation of the system state that can be
exploited to improve the efﬁciency of RL. A schematic of
the approach is illustrated in Fig. 1.
A. Extracting the Latent Space for Reinforcement Learning
In our framework, kinesthetic demonstration (in which the
robot’s movements are manually guided and recorded) is
used to generate a set of postures that are deemed useful
for the task by the demonstrator. Using kinesthetic demonstrations in this way has several beneﬁts, for example,
(i) it ensures that all demonstrated postures are feasible
for the robot, (ii) the demonstrator can directly see that
task constraints are satisﬁed within the demonstrations and
(iii) it avoids correspondence issues that may arise due to
differences in embodiment between the demonstrator and
imitator (since the demonstrations are already performed on
the robotic plant).
One of the downsides of kinesthetic demonstration is that
it becomes increasingly difﬁcult to demonstrate movements
In. Proc. IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robotics and Systems (IROS), Taiwan .
(e.g., GPLVM)
Reinforcement
Learning in LS
(e.g., TD(0))
Fig. 1. Schematic of our approach. Given a set of demonstrated movements,
DR is used to ﬁnd a low-dimensional manifold on which the demonstrations
lie (the latent space). The space deﬁned by this manifold can then be used
as the state-space representation within reinforcement learning.
(i.e., continuous trajectories) with increasing number of
degrees of freedom of the robotic plant. To counter this,
in our framework we use discrete demonstrations, where
desired postures are demonstrated individually1 (similar to
‘keyframing’ in animation). Speciﬁcally, in our framework,
demonstrations are recorded by ﬁrst moving all robot joints
to the desired posture, recording the joint angles, and then
repeating the procedure for the next one. In this way, even
a single person can, with ease, provide demonstrations to a
high-DOF humanoid to generate full-body movements.
Using the demonstrations, we then apply nonlinear DR
techniques to extract a manifold that captures the latent
structure of the data. In effect, here DR acts as a nonlinear
interpolator that allows us to generate continuous movements
from a discrete set of samples. At the same time, it provides
a state representation which makes RL feasible even when
the dimensionality of the original state space is very high.
We assume that the demonstrated postures fulﬁl constraints, when they are necessary for the achievement of the
task (see example below). By introducing this invariance into
the demonstrations, this latent structure (i.e., the constraint
manifold) can be incorporated into the state space model
learnt by the DR2. This, in turn, beneﬁts RL by restricting
exploration to parts of the space in which (in the eyes of the
demonstrator) a feasible solution to the task exists.
B. Example: Constrained Bi-manual Manipulation
As a simple example of the above, consider a bi-manual
manipulation task in which we want to move an object with
two hands from one place to another (see Fig. 2). If the
full state of the two arms is deﬁned by the positions of the
shoulder and elbow joints, then the total dimensionality of
the system is four. However, for the movement to succeed,
the condition that the two hands must remain a ﬁxed distance
apart must be fulﬁlled throughout the movement (see Fig. 2,
left), otherwise the object will be dropped. In effect, this constrains the possible movements that can be used to solve the
1Please note that, if demonstrations of continuous movements are available, our approach can still be applied to ﬁnd a compact state representation
for RL. In this case, the sample density will simply be higher and,
potentially, the sequential structure of the demonstrations could be exploited.
2This has interesting parallels with the idea of looking for generalised
coordinates in analytical dynamics (e.g., see ) where, under a holonomic
constraint (i.e., an equality constraint), it is possible to ﬁnd a coordinate
system in which the constraint is automatically satisﬁed. This greatly
simpliﬁes the problem of solving the equations of motion of the system.
In order to move the ball to the target (x), the movement must
be constrained so that the hands remain a ﬁxed distance apart (left). If the
constraint is broken, the ball is dropped (right).
task: one degree of freedom is eliminated by constraining the
distance between the two hands, and a second is eliminated
if we do not allow rotations of the object. In other words,
for this problem, any successful movement (fulﬁlling these
task constraints) must lie on a 2-D manifold embedded in
the full 4-D state space.
Now, if we can ﬁnd an an appropriate representation of
this manifold, then we can exploit it by restricting RL to
only explore in the space where the constraints are satisﬁed.
In some cases, this could be derived from an expert analysis
of the task (here, involving derivation of kinematics of the
plant and the constraints) resulting in an analytical model
of the manifold. However, for the non-expert user, this
greatly increases the complexity of ﬁnding the appropriate
representation. Instead, in our framework, we propose to
learn the manifold by demonstration. That is, we rely on the
demonstrator to provide appropriate example postures that
(i) satisfy the task constraints (here, postures in which the
hands are in the right position to grasp the object), (ii) have
sufﬁcient coverage to make a reasonable approximation of
the underlying manifold, and (iii) deﬁne a space in which
a feasible solution to the task (here, a path to the target)
exists. In other words, by taking appropriate care in selecting
example postures, a non-expert demonstrator can use our
framework to automatically learn a state representation that
captures structural elements of the task (in this example, an
implicit model of the constraints) without the need to deﬁne
them formally by hand.
While this is a simple example, similar arguments also
apply to more complicated situations, in particular for natural
movements with many degrees of freedom such as that
of humans or humanoid robots subject to more
complex environmental or task constraints . For systems
such as these, using DR is even more appealing since formal
deﬁnition of the task structure is much harder as the system
dimensionality increases. In the next section we turn to the
implementation details of the proposed framework.
III. METHOD
In this section, we describe the design choices made for implementing our programming by demonstration framework.
As mentioned in the preceding sections, we assume that a
non-expert demonstrator provides a number of kinesthetic
demonstrations of key postures for a given task. These come
in the form of vectors of joint angles qn, from which we wish
to learn a nonlinear manifold that captures salient elements
of the task. Having done this, we can then apply RL to ﬁnd
the optimal policy within the space deﬁned by the learnt
manifold, in order to ﬁnd a feasible solution to the task.
A. Dimensionality Reduction
A number of DR techniques are available for extracting
the latent structure from our demonstrations. In our setting,
we require a method that (i) is able to represent manifolds
that are potentially non-linear in the robot’s joint space,
and (ii) gives good generalisation with relatively little data
(to minimise the number of demonstrations required for
learning). Furthermore, in order to incorporate our DR model
into RL, the DR technique must provide both a generative
mapping and its inverse (i.e., generative mapping from latent
to joint space, and the inverse mapping back).
By far the simplest and most popular approach to DR is to
use principal components analysis (PCA) which deﬁnes
a linear mapping between low-dimensional latent space and
high-dimensional data space based on eigenanalysis of the
data covariance. It is robust and computationally efﬁcient,
but, as a linear technique, is not adequate for our purposes (as
we show in Sec. IV). Our method of choice is the Gaussian
Process Latent Variable Model (GPLVM) , a nonlinear
extension to PCA based on Gaussian processes (GPs). In the
next section we brieﬂy review the formulation of the GPLVM
employed in our experiments.
B. The Gaussian Process Latent Variable Model
The GPLVM deﬁnes a generative, probabilistic model of the
data which uses GPs to map latent variables z ∈Rd to observed variables x ∈RD. Each data dimension j ∈1, . . . , D
has its own GP, but all GPs share the same covariance
parameters. In particular, the data likelihood of the model
is deﬁned as
P(X|Z, θ) ∝
where X ∈RN×D is the data matrix containing N data
points, xj is a column of this matrix, Z ∈RN×d is the matrix
of latent points, θ is a vector of covariance parameters and
K is the covariance matrix of the GPs which depends on Z
and θ. We use the standard squared exponential covariance
function with added white noise deﬁned as
Kmn =k(zm, zn)=θ1 exp
−∥(zm −zn)∥2
where zm and zn are latent points, θ1 controls the amplitude
of the modelled function, θ2 controls its smoothness and θ3
is the variance of the Gaussian noise around the data. This
formulation of the GPLVM can be derived from the dual
formulation of probabilistic PCA which integrates out the
parameters of the PCA model as shown in .
The positions of the latent points, Z, and the covariance
parameters, θ, are found simultaneously by minimising the
negative GP data log-likelihood
{Z, θ} = arg min
Z,θ −log P(X|Z, θ)
using gradient descent. We initialise Z with points found by
applying PCA as suggested in . Because the inverse of K
needs to be computed, each gradient step has a complexity of
O(N 3) which means that the learning gets expensive with
increasing number of data points. In our setting, however,
where the number of data points (as discrete demonstrations)
this is not a signiﬁcant problem.
More important in our setting is the speed of prediction
since this is required at every time step during the RL (see
Sec. III-C). In the GPLVM this is standard GP prediction
which has O(N) complexity, because K−1 is ﬁxed after
learning and can be pre-computed. Prediction for a single
data point z∗returns a Gaussian distribution with mean µj
and variance σ2
j in data dimension j
µj = k∗⊤K−1xj
j = k∗−k∗⊤K−1k∗
where k∗=k(z∗, z∗) is the covariance function evaluated at
that point and k∗=[k(z∗, z1), . . . , k(z∗, zN)]⊤. The returned
variance (equal in all data dimensions) gives a measure
for the conﬁdence in the prediction, usually indicating the
quality of generalisation away from the data. In our setting,
this relationship can be exploited in the RL to prevent
the expensive evaluation of states for which the predictive
variance indicates that the generated posture is unlikely to
adhere to the task structure anyway (see Sec. IV-C).
The GPLVM only learns the mapping from latent to
data space, but does not provide the mapping back. Many
DR methods have the same problem and various out-ofsample extensions have been suggested. In our experience,
the most accurate of these for the GPLVM projects a test
point x∗into latent space by maximising its probability
under the predictive distribution N(x∗|µ, σ2) by varying
the corresponding z∗with gradient descent only on µ (4).
Unfortunately this iterative procedure is comparatively slow,
even though only a few iterations are needed, if initialised
with the nearest data point. Consequently, we ﬁt another set
of GPs for the data-to-latent mapping after the GPLVM has
been learnt. The resulting mapping has good accuracy in
high conﬁdence regions of the latent space and is efﬁcient
to compute.
C. Reinforcement Learning
A number of RL techniques are available for planning and
optimising movements based on exploration of the environment. For the experiments in this paper, we restrict ourselves
to the popular class of methods known as temporal difference
learning (TD(0)) since these perform robustly without the
need for careful initialisation of parameters. In the following
we brieﬂy describe TD(0) learning for approximating the
value function, as used in our framework.
D. TD(0) V-Learning
The general goal of learning is to ﬁnd a policy π(u|x) that
V π(x) = Eπ
γtrt|x0 = x
under dynamics xt+1 = xt + δt f(xt, ut). Here, x ∈Rn
denotes the (continuous) state, u ∈Rd the action and δt
is the time step. V π(x) is the expected return accumulated
by the agent when following the policy π starting from state
x0, γ is a discount factor and rt denotes the instantaneous
Exploiting the latent dimensionality of demonstrations for RL.
reward collected at time t. V π(x) can also be identiﬁed as
the value function of π.
TD(0) methods update the estimate of the value function or
Q-function based on the one-step temporal difference (a.k.a.
the Bellman error) . In our experiments, we used the
variant of TD-learning that uses a function approximator of
ˆV (x) = wT b(x)
to learn (5). Here, w ∈RM is a vector of weights, and
b(x)∈RM is a vector of ﬁxed basis functions. For the latter
we used normalised radial basis functions (RBFs) bi(x) =
j=1 K(x−cj) calculated from squared exponential kernels
K(·) around M pre-determined centres ci, i = 1 . . . M.
During episodes, the value function is learnt online according to
ˆV (xt+1) = ˆV (xt) + αδt
where α is the learning rate and δt is the temporal difference
δt = rt + γ ˆV (xt+1) −ˆV (xt).
For our parametric model (6), this means we apply the update
wt+1 = wt + αδtb(xt).
Finally, using the approximated ˆV (x), actions are selected
according to a soft-max policy to provide directed exploration during episodes. Speciﬁcally, actions are drawn from a
discrete set of |U| continuous actions ui ∈Rd, i={1, . . . |U|}
according to the Boltzmann distribution
p(ui|x) = exp(β ˆQ(x, ui))
j=0 β ˆQ(x, uj)
where β controls the rate of exploration and ˆQ(x, ui) is the
state-action value for action ui, calculated using one-step
look-ahead on the learnt value function, i.e.,
ˆQ(x, ui) = ˆV (x + δt f(x, ui)).
For further details of the implementation see .
E. Incorporating the Latent Space State Representation
For including the representation learnt with DR into our RL
framework, we replace the high-dimensional state x with its
DR representation z, and modify the state update equations
accordingly. Fig. 3 illustrates this for a single RL step.
Starting from a state in latent space, z1, RL selects and
executes action a according to its current policy, leading
to a new latent space state z′
2. The latter is then used to
generate a target in the environment x′
2 by mapping through
the generative GPLVM model, which can be reached, for
example, using a simple PD controller. In general, (due to
tracking errors, noise, etc.) we will not exactly reach x′
instead a slightly different state x2 which we must estimate
(e.g., by taking a sensor reading). It is at this point that
we receive a reward (i.e., based on the true environmental
state). Finally, we return to latent space via the inverse
mapping (out-of-sample GP) to estimate the new reduced
state z2, which is then used to select the next action. Note
that, due to the non-linearity of the DR mapping, the same
action executed in different locations of latent space may
correspond to different movements in the environment. This,
however, is not a problem, if a suitably ﬂexible local policy
is chosen (i.e., one that selects actions based solely on the
current state). Also note that, since the RL is restricted to the
smaller latent space, it may not be possible to ﬁnd globally
optimal (or even feasible sub-optimal) solutions if they do
not lie on this manifold. In practice, however, this is easily
rectiﬁed by the demonstrator by, for example, adjusting the
demonstrated poses and re-learning the DR model.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we report experiments exploring the performance of learning for systems of varying complexity and
size. First, in order to illustrate the concepts involved, we
apply our method to a simulated 4-DOF toy system with
linear state dynamics. We then test the scalability of the
method to a more complex, non-linear system and, ﬁnally,
we illustrate the use of our approach for learning on the
19-DOF KHR-1HV humanoid robot (Fig. 8).
All our experiments are based on the intuitive example
of carrying an object to a target using a bi-manual strategy,
similar to the example described in Sec. II-B. The task of
the learner is to ﬁnd a movement that brings the hands to a
target x∗without dropping the object. For this, the learner
is rewarded according to
R(x) = exp
−θ∥x −x∗∥2
where θ is a scaling parameter. Under (12), the learner
receives very little reward over most of the space, but this
rapidly increases as the hands approach x∗. To increase the
difﬁculty of this problem, we also placed an obstacle in the
environment obstructing the path to the target. Accordingly,
the learner was penalised if the hands (i) hit the obstacle
or, (ii) hit the boundaries of the state space. In both cases,
a ﬁxed penalty R0 = −1 was added to the reward and the
episode terminated. Equal penalisation occurred at any time
the object was dropped. As described in Sec. II-B, one of
the keys to success in this task is, therefore, to maintain
the hands on either side of the object throughout movement.
Formally, this can be expressed as a set of constraints on
the hands of the robot. Note, however, that this information
is not explicitly available to the learner and therefore must
be learnt either (i) from experience (i.e., exploration), or (ii)
from the examples given to the learner as demonstrations.
A. Bi-manual Reaching in End-effector Space
Here, we formulate the bi-manual reaching problem in endeffector space and assume that the full state of the system can
Cumulative Reward
(a) Cumulative reward over episodes for the two-hand problem
when learning in the full 4D state space (red) and the reduced 2D space
(black). The mean±s.d. over 25 trials are shown. (b) Left (green) and right
(red) hand trajectories generated at equal intervals throughout 5000 episodes
of training in 4D (top) and 2D (bottom). Darker colours indicate later phases
of learning. (c) 5 test trajectories sampled from different starting points after
5000 episodes of training with the two approaches. The grey area indicates
the location of the obstacle and the target is marked with an ’x’.
be described by the horizontal-planar coordinates of the two
hands, x ∈R4. State transitions followed linear dynamics,
i.e., xt+1 =xt+δt ut with time step δt=0.1 and we placed a
square obstacle (0.5×0.5 m) in the environment (see Fig. 4).
The target was at x∗= (0, 0, 0.1, 0)T and we set θ = 0.75
in the reward function (12). We compared two approaches
to learning in this setting, namely (i) standard RL, whereby
we used TD(0) to learn the optimal policy in the full state
space x and (ii) the proposed approach, whereby a reduced
state representation is learnt from demonstrations, prior to
applying RL.
For the direct RL approach, the set up was as follows.
The learner was given a set U of actions ui ∈R4 allowing it
to move the hands either independently or simultaneously, in
the four orthogonal directions in x. A Gaussian RBF network
(6), with centres placed on a 20×20×20×20 grid was used to
approximate the value function. A soft-max policy (10) was
used to select actions where, to encourage exploration, we
set β = 10.0. As parameters to the RL, we chose learning
rate α=0.9 and discount factor γ =0.95.
For the proposed approach, we randomly sampled 200
points across the space, which fulﬁlled the constraint on the
distance between the hands. These were used to train the
GPLVM to learn a reduced, 2D state representation, within
which we applied TD(0). For the latter, all RL parameters
were identical to those used for direct RL, with the exception
that (i) the number of RBFs used in the value function
approximation was scaled down to a 2D (as opposed to 4D)
grid of 20×20 bases in latent space, and (ii) the learner’s
action set was reduced to that of movement in the four
orthogonal directions in latent space. Please note that, for
both approaches, if the global optimal policy is found, the
learner can reach the target in the same number of steps,
with the same reward.
Training was conducted for 5000 episodes, with each
episode lasting 500 steps (50 s). Start states were drawn
from a Gaussian distribution N(x0, 0.1) around the point
= (1, 1, 1.1, 1)T . To evaluate learning performance,
the experiment was repeated for 25 trials and the reward
accumulated in each episode of learning was recorded. The
Bi-manual TS
Bi-manual JS
0.05 ± 0.01
3.25 ± 0.41
0.24 ± 0.18
0.80 ± 0.70
100.00 ± 0.00
4.92 ± 0.81
94.50 ± 5.61
61.03 ± 6.16
TOP: RECONSTRUCTION ERROR (RMSE×102) ON 1000 RANDOM
POINTS IN END-EFFECTOR SPACE. BOTTOM: PERCENTAGE OF POINTS IN
LATENT SPACE THAT FULFIL CONSTRAINTS (CF. FIG. 5). SHOWN ARE
MEAN±S.D. OVER 20 TRIALS.
results are shown in Fig. 4.
As can be seen, initially, the average reward accumulated by the two learners increases rapidly. However, when
learning in the full 4D space, beyond the ﬁrst 500 episodes
the average reward starts to level out and the progress
of learning is slow. In contrast, learning in the reduced
dimensional space proceeds much quicker, with convergence
already after approximately 3000 episodes. The reason for
the performance difference becomes clear when looking at
the trajectories generated during training. In Fig. 4(b) we
show examples of trajectories generated at regular intervals
during training with the two approaches. Clearly, due to the
higher dimensionality, learning in the full 4D state space
requires far more exploration to cover the same proportion of
space. The trajectories generated during training also appear
to be shorter than those generated with the DR representation, despite both having to avoid the same obstacle and
boundaries. The difference is that the trajectories generated
in the reduced space automatically satisfy the constraint on
the hands. This means that exploration is focused only on the
reduced part of the space in which possible solutions lie, and
exploration of actions that lead to the object being dropped
is avoided. As a result, the learner using DR rapidly learns a
policy that allows it to satisfy the constraints and reach the
goal from a larger range of the state space (compare example
trajectories in Fig. 4(c)).
It should be noted that, in this simple example there in
fact exists a simple linear transformation between the 2D
constrained space and the 4D space of the hand positions.
Consequently, linear PCA also gives good results (and even
outperforms the GPLVM as shown in Table I) in this
experiment. In our next experiment, however, the nonlinear
relationship between the spaces introduced through the kinematics necessitates the use of nonlinear DR techniques.
B. Bi-manual Reaching in Joint space
In our second experiment we investigated a similar problem
to that described in the previous section, with the difference
that the task must be achieved by controlling 2 planar, 2link arms. The constraints of the problem are identical (i.e.,
to keep the end-effectors keep a ﬁxed distance apart) and full
state space is still 4D, but instead of end-effector positions,
the state is described by the joint angles of the robot. Due
to the kinematics of the arms, non-linearities are introduced
into the problem which cannot be handled by linear DR. To
illustrate this point, we ﬁrst compare the GPLVM with PCA
and evaluate their ability to represent the constraint.
Evaluating DR for the planar 2-link arms: Do points generated
from latent space keep a distance of 0.1 between the two end-effectors?
Light blue dots: end-effector position of left arm (right arm not shown) for
which the distance between end-effectors lies within 0.005 of 0.1, red dots:
distance differs by more than 0.005 from 0.1, circles: demonstrations used
for DR. Top: GPLVM, bottom: PCA. In both ﬁgures the conﬁguration of
the arms is plotted for one example point.
number of episodes
running average of cumulative reward
RL results for the planar 2-link arms. (a) Rewards during learning,
thick black line: average over the plotted trials, blue line: trial for which
results in (b)-(d) are plotted. (b) and (d) Value function before and after
learning. (c) Example trajectories in end-effector space (left hand only), red
cross: goal. Shading in (b) and (c) visualises predictive variance of GPLVM
generative mapping (white means low variance, high conﬁdence). Black
object is latent space representation of the obstacle after mapping through
out-of-sample GP of GPLVM.
Fig. 5 shows a visualisation of our simulation in which
several data sets are plotted. For clarity all data points shown
are from the left hand of the robot only. The circles depict
123 randomly sampled data points which fulﬁl the constraints. We executed DR on their joint space representation,
drew uniform samples from the resulting latent space and
then mapped these to joint angles of the robot using the
generative DR mapping. The dots are the corresponding
hand positions as computed with the forward kinematics
of the robot, colour-coded as to whether they fulﬁl the
constraint within a small error margin. The results clearly
show that PCA (Fig. 5, right) can only correctly represent
the constraint in a very small region of end-effector space
while the GPLVM (Fig. 5, left) covers almost the complete
work space. Table I further documents this result.
Having established that the constraints are correctly represented by the GPLVM we ran RL in its latent space. We used
the above setup with the following changes: we set the width
of the Gaussian reward to θ=0.35, learning rate to α=0.8,
discount factor to γ =0.99, time step to δt=0.05, soft-max
policy to β = 20, extended the action set to also include
diagonal actions and ran the learning for 5000 episodes with
(a) PCA error
(b) Initial value function
(demonstr.
indicated as dots)
(c) Learnt value function with example trajectories.
(d) Example traj. in
end-effector space.
number of episodes
running average of cumulative reward
(e) Rewards during learning, thick black line: average
over the plotted trials, blue line: trial for which results
(b)-(d) are plotted.
Fig. 7. (a) KHR-1HV in a demonstrated pose reconstructed by the GPLVM
(wire frame) and PCA (solid). There is no visual difference between the
GPLVM pose and the original demonstration. (b)-(e): RL results for the
KHR-1HV. Shading in (b) and (c) visualises predictive variance of GPLVM
generative mapping (white means low variance, high conﬁdence).
1000 steps each (or the episode was stopped prematurely
under the conditions given above). We again introduced an
obstacle which, this time, only allowed successful trajectories
to pass through a ‘corridor’ in end-effector space (Fig. 6(c)).
Start states were drawn uniformly across latent space. The
results are presented in Fig. 6.
Fig. 6(a) shows running averages over a window of 500
episodes of the cumulative reward per episode for 25 runs of
RL (trials). We plot running averages, because the random
start states mean that the cumulative reward per episode is
highly variable. The accumulated reward clearly increases
with learning. For the trial highlighted as the blue line, we
present the initial and learnt value functions in latent space in
Figures 6(b) and 6(d), respectively. As demonstrated by the
sample trajectories in Fig. 6(d) the learnt policy successfully
solves the task, leading trajectories around the obstacle into
the goal. Fig. 6(c) depicts the resulting trajectories in endeffector space. For clarity we only plot the trajectories of the
left hand, but right hand trajectories follow with the desired
distance of 0.1 m behind the left hand.
C. Full-Body Humanoid Reaching
In our ﬁnal experiment, we demonstrate the complete approach on the 19 DOF KHR-1HV humanoid (Fig. 8). Similar
to the preceding experiments, we investigate a bi-manual
task, this time to lift an object while avoiding obstacles.
Instead of devising an inverse kinematics for this task by
hand, we demonstrated individual poses of 2 alternative ways
of lifting an object (7 poses in total). Of the 19 DOF, 10 were
major contributors to the changes in posture, the remaining 9
Fig. 8. Left: Kinematic model showing the 19 DOF of the robot.Orientation
of circles indicates axis of rotation of rotation of the joints; x: vertical
ellipse, y: circle, z: horizontal ellipse. Right: Video frames of successful,
obstacle avoiding trajectory executed on KHR-1HV after RL.
(marked in red in Fig. 8(b)) changed by less than 10 degrees
across different postures. The realised postures all lay on a
central y-z-plane of the robot, i.e., the hands of the robot
did not move sidewards (subject to noise originating from
the manual demonstrations). Therefore, the space of related
movements was inherently 2D which motivated the use of 2D
latent spaces for DR. Compared to the previous examples,
PCA already performed remarkably well in reconstructing
and interpolating the demonstrated postures. The remaining
inaccuracies, however, meant that the robot leant excessively
backwards (Fig. 7(a)) causing it to fall after transition between relevant poses. In contrast, with the GPLVM, the learnt
latent space almost perfectly reconstructed the demonstrated
postures and, in high conﬁdence regions, avoided unstable
positions.
We applied RL in the learnt latent space with the following
changes to the parameters: we replaced the Gaussian reward
function (12) with a more pointed Laplacian3 R(x) =
exp {−20∥x −x∗∥}, set γ = 0.995, δt = 0.5, allowed for
more stochastic action selection β = 10 and reduced the
number of steps per episode to 200. An episode was aborted
when an obstacle was hit, or when the predictive variance
of a latent point was larger than 0.0004 (corresponding to
standard deviation of 1.15 degrees in each joint). The latter
criterion is an indirect measure of constraint fulﬁlment and
replaces the direct measures from the previous experiments
as they are unavailable in this completely unsupervised
setting (where the only information about the task is given
indirectly by the demonstrations themselves). In Fig. 7 we
present the results.
As in the previous examples, RL consistently learnt good
approximations of the value function and resulting policies
moved the hands of the robot to the target while avoiding
the obstacle. In the accompanying video we present these
results on the real robot. We show an example demonstration, explore the resulting latent space online and execute
trajectories of the learnt policy (see also Fig. 8).
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we explored the potential use of DR as abstraction for RL to improve its scalability to high-dimensional
continuous spaces. Our hypothesis was that for constrained
problems DR provides an alternative state representation,
that exploits the hidden low-dimensional structure of the
3The reward was deﬁned over the positions of the hands and used the
forward kinematics to evaluate the generated movements in simulation.
task. This beneﬁts RL by (i) reducing the size of the
space in which planning is done, and; (ii) avoiding wasteful
exploration of the parts of the space in which the constraints
are not satisﬁed and no solution exists. These beneﬁts were
evident in our experiments where RL in latent spaces emphatically outperformed learning in the original state space
of the problem. By using this approach we saw that RL
becomes feasible even in very high-dimensional, continuous
systems such as the KHR-1HV humanoid to which the used
RL method could otherwise not be applied.
For future work, we are looking into extending the approach in to the nonlinear case within our framework
to provide the DR with additional information about the
relevance of demonstrated postures to the task given by
the reward. Furthermore, we aim to reduce the number of
episodes needed during RL training by employing more
sophisticated RL techniques.