Simultaneous Deep Transfer Across Domains and Tasks
Eric Tzeng∗, Judy Hoffman∗, Trevor Darrell
UC Berkeley, EECS & ICSI
{etzeng,jhoffman,trevor}@eecs.berkeley.edu
Kate Saenko
UMass Lowell, CS
 
Recent reports suggest that a generic supervised deep
CNN model trained on a large-scale dataset reduces, but
does not remove, dataset bias. Fine-tuning deep models in
a new domain can require a signiﬁcant amount of labeled
data, which for many applications is simply not available.
We propose a new CNN architecture to exploit unlabeled and
sparsely labeled target domain data. Our approach simultaneously optimizes for domain invariance to facilitate domain
transfer and uses a soft label distribution matching loss to
transfer information between tasks. Our proposed adaptation method offers empirical performance which exceeds
previously published results on two standard benchmark visual domain adaptation tasks, evaluated across supervised
and semi-supervised adaptation settings.
1. Introduction
Consider a group of robots trained by the manufacturer
to recognize thousands of common objects using standard
image databases, then shipped to households around the
country. As each robot starts to operate in its own unique
environment, it is likely to have degraded performance due
to the shift in domain. It is clear that, given enough extra supervised data from the new environment, the original
performance could be recovered. However, state-of-the-art
recognition algorithms rely on high capacity convolutional
neural network (CNN) models that require millions of supervised images for initial training. Even the traditional
approach for adapting deep models, ﬁne-tuning ,
may require hundreds or thousands of labeled examples for
each object category that needs to be adapted.
It is reasonable to assume that the robot’s new owner
will label a handful of examples for a few types of objects,
but completely unrealistic to presume full supervision in
the new environment. Therefore, we propose an algorithm
that effectively adapts between the training (source) and test
(target) environments by utilizing both generic statistics from
∗Authors contributed equally.
Source domain!
Target domain!
1. Maximize domain confusion!
2. Transfer task correlation!
Figure 1. We transfer discriminative category information from
a source domain to a target domain via two methods. First, we
maximize domain confusion by making the marginal distributions
of the two domains as similar as possible. Second, we transfer correlations between classes learned on the source examples directly to
the target examples, thereby preserving the relationships between
unlabeled data collected in the new environment as well as a
few human labeled examples from a subset of the categories
of interest. Our approach performs transfer learning both
across domains and across tasks (see Figure 1). Intuitively,
domain transfer is accomplished by making the marginal
feature distributions of source and target as similar to each
other as possible. Task transfer is enabled by transferring
empirical category correlations learned on the source to the
target domain. This helps to preserve relationships between
categories, e.g., bottle is similar to mug but different from
keyboard. Previous work proposed techniques for domain
transfer with CNN models but did not utilize the
learned source semantic structure for task transfer.
To enable domain transfer, we use the unlabeled target
data to compute an estimated marginal distribution over the
new environment and explicitly optimize a feature repre-
 
sentation that minimizes the distance between the source
and target domain distributions. Dataset bias was classically illustrated in computer vision by the “name the dataset”
game of Torralba and Efros , which trained a classiﬁer
to predict which dataset an image originates from, thereby
showing that visual datasets are biased samples of the visual
world. Indeed, this turns out to be formally connected to
measures of domain discrepancy . Optimizing for
domain invariance, therefore, can be considered equivalent
to the task of learning to predict the class labels while simultaneously ﬁnding a representation that makes the domains
appear as similar as possible. This principle forms the domain transfer component of our proposed approach. We
learn deep representations by optimizing over a loss which
includes both classiﬁcation error on the labeled data as well
as a domain confusion loss which seeks to make the domains
indistinguishable.
However, while maximizing domain confusion pulls the
marginal distributions of the domains together, it does not
necessarily align the classes in the target with those in the
source. Thus, we also explicitly transfer the similarity structure amongst categories from the source to the target and
further optimize our representation to produce the same structure in the target domain using the few target labeled examples as reference points. We are inspired by prior work on
distilling deep models and extend the ideas presented
in these works to a domain adaptation setting. We ﬁrst compute the average output probability distribution, or “soft
label,” over the source training examples in each category.
Then, for each target labeled example, we directly optimize
our model to match the distribution over classes to the soft
label. In this way we are able to perform task adaptation by
transferring information to categories with no explicit labels
in the target domain.
We solve the two problems jointly using a new CNN architecture, outlined in Figure 2. We combine a domain confusion and softmax cross-entropy losses to train the network
with the target data. Our architecture can be used to solve supervised adaptation, when a small amount of target labeled
data is available from each category, and semi-supervised
adaptation, when a small amount of target labeled data is
available from a subset of the categories. We provide a comprehensive evaluation on the popular Ofﬁce benchmark 
and the recently introduced cross-dataset collection for
classiﬁcation across visually distinct domains. We demonstrate that by jointly optimizing for domain confusion and
matching soft labels, we are able to outperform the current
state-of-the-art visual domain adaptation results.
2. Related work
There have been many approaches proposed in recent
years to solve the visual domain adaptation problem, which
is also commonly framed as the visual dataset bias problem . All recognize that there is a shift in the distribution of the source and target data representations. In
fact, the size of a domain shift is often measured by the
distance between the source and target subspace representations . A large number of methods have
sought to overcome this difference by learning a feature
space transformation to align the source and target representations . For the supervised adaptation
scenario, when a limited amount of labeled data is available
in the target domain, some approaches have been proposed
to learn a target classiﬁer regularized against the source classiﬁer . Others have sought to both learn a feature
transformation and regularize a target classiﬁer simultaneously .
Recently, supervised CNN based feature representations
have been shown to be extremely effective for a variety of
visual recognition tasks . In particular, using
deep representations dramatically reduces the effect of resolution and lighting on domain shifts . Parallel CNN
architectures such as Siamese networks have been shown
to be effective for learning invariant representations .
However, training these networks requires labels for each
training instance, so it is unclear how to extend these methods to unsupervised or semi-supervised settings. Multimodal
deep learning architectures have also been explored to learn
representations that are invariant to different input modalities . However, this method operated primarily in a
generative context and therefore did not leverage the full
representational power of supervised CNN representations.
Training a joint source and target CNN architecture was
proposed by , but was limited to two layers and so was
signiﬁcantly outperformed by the methods which used a
deeper architecture , pre-trained on a large auxiliary
data source (ex: ImageNet ). proposed pre-training
with a denoising auto-encoder, then training a two-layer network simultaneously with the MMD domain confusion loss.
This effectively learns a domain invariant representation, but
again, because the learned network is relatively shallow, it
lacks the strong semantic representation that is learned by directly optimizing a classiﬁcation objective with a supervised
Using classiﬁer output distributions instead of category
labels during training has been explored in the context of
model compression or distillation . However, we are
the ﬁrst to apply this technique in a domain adaptation setting
in order to transfer class correlations between domains.
Other works have cotemporaneously explored the idea
of directly optimizing a representation for domain invariance . However, they either use weaker measures
of domain invariance or make use of optimization methods
that are less robust than our proposed method, and they do
not attempt to solve the task transfer problem in the semisupervised setting.
Source Data
Target Data
Source softlabels
all target data
source data
labeled target data
source data
classiﬁcation
Figure 2. Our overall CNN architecture for domain and task transfer. We use a domain confusion loss over all source and target (both labeled
and unlabeled) data to learn a domain invariant representation. We simultaneously transfer the learned source semantic structure to the target
domain by optimizing the network to produce activation distributions that match those learned for source data in the source only CNN. Best
viewed in color.
3. Joint CNN architecture for domain and task
We ﬁrst give an overview of our convolutional network
(CNN) architecture, depicted in Figure 2, that learns a representation which both aligns visual domains and transfers
the semantic structure from a well labeled source domain to
the sparsely labeled target domain. We assume access to a
limited amount of labeled target data, potentially from only
a subset of the categories of interest. With limited labels on
a subset of the categories, the traditional domain transfer approach of ﬁne-tuning on the available target data 
is not effective. Instead, since the source labeled data shares
the label space of our target domain, we use the source data
to guide training of the corresponding classiﬁers.
Our method takes as input the labeled source data
{xS, yS} (blue box Figure 2) and the target data {xT , yT }
(green box Figure 2), where the labels yT are only provided
for a subset of the target examples. Our goal is to produce
a category classiﬁer θC that operates on an image feature
representation f(x; θrepr) parameterized by representation
parameters θrepr and can correctly classify target examples
at test time.
For a setting with K categories, let our desired classiﬁcation objective be deﬁned as the standard softmax loss
LC(x, y; θrepr, θC) = −
1[y = k] log pk
where p is the softmax of the classiﬁer activations,
p = softmax(θT
Cf(x; θrepr)).
We could use the available source labeled data to train
our representation and classiﬁer parameters according to
Equation (1), but this often leads to overﬁtting to the source
distribution, causing reduced performance at test time when
recognizing in the target domain. However, we note that
if the source and target domains are very similar then the
classiﬁer trained on the source will perform well on the
target. In fact, it is sufﬁcient for the source and target data to
be similar under the learned representation, θrepr.
Inspired by the “name the dataset” game of Torralba
and Efros , we can directly train a domain classiﬁer
θD to identify whether a training example originates from
the source or target domain given its feature representation.
Intuitively, if our choice of representation suffers from domain shift, then they will lie in distinct parts of the feature
space, and a classiﬁer will be able to easily separate the
domains. We use this notion to add a new domain confusion
loss Lconf(xS, xT , θD; θrepr) to our objective and directly optimize our representation so as to minimize the discrepancy
between the source and target distributions. This loss is
described in more detail in Section 3.1.
Domain confusion can be applied to learn a representation
that aligns source and target data without any target labeled
data. However, we also presume a handful of sparse labels
in the target domain, yT . In this setting, a simple approach is
to incorporate the target labeled data along with the source
labeled data into the classiﬁcation objective of Equation (1)1.
However, ﬁne-tuning with hard category labels limits the
impact of a single training example, making it hard for the
network to learn to generalize from the limited labeled data.
Additionally, ﬁne-tuning with hard labels is ineffective when
labeled data is available for only a subset of the categories.
For our approach, we draw inspiration from recent network distillation works , which demonstrate that a
large network can be “distilled” into a simpler model by replacing the hard labels with the softmax activations from the
original large model. This modiﬁcation proves to be critical,
as the distribution holds key information about the relation-
1We present this approach as one of our baselines.
ships between categories and imposes additional structure
during the training process. In essence, because each training example is paired with an output distribution, it provides
valuable information about not only the category it belongs
to, but also each other category the classiﬁer is trained to
recognize.
Thus, we propose using the labeled target data to optimize the network parameters through a soft label loss,
Lsoft(xT , yT ; θrepr, θC). This loss will train the network parameters to produce a “soft label” activation that matches
the average output distribution of source examples on a network trained to classify source data. This loss is described in
more detail in Section 3.2. By training the network to match
the expected source output distributions on target data, we
transfer the learned inter-class correlations from the source
domain to examples in the target domain. This directly transfers useful information from source to target, such as the fact
that bookshelves appear more similar to ﬁling cabinets than
to bicycles.
Our full method then minimizes the joint loss function
L(xS, yS, xT , yT , θD;θrepr, θC) =
LC(xS, yS, xT , yT ; θrepr, θC)
+ λLconf(xS, xT , θD; θrepr)
+ νLsoft(xT , yT ; θrepr, θC).
where the hyperparameters λ and ν determine how strongly
domain confusion and soft labels inﬂuence the optimization.
Our ideas of domain confusion and soft label loss for task
transfer are generic and can be applied to any CNN classiﬁcation architecture. For our experiments and for the detailed
discussion in this paper we modify the standard Krizhevsky
architecture , which has ﬁve convolutional layers (conv1–
conv5) and three fully connected layers (fc6–fc8). The representation parameter θrepr corresponds to layers 1–7 of the
network, and the classiﬁcation parameter θC corresponds to
layer 8. For the remainder of this section, we provide further
details on our novel loss deﬁnitions and the implementation
of our model.
3.1. Aligning domains via domain confusion
In this section we describe in detail our proposed domain
confusion loss objective. Recall that we introduce the domain
confusion loss as a means to learn a representation that is
domain invariant, and thus will allow us to better utilize a
classiﬁer trained using the labeled source data. We consider
a representation to be domain invariant if a classiﬁer trained
using that representation can not distinguish examples from
the two domains.
To this end, we add an additional domain classiﬁcation
layer, denoted as fcD in Figure 2, with parameters θD. This
layer simply performs binary classiﬁcation using the domain
corresponding to an image as its label. For a particular feature representation, θrepr, we evaluate its domain invariance
by learning the best domain classiﬁer on the representation.
This can be learned by optimizing the following objective,
where yD denotes the domain that the example is drawn
LD(xS, xT , θrepr; θD) = −
1[yD = d] log qd
with q corresponding to the softmax of the domain classiﬁer
activation: q = softmax(θT
Df(x; θrepr)).
For a particular domain classiﬁer, θD, we can now introduce our loss which seeks to “maximally confuse” the
two domains by computing the cross entropy between the
output predicted domain labels and a uniform distribution
over domain labels:
Lconf(xS, xT , θD; θrepr) = −
This domain confusion loss seeks to learn domain invariance by ﬁnding a representation in which the best domain
classiﬁer performs poorly.
Ideally, we want to simultaneously minimize Equations (3) and (4) for the representation and the domain classiﬁer parameters. However, the two losses stand in direct
opposition to one another: learning a fully domain invariant
representation means the domain classiﬁer must do poorly,
and learning an effective domain classiﬁer means that the
representation is not domain invariant. Rather than globally
optimizing θD and θrepr, we instead perform iterative updates
for the following two objectives given the ﬁxed parameters
from the previous iteration:
θD LD(xS, xT , θrepr; θD)
θrepr Lconf(xS, xT , θD; θrepr).
These losses are readily implemented in standard deep
learning frameworks, and after setting learning rates properly
so that Equation (5) only updates θD and Equation (6) only
updates θrepr, the updates can be performed via standard
backpropagation. Together, these updates ensure that we
learn a representation that is domain invariant.
3.2. Aligning source and target classes via soft labels
While training the network to confuse the domains acts
to align their marginal distributions, there are no guarantees
about the alignment of classes between each domain. To
ensure that the relationships between classes are preserved
across source and target, we ﬁne-tune the network against
“soft labels” rather than the image category hard label.
We deﬁne a soft label for category k as the average over
the softmax of all activations of source examples in category
k, depicted graphically in Figure 3, and denote this average as l(k). Note that, since the source network was trained
Figure 3. Soft label distributions are learned by averaging the percategory activations of source training examples using the source
model. An example, with 5 categories, depicted here to demonstrate
the ﬁnal soft activation for the bottle category will be primarily
dominated by bottle and mug with very little mass on chair, laptop,
and keyboard.
Source Activations
Cross Entropy Loss
Figure 4. Depiction of the use of source per-category soft activations with the cross entropy loss function over the current target
activations.
purely to optimize a classiﬁcation objective, a simple softmax over each zi
S will hide much of the useful information
by producing a very peaked distribution. Instead, we use a
softmax with a high temperature τ so that the related classes
have enough probability mass to have an effect during ﬁnetuning. With our computed per-category soft labels we can
now deﬁne our soft label loss:
Lsoft(xT , yT ; θrepr, θC) = −
where p denotes the soft activation of the target image,
p = softmax(θT
Cf(xT ; θrepr)/τ).
The loss above corresponds to the cross-entropy loss between the soft activation
of a particular target image and the soft label corresponding
to the category of that image, as shown in Figure 4.
To see why this will help, consider the soft label for a
particular category, such as bottle. The soft label l(bottle) is
a K-dimensional vector, where each dimension indicates
the similarity of bottles to each of the K categories. In this
example, the bottle soft label will have a higher weight on
mug than on keyboard, since bottles and mugs are more
visually similar. Thus, soft label training with this particular
soft label directly enforces the relationship that bottles and
mugs should be closer in feature space than bottles and
keyboards.
One important beneﬁt of using this soft label loss is that
we ensure that the parameters for categories without any
labeled target data are still updated to output non-zero probabilities. We explore this beneﬁt in Section 4, where we train
a network using labels from a subset of the target categories
and ﬁnd signiﬁcant performance improvement even when
evaluating only on the unlabeled categories.
4. Evaluation
To analyze the effectiveness of our method, we evaluate it
on the Ofﬁce dataset, a standard benchmark dataset for visual
domain adaptation, and on a new large-scale cross-dataset
domain adaptation challenge.
4.1. Adaptation on the Ofﬁce dataset
The Ofﬁce dataset is a collection of images from three
distinct domains, Amazon, DSLR, and Webcam, the largest
of which has 2817 labeled images . The 31 categories
in the dataset consist of objects commonly encountered in
ofﬁce settings, such as keyboards, ﬁle cabinets, and laptops.
We evaluate our method in two different settings:
• Supervised adaptation Labeled training data for all
categories is available in source and sparsely in target.
• Semi-supervised adaptation (task adaptation) Labeled training data is available in source and sparsely
for a subset of the target categories.
For all experiments we initialize the parameters of conv1–
fc7 using the released CaffeNet weights. We then further ﬁne-tune the network using the source labeled data in order to produce the soft label distributions and use the learned
source CNN weights as the initial parameters for training
our method. All implementations are produced using the
open source Caffe framework, and the network deﬁnition ﬁles and cross entropy loss layer needed for training
will be released upon acceptance. We optimize the network
using a learning rate of 0.001 and set the hyper-parameters
to λ = 0.01 (confusion) and ν = 0.1 (soft).
For each of the six domain shifts, we evaluate across ﬁve
train/test splits, which are generated by sampling examples
from the full set of images per domain. In the source domain,
we follow the standard protocol for this dataset and generate
splits by sampling 20 examples per category for the Amazon
domain, and 8 examples per category for the DSLR and
Webcam domains.
We ﬁrst present results for the supervised setting, where
3 labeled examples are provided for each category in the
target domain. We report accuracies on the remaining unlabeled images, following the standard protocol introduced
with the dataset . In addition to a variety of baselines, we
DeCAF6 S+T 
80.7 ± 2.3
94.8 ± 1.2
53.6 ± 0.2
83.5 ± 0.0
71.2 ± 0.0
Source CNN
56.5 ± 0.3 64.6 ± 0.4
42.7 ± 0.1
93.6 ± 0.2
47.6 ± 0.1
92.4 ± 0.3
Target CNN
80.5 ± 0.5 81.8 ± 1.0
59.9 ± 0.3
81.8 ± 1.0
59.9 ± 0.3
80.5 ± 0.5
Source+Target CNN
82.5 ± 0.9 85.2 ± 1.1 65.2 ± 0.7 96.3 ± 0.5
65.8 ± 0.5 93.9 ± 0.5
Ours: dom confusion only
82.8 ± 0.9 85.9 ± 1.1 64.9 ± 0.5 97.5 ± 0.2 66.2 ± 0.4 95.6 ± 0.4
Ours: soft labels only
82.7 ± 0.7 84.9 ± 1.2 65.2 ± 0.6
98.3 ± 0.3 66.0 ± 0.5 95.9 ± 0.6
Ours: dom confusion+soft labels 82.7 ± 0.8 86.1 ± 1.2 65.0 ± 0.5 97.6 ± 0.2 66.2 ± 0.3 95.7 ± 0.5
Table 1. Multi-class accuracy evaluation on the standard supervised adaptation setting with the Ofﬁce dataset. We evaluate on all 31 categories
using the standard experimental protocol from . Here, we compare against three state-of-the-art domain adaptation methods as well as a
CNN trained using only source data, only target data, or both source and target data together.
44.6 ± 0.3
58.3 ± 0.5
Source CNN
54.2 ± 0.6 63.2 ± 0.4
34.7 ± 0.1
94.5 ± 0.2
36.4 ± 0.1
89.3 ± 0.5
Ours: dom confusion only
55.2 ± 0.6 63.7 ± 0.9 41.1 ± 0.0 96.5 ± 0.1
41.2 ± 0.1 91.3 ± 0.4
Ours: soft labels only
56.8 ± 0.4 65.2 ± 0.9
38.8 ± 0.4
96.5 ± 0.2
41.7 ± 0.3
89.6 ± 0.1
Ours: dom confusion+soft labels 59.3 ± 0.6 68.0 ± 0.5 40.5 ± 0.2 97.5 ± 0.1
43.1 ± 0.2 90.0 ± 0.2
Table 2. Multi-class accuracy evaluation on the standard semi-supervised adaptation setting with the Ofﬁce dataset. We evaluate on 16
held-out categories for which we have no access to target labeled data. We show results on these unsupervised categories for the source only
model, our model trained using only soft labels for the 15 auxiliary categories, and ﬁnally using domain confusion together with soft labels
on the 15 auxiliary categories.
report numbers for both soft label ﬁne-tuning alone as well
as soft labels with domain confusion in Table 1. Because the
Ofﬁce dataset is imbalanced, we report multi-class accuracies, which are obtained by computing per-class accuracies
independently, then averaging over all 31 categories.
We see that ﬁne-tuning with soft labels or domain confusion provides a consistent improvement over hard label
training in 5 of 6 shifts. Combining soft labels with domain confusion produces marginally higher performance on
average. This result follows the intuitive notion that when
enough target labeled examples are present, directly optimizing for the joint source and target classiﬁcation objective
(Source+Target CNN) is a strong baseline and so using either of our new losses adds enough regularization to improve
performance.
Next, we experiment with the semi-supervised adaptation
setting. We consider the case in which training data and
labels are available for some, but not all of the categories in
the target domain. We are interested in seeing whether we
can transfer information learned from the labeled classes to
the unlabeled classes.
To do this, we consider having 10 target labeled examples per category from only 15 of the 31 total categories,
following the standard protocol introduced with the Ofﬁce
dataset . We then evaluate our classiﬁcation performance
on the remaining 16 categories for which no data was available at training time.
In Table 2 we present multi-class accuracies over the 16
held-out categories and compare our method to a previous
domain adaptation method as well as a source-only
trained CNN. Note that, since the performance here is computed over only a subset of the categories in the dataset, the
numbers in this table should not be directly compared to the
supervised setting in Table 1.
We ﬁnd that all variations of our method (only soft label
loss, only domain confusion, and both together) outperform
the baselines. Contrary to the fully supervised case, here we
note that both domain confusion and soft labels contribute
signiﬁcantly to the overall performance improvement of our
method. This stems from the fact that we are now evaluating on categories which lack labeled target data, and thus
the network can not implicitly enforce domain invariance
through the classiﬁcation objective alone. Separately, the
fact that we get improvement from the soft label training on
related tasks indicates that information is being effectively
transferred between tasks.
Amazon→Webcam shift where our method correctly
classiﬁes images from held out object categories and the
baseline does not.
We ﬁnd that our method is able to
consistently overcome error cases, such as the notebooks
that were previously confused with letter trays, or the black
ring binder
laptop computer
laptop computer
paper notebook
letter tray
paper notebook
letter tray
paper notebook
letter tray
paper notebook
letter tray
paper notebook
laptop computer
paper notebook
calculator
calculator
file cabinet
file cabinet
file cabinet
laptop computer
laptop computer
file cabinet
tape dispenser
laptop computer
ring binder
ring binder
ring binder
letter tray
ring binder
laptop computer
ring binder
Figure 5. Examples from the Amazon→Webcam shift in the
semi-supervised adaptation setting, where our method (the bottom turquoise label) correctly classiﬁes images while the baseline
(the top purple label) does not.
mugs that were confused with black computer mice.
4.2. Adaptation between diverse domains
For an evaluation with larger, more distinct domains, we
test on the recent testbed for cross-dataset analysis ,
which collects images from classes shared in common among
computer vision datasets. We use the dense version of this
testbed, which consists of 40 categories shared between
the ImageNet, Caltech-256, SUN, and Bing datasets, and
evaluate speciﬁcally with ImageNet as source and Caltech-
256 as target.
We follow the protocol outlined in and generate 5
splits by selecting 5534 images from ImageNet and 4366
images from Caltech-256 across the 40 shared categories.
Each split is then equally divided into a train and test set.
However, since we are most interested in evaluating in the
setting with limited target data, we further subsample the
target training set into smaller sets with only 1, 3, and 5
labeled examples per category.
Results from this evaluation are shown in Figure 6. We
compare our method to both CNNs ﬁne-tuned using only
source data using source and target labeled data. Contrary to
the previous supervised adaptation experiment, our method
signiﬁcantly outperforms both baselines. We see that our
full architecture, combining domain confusion with the soft
label loss, performs the best overall and is able to operate
in the regime of no labeled examples in the target (corresponding to the red line at point 0 on the x-axis). We ﬁnd
that the most beneﬁt of our method arises when there are
few labeled training examples per category in the target domain. As we increase the number of labeled examples in
the target, the standard ﬁne-tuning strategy begins to approach the performance of the adaptation approach. This
Number Labeled Target Examples per Category
Multi-class Accuracy
Source CNN
Source+Target CNN
Ours: softlabels only
Ours: dom confusion+softlabels
Figure 6. ImageNet→Caltech supervised adaptation from the Crossdataset testbed with varying numbers of labeled target examples per category. We ﬁnd that our method using soft label loss
(with and without domain confusion) outperforms the baselines
of training on source data alone or using a standard ﬁne-tuning
strategy to train with the source and target data. Best viewed in
indicates that direct joint source and target ﬁne-tuning is
a viable adaptation approach when you have a reasonable
number of training examples per category. In comparison,
ﬁne-tuning on the target examples alone yields accuracies
of 36.6 ± 0.6, 60.9 ± 0.5, and 67.7 ± 0.5 for the cases of 1,
3, and 5 labeled examples per category, respectively. All of
these numbers underperform the source only model, indicating that adaptation is crucial in the setting of limited training
Finally, we note that our results are signiﬁcantly higher
than the 24.8% result reported in , despite the use of
much less training data. This difference is explained by their
use of SURF BoW features, indicating that CNN features
are a much stronger feature for use in adaptation tasks.
5. Analysis
Our experimental results demonstrate that our method
improves classiﬁcation performance in a variety of domain
adaptation settings. We now perform additional analysis on
our method by conﬁrming our claims that it exhibits domain
invariance and transfers information across tasks.
5.1. Domain confusion enforces domain invariance
We begin by evaluating the effectiveness of domain confusion at learning a domain invariant representation. As
previously explained, we consider a representation to be
domain invariant if an optimal classiﬁer has difﬁculty predicting which domain an image originates from. Thus, for
our representation learned with a domain confusion loss, we
expect a trained domain classiﬁer to perform poorly.
We train two support vector machines (SVMs) to classify images into domains: one using the baseline CaffeNet
fc7 representation, and the other using our fc7 learned with
Figure 7. We compare the baseline CaffeNet representation to
our representation learned with domain confusion by training a
support vector machine to predict the domains of Amazon and
Webcam images. For each representation, we plot a histogram of
the classiﬁer decision scores of the test images. In the baseline
representation, the classiﬁer is able to separate the two domains
with 99% accuracy. In contrast, the representation learned with
domain confusion is domain invariant, and the classiﬁer can do no
better than 56%.
domain confusion. These SVMs are trained using 160 images, 80 from Amazon and 80 from Webcam, then tested
on the remaining images from those domains. We plot the
classiﬁer scores for each test image in Figure 7. It is obvious
that the domain confusion representation is domain invariant,
making it much harder to separate the two domains—the
test accuracy on the domain confusion representation is only
56%, not much better than random. In contrast, on the baseline CaffeNet representation, the domain classiﬁer achieves
99% test accuracy.
5.2. Soft labels for task transfer
We now examine the effect of soft labels in transferring information between categories.
We consider the
Amazon→Webcam shift from the semi-supervised adaptation experiment in the previous section. Recall that in this
setting, we have access to target labeled data for only half
of our categories. We use soft label information from the
source domain to provide information about the held-out
categories which lack labeled target examples. Figure 8
examines one target example from the held-out category
monitor. No labeled target monitors were available during
training; however, as shown in the upper right corner of Figure 8, the soft labels for laptop computer was present during
training and assigns a relatively high weight to the monitor
class. Soft label ﬁne-tuning thus allows us to exploit the fact
that these categories are similar. We see that the baseline
model misclassiﬁes this image as a ring binder, while our
soft label model correctly assigns the monitor label.
6. Conclusion
We have presented a CNN architecture that effectively
adapts to a new domain with limited or no labeled data per
target category. We accomplish this through a novel CNN
architecture which simultaneously optimizes for domain inback pack
bike helmet
calculator
desk chair
desktop computer
file cabinet
headphones
laptop computer
letter tray
mobile phone
paper notebook
ring binder
tape dispenser
Ours soft label
bike helmet
calculator
desk chair
desktop computer
file cabinet
headphones
laptop computer
letter tray
mobile phone
paper notebook
ring binder
tape dispenser
Baseline soft label
bike helmet
calculator
desk chair
desktop computer
file cabinet
headphones
laptop computer
letter tray
mobile phone
ring binder
Baseline soft activation
Our soft activation
Source soft labels
Target test image
Figure 8. Our method (bottom turquoise label) correctly predicts
the category of this image, whereas the baseline (top purple label)
does not. The source per-category soft labels for the 15 categories
with labeled target data are shown in the upper right corner, where
the x-axis of the plot represents the 31 categories and the y-axis is
the output probability. We highlight the index corresponding to the
monitor category in red. As no labeled target data is available for
the correct category, monitor, we ﬁnd that in our method the related
category of laptop computer (outlined with yellow box) transfers
information to the monitor category. As a result, after training, our
method places the highest weight on the correct category. Probability score per category for the baseline and our method are shown
in the bottom left and right, respectively, training categories are
opaque and correct test category is shown in red.
variance, to facilitate domain transfer, while transferring
task information between domains in the form of a cross
entropy soft label loss. We demonstrate the ability of our
architecture to improve adaptation performance in the supervised and semi-supervised settings by experimenting with
two standard domain adaptation benchmark datasets. In the
semi-supervised adaptation setting, we see an average relative improvement of 13% over the baselines on the four most
challenging shifts in the Ofﬁce dataset. Overall, our method
can be easily implemented as an alternative ﬁne-tuning strategy when limited or no labeled data is available per category
in the target domain.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by DARPA;
AFRL; DoD MURI award N000141110688; NSF awards
113629, IIS-1427425, and IIS-1212798; and the Berkeley
Vision and Learning Center.