Efﬁcient Evaluation of k-Range Nearest Neighbor
Queries in Road Networks
∗Chi-Yin Chow
∗Mohamed F. Mokbel
†Wei-Shinn Ku
∗Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA
Email: {baojie, cchow, mokbel}@cs.umn.edu
† Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849, USA
Email: 
Abstract—A k-Range Nearest Neighbor (or kRNN for short)
query in road networks ﬁnds the k nearest neighbors of every
point on the road segments within a given query region based on
the network distance. The kRNN query is signiﬁcantly important
for location-based applications in many realistic scenarios. For
example, (1) the user’s location is uncertain, i.e., user’s location
is modeled by a spatial region, and (2) the user is not willing
to reveal her exact location to preserve her privacy, i.e., her
location is blurred into a spatial region. However, the existing
solutions for kRNN queries simply apply the traditional k-nearest
neighbor query processing algorithm multiple times, which poses
a huge redundant searching overhead. To this end, we propose
an efﬁcient kRNN query processing algorithm in this paper.
Our algorithm (1) employs a shared execution approach to
eliminate the redundant searching overhead, and (2) provides
a parameter that can be tuned to achieve a tradeoff between the
query processing performance and the storage overhead, while
guaranteeing the user’s exact k-nearest neighbors are included
in the query answers. The experimental results show that our
algorithm always outperforms the existing solution in terms of
query response time, and the introduced tuning parameter is an
effective way to achieve the tradeoff between the query response
time and the storage overhead.
I. INTRODUCTION
k-Nearest Neighbor (or kNN for short) query is one of
the most popular query types in location-based services ,
 , where a user issues a kNN query to the service provider
for the k-nearest objects of interest to her current location.
With the advances in spatial databases, the kNN query has
been extended from the Euclidean space to the road network
environment , , , where the user can issue the kNN
query to ﬁnd her k-nearest objects of interest based on the
network distance. The kNN query result over the network
distance or the travel time is more meaningful to the user, since
the user is usually traveling on the road network,. Recently,
the kNN query has been further extended to k-range nearest
neighbor (or kRNN for short) query in the road network. The
main idea of the kRNN query is to ﬁnd the k-nearest objects
of interest to every point on the road segments within a query
region given by the user. Figure 1 gives an example of a
kRNN query in a road network, where each line represents
a road segment, each circle represents an intersection of road
This research was supported in part by NSF grants IIS-0811998, IIS-
0811935, CNS-0708604, CNS-0831502, CNS-0855251, and by a Microsoft
Research Gift.
Fig. 1: An example of a k-range nearest neighbor query in road
segments, and the dotted rectangle is the given query region. In
this example, the query answer includes the k-nearest objects
of interest to every point on the road segments, BE, DE, and
EF, which are covered by the query region.
Many research efforts have shown that the kRNN query is
signiﬁcantly important for many location-based applications:
• Uncertain location. The uncertain location information
is posed by either the imprecision of the positioning
techniques or the discontinuous location updates ,
 , . With the imprecise positioning techniques, e.g.,
3G cellular services and Wi-Fi, the user is not able
to acquire her exact location. On the other hand, the
discontinuousness of location update is caused by the
agreement between the user and the service provider to
reduce the location-update frequency in order to reduce
the energy consumption and communication overhead
(e.g., , ).
• Privacy-aware applications. Due to the possibility of
privacy leakages with a potentially untrusted locationbased server, the user may not be willing to expose
her exact location to the service provider. Many existing
privacy-preserving techniques have been proposed to blur
the user’s exact location into a spatial region (e.g. ,
 , , , , , ).
In these two realistic scenarios, the user’s location is modeled
by a spatial region. The location-based database server only
knows that the user is anywhere within the query region, rather
than an exact location point. Thus, the server has to ﬁnd the knearest objects of interest to every point on the road segments
within the query region in order to guarantee that the exact
kRNN query answer is included in the query result returned
to the user. It has been proved that the exact answer of the
kRNN query includes (1) the objects within the query region
and (2) the k-nearest objects of each intersection point, i.e.,
termed a boundary point, of the query region and the road
segments in the underlying road network .
Unfortunately, existing approaches for kRNN queries that
apply a traditional kNN query processing algorithm in the
road network, i.e., the incremental network expansion (INE)
algorithm , to every boundary point incur a huge redundant
searching overhead , , . We will illustrate the
existing approach based on the INE algorithm using the
example given in Figure 1, where the boundary points of
the query are at the intersections B, D, and F. The existing
approach executes a range query to select the objects on the
road segments within the query region (represented by a dotted
rectangle), i.e., the road segments DE, BE, and EF, to an
answer set; and hence, the answer set includes the object P1.
Then, it executes the INE algorithm for each boundary point.
The kNN query processing for the boundary point D searches
the road segments CD and DE. The kNN query processing
for B searches the road segments AB, BE, DE, CD, EF,
and FG. Finally, the kNN query processing for F searches the
road segments AB, BE, CD, DE, EF, and FG. The ﬁnal
answer set includes two objects P1 and P2. As a result, the
total number of road segments processed by the traditional
approach is 17. However, an optimal solution searches only
six road segments, i.e., AB, BE CD, DE, EF and FG,
and each of these road segment is processed once. Therefore,
the redundant searching overhead of the existing approach is
(17−6)/6×100% = 183%. The redundant searching overhead
could become even much worse if the query region contains
more boundary points or the objects are sparsely distributed
in the road networks.
To avoid the redundant searching overhead in the traditional
approach, we propose an efﬁcient algorithm to process kRNN
queries in the road network. The main idea of our algorithm
is to share the execution among the searching process for
each boundary point of the query. Our shared execution
paradigm requires the shortest network distance from each
boundary point to a certain set of objects in order to ﬁnd
the query answer. Such shortest distances can be either precomputed and stored in the main memory or computed onthe-ﬂy during the query processing. Although pre-computing
all possible required shortest network distances can reduce
query processing time, it incurs very high storage overhead.
To this end, our algorithm also introduces a system parameter
that controls the amount of space for storing the pre-computed
shortest network distance. A larger parameter value achieves
better query processing performance, but it incurs higher
storage overhead. Thus, this parameter can be tuned to achieve
a tradeoff between the query processing performance and the
storage overhead. Our kRNN query processing algorithm is
evaluated through simulated experiments. The experimental
results show that (1) our algorithm always outperforms the
existing solution based on the INE algorithm in terms of both
query processing time and query response time, and (2) the
tuning parameter is an effective way to provide a trade off
between the query response time and the storage overhead.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
highlights the related works. Section III gives our system
model. Our proposed kRNN query processing algorithm is
presented in Section IV. The experimental results are given in
Section V. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper.
II. RELATED WORK
In location-based services, processing k-nearest neighbor
(kNN) queries in the road network has been well studied
(e.g., , , , , , , , , ). Among
the existing solutions for kNN queries, the simplest one
is the incremental network expansion (INE) algorithm .
The basic idea of the INE algorithm is to incrementally
search the road segments from the query point until the
k-nearest objects of interest of the query point are found.
Since the INE algorithm does not need any pre-computed
shortest distance information, it incurs low storage overhead.
However, the limitation of the INE algorithm is that it cannot
take the advantage of the optimization based on the precomputed shortest distance. To overcome this limitation, there
are many kNN query processing algorithms that utilize the precomputed network distance to optimize the query processing
(e.g., , , , , , , , , , ).
Although these optimized algorithms perform faster than the
INE algorithm, they incur higher storage overhead. In the
worst case, the storage overhead of the algorithm requiring
the pre-computed shortest distance is O(n2), where n is the
number of intersections of the road segments in the underlying
road network .
To our best knowledge, the k-range nearest neighbor
(kRNN) query has been only studied in the context of privacypreserving location-based services where the exact location of
a kNN query issuer is blurred into a spatial region , ,
 , . The basic idea of the existing solutions for the
kRNN query is to execute a spatial range query to retrieve
the objects on the road segments within the query region,
and use the INE algorithm to ﬁnd the k-nearest objects of
each intersection point, termed a boundary point, of the query
region boundary and the road segments in the underlying road
network. As illustrated in Figure 1, simply applying the INE
algorithm multiple times for processing kRNN queries incurs
a huge redundant searching overhead.
Our kRNN query processing algorithm can distinguish
itself from the existing solutions for the kRNN query, as
it (1) employs a shared execution paradigm to share the
execution of the searching process of each boundary point
of the query to eliminate redundant computational overhead,
and (2) introduces a new tuning parameter to control the
amount of space for storing the pre-computed network distance
in order to achieve a tradeoff between the query processing
performance and the storage overhead. It is important to note
that our algorithm always returns the exact k-nearest objects
of interest to the user within the answer set, regardless of the
actual user location within the query region and the value of
the tuning parameter.
III. SYSTEM MODEL
In this section, we describe the road network and system
model, deﬁne the k-range nearest neighbor (kRNN) query and
its answer, and present the formal deﬁnition of our problem.
Road network and system model. We model the underlying road network as a weighted undirected graph G = (V, E)
where E is an edge set of the road segments in the road
network, V is a vertex set of the intersection points of the
road segments, and each edge is given the length of its
corresponding road segment as a weight. In this work, we
consider our system with a mobile environment, in which
the mobile user is able to communicate with the service
provider through wireless communication infrastructure, e.g.,
3G cellular services and Wi-Fi.
Deﬁnitions. A kRNN query is deﬁned in a form (ID,
Region, ObjectofInterest, k), where ID is the user’s unique
identity, Region is the query region, ObjectofInterest deﬁnes
the type of objects of interest of the query, and k is the
required number of nearest objects of interest. The Region of
the kRNN query covers a set of road segments that is referred
to as inside road segments, while each intersection point of the
Region boundary and the road segments in the underlying road
network is referred to as a boundary point. To guarantee that
the kRNN query answer includes the exact k-nearest objects
to the user, regardless of the user’s actual location within the
Region, the correct answer for a kRNN query must include
(a) the objects within the inside road segments, and (b) the
k-nearest objects of each of boundary point .
Problem deﬁnition. We now give the formal deﬁnition of
our problem. Given a k-range nearest neighbor query Q with
a query region Region, the underlying road network G, and a
set of objects of interest of the query O, we want to ﬁnd the
k-nearest objects in O to every point on the road segments
in G within Q.Region. The key objectives of our algorithm
are to (1) eliminate the redundant searching overhead in the
traditional solution to improve query processing performance,
and (2) design a tuning parameter that controls the amount
of space dedicated to store the pre-computed shortest distance
information to achieve a tradeoff between the query processing
performance and the storage overhead.
IV. EFFICIENT kRNN QUERY ALGORITHM
In this section, we ﬁrst present the key data structures and
main idea of our k-range nearest neighbor (kRNN) query
processing algorithm. Then, we describe our algorithm with
a detailed example, and the correctness of our algorithm is
proofed at the end of this section.
A. Data Structures
In general, our algorithm has ﬁve key data structures.
Shortest distance table. This table stores the pre-computed
shortest network distance between two vertices in the road
network. Each entry in this table is in a form (< x, y >,
d(x, y)), where < x, y > is a key, and d(x, y) is the shortest
distance from x to y. We assume that the shortest distance
is symmetric, i.e., d(x, y) = d(y, x). In addition, we have a
system tuning parameter that controls the size of the shortest
distance table in order to achieve a tradeoff between the
query processing performance and the storage overhead. The
table stores the most frequently accessed shortest distance
information based on historical statistics, and it is updated
periodically, e.g., hourly or daily.
Answer set table. This table contains the data objects that will
be returned to the user. Each entry in this table contains the
data object identity along with its distance to each boundary
point of the query region.
Searching queue. We construct a searching queue for each
boundary point of the query to store the road segments that
will be searched by our algorithm. In the searching queue Qi,
the road segments are sorted by their shortest distance to the
corresponding boundary point, i, in an increasing order. Each
searching queue is associated with two parameters.
• Searching bound. This parameter records the network
distance from the corresponding boundary point to its
k-th nearest object in the answer set table.
• Searched distance. This parameter records the distance
from the corresponding boundary point to the ﬁrst item
in its searching queue, which also indicates the network
distance this searching queue has covered.
Search collision point table. This table maintains the vertices
of the road segments that are searched by the searching process
of more than one boundary points. Each entry in this table
contains the vertex ID and its distance to each boundary point
of the query.
Searched segment set. This set contains the road segments
that have been searched by the algorithm.
B. Main Ideas
We will discuss the main ideas of our algorithm.
Shared execution. In our algorithm, we share the result of the
searching process of each boundary point of the query to avoid
the redundant searching overhead in the traditional solution.
With this shared execution paradigm, each boundary point is
able to know its distance to the data objects that are found by
the searching process of the other boundary points.
Searching bound. The searching bound is the value to tell the
algorithm to terminate the searching process of a boundary
point. To determine the searching bound of a searching
queue, we have to know the distance from the corresponding
boundary point to each data object that is found by the
algorithm. In the algorithm, such a distance can be either
retrieved from the shortest distance table or calculated based
on the search collision point table on-the-ﬂy along with the
query processing.
Approach 1: Using the shortest distance table. Given a
boundary point b on a road segment vivj and a data object o
on a road segment vpvq, if the shortest distances of the keys
< vi, vp >, < vi, vq >, < vj, vp >, and < vj, vq > are
stored in the shortest distance table, we can easily calculate
the shortest distance from the boundary point to the data
object, i.e., min(d(b, vi) + d(vi, vp) + d(o, vp), d(vi, vp) +
d(b, vi) + d(o, vp), d(vj, vp) + d(b, vj) + d(o, vp), d(vj, vq) +
d(b, vj) + d(o, vp)). Although using the shortest distance
table can improve the query processing performance, storing
the shortest distance of every pair of vertices in the road
network may incur very large storage overhead. To this end, we
introduce a tuning parameter to specify the size of the shortest
distance table; and therefore, tuning this parameter can achieve
a tradeoff between the query processing performance and
the storage overhead. When we need to calculate a shortest
distance, we ﬁrst check if the shortest distance table has
enough information for computing the shortest distance. If
this is the case, we simply retrieve the four relevant entries
to compute the shortest distance. Otherwise, we calculate the
shortest distance as using the Approach 2.
Approach 2: Using the search collision point table. A
search collision takes place, when the searching process of
a boundary point attempts to search a road segment that
has been searched by the searching process of some other
boundary points. Then, two vertices of such a road segment
that are referred to as search collision points are inserted to
the search collision point table along with its distance to each
boundary point of the query, which is calculated based on the
information of its ancestral search collision point which this
road segment is expanded from. If a data object is found by the
algorithm, we identify its ancestral search collision point from
which the algorithm ﬁnds the object, and update the distance
from each boundary point of the query to the object based
on the distance information of this ancestral search collision
point in the search collision point table.
C. Algorithm
Initially, we construct a searching queue for each boundary
point of the query, and then set the searched distance to zero
and the searching bound to ∞for each searching queue. In
general, our kRNN query processing algorithm has two main
Step 1. Inside road segment search step. In this step, we
ﬁnd the data objects within the inside road segments, and insert
them into the answer set table. Then, we calculate the shortest
distance for every pair of boundary points of the query, and
insert each boundary point to the search collision point table
along with its shortest distance to each of the other boundary
points. This step is depicted in Lines 6 to 8 in Algorithm 1. It
is important to note that when the algorithm needs to compute
a shortest distance, it ﬁrst checks if it can use the ﬁrst approach
described in Section IV-B to determine the shortest distance;
otherwise, it uses the second approach to do so.
Step 2. Boundary point expansion step. The main purpose
of this step is to search beyond the inside road segments by
iterations. In each iteration, we select the searching queue
with the minimum searched distance to process. If the answer
set table has at least k objects, the searching bound is set
to the distance from the corresponding boundary point to its
k-th nearest data object in the answer set table (Line 13 in
Algorithm 1). Then, we check for the termination condition,
i.e., (1) the searched distance of the selected searching queue
is equal to or larger than the searching bound for all the other
Algorithm 1 Efﬁcient kRNN Query Processing in Road
Input: Boundary Point Set B, Inside Road Segment Set R, and
Integer k.
1: Initialize the data structures
2: for Each boundary point bi in B do
Create a searching queue Qi for bi
4: end for
5: //Step 1: Inside road segment search step
6: Insert the data objects on the road segments in R to the answer
7: Find the shortest distance of every pair of boundary points in B
8: Insert each boundary point in B to the search collision point
9: //Step 2: Boundary point expansion step
10: while Not all Q1, Q2, . . . , Q|B| are terminated do
Select Qi with the minimum searched distance
if The number of data objects in the answer set table ≥k
Set the searched distance of Qi to the shortest distance
from bi to its k-th nearest object in the answer set table
if Qi meets the termination condition, i.e., its searched distance ≥all searching bound or Qi ﬁnds k data objects by
itself then
Terminate Qi
while Qi searched distance is not changed do
S ←the top road segment in Qi
if S is in the searched segment set then
if S contains data objects then
Update the answer set table
Update the search collision point table
Remove S from Qi
Insert the data objects on S to the answer set table
Insert S to the searched segment set
Insert the adjacent road segments of S into Qi
33: end while
34: Return the data objects in the answer set table to the user
searching queues or (2) no less than k data objects has been
found by selected searching queue itself. If the termination
condition takes place, the searching on the selected searching
queue is terminated and will not be selected to process in
the future executions. Otherwise, the algorithm continues to
process the road segment in the selected searching queue based
on two cases.
Case 1: The road segment is in the searched segment set. In
this case, a search collision takes place, i.e., there are different
shortest pathes from the query region to this road segment. If
there are some data objects on this segment, for each data
object, we update the shortest distance from each boundary
point to the data object in the answer set table if necessary
(Line 22). The two vertices of the segment are inserted into the
search collision point table along with their distance to each
boundary point (Line 24). Then, the road segment is removed
Fig. 2: An example of road networks.
from the queue without considering its adjacent road segments
because these adjacent road segments will be searched by the
searching process of some other boundary point (Line 25).
Case 2: The road segment is NOT in the searched segment
set. The data objects found on the road segment are inserted
into the answer set table along with its shortest distance to
each boundary point, and the road segment is inserted into
the searched segment set (Lines 27 to 28). The adjacent road
segments of the processed road segment are inserted into the
searching queue for further processing (Line 29).
Our algorithm repeats this step until all the searching queues
meet the termination condition. After the algorithm terminates,
the objects stored in the answer set table are returned to the
user as a query result.
D. Example for efﬁcient kRNN query processing algorithm
In this section, we give a detailed example to illustrate
our kRNN query processing algorithm. Figure 2 depicts a
road network, where the road segments are represented by
lines, the intersection of the road segments are represented by
circles, and the data objects are represented by triangles. In
this example, the user issues a 2-RNN query with a query
region that contains two road segments HM and LM, which
are represented by dotted lines. The boundary points of this
query are H, L, and M, which are represented by black
circles. In our example, we assume that the tuning parameter
for the shortest distance table is zero, i.e., the shortest distance
table does not have any shortest distance information. Thus,
all shortest distance information required by the algorithm is
calculated based on the search collision point table on-the-ﬂy.
Figure 3 gives the status of the searching queues for each
iteration. In each searching queue, the number under the ID
of the road segment is the shortest distance from the road
segment to the corresponding boundary point. The arrow over
the searching queue indicates the active searching queue,
which has the minimum searched distance, for the current
iteration. Table I depicts the value changes in the searching
bound and searched distance for each searching queue, the
searched segment set, the answer set table and the search
collision point table during the query processing.
Initial step. The initial step (Figure 3a) for the algorithm is
to construct the searching queue for each boundary point, QH,
(a) Initial
(b) After first 3 iteration
(c)After the 4th iteration
(d) After the 5th iteration
Fig. 3: An example of query procedure in each of searching queue.
QL and QM. During the inside road segment search step, data
object P3 is found. P3 is inserted into the answer set table with
the shortest distance to all the boundary points, as depicted in
the initial column in Table I. The inside road segments HM
and LM are inserted into the searched segment set, while all
the boundary points are inserted into the the search collision
point table with the shortest distance information to the other
boundary points. For each boundary point, its adjacent road
segments are inserted into its searching queue, as depicted in
Figure 3a. Since we only found one data object, which is less
than the k value, the searching bound of each searching queue
remains ∞.
The ﬁrst 3 iterations. Since the searched distance of all the
searching queues is initially set to be zero, we can arbitrarily
select any searching queue to start with. For instance, we
start the query processing with QH. In the ﬁrst iteration,
HI and HG are processed, but no data object is found. Our
algorithm only inserts their adjacent segments into the QH. In
the second iteration, we select QL to process road segments
LG and KL. During this iteration, we ﬁnd P2 and P1 on
KL and LG, respectively. Since KL and LG are not in
the searched segment set, the distance information of P1 and
P2 is calculated based on the searching collision point that
they expanded from, which is L. The distance information is
calculated by using the sum of the distance information of L
stored in the collision points table and the distance from P1 to
L. The distance from P1 to all the boundary points is updated
in the answer set table, i.e., the distance from P1 to L is 1,
the distance from P1 to H is 10 + 1 = 11 and the distance
from P1 to M is 5+1 = 6. Similarly, the distance information
from P2 to all boundary points are updated in the answer set
table accordingly. Since QL ﬁnds two data objects by itself,
it is terminated, as its searching queue is marked by dotted
lines. In the third iteration, QM processes MN. Since we
TABLE I: An example of query procedure in each data structure.
After ﬁrst 3
After the 4th
After the 5th
iterations
Searching bound
Searched distance
segments set
Answer set
Search collision
do not ﬁnd any data object on road segment MN, we insert
its adjacent road segments to the searching queue. After the
ﬁrst three iterations, the searched distance (denoted as SD) of
each searching queue is updated, i.e., QH.SD=2, QL.SD=4
and QM.SD=4. Moreover, we have more than k data objects
in the answer set table, the searching bound (denoted as SB)
of each searching queue can be updated, i.e., QH.SB=11,
QL.SB=2 and QM.SB=6.
The 4th iteration. In this iteration, QH is selected to be
processed, because it has the smallest searched distance, as
depicted in Figure 3b. QH searches ID and IN, and ﬁnds P4
on IN. The distance information for P4 is calculated based on
its ancestral search collision point H. As a result, the distance
from P4 to H is 0 + 4 = 4, the distance from P4 to L is
10 + 4 = 14 and the distance from P4 to M is 5 + 4 = 9. The
searching bound is updated for QH and QM to be 4 and 6,
respectively. The QH.SD is updated to be 5 and ID and IN
are inserted into the searched segment set. After this iteration,
QH.SD is greater than QH.SB, but QH.SD is smaller than
QM.SB; and therefore, QH does not meet the termination
condition.
The 5th iteration. In the ﬁfth iteration, QM is selected to
be processed, as it has the smallest searched distance. NO
is processed ﬁrst without ﬁnding any data object. After that,
QM processes IN. However, IN is already in the searched
segment set, which generates a search collision and makes I
and N search collision points. Both of them are inserted into
the search collision points table and the distance from the point
to every boundary point is calculated. The distance from I to
all the boundary points is ﬁrst calculated based on the search
collision point H, where it is expanded from. The distances
from to I to H, L and M are updated to be 2, 12 and 7,
respectively. The distance from N to all the boundary points
is calculated based on its ancestral search collision point, M,
in the same way, which makes the distances to H, L and M
to be 9, 9 and 4, respectively. Then I updates its distances
to each boundary point based on the length of IN and the
distance information of point N in the search collision point
table. The distances calculated through N for I to boundary
points H, L and M are 12, 12 and 7, respectively. Because
all the calculated results are greater than I’s original value,
no update will be made for I. On the other hand, the distance
information for N calculated though I to the boundary points
H, L and M is 5, 15 and 10, respectively. The distance from
N to H is updated to 5, because the new calculated value is
smaller. Moreover, we ﬁnd P4 is in IN. As the result, the
distance from P4 to M is updated to be 4 + 1 = 5. The
distance from P4 to L is updated to be 9 + 1 = 10. The
distance from P4 to H remains 4 because it is smaller than
9+1 = 10. Then, I and N are inserted into the search collision
point table with the distance information, as shown in Table I
. The searched distance for QM is updated to 7, which is
greater than QM.SB and QH.SB. QM is terminated after this
iteration as the searching bounds of all the searching queues
are less than its searched distance. We mark the queue in
dotted lines, shown in Figure 3c.
The 6th iteration. There is only one active searching queue
QH left. Since QH.SD is greater than the searching bound
of all the other searching queues, it is terminated; as QH
is marked by dotted lines (Figure 3d). As all the searching
queues are done, our algorithm is terminated. The data objects
in the answer set table, i.e., P1, P2, P3 and P4, are returned
to the user.
E. Proof of correctness
In this section, we prove that our kRNN query processing
algorithm always returns the exact k-nearest objects to the user
within the answer set, regardless of the actual user location
within the query region.
Theorem 1. Given a kRNN query with a query region Region
issued by a user residing in Region and a set of objects of
interest O, the answer set A returned by our query processing
TABLE II: Experiment Parameter Settings.
Default Value
number (K value)
Total data object number
200 to 1000
Query region size (ratio
over total space)
0.002 to 0.050
algorithm always includes the exact k-nearest objects to the
Proof: Suppose that an object O ∈O is one of the knearest objects to the user, but O /∈A. Since our algorithm
selects all the objects within Region to A, O must be outside
Region. Thus, if O is one of the k-nearest objects to the
user, O has to be one of the k-nearest objects to a boundary
point of the query. However, for each boundary point P of
the query, our algorithm searches the road segments from P
with a range of at least the distance from P to its k-th object,
i.e., the termination condition for searching queue P in our
algorithm, and selects all the objects within this range to A.
Since O /∈A, O is not one of the k-nearest object of any
boundary point. As a result, it contradicts to the assumption
that O is one of the k-nearest objects to the user.
V. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
In this section, we evaluate the performance of our kRNN
query processing algorithm by comparing with the traditional
solution as a baseline. We also investigate the query performance with the impact of the tuning parameter that controls
the size of the shortest distance table and the communication
bandwidth between the user and the database server.
A. Experiment Settings
The road map of Hennepin county, Minnesota, USA, which
contains 39,513 nodes and 54,444 road segments, is used as
the road network in our experiment. We generate 100 kRNN
queries in the road network and use the mean value as the
result for each experiment. Table II summarizes the parameters
we used in the experiment. All the experiments are performed
on a Sun Ultra 27 server with a Quad-core 3.2 GHz Intel Xeon
3570 processor and 6 GB RAM.
In our experiment, we evaluate the performance of our algorithm in terms of three major measures: (1) query processing
time, (2) size of the answer set, and (3) overall response time.
The query processing time is the average time consumed for
the algorithm to ﬁnish the query processing. The size of the
answer set is the average number of the data objects returned
to the user. Since our algorithm may return more data objects,
it is used to measure the quality of the answer set. The overall
response time is the average of the sum of the query processing
time and the transmission time of sending the answer to the
The section is organized as follows: First, we compare the
query processing performance of our algorithm with the traditional solution. Then, we investigate the impact for different
TABLE III: Relationship of area size and the boundary points.
Boundary points
Inside segments
tuning parameters in our algorithm. Finally, we evaluate the
impact of the communication bandwidth for our algorithm.
B. Comparison with the traditional solution
In this section, we present the results of our algorithm
with the traditional solution with respect to four different
settings: (1) different required numbers of the data objects
(different k values) in the query, (2) different numbers of data
objects in the system, (3) different sizes of query regions,
and (4) different distributions of the data objects in the road
network. We use two extreme cases of our algorithm to
compare with the traditional approach: (a) query processing
with all the shortest distance information, referred as KRNN-
F, and (b) query processing without any shortest distance
information, referred as KRNN-E.
1) Impact of the number of requested data objects: Figure 4a depicts the performance of our algorithm with different
requested numbers of data objects (k value). As shown in
the result, the query processing time of all the approaches
increases, because a larger k value usually leads to a larger
searching area. Moreover, we notice that the query processing
time of the traditional algorithm increases rapidly as the k
value gets larger. On the other hand, the query processing time
of our algorithm increases relatively slower than the traditional
solution in both extreme cases. The reason of the signiﬁcant
difference is that a larger k indicates a larger searching area,
and introduces more redundant searching overhead between
the searching process of each boundary point for the traditional
approach. Our algorithm does not have this problem because
the redundant searching overhead is eliminated by our shared
execution paradigm.
2) Impact of the total number of data objects: Figure 4(b)
shows the query processing time of our algorithm with different total numbers of data objects in the road network. The
distribution of these data objects is based on the uniform
distribution. As shown in the experimental result, the query
processing time of all the algorithms decreases as the total
number of data objects gets larger. Because the more data
objects in the system, the smaller searching area the query
processing algorithm needs to cover. Moreover, the traditional
algorithm covers a larger search area for each boundary point
in the area of low density data objects, which incurs more
redundant searching overhead.
3) Impact of size of the query region: The query regions are
modeled by circles in our experiment, whose center a location
point that is randomly picked in the road network and the
radius is uniformly selected with a range varied from 1 to 5
times of the average length of the road segments in the road
network, i.e., the ratio of the query region size to the total
system space is varied from 0.20% to 5.00%. The relationship
SD=0.1 SD=0.01 SD=0.001
Query processing time (s)
(d) Different distributions of data objects
0.20% 0.80% 1.80% 3.20% 5.00%
Query processing time (s)
(c) Size of the query region
Query processing time (s)
(b) Total number of data objects
Query Processing Time (s)
(a) Number of requested data objects
Fig. 4: Comparison with the traditional solutions.
between the size of the query region and the average number
of insider road segments and the boundary points is depicted
in Table III.
Figure 4(c) illustrates the query processing time with different sizes of query regions. The query processing time of all the
algorithms increases as the size of the query region gets larger.
Because with a larger query region, more boundary points will
be introduced. It is especially a drawback for the traditional
solution, because the more boundary points lead to more overlaps in the searching space which introduces more redundant
searching overhead. The processing time of the traditional
solution grows linearly with the number of boundary points.
On the other hand, query processing time of our proposed
algorithm grows relatively slower than the traditional solution.
Thus, the proposed algorithm is more scalable in terms of the
query region size. The signiﬁcant deviation of two extreme
cases of our algorithm is a result of the approximation in the
calculation. The approach without the pre-computed shortest
distance information is likely to generate a larger searching
bound and consume more processing time.
4) Impact of distributions of data objects: Figure 4d depicts the impact of different distributions of the data objects
over the road network for the query processing. We evaluate
our algorithm and the baseline solution using two different
distributions: (1) Uniform distribution which means the data
objects in that road network is evenly deployed and no hot spot
in the map. (2) Gaussian distribution with different standard
deviations which means the data objects are deployed densely
in a certain range of location. We use Gaussian distribution
to simulate the hot spot in the road networks, i.e., downtown
areas in the city. The parameter SD on Figure 4d is the standard
deviation value of the Gaussian distribution used for the data
objects deployment over the road network. The smaller value
of SD indicates that the data objects are more likely to be
placed densely in a smaller area.
The result in Figure 4d indicates that the traditional algorithm has a huge impact on the distribution of the data objects.
If the data objects are unevenly distributed in the road network,
the performance of the traditional solution is degraded signiﬁcantly due to the redundant searching overhead. Because in the
Gaussian distribution, the data objects are distributed densely
in a small area. As a result, the searching process for each
boundary point needs to cover that particular area to get the
its k-nearest neighbors which incurs much more redundant
searching overhead. On the other hand, different distributions
of data objects do not have that signiﬁcant impact on the query
processing time of our algorithm as shown in Figure 4d.
5) Summary: The above experimental results show that
our algorithm always outperforms the traditional solution
signiﬁcantly in terms of the query processing time, which
is more efﬁcient for the kRNN queries. In most cases, our
algorithm gets over 100% performance gain. Moreover, our
algorithm is more adaptive to the changes in the experimental
parameters than the traditional solution, which indicates our
algorithm is more scalable.
C. Tradeoff between the storage and performance
In this section, we present the results of our algorithm with
different tuning parameters P, which indicates the different
size of the shortest distance table. The tuning parameter P is
set as a percentage value, where 100% indicates that the shortest distance table contains the shortest distance information for
any two vertexes and 0% indicates that the shortest distance
table does not exist that the all distance information should
be calculated by the search collision points table on-the-ﬂy.
With the settings in our experiment, it costs 980 MB memory
to materialize the full shortest distance table. The entries in
the shortest distance table are ranked by the access frequency
during a warm up process. During the warm up process, we
issues 1000 kRNN queries and ranks the entries in the table
by the number of accesses. Tuning parameter P in the system
indicates that top P percents of the shortest distance table is
materialized.
We evaluate the impact of the tuning parameter with three
different parameter settings: (1) different numbers of the data
objects (different k values) in the query, (2) different numbers
of total data objects in the road network, and (3) different sizes
of query regions. For each of the experiment, we evaluate not
only the query processing time but also the size of the answer
set that returns to user as the quality of the query answers.
1) Impact of the number of requested data objects: Figure 5a depicts the query processing time for the different
values of the tuning parameter P with different requested
number of data objects (k value). As shown in the ﬁgure,
the larger shortest distance table we have, the less query
processing time the algorithm consumes to get the answer
set. Figure 6a illustrates the size of the answer set for the
different tuning parameters with different k values. Observed
Query processing time (s)
Tuning Parameter
(c) Size of query regions
Query processing time (s)
Tuning Parameter
(a) Number of requested dataobjects
Query processing time (s)
Tuning Parameter
(b) Total number of data objects
Fig. 5: Query processing time with respect to various tuning parameter values.
Size of answer set
Tuning Parameter
(c) Size of query regions
Size of answer set
Tuning Parameter
(b) Total number of data objects
Size of answer set
Tuning Parameter
(a) Number of requested data objects
Fig. 6: Answer set size with respect to various tuning parameter values.
from the ﬁgure, larger value of the tuning parameter P leads
to a smaller size of the answer set for user. The smaller size
of answer set means a better quality of query answer.
2) Impact of the number of total data objects: Figure 5b
depicts the query processing time for the different values of
the tuning parameter P with different total number of data
objects over the road network. The data objects are uniformly
distributed over the road network in this experiment. As
shown in the ﬁgure, with a larger tuning parameter, the query
processing time decreases for all cases. Figure 6b illustrates
the size of the answer set for the different value of tuning
parameters with different total number of data objects over
the road network. The ﬁgure conﬁrms that a larger value of
the tuning parameter leads to a smaller size of the answer set
and a better quality of answers for the user.
3) Impact of the query region size: Figure 5c depicts
the query processing time for the different values of the
tuning parameter P with different size of query regions. The
relationship of the query region size and the boundary points
is illustrated in Table III. As shown in the ﬁgure, with the
larger shortest distance table in our algorithm, the less query
processing time our algorithm consumes. Figure 6c illustrates
the size of the answer set for the different tuning parameters
with different size of query regions. From the ﬁgure, it is
obvious that the larger value of the tuning parameter leads to
a smaller size of the answer set and a better quality of answers
for the user.
4) Summary: As shown in the above experimental results,
the size of the tuning parameter P provides a tradeoff between the query processing performance (both in the query
processing time and the quality of the answer set) and the
storage overhead. The larger value of the tuning parameter we
choose, the larger shortest distance table we need to maintain.
However, with the larger shortest distance table, the query
performance is improved with less query processing time and
better quality of the answer set.
D. Impact of different communication bandwidth
Due to the approximate result by our search collision
point table based calculation method for the shortest distance
information, the algorithm is likely to return extra data objects
to the user comparing with the optimal solution. We introduce
the overall response time to determine the impact of the extra
number data objects we return to the user. The query response
time is consisted of two parts: (1) the query processing time,
and (2) transmission time for the answer set. The overall
response time is an end-to-end performance metric to measure
the performance of our algorithm. If we return more data
objects to the user, the transmission time increases. In this
experiment, we use the traditional algorithm as the baseline
to compare with the two extreme cases of our algorithm:
Response Time (s)
Download bandwidth (kbps)
(b) Object size=10KB
Response Time (s)
Download bandwidth (kbps)
(a) Object size=1KB
Fig. 7: Object size and bandwidth.
(a) query processing with all the shortest distance information,
referred as KRNN-F, and (b) query processing without any
shortest distance information, referred as KRNN-E.
In our experiment, we consider that there are two different
sizes of each data object, 1 KB and 10 KB. We assume that
the user connects with the service provider through 3G mobile
networks. The download bandwidth is different with different
user mobility speeds, e.g., 128 kbps (e.g., kilo bits per second)
when the user is in a moving vehicle, 384 kbps when the user
is walking and 2 Mbps when the user is staying at the same
place or moving in a very slow speed.
Figure 7 illustrates the overall response time of our algorithm and the traditional solution with different object sizes
and communication speeds. In all the scenarios, although
some extra data objects are given in the answer set by our
algorithm, the overall response time of our algorithm still
outperforms the traditional solution. The closest case in this
experiment is in the scenario when the users are moving
very fast and they ask for the data objects with a large size.
However, the performance of all the test cases is suffered.
Because the transmission time of sending the answer set to
the user dominates the overall response time, which indicates
the system bottleneck is no longer at the query processing time
in the database but the transmission time in the communication
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed an efﬁcient query processing
algorithm for k-range nearest neighbor (kRNN) queries in road
networks. Our algorithm distinguishes itself from the existing
solution for the kRNN query, as it (1) designs a shared execution paradigm to eliminate the redundant searching overhead in
the existing solution to improve query processing performance,
and (2) introduces a system tuning parameter that controls
the amount of space dedicated to store the shortest network
distance information for the query processing to achieve
a tradeoff between the query processing performance and
the storage overhead. We evaluate our algorithm extensively
through simulated experiments. The experimental results show
that our algorithm outperforms the existing solution in terms
of query processing time and overall response time, and the
tuning parameter, which speciﬁes the size of the pre-computed
shortest network distance table, is an effective way to achieve
the tradeoff between the query processing performance and
the storage overhead.