Exploring the Limits of
Weakly Supervised Pretraining
Dhruv Mahajan
Ross Girshick
Vignesh Ramanathan
Kaiming He
Manohar Paluri
Ashwin Bharambe
Laurens van der Maaten
Abstract. State-of-the-art visual perception models for a wide range
of tasks rely on supervised pretraining. ImageNet classiﬁcation is the de
facto pretraining task for these models. Yet, ImageNet is now nearly ten
years old and is by modern standards “small”. Even so, relatively little is
known about the behavior of pretraining with datasets that are multiple
orders of magnitude larger. The reasons are obvious: such datasets are
diﬃcult to collect and annotate. In this paper, we present a unique study
of transfer learning with large convolutional networks trained to predict
hashtags on billions of social media images. Our experiments demonstrate that training for large-scale hashtag prediction leads to excellent
results. We show improvements on several image classiﬁcation and object
detection tasks, and report the highest ImageNet-1k single-crop, top-1
accuracy to date: 85.4% (97.6% top-5). We also perform extensive experiments that provide novel empirical data on the relationship between
large-scale pretraining and transfer learning performance.
Introduction
Nearly all state-of-the-art visual perception algorithms rely on the same formula:
(1) pretrain a convolutional network on a large, manually annotated image classiﬁcation dataset and (2) ﬁnetune the network on a smaller, task-speciﬁc dataset.
This formula has been in wide use for several years and led to impressive improvements on numerous tasks. Examples include: object detection ,
semantic segmentation , human pose estimation , video recognition ,
monocular depth estimation , and so on. In fact, it is so eﬀective that it
would now be considered foolhardy not to use supervised pretraining.
The ImageNet dataset is the de facto pretraining dataset. While there are
studies analyzing the eﬀects of various ImageNet pretraining factors on transfer
learning (e.g., ) or the use of diﬀerent datasets that are of the same size
magnitude as ImageNet (e.g., ), relatively little is known about pretraining
on datasets that are multiple orders of magnitude larger ( are the largest
studies to date). The reasons for this are numerous: few such datasets exist,
building new datasets is labor intensive, and large computational resources are
needed to conduct experiments. Yet, given the central role of pretraining it is
important to expand our scientiﬁc knowledge in this domain.
This paper tries to address this complex issue by studying an unexplored data
regime: billions of images “labeled” in the wild with social media hashtags. This
Mahajan et al.
data source has the advantage of being large and continuously growing, as well
as “free” from an annotation perspective since no manual labeling is required.
However, the data source also has potential disadvantages: hashtags may be
too noisy to serve as an eﬀective supervisory signal and the image distribution
might be biased in ways that harm transfer learning. It is not a priori obvious
that training on this data will yield good transfer learning results.
The main result of this paper is that without manual dataset curation or sophisticated data cleaning, models trained on billions of Instagram images using
thousands of distinct hashtags as labels exhibit excellent transfer learning performance. For example, we observe improvements over the state-of-the-art for
image classiﬁcation and object detection, where we obtain a single-crop, top-1
accuracy of 85.4% on the ImageNet-1k image-classiﬁcation dataset and 45.2%
AP on the COCO object-detection dataset , compared to 79.8% and 43.7%,
respectively, when training (or pretraining) the same models on ImageNet-1k.
Our primary goal, however, is to contribute novel experimental data about this
previously unexplored regime. To that end, we conduct numerous experiments
that reveal interesting trends. For example, we ﬁnd that “hashtag engineering”
(i.e., collecting images tagged with a speciﬁc subset of hashtags) is a promising
new direction for improving transfer learning results, that training on large-scale
hashtag data is unexpectedly robust to label noise, and that the features learned
allow a simple linear classiﬁer to achieve state-of-the-art ImageNet-1k top-1 accuracy of 83.6% without any ﬁnetuning (compared to 84.2% with ﬁnetuning).
Scaling up Supervised Pretraining
In our experiments, we train standard convolutional network architectures to
predict hashtags on up to 3.5 billion public Instagram images. To make training
at this scale practical, we adopt a distributed synchronous implementation of
stochastic gradient descent with large (8k image) minibatches, following Goyal
et al. . We experiment on a variety of datasets, which we describe next.
Instagram Datasets
We use a simple data collection pipeline: (1) We select a set of hashtags. (2) We
download images that are tagged with at least one of these hashtags. (3) Then,
because multiple hashtags may refer to the same underlying concept, we apply
a simple process that utilizes WordNet synsets to merge some hashtags into
a single canonical form (e.g., #brownbear and #ursusarctos are merged). (4)
Finally, for each downloaded image, we replace each hashtag with its canonical
form and discard any hashtags that were not in the selected set. The canonical
hashtags are used as labels for training and evaluation.
By varying the selected hashtags and the number of images to sample, we
can construct a variety of datasets of diﬀerent sizes and visual distributions. Table 1 summarizes the datasets used in our experiments. Each dataset is named
Exploring the Limits of Weakly Supervised Pretraining
Name template
Description
train-IG-I-1.5k
Instagram training set of I images and ∼1.5k hashtags from ImageNet-1k.
train-IG-I-8.5k
Instagram training set of I images and ∼8.5k hashtags from WordNet.
train-IG-I-17k
Instagram training set of I images and ∼17k hashtags from WordNet.
train-IN-1M-1k
The standard ImageNet-1k ILSVRC training set with 1.28M images.
val-IN-50k-1k
The standard ImageNet-1k ILSVRC validation set with 50k images.
train-IN-I-L
Extended ImageNet training set of I images and L ∈{5k, 9k} labels.
val-IN-I-L
Extended ImageNet validation set of I images and L ∈{5k, 9k} labels.
train-CUB-6k-200
The Caltech-UCSD Birds-200-2011 training set.
val-CUB-6k-200
The Caltech-UCSD Birds-200-2011 validation set.
train-Places-1.8M-365
The Places365-Standard training set (high-resolution version).
val-Places-37k-365
The Places365-Standard validation set (high-resolution version).
train-COCO-135k-80
The standard COCO detection training set .
val-COCO-5k-80
The standard COCO detection validation set .
test-COCO-20k-80
The standard COCO detection test-dev set .
Table 1: Summary of image classiﬁcation datasets. Each dataset is named with a
template, role-source-I-L, that indicates its role (training, validation, testing), source,
number of images I, and number of labels L.
by completing a template, role-source-I-L, that indicates its role (training, validation, testing), source (IG for Instagram, IN for ImageNet, etc.), number of
images I, and number of labels L. We use approximate image and label counts
for convenience, for example “train-IG-940M-1.5k” is an Instagram dataset for
training with ∼940e6 images and ∼1,500 labels. We omit the role and image
count when it is clear from context or not useful to present.
We design three hashtag sets for the Instagram data: (1) A ∼1.5k set with
hashtags from the standard 1,000 IN-1k synsets (each synset contains at least
one synonym, hence there are more hashtags than synsets). (2) A ∼17k set with
hashtags that are synonyms in any of the noun synsets in WordNet. And (3)
an ∼8.5k set with the most frequent hashtags from the 17k set. The hashtag set
sizes are measured after merging the hashtags into their canonical forms. We
hypothesize that the ﬁrst set has a visual distribution similar to IN-1k, while
the other two represent more general visual distributions covering ﬁne-grained
visual categories. Details of how these hashtags are selected and how the merging
process works are given in supplemental material.
Image deduplication. When performing transfer learning, it is essential to
understand and properly address overlap between training and test sets. Overlap
can exists because images may come from the same underlying sources (e.g.,
Wikipedia, Flickr, Google). For instance, ∼5% of the images in the val-CUB-6k-
200 set also appear in train-IN-1M-1k, and 1.78% of images in val-IN-50k-1k
set are in the JFT-300M training set . To address this issue, we performed the
following deduplication procedure: we compute R-MAC features for all
candidate images using a ResNet-50 model, and use these features to ﬁnd the k=
21 nearest neighbors for each of the images in our test sets (additional details are
in the supplemental material). Subsequently, we manually inspected all images
and their nearest neighbors to identify duplicates. This procedure uncovered
150 val-IN-50k-1k (0.30%), 10 val-CUB-6k-200 (0.17%), 151 val-Places-37k-365
Mahajan et al.
(0.41%), and 6 val-COCO-5k-80 (0.12%) duplicates. In our results, we report
the observed accuracy of our models; in the supplemental material, we report
a conservative lower bound on accuracy by marking all duplicates as incorrect.
Given the small percentage of duplicates, they do not impact our ﬁndings.
Discussion. Our datasets have two nice properties: public visibility and simplicity. By using publicly accessible images, the data used in our experiments is
visible to everyone. To see what it looks like, the images are browsable by hashtag
at followed by a speciﬁc hashtag;
for example shows images tagged with #brownbear. Our data is also taken from the “wild”, essentially
as-is, with minimal eﬀort to sanitize it. This makes the dataset construction process particularly simple and transparent.
We contrast these properties with the JFT-300M dataset , which is not
publicly visible and is the result of a proprietary collection process (“The [JFT-
300M] images are labeled using an algorithm that uses a complex mixture of raw
web signals, connections between web-pages and user feedback.”). Additional
details describing the collection of JFT-300M have not been publicly disclosed.
Despite our eﬀorts to make the dataset content and collection process transparent, we acknowledge that, similar to JFT-300M, it is not possible for other
research groups to know exactly which images we used nor to download them
en masse. Hence it is not possible for others to replicate our results at this time.
However, we believe that it is better if we undertake this study and share the
results with the community than to not publish the results.
ImageNet Datasets
In addition to the standard IN-1k dataset, we experiment with larger subsets
of the full ImageNet 2011 release that contains 14.2M images and 22k labels.
We construct training and validation sets that include 5k and 9k labels. For the
5k set, we use the now standard IN-5k proposed in (6.6M training images).
For the 9k label set, we follow the same protocol used to construct IN-5k, which
involves taking the next most frequent 4k labels and all of the associated images
(10.5M training images). In all cases, we use 50 images per class for validation.
We use residual networks with grouped convolutional layers, called ResNeXt
 . Our experiments use ResNeXt-101 32×Cd, which has 101 layers, 32 groups,
and group widths C of: 4 (8B multiply-add FLOPs, 43M parameters), 8 (16B,
88M), 16 (36B, 193M), 32 (87B, 466M), and 48 (153B, 829M). Our implementation matches . We believe our results will generalize to other architectures
 .
Exploring the Limits of Weakly Supervised Pretraining
Loss function. In contrast to ImageNet, our Instagram datasets may contain
multiple labels per image (because a user speciﬁed multiple hashtags). The average number of hashtags per image varies depending on the dataset; for instance,
train-IG-1B-17k contains ∼2 hashtags per image. Our model computes probabilities over all hashtags in the vocabulary using a softmax activation and is trained
to minimize the cross-entropy between the predicted softmax distribution and
the target distribution of each image. The target is a vector with k non-zero
entries each set to 1/k corresponding to the k ≥1 hashtags for the image.
We have also experimented with per-hashtag sigmoid outputs and binary
logistic loss, but obtained signiﬁcantly worse results. While counter-intuitive
given the multi-label data, these ﬁndings match similar observations in .
The successful application of sigmoid activations and logistic loss may require
sophisticated label completion techniques and more hyper-parameter search.
Pretraining Details
Our models are trained by synchronous stochastic gradient descent (SGD) on 336
GPUs across 42 machines with minibatches of 8,064 images. Each GPU processes
24 images at a time and batch normalization (BN) statistics are computed
on these 24 image sets. The length of the training schedule, measured in units
of number-of-images-processed (i.e., minibatch size × total SGD updates), is
determined by a heuristic: we choose two training extremes (for instance, 120
epochs on 1.2e6 images and 2 epochs on 3.5e9 images) and linearly interpolate
the schedule between them to set the number-of-images-processed for each experiment. Schedules for each experiment are in the supplemental material. Our
ResNeXt-101 32×16d networks took ∼22 days to train on 3.5B images.
To set the learning rate, we follow the linear scaling rule with gradual warmup described in . We use a warm-up from 0.1 up to 0.1/256×8064, where 0.1
and 256 are canonical learning rate and minibatch sizes . After the warm-up,
the learning rate is multiplied by 0.5 at equally spaced steps, such that the total
number of learning rate reductions is 20 over the course of training. The same
settings are used when training on ImageNet and Instagram data, except that
when training on ImageNet we use 128 GPUs in 16 machines (for a minibatch
size of 3,072) due to the smaller dataset size and we use the standard learning
rate schedule that involves three equally spaced reductions by a factor of 0.1.
All other initialization and training details match and are summarized in
the supplemental material.
Experiments
In our experiments, we pretrain convolutional networks for hashtag prediction
and transfer those networks to a variety of tasks. There are two established protocols for judging the quality of a pretrained model (see §3 for a discussion).
Both analyze how pretraining on a source task, e.g. IN-1k classiﬁcation, leads to
gains (or losses) on a target task, e.g. bird recognition or object detection.
Mahajan et al.
Full network ﬁnetuning views pretraining as sophisticated weight initialization: the success of pretraining is judged by its impact on the target task after
further training the network weights in a task-speciﬁc manner (i.e. ﬁnetuning).
By contrast, feature transfer uses the pretrained network as a feature extractor:
it judges the quality of the network by how eﬀective its features are on other
tasks, without updating any of the network parameters. These protocols are two
extremes of a spectrum along which the proportion of pretrained weights that are
ﬁnetuned varies from all to none. We employ both protocols in our experiments;
at times one is more appropriate than the other.
Full network ﬁnetuning is performed by removing the hashtag-speciﬁc fully
connected classiﬁcation layer from the network and replacing it with a randomly
initialized classiﬁcation layer with one output per class in the target task. This
modiﬁed network is then trained using SGD with momentum. We select the
ﬁnetuning learning rate and schedule by grid search on a proper validation set
for each target task. To do this, we randomly hold out a small portion of the
training set (see supplemental material). This practice ensures that our results
on the standard validation sets are clean.
Feature transfer is performed by training an L2-regularized linear logistic
regressor on the training data for the target task using SGD. The features produced by the pretrained network are used as input into the classiﬁer. We train
the classiﬁer until convergence to the global optimum.
Image Classiﬁcation Experiments
We evaluate Instagram pretraining by measuring classiﬁcation accuracies on
three classiﬁcation target tasks: ImageNet , CUB2011 , and Places365
 . We perform inference on 224×224 center-cropped images, and study the
eﬀects of (1) the hashtag vocabulary size, (2) the training set size, (3) the amount
of noise in the hashtag targets, and (4) the hashtag sampling strategy.
3.1.1 How does the Instagram hashtag set impact accuracy? Our ﬁrst
experiment varies the Instagram hashtag sets used in pretraining (1.5k, 8.5k,
vs. 17k) whilst keeping other factors constant. We compute transfer learning results as top-1 classiﬁcation accuracy on ﬁve target datasets: val-IN-1k, val-IN-5k,
val-IN-9k, val-CUB-200, val-Places-365. For baseline models, we use ImageNet
classiﬁcation as a source task: we train networks on train-IN-1k, train-IN-5k,
and train-IN-9k, and evaluate them on the corresponding validation sets (ﬁnetuning is not needed in these cases). For val-CUB-200 and val-Places-365, we
use train-IN-1k as the baseline source task and ﬁnetune on train-CUB-200 and
train-Places-365. Full network ﬁnetuning of ResNeXt-101 32×16d is used for all
source-target pairs in which source and target are not the same.
Figure 1 shows that pretraining for hashtag prediction substantially improves
target task accuracy: on the standard IN-1k benchmark set, a network pretrained
on nearly 1B Instagram images with 1.5k hashtags achieves a state-of-the-art
accuracy of 84.2%—an improvement of 4.6% over the same model architecture
Exploring the Limits of Weakly Supervised Pretraining
Target task: ImageNet
Number of classes in target task (ImageNet)
ImageNet top-1 accuracy (in %)
Source task
ImageNet (target = source)
Instagram (940M, 1.5k tags)
Instagram (1B, 8.5k tags)
Instagram (1B, 17k tags)
Instagram (3.5B, 17k tags)
Target task: CUB & Places
Target task
Classification accuracy (in %)
Source task
ImageNet (1.3M, 1k labels)
Instagram (940M, 1.5k tags)
Instagram (1B, 8.5k tags)
Instagram (1B, 17k tags)
Instagram (3.5B, 17k tags)
Fig. 1: Classiﬁcation accuracy of ResNeXt-101 32×16d pretrained on IG-1B with different hashtag vocabularies (purple bars) on IN-{1k, 5k, 9k} (left) and CUB2011,
Places365 (right). Baseline models (gray bars) are trained on IN-{1k, 5k, 9k} (left)
and IN-1k (right), respectively. Full network ﬁnetuning is used. Higher is better.
trained on IN-1k alone and a 1.5% boost over the prior state-of-the-art ,
which uses an optimized network architecture. The performance improvements
due to Instagram pretraining vary between ImageNet tasks: on the 1k class task,
the model pretrained with the IN-1k-aligned 1.5k hashtag set outperforms source
networks trained on larger hashtag sets. This trend reverses as the number of
target ImageNet classes increases: on 9k ImageNet target classes, the model
pretrained with 17k hashtags strongly outperforms the 1.5k hashtag model. On
the CUB2011 and Places365 target tasks, source models trained with the largest
hashtag sets perform the best, likely, because the 17k hashtags span more objects,
scenes, and ﬁne-grained categories. These patterns are intuitive and suggest that
alignment between the source and target label sets is an important factor.
We also show results in Figure 1 using a larger 3.5B image set with 17k
hashtags (dark purple bars), which performs best across all target tasks. Furthermore, following , we measure the rectiﬁed classiﬁcation accuracy of this
model on val-IN-1k. We present all incorrect classiﬁcations to ﬁve human annotators, asking whether or not the prediction is correct: if at least four annotators
answer this question aﬃrmatively the model’s prediction is considered correct.
Whereas the IN-1M-1k model obtained a rectiﬁed top-1 accuracy of 87.5% on
val-IN-1k, our IG-3.5B-17k pretrained model achieved 90.4%.
3.1.2 How does the pretraining image set size impact accuracy? This
experiment studies the relationship between the number of images used in Instagram pretraining and classiﬁcation accuracy on the target task. For these
experiments, when transferring to the target task we keep the pretrained network weights ﬁxed and only train a linear classiﬁer for the target task. We make
this choice because when the number of pretraining images is small relative to
the number of target task images (e.g., 1M vs. 7M), the eﬀect of pretraining is
Mahajan et al.
Target task: ImageNet-1k
Number of training images in source task (Instagram)
ImageNet top-1 accuracy (in %)
Source task / ResNext-101 capacity
Instagram (1.5k tags) / 32x4d
Instagram (1.5k tags) / 32x8d
Instagram (1.5k tags) / 32x16d
Instagram (17k tags) / 32x4d
Instagram (17k tags) / 32x8d
Instagram (17k tags) / 32x16d
Target task: ImageNet-5k
Number of training images in source task (Instagram)
ImageNet top-1 accuracy (in %)
Target task: ImageNet-9k
Number of training images in source task (Instagram)
ImageNet top-1 accuracy (in %)
Target task: CUB2011
Number of training images in source task (Instagram)
Accuracy (in %)
Fig. 2: Classiﬁcation accuracies on IN-{1k, 5k, 9k} and CUB2011 target tasks as a
function of the number of Instagram images used for pretraining for three network
architectures (colors) and two hashtag vocabularies (dashed / solid lines). Only the
linear classiﬁer is trained on the target task. Higher is better.
masked by the large amount of ﬁnetuning data (this was not the case in the previous experiment where the source task had orders of magnitude more images).
Figure 2 shows the classiﬁcation accuracy on ImageNet validation sets (yaxis) as a function of the number of Instagram training images (x-axis; note
the log scale) ranging from 3.5M to 3.5B images. The ﬁgure shows results for
models pretrained to predict 1.5k hashtags (dashed lines) or 17k hashtags (solid
lines) for ResNeXt-101 models with three diﬀerent capacities (represented by
diﬀerent colors).1 The four panels correspond to ImageNet target tasks with
three diﬀerent number of classes (1k, 5k, 9k) and CUB2011.
In line with prior results , we observe near log-linear behavior: each
time we multiply the amount of training data by a factor of x, we observe a
ﬁxed increase y in classiﬁcation accuracy. While the scaling behavior is con-
1 The maximum number of images available for the 1.5k hashtag set is 940M.
Exploring the Limits of Weakly Supervised Pretraining
sistent across hashtag vocabulary sizes and models, the accuracy increase y is
larger for higher-capacity networks: across all ﬁgures, the lines corresponding to
ResNeXt-101 32×16d networks (purple) are steeper than those corresponding to
32×8d and 32×4d models. This result suggests that when training convolutional
networks on billions of training images, current network architectures are prone
to underﬁtting. We also observe log-linear scaling break down in two regimes:
(1) because accuracy is bounded, endless log-linear scaling is not possible. On
datasets like IN-1k and CUB2011 the ceiling eﬀect necessarily creates sub-loglinear scaling. (2) We observe a deviation from log-linear scaling in the 1B to
3.5B image regime even without apparent ceiling eﬀects on IN-{5k, 9k}.
These plots also illustrate an interesting eﬀect of the hashtag vocabulary on
the transfer task accuracy. On IN-1k, networks pretrained on the target-taskaligned 1.5k hashtags outperform those trained using a larger hashtag vocabulary, because the 1.5k hashtags were selected to match the ImageNet synsets.
However, as the matching between hashtag vocabulary and target classes disappears and the visual variety in the transfer task increases, networks pretrained
to recognize a larger number of hashtags increasingly outperform networks pretrained on fewer hashtags: on the IN-9k transfer task, the diﬀerence in accuracy
between networks trained on 1.5k and those trained on 17k hashtags is ∼7%.
The highest accuracies on val-IN-1k are 83.3% (source: IG-940M-1k) and
83.6% (source: IG-3.5B-17k), both with ResNeXt-101 32×16d. These results are
obtained by training a linear classiﬁer on ﬁxed features and yet are nearly as good
as full network ﬁnetuning, demonstrating the eﬀectiveness of the feature representation learned from hashtag prediction. These results also have low variance:
we pretrained the ResNeXt-101 32×16d architecture of two diﬀerent random
samples of 1B images and then trained linear classiﬁers on IN-{1k, 5k, 9k} ﬁnding a diﬀerence in top-1 accuracy of less than 0.1% in all cases.
To test whether the above observations generalize to ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation, we repeated the experiments on the CUB2011 dataset, and show the results
in Figure 2, bottom right. The curves reveal that when training data is limited,
the 1.5k hashtag dataset is better, but once the number of training images surpasses ∼100M, the larger 17k hashtag dataset prevails, presumably because it
represents a more diverse visual distribution with more ﬁne-grained concepts.
3.1.3 What is the eﬀect of hashtag label noise on model accuracy? A
major diﬀerence between hashtag supervision and the labels provided in datasets
such as ImageNet is that hashtag supervision is inherently noisy: users may apply
hashtags that are irrelevant to the visual content of the image, or they may have
left out hashtags that would have been visually relevant . Because an exact
characterization of this label noise is diﬃcult, instead, we investigate the eﬀect
of injecting additional label noise on the accuracy of our networks. To do so, we
pretrain ResNeXt-101 32×16d networks on a version of IG-1B-17k in which we
randomly replaced p% of the hashtags by hashtags obtained by sampling from
the marginal distribution over hashtags (excluding the tag to be replaced).
Figure 3 shows the ImageNet classiﬁcation accuracy of the resulting networks
for diﬀerent numbers of classes at three levels, p, of artiﬁcial label noise as well
Mahajan et al.
Number of classes in target task (ImageNet)
ImageNet top-1 accuracy (in %)
Source task
No label noise
Label noise: 10%
Label noise: 25%
Label noise: 50%
Classiﬁcation
ResNeXt-101
pretrained
IG-1B-17k, on val-IN-{1k, 5k, 9k} at
three levels of injected label noise. The
no-label-noise
the original hashtags. Only the linear
classiﬁer is trained on the target task.
Number of classes in target task (ImageNet)
ImageNet top-1 accuracy (in %)
Class sampling
Square root
Classiﬁcation
ResNeXt-101
pretrained
IG-1B-17k, on val-IN-{1k, 5k, 9k} for
three diﬀerent hashtag sampling strategies: natural sampling, uniform sampling,
and square-root sampling. Only the linear
classiﬁer is trained on the target task.
as for a baseline in which no artiﬁcial label noise was added during pretraining.
We only train the ﬁnal linear classiﬁer on the target task, because full ﬁnetuning
may mask the damage caused by pretraining noise. The results suggest that the
networks are remarkably resilient against label noise: a noise level of p = 10%
leads to a loss of less than 1% in classiﬁcation accuracy, and at p = 25% label
noise, the reduction in accuracy is around 2%. These results suggest that label
noise may be a limited issue if networks are trained on billions of images.
How does the sampling of pretraining data impact accuracy?
Another diﬀerence between hashtag and ImageNet supervision is that, like in
language modeling, hashtags are governed by a Zipﬁan distribution. Prior studies in language modeling found that resampling Zipﬁan distributions reduces
the impact of the head of the word distribution on the overall training loss .
Motivated by this work, we perform experiments in which we evaluate three
diﬀerent types of data sampling in the Instagram pretraining: (1) a natural sampling in which we sample images and hashtags according to the distribution by
which they appear on Instagram; (2) square-root sampling in which we take
the square-root of the head of the hashtag distribution, renormalize, and sample
according to the resulting distribution (due to practical considerations, our implementation is slightly diﬀerent; see supplemental material); and (3) uniform
sampling in which we sample a hashtag uniformly at random, and then sample
an image that has this hashtag associated to it uniformly at random . (Aside
from this experiment, we always pretrain on Instagram data using square-root
sampling.) As before, we only train the ﬁnal linear classiﬁer on the target task.
Figure 4 displays classiﬁcation accuracy as a function of the number of ImageNet classes for networks that were pretrained on IG-1B-17k using the three
Exploring the Limits of Weakly Supervised Pretraining
sampling strategies. The results show that resampling of the hashtag distribution
is important in order to obtain good transfer to ImageNet image-classiﬁcation
tasks: using uniform or square-root sampling leads to an accuracy improvement
of 5 to 6% irrespective of the number of ImageNet classes in the transfer task.
In line with prior results, the ﬁgure also shows that larger hashtag vocabularies
lead to increasing accuracy improvements as the number of target classes grows.
Model capacity (number of mult-add operations)
ImageNet top-1 accuracy (in %)
Source task
ImageNet (target = source)
Instagram (940M, 1.5k tags)
Fig. 5: Classiﬁcation accuracy on val-IN-1k
using ResNeXt-101 32×{4, 8 16, 32, 48}d
with and without pretraining on the IG-
940M-1.5k dataset.
3.1.5 With billions of images, is
transfer learning model-capacity
bound? Now, we look at what happens when we train convolutional networks that are substantially larger
than those typically used in recent
studies (and our experiments so far).
In particular, we use IG-940M-1.5k
to pretrain ResNeXt-101 32×32d and
ResNeXt-101
2.4× and 4.3× more add-mult FLOPs
than ResNeXt-101 32×16d, respectively. Using these “super-sized” models improves val-IN-1k results over the
32×16d model from 84.2% top-1 accuracy to 85.1% and 85.4%, respectively
(top-5 accuracy: from 97.2% to 97.5%
and 97.6%). By comparison, when training from scratch on IN-1k, top-1 accuracy
saturates at around 79.6% with the 32×16d model and does not meaningfully
increase by using larger models. These results, plotted in Figure 5, indicate that
with large-scale Instagram hashtag training, transfer-learning performance appears bottlenecked by model capacity.
On what visual classes is Instagram pretraining most helpful?
Our results with diﬀerent hashtag vocabularies suggest that choosing the right
hashtag vocabulary may be at least as important as scaling model training to
billions of images. Speciﬁcally, we expect that some hashtags are easier to predict
because they are more “visually concrete” than others: whereas #eiffeltower
corresponds to a very speciﬁc visual scene, #party may correspond to a large
variety of visual scenes. We matched the 17k Instagram hashtags with a list of
40k “concreteness” values of nouns to obtain 5,730 hashtag concreteness
values. Figure 6 displays these hashtag concreteness values and the accuracy
of predicting the hashtags correctly (measured in terms of AUC on balanced
validation sets) in a scatter plot. The ﬁgure suggests a clear relation between
the concreteness of a noun and the model’s ability to predict the corresponding
hashtag: the Pearson correlation, ρ, between both variables is 0.43.
We also analyze the eﬀect of Instagram pretraining on recognizing individual
IN-1k classes. Figure 7 shows the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of
the absolute accuracy improvement per class of a ResNeXt-101 32×16d network
pretrained on IG-3.5B-17k compared to the same network trained on IN-1k.
Mahajan et al.
Concreteness
Area under ROC curve (AUC)
Fig. 6: Area under ROC curve (AUC) for
hashtag prediction as a function of the
hashtag concreteness , and corresponding least-squares ﬁt (ρ=0.43).
Absolute accuracy improvement (in %)
Cumulative number of ImageNet classes
CDF on IN-1k
Fig. 7: CDF of absolute per-class accuracy improvements on IN-1k validation set
of an Instagram-pretrained network compared to ImageNet baseline.
Accuracy improves on more than 80% of the IN-1k classes, with 20% of classes
gaining at least 10 percentage points.
Object Detection
We have looked at target tasks that require image classiﬁcation, but we are also
interested in observing if pretraining on Instagram hashtag data can improve
object detection and instance segmentation tasks by ﬁnetuning networks on the
COCO dataset . We use Mask R-CNN and experiment with ResNeXt-
101 FPN backbones of three diﬀerent capacities (see Figure 8).
We compare performance on the 2017 test-dev set using several diﬀerent pretrained networks. As baselines, we use IN-{1k, 5k} pretraining (IN-9k performs
no better than IN-5k) and compare them to IG-940M-1k and IG-1B-17k. For the
largest model (32×16d) we also include results for IG-3.5B-17k. We use standard
settings for end-to-end Mask R-CNN training with one exception: for the
Instagram pretrained models we found it necessary to perform grid search for the
ﬁnetuning learning rate on the validation set. We found that models pretrained
on the Instagram data require ﬁnetuning learning rates that are ∼4-10× lower
than ImageNet pretrained models (see supplemental material). This ﬁnding illustrates that ﬁnetuning recipes developed for ImageNet pretrained models do
not transfer to new pretraining sets: a larger amount of pretraining data implies
the need for lower ﬁnetuning learning rates.
Figure 8 shows two interesting trends. First, we observe that when using
large amounts of pretraining data, detection is model capacity bound: with the
lowest capacity model (32×4d), the gains from larger datasets are small or even
negative, but as model capacity increases the larger pretraining datasets yield
consistent improvements. We need even larger models to take advantage of the
large-scale pretraining data. The second trend we observe comes from comparing
COCO’s default AP metric (average precision averaged over intersection-over-
Exploring the Limits of Weakly Supervised Pretraining
Target task: COCO detection (box AP)
ResNeXt-101 capacity (in Mask R-CNN)
COCO test-dev box AP (in %)
Source task
IN-1k (1.3M, 1k labels)
IN-5k (6.6M, 5k labels)
IG (940M, 1.5k tags)
IG (1B, 17k tags)
IG (3.5B, 17k tags)
Target task: COCO detection (box AP@50)
ResNeXt-101 capacity (in Mask R-CNN)
COCO test-dev box AP@50 (in %)
Target task: COCO detection (mask AP)
ResNeXt-101 capacity (in Mask R-CNN)
COCO test-dev mask AP (in %)
Target task: COCO detection (mask AP@50)
ResNeXt-101 capacity (in Mask R-CNN)
COCO test-dev mask AP@50 (in %)
Fig. 8: Transfer to object detection and instance segmentation with Mask R-CNN. We
compare ResNeXt-101 FPN backbones of three diﬀerent capacities using a variety of
source pretraining tasks. Higher is better.
union (IoU) overlap thresholds 0.5:0.95) to AP@50 (average precision computed
at IoU threshold 0.5 only). The former emphasizes precise localization while the
later allows for looser localization. We observe that the improvement over IN-
{1k, 5k} pretraining from IG-1B-1k is much larger in terms of AP@50. Thus,
the gains from Instagram pretraining may be primarily due to improved object
classiﬁcation performance, rather than spatial localization performance. Further
evidence comes from experiments with keypoint detection using Mask R-CNN,
where we found that compared to IN-1k pretraining, IG-1B-1k pretraining leads
to worse results (65.3% vs. 67.0% keypoint AP). These two ﬁndings suggest that
pretraining for Instagram hashtag classiﬁcation may reduce spatial localization
performance while improving classiﬁcation.
Mahajan et al.
Related Work
Our study is part of a larger body of work on training convolutional networks
on large, weakly supervised image datasets. Sun et al. train convolutional
networks on the JFT-300M dataset of 300 million weakly supervised images.
Our Instagram datasets are an order of magnitude larger than JFT-300M, and
collecting them required much less manual annotation work (see Section 2.1).
Due to the larger training set size and the use of better network architectures,
we obtain substantially higher accuracies on transfer tasks: e.g., we obtain 85.4%
top-1 accuracy on ImageNet-1k, compared to 79.2% reported in .
Other prior studies trained convolutional networks to predict words
or n-grams in comments on a collection of 100 million Flickr photos and corresponding comments . Word or n-gram supervision is weaker than hashtag supervision because it is less structured, as reﬂected in the relatively poor transfer
of features to ImageNet reported in . Other work also trained networks to
predict hashtags on the Flickr dataset but, unlike our study, does not investigate
transfer of the resulting networks to other tasks. In addition to Flickr hashtags,
 trained hard mixture of expert models on food-related Instagram hashtags;
our focus is on standard recognition networks and general hashtags. Other studies on hashtag prediction do not train convolutional networks from scratch,
but train linear classiﬁers to predict relevant hashtags from pre-deﬁned image
features. Several other works have trained models on web-scale image data for
other purposes, such as face recognition and similarity search , but
to the best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to report the results of experiments
that involve training convolutional networks from scratch on billions of images.
Discussion
We have attempted to explore the limits of supervised pretraining. In addition
to producing state-of-the-art results on the ImageNet-1k benchmark task (85.4%
single-crop, top-1 accuracy; 97.6% single-crop, top-5 accuracy) and several other
vision tasks, our study has led to four important observations:
1. Our results suggests that, whilst increasing the size of the pretraining dataset
may be worthwhile, it may be at least as important to select a label space
for the source task to match that of the target task. We found that networks
trained on a hashtag vocabulary that was designed to match the classes in the
ImageNet-1k dataset outperformed those trained on twice as many images
without such careful selection of hashtags (Figure 2, top left). This observation paves the way for the design of “label-space engineering” approaches
that aim to optimally select (weakly supervised) label sets for a particular
target task. Such label-space engineering may be much more fruitful than
further increasing the scale of the data on which models are trained.
2. In line with prior work , we observe that current network architectures
are underﬁtting when trained on billions of images. Whilst such underﬁtting
Exploring the Limits of Weakly Supervised Pretraining
does lead to very high robustness to noise in our hashtag targets (Figure 3),
our results do suggest that accuracy improvements on target tasks may be
obtained by further increases of the capacity of our networks (Figure 2).
Capacity may be increased, for instance, by increasing the number of layers
and the number of ﬁlters per layer of existing architectures or by mixturesof-experts (using model parallelization across GPUs). However, it is not
unthinkable that some of the design choices that were made in current network architectures are too tailored to ImageNet-1k classiﬁcation, and need
to be revisited when training on billions of images with hashtag supervision.
3. Our results also underline the importance of increasing the visual variety
that we consider in our benchmark tasks. They show that the diﬀerences in
the quality of visual features become much more pronounced if these features
are evaluated on tasks with a larger visual variety. For instance, we ﬁnd
that the accuracy diﬀerence between models pretrained using two diﬀerent
vocabularies increases as the number of target classes increases (Figure 2):
if we would have only evaluated our models on ImageNet-1k, we would have
concluded they learned visual features of similar quality, whereas results on
ImageNet-9k show that one model learns substantially better features than
the other. We believe evaluation on more ImageNet classes is a good step
towards a more comprehensive assessment of visual recognition models.
4. Results from transferring our models to object detection, instance segmentation, and keypoint detection tasks suggestion that training for large-scale
hashtag prediction improves classiﬁcation while at the same time possibly
harming localization performance. This opens a future direction of modifying
large-scale, weakly supervised pretraining tasks to better suit the localization
needs of important target tasks like detection and human pose estimation.
In closing, we reﬂect on the remarkable fact that training for hashtag prediction,
without the need for additional manual annotation or data cleaning, works at all.
We believe our study illustrates the potential of natural or “wild” data compared
to the traditional approach of manually designing and annotating datasets.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Matthijs Douze, Aapo Kyrola, Andrew Dye, Jerry Pan,
Kevin Wilfong, and Martin Englund for helpful discussions and support.