MOBA: a New Arena for Game AI
Victor do Nascimento Silva1 and Luiz Chaimowicz2
Abstract—Games have always been popular testbeds for Arti-
ﬁcial Intelligence (AI). In the last decade, we have seen the rise
of the Multiple Online Battle Arena (MOBA) games, which are
the most played games nowadays. In spite of this, there are few
works that explore MOBA as a testbed for AI Research. In this
paper we present and discuss the main features and opportunities
offered by MOBA games to Game AI Research. We describe
the various challenges faced along the game and also propose a
discrete model that can be used to better understand and explore
the game. With this, we aim to encourage the use of MOBA as
a novel research platform for Game AI.
I. INTRODUCTION
From Arthur Samuel’s research on Checkers , through
Deep Blue’s efforts in defeating a human chess champion 
to the recent accomplishments of AlphaGo , games have
always been an important drive for Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI).
Games provide a controlled test environment with interesting challenges, where novel AI techniques can be tested.
Moreover, playing competitively against humans has always
motivated AI researchers and has proved to be difﬁcult in most
In the last decade, Real Time Strategy (RTS) Games have
emerged as a challenging testbed for AI . More than just
rational behavior, these games require agents that reason and
act as fast as possible in partially known environments. In
RTS Games, AI techniques have to deal with a broad range
of variables, that could inﬂuence the chances of winning and
losing the game. Real-time games also offer a wider range
of actions to the player, and, sometimes, a large number of
agents to be controlled .
One of the most successful testbeds in this context is the
RTS Game Starcraft. Specially, the Brood War version of
Starcraft became very popular among researchers, being used
in many works and competitions . It requires abilities in
different areas such as unit coordination, resource management
and combat skills and presents several challenges to AI agents
that have to deal with a complex state space, feature analysis
and some kind of intuition involved in Starcraft gameplay.
Due to this, humans has historically performed better than
computers in Starcraft , .
We believe that Starcraft has become a standard research
platform because of two main factors: a) the availability of a
programming environment that allowed researchers to develop
their agents ; and b) the large player base of the game,
allowing researchers to compare their agents with humans.
These factors make the research easier, and makes it more
1V. N. Silva is with the Department of Computing Science, University of
Alberta, Canada 
2Luiz Chaimowicz is with the Department of Computing Science, Federal
University of Minas Gerais, Brazil. 
*This work was partially supported by FAPEMIG and CNPq
relevant, because it impacts more people. Moreover, it is better
to perform user test in an environment that players are familiar
with, because they feel comfortable, and already know how to
behave in the game.
Recently, the game community has witnessed the rise of
MOBA (Multiple Online Battle Arena) Games. With titles
such as League of Legends, Smite and Dota 2, MOBA
games are responsible for almost 30% of the online gameplay
around the world . League of Legends alone consumes
approximately 23% of this gameplay, and became the most
played game of the world, surpassing the MMORPG World
of Warcraft .
MOBA can be considered a sub-genre of the RTS, inheriting
some of its characteristics. However, instead of focusing on the
ability of maneuvering large amounts of units and building
fortresses, a set of actions known as Macromanagement,
MOBAs have a strong focus on Micromanagement which
consists in mastering a set of actions and their best use in
the control of a small set of units. In MOBA games, this is
generally known as mechanics, and players with these ﬁne
abilities normally excel in the game.
Due to their speciﬁc gameplay, MOBA games present a
different and interesting set of challenges for Game AI. But,
in spite of their huge commercial success, they have not yet
been extensively explored as a testbed for game AI such as
their RTS ancestors. Thus, in this paper we present and discuss
the main challenges and opportunities offered by MOBA
games to Game AI Research. We break down this discussion
considering the speciﬁc phases of the gameplay and also in
more general terms related to game mechanics. Moreover, we
present a general model based on a MOBA abstraction that
can facilitate related research in more general settings such as
autonomous agents, computational intelligence and learning.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: we
give an overview of the MOBA genre in Section II. We follow
by discussing the MOBA phases and their speciﬁc challenges
in Section III. The mechanic challenges found in MOBA are
described in Section IV while the Discrete Model proposed
for the MOBA environment is presented in V. Finally, we
present the related research that have been done using MOBA
in Section VI and discuss the conclusions and future work in
Section VII.
II. MULTIPLAYER ONLINE BATTLE ARENA
The MOBA genre has its roots on the RTS genre, and even
shared game platforms in the early days. Instead of focusing
on the management of an army, exploring maps and build a
fortress, MOBA focuses on the ﬁnest mechanic abilities, such
as combos, kiting, abilities, among others.
The core gameplay of most MOBAs is the control of a
single unit, commonly called hero. This unit has a set of
 
special powers and characteristics that allow it to combat other
units. Each player receives his chosen hero in the level 1,
and should evolve his hero to the max level offered by the
game. Thus, each game is different from another, and the
environment is not persistent. The main goal is to conquer
a single structure located at the opposite side of the map.
Another important characteristic of MOBA is that it is not
played alone. The common game mode of most MOBAs
requires two teams of ﬁve players. Each player controls a
single hero that should assume a role in the team, composing
the team’s strategy. The role consists of the function that the
hero will assume in the match, e.g. Carry, Initiator, Tank,
Ganker, among others. Each team has a base, which contains
a structure that should be conquered by the opponent team. To
do so, the team should ﬁght against strong defensive structures,
called turrets.
A general MOBA map is composed by three lanes, and each
lane can contain up to three turrets. To conquer a turret closer
to the base, the team should ﬁrstly destroy the precedent turret
in the same lane. A view of a generic MOBA map can be seen
in Figure 1.
Fig. 1. A generic map found on MOBA games. Red shapes represent a team
while blue represent another. Circles represent turrets. The green area is the
jungle and the yellow area are the lanes. The corner areas are the team’s base.
An important part of RTS gameplay is to collect resources
from speciﬁc places to build structures and units. For instance,
in Starcraft this resource collection is done in sources of gas
and crystals, that are later used to create units and structures.
In the MOBA gameplay, the resource collection task is also
present, but with different characteristics. Instead of simply
sending units to collect the materials from a source, MOBA
rely on the player skills to perform the so called farming.
Farming consists in killing certain units known as creeps or
minions in order to get gold. These units spawn in waves from
each team base, and follow a lane ﬁghting their way to the
enemy base. Besides, it is possible to obtain gold from neutral
minions, which live in the jungle, the free space between
the lanes. Lastly, killing enemy heroes or destroying enemy
structures also give the hero or the team a certain amount of
gold. Therefore, more mechanically skilled players can collect
more resources than the least skilled ones. We can consider
that collecting resources in MOBA is a harder task than in RTS
since it involves skills like positioning, skill/attack control and
target selection, while RTS requires the player to simply send
units to a speciﬁc place to collect resources.
The gold in MOBAs is not used to buy structures or units.
Instead, it is used to buy items for the controlled hero. These
items improve the hero abilities and status, making it more
powerful. Besides, there are items that give the hero special
powers and can be used during team ﬁghts or to disable
enemies. Thus, instead of focusing in building a fortress,
MOBA requires the player to improve his/her own hero,
preparing it to succeed in the game.
Lastly, MOBA focuses on team cooperation to defeat an
enemy team. Differently from RTS, which values players that
are able to manage many units, explore the map and build
structures, MOBA rewards players with higher mechanical
skills that are also capable of cooperating with other players
to execute a successful strategy. Therefore, besides individual
abilities, cooperation is an important feature in MOBA gameplay.
III. MOBA PHASES’ CHALLENGES
A MOBA game can be divided in different phases, which
one with speciﬁc challenges. Identifying such challenges and
game features is important to better understand the game
and to the discuss the main avenues for AI research on
MOBA. In the next sections, for each phase, we describe
its main characteristics and strategies and then present its
main challenges in terms of AI. The phases are described in
chronological order, starting before the match actually starts
up to the point where the game state is more consolidated.
A. Pick and Ban Phase
Most MOBAs offer a large hero base to players, allowing
them to build speciﬁc strategies, and to pick heroes that excel
over other heroes, an act called counter-picking. Normally,
there are two main hero picking modes: blind and tournament.
In blind mode each team of players selects freely from the hero
pool without knowing the enemy team’s heroes. On the other
hand, in the tournament mode, each team picks alternately and
is allowed to perform bans on the other team, as seen in Figure
2. Moreover, in the tournament mode, the hero picked or being
considered is seen by all players in the match. A hero cannot
be picked twice in the tournament mode, while in blind mode
it can be picked once by each team.
Most professional players and eSport staff agree that the
game can be, sometimes, deﬁned during the pick and ban
phase. That is because there are some heroes that stand out in
the game strategy, especially in professional gameplay where
players have better mechanical skills. It is also common to
see bans towards speciﬁc heroes that players have difﬁculty to
play against, or that are considered overpowered.
The picks are normally made in accordance to a strategy to
be executed by the team, such as ﬁghting, picking enemies,
pushing lanes, etc. The picks can also be done based on
the player’s skills with a speciﬁc hero or considering the
metagame. The metagame consists of a set knowledge from
inside and outside the game that encompass a series of
Fig. 2. A screenshot from the pick and ban Phase from the game Dota 2 in
tournament mode.
guidelines of which strategies and heroes are more likely to
succeed during a time period. Lastly, the picks can be done
based on outplaying the enemy team’s strategy, or simply by
picking heroes that counter-play the enemy heroes.
The choices in the Pick and Ban Phase are key since they
can determine the outcome of the game. So, the challenges
faced by an Artiﬁcial Intelligence Agent playing this phase
are of great importance. Firstly, an Artiﬁcial Intelligent Agent
should pick heroes that are effective both playing alone and
in a team also considering that they should be at least as
good as the other team’s roster. Moreover, the AI should start
the construction of a game strategy, planning which are the
best actions for the chosen heroes. Lastly, it is important to
perform some kind of opponent modeling in order to identify
the possible strategies and roles to be assumed by the enemy
B. Opening Phase
The opening phase begin when the match starts and ends
when the creeps or minions reach the middle of each lane.
This phase consists of two main tasks: buying the opening
items and performing role allocation. Optionally, there may
be pickoffs, level one team ﬁghts or jungle invasion.
The act of buying the very ﬁrst items depends much on the
enemies that the hero will be facing. Nevertheless, the initial
items are very tentative, because the player can only guess
which hero it will be playing against. If the player has a deep
comprehension of the metagame, it can predict which hero
will be in each lane, however, this can be just a guess.
The role allocation not only consists of assigning a role
to a hero, it also consists of making the initial positioning
on the game environment. For instance, the strategy deﬁned
can propose an inversion of lanes to make the hero to face a
weaker hero and, therefore, maximize its chances of winning
the combat.
The jungle invasion consists of trying to kill neutral creeps
located at the enemy’s jungle, denying gold and experience to
the enemy team, especially if there is a jungle role. Performing
this strategy can lead to pickoffs, where the team ﬁnds a
vulnerable hero in the map and try to kill him, getting gold
and experience to the team. If the strategy is based on ﬁghts
and the opportunity happens, the team can choose to perform
a level one team ﬁght, that happens before the heroes are well
developed.
The main challenges here are the following: a) select the
initial set of items to buy; b) allocate a set of ﬁve heroes
to their respective roles; and c) deﬁne which lane will be
claimed by one or more heroes. For accomplishing these, it
may be necessary to develop a system that predicts the enemy’s
strategy and plan a counter strategy that minimizes the chances
of losing the game, by deﬁning roles, lanes and items to each
C. Laning Phase
The Laning Phase starts when the creeps reach the middle of
each lane. It consists of mostly staying in the lane and trying to
collect the maximum number of resources as possible. These
resources come mainly from executing last-hits on enemy
minions that come to the lane. This is generaly know as
farming. Although this task seems to be simple, it is not, due
to several factors. The player competes in damaging with its
allied creeps, allied heroes and turrets. Moreover, the player
should take care to avoid being damaged by the enemies. In
some games, like Dota and Dota2, the enemy heroes can also
damage their allied creeps, making it harder to the player to
execute the last hit.
Besides the resource collection task, the player should worry
about the positioning of the heroes. Enemies can take advantage of a bad positioning by increasing the inﬂicted damage
or even ganking the player. The ganking action consists of
being caught and killed by other heroes that are not currently
combating the player. A common practice is to use the Fog
of War to perform effective ganks, taking advantage of the
partial information. Every time the hero is killed the player
receives a time punishment, through which the player cannot
perform actions. This gank often comes from a player role
called ganker or jungler, a role intended to help heroes to kill
enemy heroes.
While most players act in the lanes, the jungler spends the
laning phase collecting resources in the jungle. The jungler
also roams around the map looking for opportunities to gank in
the lanes. Moreover, junglers are responsible for the collection
of minions and special blesses that change the hero status
temporarily, commonly called buffs. For instance, in the game
League of Legends, the jungle creeps offer special buffs that
helps the jungler to perform ganks or help the team. In Dota2
and League of Legends there are heroes that can recruit neutral
creeps to ﬁght alongside them.
The Laning Phase normally ﬁnishes when a hero has enough
resources to buy an important item or has relevant status or
level difference to other heroes. That can be achieved through
farming or killing enemies. Having this strategic advantage
leads the hero to perform ganks itself performing the roaming,
i.e. walking around the map in the jungle or other lanes.
During the laning phase the AI should perform many
reasoning tasks. Among these are: deciding whether or not
to buy new items, when to ﬁght or damage the enemy hero,
which positioning is the best, etc. Moreover, since there are
just three lanes and ﬁve heroes, the AI should be ready to
cooperate with other players towards killing enemies or any
other strategy.
D. Mid Game
The Mid Game is considered the phase in which the strategy
takes form after the Laning Phase. Commonly there are three
main strategy types found in most MOBA games: team ﬁghts,
pickoff and lane push.
The team ﬁght strategy consists of focusing the game in
getting strategic advantage through defeating the enemy team
in a series of group ﬁghts. Teams that focus in this strategy
commonly have carry and tank heroes. The ﬁrst is a hero
capable of inﬂicting heavy damage on the opponents while
the second is able of taking a lot of damage. By winning
those ﬁghts the entire team obtains gold and experience, while
punishing the enemy team with time penalties.
Pickoff is the action of selecting a vulnerable or weak
hero and trying to kill it. Normally, this strategy focuses on
defeating the enemy by picking important heroes and killing
them to obtain ﬁght advantage or weakening a main hero in
the group. That can grant advantage in team ﬁghts or lead the
team to gank the enemy heroes one-by-one, opening way to
Lastly, the lane push strategy has the objective of picking
a lane and pushing it as hard as possible, destroying all
the structures on the path to the base. This kind of strategy
has many variants, with three as the most used: split push,
sieging and team push. The split push consists of making a
distraction to the enemy team while a hero can destroy the
enemy structures on other lanes. Sieging consists of pushing
the enemy team hard toward their base or turrets, focusing
on destroying enemy structures instead of ﬁghting. Finally,
the team push is the least used and may be seem as a rush
strategy. The entire team goes for a lane and try to destroy all
the structures as quick as possible, avoiding direct ﬁghts with
the enemy team.
Challenges found in this phase are very diverse, but the
cooperation and real-time reasoning problems stand out. In this
phase, regardless of the strategy being followed, the synergy
between the team is the key. Furthermore, the mechanics
demonstrated by the AI should excel the human mechanics.
Prediction, skill evasion and kiting are very valuable mechanics in this phase, because players will be ﬁghting each other
in a faster pace than in previous phases. A shallow analysis
demonstrates that, for instance, a level one hero commonly has
a few different actions to perform against one or two enemy
heroes. On the other hand, in the mid game the hero has to
ﬁght against ﬁve other heroes and has many actions and action
combinations.
E. Late Game
The late game is the last phase of a MOBA match. It
starts when almost all heroes are missing one or two items to
ﬁnish their itemization. In this phase the heroes are strong and
the number of possible actions large, making combats more
complex. Being caught alone in the late game normally means
to be defeated. Moreover, the time penalty for being killed is
higher at the late game, impairing the teams during ﬁght.
When heroes have ﬁlled their item slots, they might start an
itemization changing. It consists in changing the less valuable
items for better ones. This technique also helps the team to
counter-play the enemy strategies by using more appropriate
In the late game it is common to have the heroes at their
maximum potential. Heroes that are meant to be tank can
absorb great amounts of damage, while carry can inﬂict a
huge amount of damage. The duels, or ﬁghts of one versus
one, are mechanically driven, meaning that the most skilled
player will win the ﬁght, considering that their powers are
almost the same.
Sieging and picking off heroes show their advantage at
this time, since heroes can take turrets down faster. The split
pushing is also very effective, but may be a weak strategy if
the team has to temporarily ﬁght without the member that is
performing the split push.
Finally, performing a combat outcome analysis at this level
may be difﬁcult, since there are many combinations of abilities
and actions. Moreover, it is hard to predict the enemies actions,
especially if the enemies are humans.
The challenges found here are mainly due to the huge
amount of actions and possible combinations. Besides, all
the analysis should be performed in real-time, meaning that
the reaction time is an important factor for the AI system.
Generating an agent that is capable of reacting as fast as human
players and capable of performing prediction and analysis at
professional level is hard, because of the number of factors
that impact these actions.
F. Side Challenges
Along with the speciﬁc challenges found on each game
phase, there are some challenges that are inherent to the game
as a whole. These challenges are related with two types of
analyses found in MOBA: prediction and combat analysis.
These two ﬁelds converge in some sense, that the combat
analysis is prediction dependent and vice-versa.
Here we list some of the prediction and combat challenges
found in MOBA:
• Combat Outcome from duels (1 on 1) and team ﬁghts;
• Killable enemies from a set of actions or combo;
• Strategies to be performed by the enemy team;
• Winner of the phase.
Regarding the combat analysis, the combat outcome prediction can only be performed by the analysis of the interactions
between a group of heroes involved in the combat scenario.
These interactions were previously studied in Dota 2 . A
special case of this scenario is the Duel, where two opposing
heroes ﬁght each other. Although seems to be easy, to predict
the winner of a duel is hard, because it involves the prediction
of attacks, abilities, movement, items, probabilities of critical
damage, among others. Besides, the reaction in a duel should
be done in real time, a task that requires the AI to return its
answers as fast as possible.
Concerning the ﬁeld of counter playing the enemy team,
it is important to predict which items the enemy proposes
to buy. A successful build will help the hero to outplay the
enemy by having statuses that help him to make the enemy
hero’s status less relevant. Moreover, building items in a nonstatic way is a hard task, because items should be acquired
on demand, analyzing the match state. For instance, if the
team is losing, one may prefer to buy defensive items, in
order to have more survivability or to risk and buy items
that maximize its damage, trying to be mechanically perfect.
These challenges could be addressed by techniques that solve
task allocation problems and optimization, like Ant Colony
Optimization, Genetic Algorithms, among others.
IV. MOBA MECHANIC CHALLENGES
The MOBA gameplay has various structures and mechanics
that are common in most MOBA games. One of such structures are the turrets. The turret is a strong structure that guards
the lane from being naturally advanced by the creeps. Besides,
turrets provide a strong defensive area where heroes can stay
safer than in the lane itself. The damage and behavior of the
turrets provide a mechanical challenge common to the MOBA
genre: the tower diving. The tower diving challenge is to go
under the area of damage of the turret and kill one or more
enemy heroes, leaving the dangerous area alive.
Executing a tower diving action correctly, or even predicting
its success, is challenging for both humans and Computers
because it requires the analysis of a set of actions and preconditions. For example, the tower diving hero must be sure that it
has sufﬁcient HP to kill the enemy and is capable of receiving
some hits from the turret without being killed. Moreover, there
must be an analysis of abilities, turret damage, probability of
another enemy come to save the allied under turret are some
of these features. One hero could simply stun the enemy diver
under the turret area, leaving him there, stunned to death by
turret damage. Both of those problems could be tackled using
Inﬂuence Maps, Graphs Interaction analysis and Bayesian
Another challenge that is common in the MOBA scenario
is the Target Selection. Selecting the target in a ﬁght is a hard
task, especially in a cooperative mode. Humans, for instance,
discuss with each other the enemy that should be the next
target in their strategy. In case of AI controlled agents, this
could be done by a voting or consensus algorithm, in which the
agents would consider factors like low HP, high risk, strategy
breaking, easy to kill, among others to decide the target.
In the laning phase, the hero should decide which minion
should be the next target among a set of creeps called wave.
In this phase it is common to perform the last hitting, which
consists of hitting just the creeps that are killable by a single
attack. On the other hand, the strategy could require the agents
to push the lane, thus, the agents should hit continually, while
maximizing the farm. This continuous hitting could be guided
under rules that distribute the hits using a Target Selection
The Target Selection should be coupled with a good positioning strategy, or this technique may not perform well. A
good positioning should allow the hero to maximize its damage/effectiveness in the action performed, while minimizing
the damage/disable received. An example of such positioning
is to have long ranged units in the back, assuming that these
units are easily killable but deal heavy damage. In the front line
is interesting to position the melee and tank heroes, because
they can absorb a lot of damage and retain the enemy advance,
while their allies can inﬂict damage.
The previous discussion about positioning raises another
relevant question. One may plan its strategy in order to
minimize the damage received, however there are heroes that
are meant to be damaged. Some of these heroes are initiators,
and may not start the team ﬁghts without receiving damage
from enemies. Moreover, there are heroes that take advantage
of being damaged, like damage buffs, and even items that
buffs the hero based on its missing HP. Therefore, the damage
minimization strategy is not always the best strategy, and that
should be taken in account in the agent development.
V. A DISCRETIZED MODEL FOR MOBA STUDY
After the study of the MOBA structure, phases and elements, we see that the game is based on discrete parts, that
can be isolated in order to perform a better study. Thus,
we propose a model based on the individual core gameplay
of each mechanic task from the MOBA game. Moreover, a
testbed framework could be generated based on this model,
making it possible to perform preliminary learning and testing
in a faster pace.
Besides the testing beneﬁt, it is known that MOBA, like its
predecessor RTS, is divided in abstract decision layers. These
layers mean that the agent should perform decision making on
micro and macro levels. These abstract levels allow the AI to
work in an individual skill without considering another ones.
Moreover, the model is proposed in a way that each have no
dependency on another part, simulating most or all features
involved in each individual piece.
We propose the division of MOBA by the main tasks that
need to be performed by an agent. The ﬁrst task is the item
build order, following, we propose models for farming, team
ﬁght, structure conquering and jungle. Having those models in
an abstract form allows the research to make and test agents
in diverse skills individually, further inserting this agent in a
real game scenario.
A. Item building
As presented, the itemization is the process of buying items
to improve the hero’s status. The validation of this process
is commonly done in two ways: a) effectiveness of the hero
in the game; and b) status increase. It is important to stress
that the effectiveness in the game leads to status increase,
since it provides more gold and experience to the hero and
the team. On the other hand, status increase not always lead
to effectiveness, since the agent must be mechanically perfect,
which includes many variables and comprehension of the team
behavior during cooperative tasks.
An effective agent should balance the items and be capable
of reasoning which building order should be done in speciﬁc
cases. This can be done without the need of simulating team
ﬁghts, because the agent must only receive the enemy team’s
status and strategy and reason about which items should
be bought to play against. This process can be done with
static and dynamic planning, Reinforcement Learning, Neural
Networks, among other techniques.
The item building model, therefore, must be composed of all
items available in the game and should provide a reasonable
amount of gold relatively to the phase to be analyzed. For
instance, a little amount of gold should be provided to the
agent to perform the openings, while a greater amount of gold
should be provided for the mid or late game representations.
The model should also be able to represent the different hero
levels and possible enemy scenarios as inputs. It is clear that
this is a hard task due to the large number of enemy team’s
combinations, enemy items, levels and game scenarios.
The laning phase is one of the most important phases
in the MOBA gameplay. Winning this phase may imply
in an important strategic advantage, besides more gold and
experience. Learning how to lane is important for any AI
agent, and is a difﬁcult task since it involves many agents
and structures.
The creation of a laning model is intended to help the agent
to analyze the resource collection, targeting, harass and tower
diving strategies. Therefore, it is necessary to implement a
complete lane system, composed of heroes, creeps and turrets.
The simulation/modeling of enemies is optional, since the
agent could learn how to ﬁght in another scenario, like the
team-ﬁght model.
This system could simulate a broad range of micromanagement skills. Learning how to control the lane, when to
execute last hits, farming, and switching between advancing
and retreating the creeps in the lane are essential skills
to MOBA gameplay. In adversarial real-time gameplay, the
system should be able to simulate multiple agents in the lane
in order to show the harass and competition between agents
for the creeps in the lane.
C. Team ﬁghts
The team ﬁght model should allow the agents to interact
with each other, and could be contained in a one lane map.
This is intended to simulate the team ﬁghts and evolve the
system to properly reason about combat results and possible
interactions between agents. That system could be modelled
both in a theoretical aspect as well as in a practical approach.
The proposition of theoretical ﬁght simulation is possible
because the team ﬁght consists of a series of interactions
that is contained in a timespan. That could be modelled
as a temporal graph, pointing the interactions between the
agents. In fact, professional players and coaches already do
that simulation which they call theorycraft, which consists of a
mathematical analysis of the game . After performing this
analysis, the player formulates theories of which interactions
and items give most advantage to his game strategy/hero. This
ﬁeld could take beneﬁt of models already established like the
econometrics .
Many combinations and analysis could be made in an
effective team ﬁght model. Among these analysis is the hero
balancing in the MOBA environment, a task that is done by a
game designer team. Given the MOBA ecosystem, we observe
that the game nature is clearly evolutionary, given its constant
updates. Moreover, the combat outcome and the potential of a
hero during all game phases could be analyzed, determining
interesting strategies, from duels to 5v5 team ﬁghts.
D. A Theoretical MOBA model
Besides the discretization of the MOBA game, the game as
a whole can be analyzed using a theoretical model, as done
in most sports such as soccer, football and rugby. This model
could be also considered in theorycraft by the coaches and
the players while planning the positioning, hero groups and
strategies. An example is shown in Figure 3.
Example of a strategic analysis in a MOBA match. The top laners
take different approaches for helping their teams.
It may be faster to simulate games using graphs and theoretical models in order to predict or analyze strategic situations
and positions. This analysis can even consider the probabilities
of succeeding in the execution of game mechanics, being
modelled as a probabilistic graphical model. Such probabilities
may be computed from the performance obtained in the
previous discrete parts, and should be identiﬁed in the strategy
and game style adopted by a team and its strategy.
Such model could even be used to identify emerging strategies that are unusual to players and teams, outperforming their
common strategies. Lastly, modeling replays in a theoretical
representation can help the system to classify the strategies,
identifying their main characteristics. For instance, distinguishing split push from sieging, or team ﬁght strategy from pickoff.
This classiﬁcation can help the system to map the strategies
adopted by a team or a hero group.
The model follows the conventions established by the
MOBA map, with its structures and lanes. We translate the
structures into nodes and the order of destruction of these
structure into edges. As discussed, the outermost structure
should be destroyed in order to enable the damage or destruction of an inner structure. Finally, the structures of an entire
lane should be destroyed in order to enable the damage to the
main structure. A diagram showing the graph structure of the
model can be seen in Figure 4.
Fig. 4. Diagram of a theoretical structure to represent a MOBA game. The
smaller nodes represent turrets while the larger one is the main structure.
Notice in the diagram that the interactions start in the
outermost structure, meaning that the turrets next to the center
should be destroyed ﬁrst. The rectangles containing a subgraph represent a dependency among the structures, such that
structures in different rectangles are independent from each
other. Destroying a group of structures unlocks a way to
attack the two turrets protecting the main structure. Lastly,
after destroying these turrets, the team can attack the main
structure. Its eventual destruction causes the end of the game.
VI. RELATED WORK
Despite the popularity of the genre, MOBA has not attracted
much attention from researchers. This lack of attention could
be mainly attributed to the commercial nature of these games
and the lack of collaboration of industry and academia, in
terms of open software, APIs, etc. Besides, MOBA is a
relatively new game genre, with the main titles debuting in
the late 2000’s.
The MOBA history go back to the RTS hype, when modders
used to modify RTS maps in Starcraft and Warcraft III to make
unique gameplay. The RTS inclusively got much attention
from the academia, having been widely studied and used
as a competition platform for many years , . In that
platform, we saw the use of Starcraft as a testbed for many
AI techniques, and the development of a complete agent
capable of defeating human players is still an open problem.
Problems like unit management , tactical gameplay ,
kiting , among others, were extensively studied in the RTS
environment.
Some of these problems have also been studied in the
MOBA environment. One example is the Kiting, a mechanic
to hit an run, largely used in the MOBA gameplay. This
problem was tackled before Uriarte and Onta˜n´on using
an ad-hoc approach, where they model the units involved in
the Target Selection task using multiple features and status
analysis, which is commonly called aggro. Moreover, selecting
the target is not only related to hero versus hero, but also in
the farming action.
Later, researchers started to note that MOBA brings a
different type of challenge. Instead of challenging the player
to manage large armies or to optimize build orders, MOBA
invites the player to control a single unit and master it.
The popularity of MOBA expanded so fast that three years
after its debut it was already the most played genre in
the world, surpassing the Multiplayer Massively Online Real
Playing Game, World of Warcraft. That expansion got the
attention of some researchers that wanted to better understand
the MOBA dynamics.
The ﬁrst researchers were worried to present to the readers
the MOBA phenomena, its basic characteristics and gameplay.
In and we can ﬁnd information about basic MOBA
characteristics. A broad discussion of MOBA as an eSport and
game design can be found in .
After these descriptive works, some researchers wanted to
go inside the MOBA gameplay and analyze it from the players
perspective or to observe player’s performance. Because there
were no tools to do so, most works have taken advantage of
large replay databases to develop their work. The behavior of
MOBA players during a match and its impacts into winning
the game are explored in . Later, the analysis of MOBA
player’s performance is done in , using a Dota2 replay
database as input. On the other hand, the work of is
interested in showing that MOBA has some patterns that could
lead a team to victory. It is interesting to see that both works
mention that the knowledge developed could be used to create
intelligent agents for MOBAs, which happened later.
The urge of creating agents for MOBA games was partially
satisﬁed with the tools available by S2Games in their game
Heroes of Newerth. However, some users got frustrated because there was not much information about the API, besides
the need of using some preprogrammed behaviors. In that
context we ﬁnd the work of , which used Reinforcement
Learning techniques for the implementation of a MOBA agent.
Later, we ﬁnd the work of that uses third part tools to
develop agents in the League of Legends context.
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper we presented an overview of the Multiplayer
Online Battle Arena genre as a testbed for Game AI research.
We discuss the challenges introduced in each phase of the
game and also in the game as a whole and propose a model
that can be implemented to allow a better understanding of
We observe that the research interest in MOBA games
is increasing, but it is still incipient. By presenting and
discussing the main features and challenges introduced by
MOBA games, we aim to “push the lane” into the direction
of a better understanding and increased use of MOBA games
as a research platform.
For future work we believe that the discrete framework
proposed in this paper should be developed in order to provide
a reliable testbed for research. Moreover, the knowledge
extracted from that framework could be useful in real MOBA
games, like Smite, Dota2 or in the RTS Starcraft.