Multifractal Texture Estimation for Detection and Segmentation
of Brain Tumors
Atiq Islam,
Ebay Applied Research, Ebay Inc., San Jose, CA 95125 USA
Syed M. S. Reza, and
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA 23529
Khan M. Iftekharuddin [Senior Member, IEEE]
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA 23529
Atiq Islam: ; Syed M. S. Reza: ; Khan M. Iftekharuddin: 
A stochastic model for characterizing tumor texture in brain magnetic resonance (MR) images is
proposed. The efficacy of the model is demonstrated in patient-independent brain tumor texture
feature extraction and tumor segmentation in magnetic resonance images (MRIs). Due to complex
appearance in MRI, brain tumor texture is formulated using a multiresolution-fractal model known
as multifractional Brownian motion (mBm). Detailed mathematical derivation for mBm model and
corresponding novel algorithm to extract spatially varying multifractal features are proposed. A
multifractal feature-based brain tumor segmentation method is developed next. To evaluate
efficacy, tumor segmentation performance using proposed multifractal feature is compared with
that using Gabor-like multiscale texton feature. Furthermore, novel patient-independent tumor
segmentation scheme is proposed by extending the well-known AdaBoost algorithm. The
modification of AdaBoost algorithm involves assigning weights to component classifiers based on
their ability to classify difficult samples and confidence in such classification. Experimental results
for 14 patients with over 300 MRIs show the efficacy of the proposed technique in automatic
segmentation of tumors in brain MRIs. Finally, comparison with other state-of-the art brain tumor
segmentation works with publicly available low-grade glioma BRATS2012 dataset show that our
segmentation results are more consistent and on the average outperforms these methods for the
patients where ground truth is made available.
Index Terms
AdaBoost classifier; brain tumor detection and segmentation; fractal; magnetic resonance image
(MRI); multifractal analysis; multiresolution wavelet; texture modeling
Correspondence to: Khan M. Iftekharuddin, .
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 29.
 
IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 2013 November ; 60(11): 3204–3215. doi:10.1109/TBME.2013.2271383.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
I. Introduction
Varying intensity of tumors in brain magnetic resonance images (MRIs) makes the
automatic segmentation of such tumors extremely challenging. Brain tumor segmentation
using MRI has been an intense research area. Both feature-based – and atlas-based
 – techniques as well as their combinations have been proposed for brain tumor
segmentation. In , Warfield et al. combined elastic atlas registration with statistical
classification to mask brain tissue from surrounding structures. Kaus et al. proposed
brain tumor segmentation using digital anatomic atlas and MR image intensity. However, the
method requires manual selection of three or four example voxels for each tissue class for a
patient. In , Prastawa et al. developed tumor segmentation and statistical classification of
brain MR images using an atlas prior. There are few challenges associated with atlas-based
segmentation. Atlas-based segmentation requires manual labeling of template MRI. In
addition, the elastic registration of template MRI with distorted patient images due to
pathological processes is nontrivial. It may pose further challenge in detecting tumor from
postoperative patient MRI where the deformation may be more extensive. Such issues with
atlas-based tumor segmentation can be mitigated by devising complementary techniques to
aid tumor segmentation , . In , Davatzikos et al. used systematic deformations
due to tumor growth to match pre-operative images of the patient with that of the
postoperative. In , Menze et al. proposed a generative probabilistic model for
segmentation by augmenting atlas of healthy tissue priors with a latent atlas of tumor.
Among feature-based techniques, Lee et al. proposed brain tumor segmentation using
discriminative random field (DRF) method. In , Lee et al. exploited a set of multiscale
image-based and alignment-based features for segmentation. However, the proposed
framework does not allow training and testing the proposed models across different patients.
Corso et al. discussed conditional random field (CRF) based hybrid discriminativegenerative model for segmentation and labeling of brain tumor tissues in MRI. The CRF
model employs cascade of boosted discriminative classifier where each classifier uses a set
of about one thousand features. Wels et al. used intensity, intensity gradient, and Haarlike features in a Markov random field (MRF) method that combines probabilistic boosting
trees and graph cuts for tumor segmentation. Overall, these methods of incorporating spatial
dependencies in classification using DRF/CRF/MRF demand very careful tumor
characterization for convergence.
Gering et al. proposed a promising framework for brain tumor segmentation by
recognizing deviation from normal tissue. However, the proposed technique in depends
on manual corrective action between iterations. Cobzas et al. studied textons and
level set features with atlas-based priors to build statistical models for tissues. Such level set
techniques are very sensitive to initialization and known to suffer from boundary leaking
artifacts. In , Wang et al. proposed a parametric active contour model that facilitates brain
tumor detection in MRI. The proposed model makes rather simplistic assumption that there
is a single continuous region associated with tumor. Bauer et al. exploited patientspecific initial probabilities with nonlocal features to capture context information. Bauer et
al. used a standard classification forest (CF) as a discriminative multiclass classification
model. The techniques in combined random forest (RF) classification with hierarchical
Islam et al.
IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
CRF regularization as an energy minimization scheme for tumor segmentation. In ,
Geremia et al. introduced a symmetry feature and RF classification for automated tumor
segmentation. Recently, Hamamci and Unal proposed a multimodal modified tumor-cut
method for tumor and edema segmentation. The proposed method needs user interaction to
draw maximum diameter of the tumor. Raviv et al. presented a statistically driven levelset approach for segmentation of subject-specific MR scans. The technique is based on latent
atlas approach, where common information from different MRI modalities is captured using
spatial probability. However, this method also requires manual initialization of tumor seed
and boundary for effective segmentation.
Among texture feature extraction techniques, fractal analysis has shown success in tumor
segmentation , , . In prior works , , we demonstrate effectiveness of fractal
features in segmenting brain tumor tissue. Considering intricate pattern of tumor texture,
regular fractal-based feature extraction techniques appear rather homogeneous. We argue
that the complex texture pattern of brain tumor in MRI may be more amenable to
multifractional Brownian motion (mBm) analysis , , . In , we study efficacy of
different feature selection and tumor segmentation techniques using multiple features
including mBm for brain tumor segmentation. The mBm feature effectively models spatially
varying heterogeneous tumor texture. In addition, mBm derivation also mathematically
combines the multiresolution analysis enabling one to capture spatially varying random
inhomogeneous tumor texture at different scales.
Consequently, in this paper, we propose formal stochastic models to estimate multifractal
dimension (multi-FD) for brain tumor texture extraction in pediatric brain MRI that is
initially proposed in . Our experimental results show that fusion of the multi-FD with
fractal and intensity features significantly improves brain tumor segmentation and
classification. We further propose novel extensions of adaptive boosting (AdaBoost) 
algorithm for classifier fusion. Our modifications help the component classifiers to
concentrate more on difficult-to-classify patterns during detection and training steps. The
resulting ensemble of classifiers offer improved patient independent brain tumor
segmentation from nontumor tissues.
The rest of the article is organized as follows. Brief discussions on several topics relevant to
this paper are provided in Section II. In Section III, we define a systematic theoretical
framework to estimate the multi-FD features. We also propose an algorithm to compute
multi-FD in this section. Our proposed modification of AdaBoost algorithm is also discussed
in this section. In Section IV, we describe our dataset. Detail processing steps are discussed
in Section V. Experimental results and performance comparison using another standard
texture feature, known as texton , are presented in Section VI. Section VI also discusses
detail performance comparison of our methods with other state-of-the-art works in literature
using a publicly available brain tumor data. Finally, Section VII provides concluding
II. Background Review
This section provides brief discussions on several topics that are relevant to this paper.
Islam et al.
IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
A. Fractal and Fractional Brownian Motion (fBm) for Tumor Segmentation
A fractal is an irregular geometric object with an infinite nesting of structure at all scales.
Fractal texture can be quantified with the noninteger FD , . In , FD estimation is
proposed in brain MRI using piece-wise-triangular-prism-surface-area (PTPSA) method.
Reference shows statistical efficacy of FD for tumor regions segmentation in brain
Reference proposes fractional Brownian motion (fBm) model for tumor texture
estimation. An fBm process, on [0, T], T ∈ ℛ, is a continuous Gaussian zero-mean
nonstationary stochastic process starting at t = 0. It has the following covariance structure
Where H is a scalar parameter 0 < H < 1 known as Hurst index (Holder exponent). The value
of H determines the fBm process such that the curve BH (t) is very rough if H = 0.01, while
for H = 0.99, the curve is very smooth. Fig. 1 shows an example of simulated BH (t) versus
time plots for different H values. The figure confirms variation of surface roughness with
variation of H values.
The FD is related to the Hurst coefficient, H, as follows:
The parameter E is Euclidean dimension (2 for 2-D, 3 for 3-D and so on) of the space.
B. Multifractal Process
Although fBm modeling has been shown useful for brain tumor texture analysis ,
considering the rough heterogeneous appearance of tumor texture in brain MRI, fBm
appears homogeneous, or monofractal. In fBm process, the local degree of H is considered
the same at all spatial/time variations. However, like many other real-world signals, tumor
texture in MRI may exhibit multifractal structure, with H varying in space and/or time.
Popescu et al. indicate that multifractal may be well suited to model processes wherein
regularity varies in space as in brain MRIs . Takahashi et al. exploit multifractal to
characterize microstructural changes of white matter in T2-weighted MRIs. Consequently,
this paper proposes a model to estimate multi-FD of tumor and nontumor regions in MRI
based on mBm analyses , . In general, mBm is generalization of fBm with a zeromean Gaussian process. The major difference between the mBm and fBm is that, contrary to
fBm, the H of mBm is allowed to vary along spatial/time trajectory.
Islam et al.
IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
C. Classifier Boosting
Due to ineffectiveness of classifying complex tumor texture across various patients, this
paper considers an ensemble boosting method. Such boosting method yields a highly
accurate classifier by combining many moderately accurate component classifiers. In this
method, each component classifier is successively added and trained on a subset of the
training data that is “most difficult” given the current set of component classifiers already
added to the ensemble. Among different variations of boosting methods, adaptive boosting
such as AdaBoost is the most common.
The selection of appropriate weak classifier for a specific application is an open research
question. Many studies report AdaBoost with decision trees , neural networks , or
support vector machine (SVM) as component classifiers. Following the theoretical
reasoning and experimental results reported by Li et al. , we consider Diverse
AdaBoostSVM algorithm in our paper. The authors show that Diverse AdaBoost-SVM
offers superior performance over its counterparts for unbalanced dataset. Since our brain
tumor data is also unbalanced (few tumor samples compared to many nontumor samples),
we believe Diverse AdaBoostSVM method is suitable for this application. The detail of
Diverse AdaBoostSVM algorithm can be found in .
III. Mathematical Models and Algorithm
A. Multiresolution Wavelet-Based FD Estimation for Multifractal Process
In this subsection, we show formal analytical modeling of one-dimensional (1-D)
multiresolution mBm to estimate the time and/or space varying scaling (or Holder) exponent
H (s). We then propose an algorithm for two-dimensional (2-D) multiresolution mBm model
to estimate texture feature of brain tumor tissues in MRIs.
1) One-Dimensional mBm Model and Local Scaling Exponent Estimation—The
covariance function of the mBm process is defined as 
is the variance of the mBm process and s, τ ∈ ℛ are two instances of time/scale.
The variance of mBm increment process is given as
In order to estimate Holder exponent H from multiple scales (resolutions), multiresolution
wavelet is used. The wavelet transform of x (s) is denoted as
Islam et al.
IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
is the analyzing wavelet and a is the scale. The
expected value of the squared-magnitude of the wavelet transform in (5) is given as
Substituting the autocovariance function of the mBm from (3) and ψs,a (τ) in (5) and
choosing m = s + τ, such that dm = ds and τ − s = −m yields,
where ∫ ψ(u) ψ (v) dv represents the autocorrelation of the analyzing wavelet. Taking log
on both sides of (7) yields
Given a single observation of the random process x, obtaining a robust estimation of the
expectation of the squared magnitude of the wavelet coefficients in (8) is nontrivial. Among
a few suggested techniques – , Gonçalvès obtained the empirical estimate of the
qth order moment of |Wx (s, a)| as follows:
where a single realization of the analyzed process is sampled on a uniform lattice, si = i/N; i
= 0, …, N − 1. This estimation is based on the postulate that the wavelet series Wx (s, a)
comply with the normality and stationary within scale. Substituting (9) into (8) and taking q
= 2 yields,
Islam et al.
IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
For the multifractal structure, the estimated Holder regularity H (s) in (10) is neither smooth,
nor continuous. To make the point-wise estimation of H(s) possible, one may relax the
condition of nonsmoothness for a sufficiently small interval of time/space Δs where Δs → 0
and estimate H(s) from the observations at −(Δs/2) ≤ s ≤ s + (Δs/2). Thus, the singularity of
the mBm process may be quantified around each point of time/space. The FD can be
obtained using estimated H (s) in (2).
2) mBm Model and Local Scaling Exponent Estimation—In this section, a
generalized 2-D method to estimate the local scaling exponent for mBm computation is
proposed. Let Z (u⃗) represent a 2-D mBm process, where u⃗ denotes a position vector (ux, uy)
of a point in the process. The properties of Z (u⃗) are similar to that of 1-D x (s) in the
previous section. The 2-D correlation function of the mBm process Z (u⃗) can be defined as
where H (ū) varies along both direction of the position vector (ux, uy). Let us define the
continuous 2-D wavelet transform as
where ψ(ū) is the 2-D spatial wavelet basis, a is the scaling factor, and b̄ is the 2-D
translation vector.
Following (6), we obtain expected value of the magnitude square of the wavelet transform as
Substituting (11) into (12), and changing the variables of integration to p̄ = (ū − v̄)/a and q̄ =
 yields
Following the steps similar to previous section one can estimate the E{|Wz (b⃗, a)|2} as
where a single realization of the analyzed 2-D process is sampled on a uniform 2-D lattice
bx,y = [(x/N, y/M); x = 0, …, N − 1, y = 0, …, M − 1]. Thus, one may approximate H (u⃗) for
a 2-D mBm process as follows:
Following the same arguments for 1-D mBm in the previous section, one may estimate H(u⃗)
from the observations of sufficiently small area Δu⃗ (Δux, Δuy) around u⃗ where Δux → 0 and
Δuy → 0. The above derivation can be generalized to estimate mBm in 3-D or higher
dimension.
B. Algorithms for Texture Modeling Using mBm
Fig. 2 shows a formal algorithm to estimate the multi-FD. We first divide the image into
nonoverlapping blocks or subimages. The second moment of selected type of wavelet for
every subimage is computed in multiple different scales as shown in (16). Then, the holder
exponent is computed from the linear regression of moments versus the scale in a log-log
plot as shown in (17). Finally, FD is computed using (2).
C. Algorithm for AdaBoost Enhancement
This section discusses novel extensions of the DiverseAdaBoostSVM to improve tumor
classification rate. The resulting enhanced AdaBoost algorithm is shown in Fig. 3. Fig. 3
briefly summarizes our changes to original Diverse AdaboostSVM method . The first
modification is in step 3(g) where the weights of the component classifiers are obtained.
These weights are inversely proportional to three factors such as: 1) how many samples are
misclassified; 2) how confidently the samples are misclassified; and 3) how difficult the
misclassified samples are. Both “confidence” and “difficultness” are closely related. Here is
the shuttle difference: “difficultness” of samples is represented by the weights Wk (i) that
carry over the classification results from previous iterations. So, if one sample is
misclassified many times in different iterations, the weight of that sample is likely to be high
compared with the one that has been misclassified in only few times in previous iterations.
Islam et al.
IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
On the other hand, “confidence” is measured based on current iteration only. We represent
confidence using the probability p(yi |xi). If one sample is misclassified with high
probability, we penalize the corresponding classifier k more compared with the classifier that
misclassifies the same sample with low probability.
The standard AdaBoost algorithm, in contrast with ours, does not consider the confidence in
computing the classifier weights. The next improvement is shown in step 3(h). The weights
(probability of being selected in the next cycle) are updated for each training sample
considering how confidently that specific sample is classified (or misclassified) in the
current cycle. Standard AdaBoost algorithm changes weights of each sample equally based
on the classification error of the last component classifier. Note that in standard AdaBoost,
the classification error is computed based on the crisp classification decision that does not
account for the confidence/probability of such decision.
The detection decision on a new sample x can be based on the weighted vote of the
component classifiers
where d (x) is class decision from each component classifiers and D (x) is the final decision.
Note if SVM is added to the AdaBoost in an unconstrained manner, the performance may
degrade since each additional SVM may be actually a “weak learner” . However, in our
framework, we never add any new SVM unless the total diversity, as defined in (20), goes
up. That is how the overall classification performance is expected to increase. Fig. 11 shows
that the classification error decreases as we add more and more component (weak) learner.
Our choice of SVM classifier as “weak learner” (e.g., “component classifier”) is inspired by
the interesting work of Li et al. . Li et al. showed how the choice of SVM outperforms
the other choices. In addition, they claim that their framework is not affected by unbalanced
dataset like ours (number of tumor samples is way less than the number of nontumor
samples). Finally, our proposed AdaBoost framework is not dependent on any specific
choice of “weak learner”.
The brain tumor MRI data in this study consists of 3 different modalities, such as T1weighted (nonenhanced), T2-weighted, and FLAIR from 14 different pediatric patients with
total of 309 tumor bearing image slices. Patients consist of two different tumor groups such
as 6 patients (99 MRI slices) are from astrocytoma and 8 patients (210 MRI slices) are from
medulloblastoma tumor types, respectively. All the slices are obtained from Axial
perspective.
All of these MRIs are sampled by 1.5 T Siemens Magnetom scanners from Siemens Medical
Systems. The slice thickness is 8–10 mm, with the slice gap of 1–12 mm, the field-of-view
Islam et al.
IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
(FOV) is 280–300 × 280–300 mm2, the image matrix is of (256 × 256) or (512 × 512) pixels
and 16 bits/pixel.
V. Fractal-Based Tumor Detection and Classification
In this study, we fuse the existing PTPSA fractal and newly proposed multi-FD features in
automatic tumor segmentation in brain MRI. In addition, we extract texton feature for
comparison in segmenting brain tumors. The overall flow diagram is shown in Fig. 4.
Following standard preprocessing steps for brain MRI, we extract corresponding fractal,
texton, and intensity features for all 14 patients in this study. In the next step, different
combinations of feature sets are exploited for tumor segmentation and classification. Feature
values are then directly fed to the AdaBoost classifier for classification of tumor and
nontumor regions. Manual labeling to tumor regions is performed for supervised classifier
training. The trained classifiers are then used to detect the tumor or nontumor segments in
unknown brain MRI. In the following subsections, we describe these steps in more details.
A. MRI Preprocessing
The proposed methods in this paper involve feature fusion from different MRI modalities.
Therefore, different MRI volumes need to be aligned. The following preprocessing steps are
performed on the MRI volumes:
Realign and unwarp slices within a volume, separately for every modality
and every patient using SPM8 toolbox.
Co-register slices from different modalities with the corresponding slices
of T1-weighted (nonenhanced) slices using SPM8 toolbox for each
The PTPSA, texton, and multi-FD texture features are extracted after the above mentioned
preprocessing steps. In addition, for intensity features, the following two preprocessing steps
are also performed on all MRI modalities (T1, T2, FLAIR) available in our dataset:
Correct MRI bias field using SPM8 toolbox.
Correct bias and intensity inhomogeneity across all the slices of all the
patients for each MRI modality using two-step normalization method .
Note that we extract the fractal features before bias field and intensity
inhomogeneity correction. As described in , the multiscale wavelets do
not require these corrections.
Finally, BET toolbox is used to extract brain tissue from skull. Fig. 5 illustrates an example
of different preprocessing steps in multimodality brain tumor MRI patients in our dataset.
B. Feature Set
As discussed in Section II-A, the feature set includes intensity, texton , PTPSA , and
multi-FD (shown in Fig. 2). We represent 3-D segmentation process into a sequence of 2-D
segmentations (at pixel level) since the prevailing practice of the radiologists in the
radiology reading room is to analyze sequence of 2-D MRI slices side-by-side for tumor
Islam et al.
IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
detection and segmentation. However, there is no theoretical limitation to extend this
computation to 3-D. Each pixel of a slice is represented by a set of feature values. Each of
intensity, PTPSA and multi-FD is represented by single feature values, while texton is
represented by a vector of 48 feature values (corresponding to 48 filters ). For both
multi-FD and PTPSA, we first divide the image into nonoverlapping subimages. In our
experiment, we obtain the best result for subimage size of 8 × 8. Furthermore, as suggested
by the mathematical derivation in previous section, multiresolution computation employing
first two scales with a wavelet such as Daubechies is used for this paper.
C. Brain Tumor Segmentation and Classification from Nontumor Tissue
For tumor/nontumor tissue segmentation and classification, MRI pixels are considered as
samples. These samples are represented by a set of feature values extracted from different
MRI modalities. Features from all modalities are fused for tumor segmentation and
classification. We follow data driven machine learning approach to fuse different features
extracted from different MRI modalities. We let our supervised classifier autonomously
exploit multiple features extracted from different modalities in the training dataset. Different
feature combinations (as described in Section VI), are used for comparison. A modified
supervised AdaBoost ensemble of classifier is trained to differentiate tumor from the
nontumor tissues. Since the features are extracted in 2-D, each sample represents a pixel
instead of a voxel. However, the proposed classification framework can readily be extended
to 3-D segmentation without any modification. For supervised training purpose, manually
labeled ground truths of tumor core and nontumor regions are used. For our dataset, ground
truth labels are obtained from combination of T1, T2, and FLAIR modalities by the
radiologists.
D. Performance Evaluation
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves are obtained to ascertain the sensitivity and
specificity of the classifiers. In this study, we define TPF as the proportion of the tumor
pixels that are correctly classified as tumor by the classifier while we define FPF as the
proportion of the nontumor pixels that are incorrectly classified as tumor by the classifier. In
addition, few similarity coefficients are used to evaluate the performance of tumor
segmentation. The similarity coefficients used in this study include: Jaccard [a/(a + b)], Dice
[2a/(2a + b)], Sokal and Sneath [a/(a + 2b)], and Roger and Tanimoto [(a + c)/(a + 2b + c)]
coefficients, where a is the number of samples where both the classifier decision and the
manual label confirms the presence of tumor; b is the number of samples where the
decisions mismatch; and c is the number of samples where both the classifier decision and
the manual label confirms the absence of tumor.
VI. Experimental Results and Discussions
This section reports results and analyses. Fig. 6 shows an example MRI slice and
corresponding scatter plots comparing feature values between tumor and nontumor regions.
The points in scatter plots represent average feature values within an 8 × 8 subimage in an
MRI for a patient. The black points represent average feature values in tumor regions, while
the white points represent the same in nontumor regions. Fig. 6(b)–(d) shows the plots of
Islam et al.
IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
PTPSA (fractal) versus intensity, multi-FD versus intensity and multi-FD versus PTPSA
versus intensity features, respectively. These plots suggest that features representing tumor
regions are well separated from that of the non-tumor regions.
Figs. 7 and 8 show examples of tumor segmentation results for four astrocytoma and
medulloblastoma patients, respectively. The slices are randomly chosen from corresponding
patient MRI volumes. The figures compare tumor segmentation results between (intensity,
PTPSA, and multi-FD) and (intensity and texton) feature combinations. Notice (intensity,
PTPSA, and multi-FD) feature combination captures more tumor regions for three
astrocytoma (P030, P040, and P090) and three medulloblastoma (M020, M040, and M100)
patients, respectively. Furthermore, the same feature combination also shows superiority in
correctly classifying nontumor regions for two astrocytoma (P040 and P060) and three
medulloblastoma (P090, M040, and M060) patients, respectively. Therefore, it is clear from
visual observation that (intensity, PTPSA and multi-FD) feature combination offers better
tumor segmentation. Quantitative analyses with the whole dataset is shown later in this
Since our dataset does not have enough sagittal or coronal slices from all different
modalities, most of the results presented here are based on axial slices only. However, for
completeness, we report two segmentation results using intensity, PTPSA and multi-FD in
Figs. 9 and 10. Fig. 9 uses sagittal slice from T1 and T1 contrast enhanced, while Fig. 10
uses coronal slices from T2 and T1 contrast modalities (no other modalities are available),
respectively.
The performance of the proposed modified AdaBoost algorithm is characterized next. Fig.
11 shows how the overall classification error on trained data changes as more classifiers are
added. As expected, the overall error initially decreases as more component classifier is
added. Similarly, Fig. 12 shows how the total diversity of the ensemble of classifier changes
as classifiers are added. We observe that at some points total diversity does not improve
further with inclusion of more classifiers. In boosting, having diversity among classifiers is
considered an important factor. Therefore, Fig. 12 suggests that for our dataset, using 10–20
classifiers may be sufficient.
Fig. 13 shows ROC curve using average performance measure values for six astrocytoma
patients (99 MRI slices; 256 × 256 or 512 × 512 pixels in each slice). We use different
feature combinations such as (a) intensity and PTPSA, (b) intensity and multi-FD, (c)
intensity, PTPSA, and multi-FD, (d) intensity and texton, and (e) intensity, PTPSA, multi-
FD, and texton. TPF and FPF values are obtained at different decision thresholds between
[−1,1]. Comparison among the ROCs obtained from intensity, PTPSA and multi-FD
combination and those obtained from texton combination show that one can achieve better
TPF (Y -axis) sacrificing much less FPF (X-axis) in tumor segmentation. We observe similar
performance with eight medulloblastoma patients as well (not shown due to space
limitation). Fig. 14 shows how the classifier prediction values vary when they are trained
with different feature combinations specified above. Each column is a box and whisker plot
of prediction values that corresponds to either tumor or nontumor samples. In x-axis, the
letters before hyphen correspond to one of the feature combinations (such as IP), while the
Islam et al.
IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
digit after hyphen specifies if the box plot corresponds to tumor (1) or nontumor (0)
samples. In each box plot, box is drawn between lower and upper quartile of prediction
values and includes a splitting line at the median. The whiskers are extended from the box
end to 1.5 times the box length. Outliers (values beyond the whiskers) are displayed with a
“+” sign. Comparison of box plot median values is similar to visual hypothesis test, or
analogous to the t-test used for comparison of mean values. The box length and whisker
positions can be representative of the dispersion of prediction values. Note for intensity and
multi-FD (IM) feature combination, the dispersion of prediction values is very low for both
tumor and nontumor samples. This is not true for any other feature combinations.
We demonstrate more quantitative performance comparison between our proposed modified
AdaBoost with the AdaBoost algorithm without modification. Table I shows classifier
performance and overlap metrics for eight medulloblastoma patients. For this experiment,
feature vector is composed of intensity, PTPSA, and multi-FD from T1, T2, and FLAIR
modalities. In rows 1 and 2 of Table I, measures obtained at a fixed decision threshold 0 are
shown. The modified AdaBoost achieves better TPF compared to that of the original
AdaBoost in . Similar performance improvement is also observed using our modified
AdaBoost algorithm for the astrocytoma patients (not shown due to space limitation).
Finally, for quantitative segmentation performance comparison using different feature
combinations, we fix decision threshold at “0” and obtain classifier performance and overlap
metrics values. The values are summarized in Table II for six astrocytoma patients (99 MRI
slices; 256 × 256 or 512 × 512 pixels in each slice). The highest performing metrics are
denoted in bold face in each column. Note that the Intensity and multi-FD feature
combination offers the best TPF and similarity overlap values when compared to all other
combinations in Table II. Similar performance improvements using multi-FD feature for
medulloblastoma patients are also observed (not shown due to space limitation). In
summary, it is worth noting that intensity and fractal feature combinations outperform
Gabor-like features for brain tumor segmentation performance. Also note that combining
intensity and fractal with Gabor-like texton features may not improve the brain tumor
segmentation performance for these patients in this study.
In order to compare performance with other state-of-the-art work, we applied our proposed
tumor segmentation technique on publicly available MICCAI BRATS2012 dataset . We
select ten low-grade glioma patients with 1492 tumor slices in four different modalities. We
select low-grade glioma patients since such cases may pose increased difficulty in
segmentation compared to high grade. Note we use T1 contrast enhanced, T1, T2, and
FLAIR MRI for the pre-processing steps as discussed in Section V-A for this BRATS2012
We predict the binary classification of tumor core versus rest (tumor plus nontumor region)
labels. Note we do not predict edema label since the goal of this paper is only tumor
segmentation. All the subsequent results are obtained by using the BRATS online evaluation
tool . Table III shows the summary of results for this dataset. In BRATS2012 ground
truth notation, active core tumor is labeled as 2 and the nontumor (the rest) as 0. We follow
these notations for our evaluations in this paper. The second column in Table III shows
Islam et al.
IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
segmentation results for our technique. These results are obtained using intensity and multi-
FD features from T1, T1 contrast enhanced, T2, and FLAIR modalities. Notice the intensity
and multi-FD feature combination is used following improved performance results as shown
in Fig. 13 and Table II, respectively. For within patient segmentation using 10 low-grade
cases, we use fivefold cross validation. Table III shows that our segmentation results (dice
overlap) is more consistent and on the average outperforms the other methods for this
dataset. Table IV shows the segmentation result on BRATS challenge/testing dataset of four
low-grade patients (across patient results). Here, the training is done with the BRATS
training dataset. The average mean dice score (0.33) is among the few top performing works
that have been published reporting BRTAS2012 competition results. To understand the
generalization trends between our dataset (as described in Section IV) and the BRATS
dataset, we train the model with our astrocytoma (low-grade) dataset, and test on both
BRATS low-grade training and test data. The results are shown in Tables V and VI for
BRATS training and test dataset, respectively. The mean results from both cases show
moderate to low performance due to the heterogeneity of tumor type, appearance, imaging
modalities, center and imaging device specific variability. All results in this paper are
obtained using MATLAB 2011 a on windows 64 bit 2.26 GHz Intel(R) Xeon(R) processor,
with 4 GHz RAM. The training time varies from 2 to 4 days per patient. Prediction time
varies from 1.5 to 2 min per slice.
VII. Conclusion and Future Works
In this paper, novel multifractal (multi-FD) feature extraction and supervised classification
techniques for improved brain tumor detection and segmentation are proposed. The multi-
FD feature characterizes intricate tumor tissue texture in brain MRI as a spatially varying
multifractal process in brain MRI. On the other hand, the proposed modified AdaBoost
algorithm considers wide variability in texture features across hundreds of multiple-patient
MRI slices for improved tumor and nontumor tissue classification. Experimental results with
14 patients involving 309 MRI slices confirm the efficacy of novel multi-FD feature and
modified AdaBoost classifier for automatic patient independent tumor segmentation. In
addition, comparison with other state-of-the-art brain tumor segmentation techniques with
publicly available low-grade glioma in BRATS2012 dataset shows that our methods
outperform other methods for most of these patients. Note our proposed feature-based brain
tumor segmentation does not require deformable image registration with any predefined
atlas. The computation complexity of multi-FD feature is liner and increases with slice
resolution (number of pixel), block size, and the number of wavelet levels. Likewise the
computation complexity for our modified AdaBoost algorithm is linear and increases with
number of samples times number of component classifiers. As a future direction,
incorporating information from registered atlas may prove useful for segmentation of more
subtle and complex tumors. In addition, it may be interesting to investigate the proposed
modified AdaBoost classification method when one incorporates atlas based prior
information in the segmentation framework.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by the NCI/NIH under Grant R15CA115464.
Islam et al.
IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
The authors would like to express appreciation to Children Hospital of Philadelphia for providing the pediatric brain
MR images for this paper. The paper also uses the brain tumor image data obtained from the MICCAI 2012
Challenge on Multimodal Brain Tumor Segmentation ( organized by
B. Menze, A. Jakab, S. Bauer, M. Reyes, M. Prastawa, and K. Van Leemput. The challenge database contains fully
anonymized images from the following institutions: ETH Zurich, University of Bern, University of Debrecen, and
University of Utah.