Pattern Theory: A Unifying Perspective
David Mumford *
I. Introduction
The term "Pattern Theory" was introduced by Ulf Grenander in the 70s as
a name for a field of applied mathematics which gave a theoretical setting
for a large number of related ideas, techniques and results from fields such as
computer vision, speech recognition, image and acoustic signal processing,
pattern recognition and its statistical side, neural nets and parts of artificial
intelligence (see [Grenander 76-81]). When I first began to study computer
vision about ten years ago, I read parts of this book but did not really
understand his insight. However, as I worked in the field, every time I
felt I saw what was going on in a broader perspective or saw sonic theme
which seemed to pull together the field as a whole, it turned out that this
theme was part of what Grenander called pattern theory. It seems to me
now that this is the right framework for these areas, and, as these fields
have been growing explosively, the time is ripe for making an attempt to
reexamine recent progress and try to make the ideas behind this unification
better known. This article presents pattern theory from my point of view,
which may be somewhat narrower than Grenander's, updated with recent
examples involving interesting new mathematics. I want to define pattern
theory as:
the analysis of the patterns generated by the world in any modality,
with all their naturally occurring complexity and ambiguity, with
the goal of reconstructing the processes, objects and events that
produced them.
Thus vision usually refers to the analysis of patterns detected in the
electromagnetic signals of wavelengths 400-700 nm. incident at a point
in space from different directions. Hearing refers to the analysis of the
patterns present in the oscillations of 60-20,000 hertz in air pressure at
a point in space as a function of time, both with and without human
language. We may also say that medical expert systems are concerned with
the analysis of the patterns in the symptoms, history and tests presented
by a patient: this is a higher level modality, but still one in which the world
* Supported in part by NSF Grant DMS 91-21266 and by the Geometry Center, University of Minnesota, a STC funded by NSF, DOE and
Minnesota Technology Inc.
David Mumford
generates confusing but structured data from which a doctor seeks to infer
hidden processes and events. Touch, especially in conjunction with active
motor control, either in an animal or robot, is yet another such channel.
Let me give two examples to help fix ideas. Figure 1 shows the graph
of the pressure p(t) while the word "SKI" is being pronounced. Note how
the signal shows four distinct wave forms: something close to white noise
during the pronunciation of the sibilant "S" , then silence followed by a
burst which conveys the plosive "K", then an extended nearly musical note
for the vowel "I". The latter has a fundamental frequency corresponding to
the vibration of the vocal cords, with many harmonics whose power peeks
around three higher frequencies, the formants. Finally, the amplitude of
the whole is modulated during the pronunciation of the word.
Figure 1. Acoustic waveform for an utterance of the word SKI
In this example, the goal of perceptual signal processing is to identify
these four wave forms, characterize each in terms of its frequency power
spectrum, its frequency and amplitude modulation, and then, drawing on
a memory of speech sounds, identify each wave form as being produced by
Pattern Theory: A Unifying Perspective
the corresponding configurations of the speaker's vocal tract, and finally,
label each with its identity as an English phoneme. In addition, one would
like to describe explicitly the stress, pitch and quality of the speaker's voice,
using this later to help disambiguate the identity of the speaker and the
intent of the utterance.
Figure 2a shows the graph of the light intensity I(x,y) of a picture of
a human eye: it would be hard to recognize this as an eye, but the black
and white image defined by the same function is shown in Figure 2b.
Figure 2a. Visual waveform for an image of an eye
Note again how the domain of the signal is naturally decomposed into
regions where I has different values or different spatial frequency behavior:
the pupil, the iris, the whites of the eyes, the lashes, eyebrows and skin. The
goal of perceptual signal processing is again to describe this function of two
variables as being built up from simpler signals on subdomains on which
it either varies slowly or is statistically regular, i.e., approximately stationary. These statistics may be its spatial power spectrum or a method of
generation from elementary units called textons by repetition with various
David Mumford
Figure 2b. Identical waveform presented using variable intensity
modifications. These modifications in particular include spatial distortion,
contrast modulation and interaction with larger scale structures. This description of the signal may be computed either prior to or concurrent with
a comparison of the signal with remembered eye shapes, which include a
description of the expected range of variation of eyes, specific descriptions
of the eyes of well-known people, and so on.
In order to understand what the field of pattern theory is all about, it is
necessary to begin by addressing a major misconception, namely, that the
whole problem is essentially trivial. The history of computer speech and
image recognition projects, like the history of AI, is a long one of ambitious
projects which attained their goals with carefully tailored artificial input
but which failed as soon as more of the complexities of real world data
were present. The source of this misconception, I believe, is our subjective
impression of perceiving instantaneously and effortlessly the significance of
the patterns in a signal, e.g. the word being spoken or which face is being
Many psychological experiments, however, have shown that what we
Pattern Theory: A Unifying Perspective
perceive is not the true sensory signal, but a rational reconstruction of
what the signal should be. This means that the messy ambiguous raw
signal never makes it to our consciousness but gets overlaid with a clearly
and precisely patterned version whose computation demands extensive use
of memories, expectations and logic. An example of how misleading our
impressions are is shown in Figure 3 below.
Figure 3. A challenging image for computers to recognize
The reader will instantly recognize that it is an image of an old man
sitting on a park bench. But ask yourself — how did you know that? His
face is almost totally obscure, with his hand merging with his nose; the most
distinct shape is that of his hat, which by itself could be almost anything;
even his jacket merges in many places with the background because of its
David Marnford
creases and the way light strikes them, so no simple algorithm is going to
trace its contour without getting lost. However, when you glance at the
picture, in your mind's eye, you "see" the face and its parts distinctly; the
man's jacket is a perfectly clear coherent shape whose creases, instead of
confusing you, in fact contribute to your perception of its 3-dimensional
structure. The ambiguities which must have been present in the early
stages of your processing of this image never become conscious because
you have found an explanation of every peculiarity of the image, a match
with remembered shapes and lighting effects. In fact, the problems of
pattern theory are hard, and although major progress has been made in
both speech and vision in the last 5 years, a robust solution has not been
2. Mathematical formulation of the field
To make the field of pattern theory precise, we need to formulate it mathematically. There are three parts to this which were all made quite clear
by Grenander: the first is the description of the players in the field, the
fundamental mathematical objects which will appear in each case. The
second is to restrict the possible generality of these objects by using something about the nature of the world. This gives us a more circumscribed,
more focussed set of problems to study. Finally, since the goal of the field
is the reconstruction of hidden facts about the world, we aim primarily
for algorithms, not theorems; and the last part is the general framework
for these algorithms. In this section, we look at the first part, the basic
mathematical objects of pattern theory.
For this there are two essentially equivalent formulations, one using
Bayesian statistics and one using information theory. The statistical approach (see for instance [D. Geman 91]) is this: consider all possible signals
f (Z) which may be perceived. These may be considered as elements of a
of functions f : D -f V. For instance, speech is defined by
pressure p : [t1, t2 ]
R+ as a function of time, color vision is defined by
intensity I on a domain D C S2 of visible rays with values in the convex
cone of colors VRGB C R3, or these functions may be sampled on a discrete
subset of the above domains, or their values may be approximated to finite
precision, etc.
The first basic assumption of the statistical approach is that nature
determines a probability gobs on a suitable a-algebra of subsets of I201„, and
that, in life, one observes random samples from this distribution. These
signals, however, arc highly structured as a result of their being produced
by a world containing many processes, objects and events which do not
Pattern Theory: A Unifying Perspective
appear explicitly in the signal. This means many more random variables
are needed to describe the state of the world. The second assumption is
that the possible states w of the world form a second probability space
S2wid and that there is a big probability distribution p„,,, on gobs X S2wid
describing the probability of both observing f and the world being in state
w. Then gobs should be the marginal distribution of po,„ on Slobs. The goal
of pattern theory is to infer the state of the world w, given the measurement
f , and for this we may use Bayes's rule:
p (w I f ) = P( f I w) • P (w )
leading to the maximum likelihood reconstruction of the state of the world:
ML estimate of w = arg max[p( flu]) • p(w)]
The statistical approach entails constructing the probability space Mobs x
Qwld Po,w) and finding algorithms to compute the ML-estimate.
In the information theoretic approach (see for instance [Rissanen 89])
we assume D and V, hence gobs are finite. The idea is that instead of writing out any particular perceptual signal f in raw form as a table of values,
we seek a method of encoding f which minimizes its expected length in
bits: i.e., we take advantage of the patterns possessed by most f to encode
them in a compressed form. We consider coding schemes which involve
choosing various auxiliary variables w and then encoding the particular f
using these w (e.g., w might determine a specific typical signal f„„ and we
then need only to encode the deviation (f — f w )). We write this:
length(code(f, w)) = length(code(w)) length(code(f using w)).
It might appear that such optimal encodings of signals would lead you
to odd combinatorial schemes that have nothing to do with what is actually
happening in the world. Remarkably, this isn't the case and, in fact, it
seems to lead you automatically, without prior knowledge of the world, to
the same hidden variables on which the Bayesian theory is based. This
link between the two approaches comes from Shannon's optimal coding
theorem. This theorem states that, given a class of signals f , the coding
scheme for such signals for which a random signal has the smallest expected
length satisfies
len(code(f)) = — log2 p( f )
David Mainford
(where fractional bit lengths are achieved by actually coding several f's
at once, and in doing this, the LHS gets asymptotically close to the RHS
when longer and longer sequences of signals are encoded at once). Using
Shannon's theorem, and taking log2 of (2), we get the minimum description
length reconstruction of the world:
MDL est. of w = arg min[len(code(w)) len(code(f using w))].
The information-theoretic approach entails constructing a coding
scheme {w} and finding algorithms to compute (5). Its great strength
is that, as opposed to the Bayesian approach, it does not require a prior
knowledge of the physics, chemistry, biology, sociology, etc. of the world,
but gives you a way of discovering these facts. In Section 5.4, we will give
an example of how this works.
3. Four universal transformation of perceptual signals
The above formulation of pattern theory provides a framework in which to
analyze signals, but it says nothing about the nature of the patterns which
are to be expected, what distortions, complexities and ambiguities are to
be expected, hence what kinds of probability spaces Slobs are we likely to
encounter, how shall we encode them, etc.
What gives the field its characteristic flavor is that the world does
not have an infinite repertoire of different tricks which it uses to disguise
what is going on. Consider the coding schemes used by engineers for the
transmission of electrical signals. They use a small number of well-defined
transformations such as AM and FM encoding, pulse coding, etc. to convert
information into a signal which can be efficiently communicated. Analogous
to this, the world produces sound to be heard, light to be seen, surfaces to
be felt, and so on, which are all, in various ways, reflections of its structure.
We may think of these signals as the productions of a particularly perverse engineer, who presents us with the problem of decoding this message,
e.g., of recognizing a friend's face or estimating the trajectory of oncoming
traffic, etc. The second contention of pattern theory is that such signals are
derived from the world by four types of transformations or deformations,
which occur again and again in different guises. The had news is that
these four transformations produce much more complex effects than the
coding schemes of engineers, hence the difficulty of decoding them by the
standard tricks of electrical engineering. The good news is that these transformations are not arbitrary recursive operations which produce unlearnable complexity. For instance, in the formal study of language learnability,
Pattern Theory: A Unifying Perspective
Gold's theorem gives very strong restrictions on what can be learned (see
[Osherson-Weinstein 84] for an excellent exposition). But the study of perceptual signals suggests that this is largely irrelevant, that the languages
in which perceptual signals speak are of very special types. In the terminology of [Grenander 76], simple unambiguous signals from the world arc
referred to as pure images and the transformations on them are called deformations, which produce the actually observed perceptual signals which
he called deformed images.
The four transformations that I propose as the basic types occurring
in natural perceptual signals are:
1. Noise and blur. These effects are the bread and butter of standard
signal processing, caused for instance by sampling error, background
noise and imperfections in your measuring instrument such as imperfect
lenses, veins in front of the retina, dust and rust. A typical form of
this transformation is given by
where a is a blurring kernel, xi are the points where the signal is
sampled and ni is some kind of additive noise, e.g., Gaussian, but of
course much more complex formulae are possible. Especially significant
is that Gaussian noise is usually a poor model of the noise effects, for
example when the noise is caused by finer detail which is not being
resolved. Rosenfeld calls such an n clutter, which conveys what it often
represents. These transformations are part of what Grenander calls
changes in contrast. When they are present, the unblurred noiseless I
should be one of the variables w as getting rid of noise and blur reveals
the hidden processes of the world more clearly.
2. Multi-scale superposition. Signals typically reveal one set of structures
caused by one set of phenomena in the world when analyzed locally,
at high precision, and other structures and phenomena when analyzed
globally and coarsely, at low precision. For instance in images, local
properties include sharp edges, texture details and local irregularities of
shapes, which coexist with global properties like slowly varying shading.
or texture statistic gradients and the overall shape of an object. In
speech, information is conveyed by the highest frequency formants, by
the lower frequency vibration of the vocal cords and the even slower
modulation of stress. A typical form of this transformation is given by
11,12 —>(I1 + /2) or (1). /2) or a(/1, /2) (7)
where Ii and /2 represent band pass signals in disjoint frequency
David Mumford
bands, which can be combined either additively (the usual superposition of high and low frequency effects), multiplicatively (as in amplitude modulation of a carrier signal for example) or by some more
complex rule Q. This type of deformation does not seem to have been
made explicit by Grenander. The individual components II, of I should
be included in the variables w.
3. Domain warping. Two signals generated by the same object or event
in different contexts typically differ because of expansions or contractions of their domains, possibly at varying rates: phonemes may be
pronounced faster or slower, the image of a face is distorted by varying
expression and viewing angle. In speech, this is called "time warping"
and in vision, this is modeled by "flexible templates". In both cases,
a diffeomorphism of the domain of the signal brings the variants much
closer to each other so that this transformation is given by
where IP represents a diffeomorphism of the domain of I. These transformations are what Grenander calls background deformations. The
diffeomorphism 1p should be one of the variables w.
4. Interruptions. Natural signals are usually analyzed best after being
broken up into pieces consisting of their restrictions to subdomains.
This is because the world itself is made up of many objects and events
and different parts of the signal are caused by different objects or
events. For instance, an image may show different objects partially
occluding each other at their edges, as in Figure 3 where the old man
is an object which occludes part of the park bench. In speech, the
phonemes naturally break up the signal and, on a larger scale, one
speaker or unexpected sound may interrupt another. Such a transformation is given by such a formula as
> (-1-11D'
where /2 represents the background signal which is interrupted by the
signal /1 on a part D' of its domain D, (or /2 may only be defined on
D — D'). This type of deformation is called incomplete observations by
Grenander. The components /k and the domain D' should be included
in the variables w.
What makes pattern theory hard is not that any of the above transformations are that hard to detect and decode in isolation, but rather that
all four of them tend to coexist, and then the decoding becomes hard.
Pattern Theory: A Unifying Perspective
4. Pattern analysis cannot be done without pattern synthesis
Taking the Bayesian definition of the objects of pattern theory, we note
that the probability distribution (0
- -obs X C2w1d Po,w)allows us to do two
things. On the one hand, we can use it to define the ML-estimate of the
state of the world; but we can also sample from it, possibly fixing some of
the world variables w, using this distribution to construct sample signals f
generated by various classes of objects or events. A good test of whether
your prior has captured all the patterns in some class of signals is to see if
these samples are good imitations of life. For this reason, Grenander's idea
was that the analysis of the patterns in a signal and the synthesis of these
signals are inseparable problems: computer vision should not be separated
from computer graphics, nor speech recognition from speech generation.
This is the third part of our definition of pattern theory. What gives it force
is the idea of constraining not merely your theory but also your algorithms
to require that they explicitly model the universal transformations, hence
can be used to generate signals as well as analyze them.
Many of the early algorithms in pattern recognition were purely bottomup. For example, one class of algorithms started with a signal, computed
a vector of "features", numerical quantities thought to be the essential
attributes of the signal, and then compared these feature vectors with those
expected for signals in various categories. This was used to classify images
of alpha-numeric characters or phonemes, for instance. Such algorithms
give no way of reversing the process, of generating typical signals. The
problem these algorithms encountered was that they had no way of dealing
with anything unexpected, such as a smudge on the paper obscuring a
character, or a cough in the middle of speech. These algorithms did not
say what signals were expected, only what distinguished typical signals in
each category.
In contrast, a second class of algorithms works by actively reconstructing the signal being analyzed. In addition to the bottom-up stage, there is
a top-down stage in which a signal with the detected properties is synthesized and compared to the present input signal. What needs to be checked
is whether the input signal agrees with the synthesized signal to within normal tolerances, or whether the residual is so great that the input has not
been correctly or fully analyzed. This architecture is especially important
for dealing with the fourth type of transformation: interruptions. When
these arc present, the features of the two parts of the signal get confused.
Only when the obscuring signal is explicitly labelled and removed, can the
features of the background signal be computed. We may describe this topdown stage as "pattern reconstruction" in distinction to the bottom-up
Comparison of
input f with
reconstruction fw
Completing or
world model w
Estimate w
David Mumford
purely pattern recognition stage. A flow chart for such algorithms is shown
in Figure 4.
'features" of difference off f,
Bottom-up Path
Top-down Path
Synthetic reconstruction fw
Figure 4. The fundamental architecture of Pattern Theory
We will not develop this aspect of pattern theory in this paper, but
would like to mention briefly several papers where these ideas are developed. A strong argument for the necessity of a top-down stage for the
recognition of heavily degraded signals, such as faces in deep shadow, is
given in [Cavanagh 91]. Neural net theory has gone in several directions:
while "feed-forward" nets categorize in an exclusively bottom-up manner,
the "attractive neural nets" with symmetric connections ([Hopfield 82], [D.
Amit 89]) seek not merely to categorize but also to construct the prototype ideal version of the category by a kind of pattern completion which
they call "associative memory". What these nets do not do is to go back
and attempt to compare this reconstruction with the actual input to see if
the full input has been "explained". One demonstration system that does
this is Grossberg and Carpenter's "adaptive resonance theory" ([Carpenter-
Grossberg 87]). A proposal for the neuroanatomical substrate for such
bottom-up/top-down loops in mammalian cortex is put forth in [Mumford
5. Examples
In this section, we want to present several examples of interesting mathematics which have come out of pattern theory, in attempting to come to
grips with one or another of the above universal transformations. These
examples are from vision because this is the field I know best, but many of
these ideas are used in speech recognition too.
5.1 Pyramids and wavelets
The problem of detecting transformations of the second kind, i.e., of analyzing functions that convey information on more than one scale, has arisen in
many disciplines. The classical method of separating additively combined
Pattern Theory: A Unifying Perspective
scales is, of course, Fourier analysis. But what is usually required is to
analyze a function locally both in its original domain and in the domain of
its Fourier transform, and Fourier analysis does not do this. In computer
vision, at least as far back as the early 70s, this problem led to the idea
of analyzing an image by means of a "pyramid", e.g., [Uhr 72], [Rosenfeld-
Thurston 71]. In its original incarnation, the main idea was to compute
a series of progressively coarser resolution images by blurring and resampling, e.g., a set of (2' x 2n)-pixel images, for n = 10,9, ... , 1. Putting these
together, the resulting data structure looks like an exponentially tapering
pyramid. Instead of running algorithms that took time proportional to
the width of the image, one ran the algorithms up and down the pyramid,
possibly in parallel at different pixels, in time proportional to log(width).
Typical algorithms that were studied at this time are morphological ones,
involving for instance linking and marking extended contours, which have
nothing to do with filtering or linear expansions. The bottom layer of
this so-called Gaussian pyramid held the original image, with both high
and low frequency components, although it was used only to add local or
high-frequency information.
In the early 80s, the idea of using the pyramid to separate band pass
components of a signal and thus to expand that signal arose both in computer vision [Burt-Adelson 83] (where they subtracted successive layers of
the Gaussian pyramid, producing what they called the Laplacian pyramid) and in petroleum geology [Grossman-Morlet 84]. Figure 5 shows this
Laplacian pyramid for a face image: note that the high-frequency differences show textures and sharp edges, while the low frequency differences
show large shapes.
This work led directly to the idea of wavelets and wavelet expansions
which now seem to be the most natural way to analyze a signal locally in
both space and frequency. Mathematically, the idea is simply to expand
an arbitrary function f(Y) of n variables as a sum:
fiElatticeL
fin.# of a
ak,fi,„1/),,,, (AkY + ii)1
where the tit„, are suitable functions, called wavelets, with mean 0. Usually
A = 2, and, at least in dimension 1, there is a single a and wavelet,.
The original expansions of Burt and Adelson, which are not quite of this
form, have been reinvestigated from a more mathematical point of view in
[Mallat 89]. The basic link between the expansion in (10) and pyramids is
this: define a space V„., to be the set of f's whose expansions involve only
terms with k < Tn. This defines a "multi-resolution ladder" of subspaces
David Mumford
Figure 5. The Gaussian and Laplacian pyramids for a face image
of functions with more and more detail:
. . . C V-1 C Vo C V1 C . . . C L2( )
such that f(x)
f(2x) maps Vm isomorphically onto Vm+1. Then
one may think of Vm as functions which have been blurred and sampled
at a spacing 2': i.e., the level of the pyramid of (2 x 2m)-pixel images. The mathematical development of the theory of these expansions is
due especially to Meyer and Daubechies (see [Meyer 86], [Daubechies 88],
[Daubechies 90]), who showed that (i) with very careful choice of //), this
expansion is even an orthogonal one, (ii) for many more 0, the functions
on the right form an unconditional but not orthogonal basis of L2(11')
and (iii) for even more Y), the functions on the right form a "frame , a set
of functions that spans L2 (Rn) and gives a canonical though non=unique
expansion of every f.
From the perspective of pattern theory, we want to make two comments
on the theory of wavelets. The first is that they fit in very naturally with
the idea of minimum description length. Looked at from the point of view
of optimal linear encoding of visual and speech signals (i.e., encoding by
linear combinations of the function values), the idea of wavelet expansions
is very appealing. This was pointed out early on by Burt and Adelson
and data compression has been one of the main applications of wavelet
theory ever since. Moreover, its further development leads beyond the
classical idea of expanding a function in terms of a fixed basis to the idea
Pattern Theory: A Unifying Perspective
of using a much larger spanning set which oversamples a function space
and using suitably chosen subsets of this set in terms of which to expand
or approximate the given function (see [Coffman-Meyer-Wickerhouser 90]
where wavelet libraries are introduced). Even though the data needed to
describe this expansion or approximation is now both the particular subset
chosen and the coefficients, this may be a more efficient code. If so, it should
lead us to the correct variables w for describing the world (cf. Section 2):
for example, expanding a speech signal using wavelet libraries, different
bases would naturally be used in the time domains during which different
phonemes were being pronounced -- thus the break-up of the signal into
phonemes is discovered as a consequence of the search for efficient coding!
It also appears that nature uses wavelet type encoding: there are severe size
restrictions on the optic nerve connecting the retina with the higher parts
of the brain and the visual signal is indeed transmitted using something
like a Burt-Adelson wavelet expansion [Dowling 87].
The second point is that wavelets, even in their oversampled form, are
still just the linear side of pyramid multi-scale analysis. In our description
of multi-scale transformations of signals in Section 3, we pointed out that
the two scales can be combined by multiplication or a more general function
a as well as by addition. To decode such a transformation, we need to
perform some local non-linear step, such as rectification or auto-correlation,
at each level of the pyramid before blurring and resampling. An even
more challenging and non-linear extension is to a multi-scale description
of shapes: e.g., subsets S C R2 with smooth boundary. The analog of
blurring a signal is to let the boundary of S evolve by diffusion proportional
to its curvature (see [Gage-Hamilton 86], [Grayson 87]). Although there
is no theory of this at present, one should certainly have a multi-scale
description of S starting from its coarse diffused form — which is nearly
round -- and adding detailed features at each scale. In yet another direction,
face recognition algorithms have been based on matching a crude blurry
face template at a low resolution, and then refining this match, especially
at key parts of the face like the eyes. This is the kind of general pyramid
algorithm that Rosenfeld proposed many years ago, many of which have
been successfully implemented by Peter Burt and his group at the SRI
Sarnoff Laboratory.
5.2 Segmentation as a free-boundary value problem
A quite different mathematical theory has arisen out of the search for algorithms to detect transformations of the fourth kind, interruptions. Evidence for an interruption or a discontinuity in a perceptual signal comes
from two sources: the relative homogeneity of the signal on either side of
the boundary and the presence of a large change in the signal across the
David Muinford
boundary. One approach is to model this as a variational problem: assuming that a blurred and noisy signal f is defined on a domain D C Rn, one
seeks a set F C D and a smoothed version g of f which is allowed to be
discontinuous on F such that:
• g is as close as possible to f,
• g has the smallest possible gradient on D — F,
• F has the smallest possible (n — 1)-volume.
These conditions define a variational problem, namely to minimize the
functional
E (g, F) = 112 f -
g)2 f • I 11V9112 +
where Lt and v are suitable constants weighting the three terms and 1F1 is
the (n —1)-volume of F. The g minimizing E may be understood as the optimal piecewise smooth approximation to the quite general function f . In
Grenander's terms, the function g is the pure image and f is the deformed
image; I like to call g a cartoon for the signal f . The F minimizing E is a
candidate for the boundaries of parts of the domain D of f where different
objects or events are detected. Segmenting the domain of perceptual signals by such variational problems was proposed independently by S. and
D. Geman and by A. Blake and A. Zisserman (see [Geman-Geman 84] and
[Blake-Zisserman 87]) for functions on discrete lattices, and was extended
by [Mumford-Shah 89] to the continuous case.
In the case of visual signals, the domain D is 2-dimensional and we want
to decompose D into the parts on which different objects in the world are
projected. When you reach the edge of an object as seen from the image
plane, the signal f typically will be more or less discontinuous (depending
on noise and blur and the lighting effects caused by the grazing rays emitted
by the surface as it curves away from the viewer). An example of the
solution of this variational problem is shown in Figure 6: Figure 6a is the
original image of the eye, 6b shows cartoon g and 6c shows the boundaries
F. This is a case where the algorithm succeeds in finding the "correct"
segmentation, but it doesn't always work so well.
Figure 7 gives the same treatment as Figure 6, to the "oldman" image.
Note that the algorithm fails to find the perceptually correct segmentation
in several ways: the man's face is connected to his black coat and the black
bar of the bench and the highlights on the back of his coat are treated as
separate objects. One reason is that the surfaces of objects are often textured, hence the signal they emit is only statistically homogeneous. More
sophisticated variational problems are needed to segment textured objects
(see below).
Pattern Theory: A Unifying Perspective
Figure 6. Segmentation of the eye-image via optimal piecewise smooth
approximation
David Mumford
Segmentation of the oldman-image via optimal piecewise
smooth approximation
Pattern Theory: A Unifying Perspective
From a mathematical standpoint, it is important to know if this variational problem is well-posed. It has been proven that E has a minimum
if F is allowed to be a closed rectifiable set of finite Hausdorff (n — 1)dimensional measure and g is taken in a certain space SBV ("special
bounded variation", which means that the distributional derivative of g
is the sum of an L2-vector field plus a totally singular distribution supported on F) (see [DeGiorgi-Carriero-Leaci 88], [Ambrosio-Tortorelli 89]
and [Dal Maso-Morel-Solimini 89]). Unfortunately, it seems hard to check
whether these minima are "nice" when f is, e.g., whether, when n = 2,
F is made up of a finite number of differentiable arcs, though Shah and I
have conjectured that this is true. Of course, if the signal is replaced by a
sampled version, the problem is finite dimensional and certainly well-posed.
This variational problem fits very nicely into both the Bayesian framework and the information theoretic one. Geman and Geman introduced it
for discrete domains in the Bayesian setting. The basic idea is to define
probability spaces by Gibbs fields. Let D = {x€,} be the domain, {f„} and
{g„} the values of f and g at xa. To describe F, for each pair of "adjacent
pixels" a and /3, let f„,0 = 1 or 0 depending on whether or not F separates
the pixels a and 13: these random variables are called the line process. Then
we define a prior probability distribution on the random variables {f„,/3}
by the formula
P({f,i3})=
where Z1 is the usual normalizing constant. This just means that boundaries F get less and less probable, the bigger they are. Next, we put a
conditional probability distribution on {g„} conditional on the line process
by the formula
d ( 1 — „ ) • (go 9p)1
This is a discrete form of the previous E: if adjacent pixels a and /3 are
not separated by F, then
= 0 and the probability of {g„} goes down as
—gol gets larger, but if they are separated, then f„,0 = 1 and go„ and go
are independent. Together, the last two equations define an intuitive prior
on {g„, fool enforcing the idea that g is smooth except across the boundary
F. The data term in the Bayesian approach makes the observations fa}
equal to the model OA plus Gaussian noise, i.e., it defines the conditional
David Mu7nford
probability by the formula
A{f.}1{gc,
Multiplying (12), (13) and (14) defines a probability space (Sloes x
CLId,Po,w) as in section 2 and taking —log of this probability, we get back a
discrete version of E up to a constant. Thus the ML-estimate of the world
variables {g,, f„,0} is essentially the minimum of the functional E.
This probability space is closely analogous to that introduced in physics
in the Ising model. In terms of this analogy, the discontinuities F of the
signal are exactly the phase transitions of statistical mechanics.
From the information-theoretic perspective, we want to interpret E
as the bit length of a suitable encoding of the image {M. These ideas
have not been fully developed, but for the simplified model in which F is
assumed to divide up the domain into pieces {Dk} on which the image
is approximately a constant -Loki-, this interpretation was pointed out by
[Leclerc 89]. We imagine encoding the image by starting with a "chain
code" for F: the length of this code will be proportional to its length IFS.
Then we encode the constants {gk} up to some accuracy by a constant
times the number of these pieces k. Finally, we encode the deviation of the
image from these constants by Shannon's optimal encoding based on the
assumption that f, = gk+ Gaussian noise 11a. The length of this encoding
will be a constant times the first term in E. (If g is not locally constant,
we may go on to interpret the second term in E as follows: consider the
Neumann boundary value problem for the laplacian A acting on the domain
D — F. We may expand g in terms of its eigenfunctions, and encode g by
Shannon's optimal encoding assuming these coefficients are independently
normally distributed with variances going down with the corresponding
eigenvalues. The length will be this second term.)
Many variants of this Gibbs field or "energy functional" approach to
perceptual signal processing have been investigated. Some of these seek to
incorporate texture segmentation, e.g., [Geman-Geman-Graffigne-Dong 90]
and [Lee-Mumford-Yuille 92] (which proposes an algorithm that should also
segment most phonemes in speech) and others to deal with the asymmetry
of boundaries caused by the 3D-world: at a boundary, one side is in front,
the other in back [Nitzberg-Mumford 90]. The "Hidden Markov Models"
used in speech recognition are Gibbs fields are of this type. To clarify
the relationship, recall that HMM's are based on modelling speech by a
Markov chain whose underlying graph is made up of subgraphs, one for
each phoneme and whose states predict the power spectrum of the speech
signal in local time intervals. Assuming a specific speech signal f is being
dist.(f tk+1 , phoneme ak) v
Pattern Theory: A Unifying Perspective
modelled, HMM-theory computes the ML sample of this chain conditional
on the observed power spectra. Note that any sample of the chain defines
a segmentation of time by the set F = {tk} of times at which the sample
moves from the subchain for one phoneme to another, and each interval
tk < t < tk+1 is associated to a specific phoneme ak. Let A be the string
{ aia2, • • • , aN}. Taking —log of the probability, the ML estimate of the
chain is the pair {F, A} minimizing an energy E of the form
which is clearly analogous to the E's defined above.
Finally, some physiological theories have been proposed in which various areas of cortex (e.g., V1 and V2) compute the segmentation of images
by an algorithm analogous to minimizing (11) [Grossberg-Mignolla 85]. It
has also been used in computing depth from stereo [Belhumeur-Mumford
92], [Geiger-Ladendorf-Yuille 92], computing the so-called optical flow field,
the vector field of moving objects across the focal plane [Yuille-Grzywacz
89], [Hildreth 84] and many other applications.
We have not mentioned the problem of actually computing or approximating the minimum of energy functionals like E. Four methods have
been proposed: in case n = 1, we can use dynamic programming to find the
global minimum fast and efficiently. This applies to the speech applications
and is one reason why speech recognition is considerably ahead of image
analysis. For any n, [Geman-Geman 84] applied a Monte Carlo algorithm
due to [Kirkpatrick-Geloti-Vecchi 83] known as simulated annealing. Making this work is something of a black art, as the theoretical bounds on its
correctness are astronomical; still it is always an easy thing to try as a first
A third method, which seems the most reliable at this point, is the
graduated non-convexity method introduced in [Blake-Zisserman 87]. It is
based on putting the functional E in a family Et such that E = E0 and E1
is a convex functional, hence has a unique local minimum. One then starts
with the minimum of El and follows it as t
0. The final idea is related
to the third and that is to use mean field theory as in statistical physics:
this often leads to approximations to the Gibbs field which allow us to put
E in a family becoming convex in the limit (see [Geiger-Yuille 89]).
5.3 Random diffeomorphisms and template matching
The third example concerns the identification of objects in an image,
putting them in categories such as "the letter A", "a hammer" or "my
Grandmother's face". One of the biggest obstacles in these problems is the
David Muinford
variability of the shapes which belong to such categories. This variability
is caused, for example, by changes in the orientation of the object and the
viewpoint of the camera, changes in individual objects such as varying expressions on a face and differences between objects of the same category
such as different fonts for characters, different brands of hammer, etc. If
the shapes were not too variable, one could hope to introduce average examples of each letter, of each tool, of the faces of everyone you know
"templates" for each of these objects
and recognize each such object as
it is perceived by comparing it to the various templates stored in memory.
Unfortunately, the variations are usually too large for this to work, and,
worse than that, some variations occur commonly, while others do not (e.g.,
faces get wrinkled but never become wavy like water). What we need to
do is to explicitly model the common variations and use our knowledge to
see if a suitably varied template fits! A large part of this variation can be
modelled by domain warping, the third of the transformations introduced
in Section 3 and this leads to the study of deformable templates, templates
whose parts can be changed in size and orientation and shifted relative to
each other. These were first introduced in computer vision by [Fischler-
Elschlager 73] who called them "templates with springs" but the idea is
well-known in biology, e.g., in the famous and beautiful book [Thompson
17] (see Figure 8a, showing the deformations between three primate skulls).
Figure 8a. Diffeomorphisms between primate skulls
Pattern Theory: A Unifying Perspective
Mathematically, we can describe flexible templates is as follows. We
must construct four things: (i) a standard image IT on a domain DT which
can be a set of pixels or can also be reduced to a graph of "parts" of the
object, (ii) a space of allowable maps 1,!) : DT
D or (D U {missing}), (iii)
a measure E(5) of the degree of deformation in the map 0, the "stretching
of the springs", and (iv) a measure of the difference d between the standard
image IT and the deformation '0* (I) of the observed image I. Here V) is
typically a diffeomorphism, "missing" is an extra element in the range of 1j)
to allow certain parts of the standard image to be missing in the observed
image, and 1/)* (I) is a "pull-back" of I which may be just the composition
of I and 1/) if DT is a set of pixels, or may be some set of local "features"
of I when DT is a graph of parts. The basic algorithm is then to compute
arg min[d(*(/), )
which gives the optimal match of the template with the observed image.
Figures 8b, 8c and 8d show three examples of this algorithm in action.
8b from [Yamamoto-Rosenfeld 82] applies these ideas to the recognition
of chinese characters or kanji. In this application DT is a 1-dimensional
polygonal skeleton of the outline of the character, and IP is a piecewise linear
embedding of DT in the domain D of the character image. 8c from [Y. Amit
91] applies these ideas to tracing a hand in an X-ray by comparing it with
a standard hand. Here V) is a small deformation of the identity defined
by a wavelet expansion of its (x, y)-coordinates and the prior E(J) is a
weighted L2-norm of the expansion coefficients. Finally 8d from [Yuille-
Hallinan-Cohen 92] applies these ideas to the recognition of eyes. Here DT
has two parts, a pair of parabolas representing the outline of the eye and
a black circle on a white ground representing the iris/pupil on the eyeball.
is linear on each parabola and on the circle, but the range of the first
may occlude the range on the second to allow the iris/pupil to be partially
hidden. This is incorporated in a careful definition of d.
An interesting mathematical side of this theory is the need for a careful
definition and comparative study of various priors on the spaces of diffeomorphisms V). One can, for instance, define various measures E OM based
(i) on the square norm of the Jacobian, as in harmonic map theory, (ii) on
the area of the graph, as in geometric measure theory, (iii) on the stress of
the map as in elasticity theory, or (iv) on second derivatives of 1/), which
give more control over the minima. [Mumford 91] discusses some of these
measures, but the best approach is unclear and restricting maps to be
diffeomorphisms is not always natural. An interesting neurophysiological
aside is that the anatomy of the cortex of mammals seems well equipped
CONCEPT OF
KANJI CHARACTER
David Mumford
Figure 8b. Diffeomorphism between kanji
to perform domain warping. The circuitry of the cortex is based on two
types of connections: local connections within disjoint subsets of the cortex
known as cortical areas, and global connections, called pathways, between
the two distinct areas. The pathways occur in pairs, setting up maps which
are crudely homeomorphisms between the cortical surfaces of the two areas which are inverse to each other. These pathways are not exactly point
to point maps, however, because of the multiple synapses of their axons,
hence the pair of inverse pathways can shift a pattern of excitation by small
amounts in any direction.
5.4 The stereo correspondence problem via minimum
description length
As described in Section 2, there are two approaches to the problems of pattern theory: the first is to use all the geometry, physics, chemistry, biology
and sociology that we know about the world and try to define from this
high-level knowledge an appropriate probabilistic model (—Oohs x Qwld po,w)
of the world and our observations. The second involves learning this model
using only the patterns and the internal structure of the signals that are
presented to us. Almost all research to date in computer vision falls in
the first category, while the standard approach to speech recognition starts
with the first but significantly improves on it using the "EM-algorithm" , a
learning algorithm in the second category.
Restoration
Difference
Pattern Theory: A Unifying Perspective
----,..,,— ..•,,,„...,
-\\I\‘‘''''
n‘4:4444;;%/
l'...::::,.... I*t.
.ANNN\\N1s ;:ttl.;::
Displacement
Figure 8c. Diffeomorphism between X-rays of hands
However, newborn animals seem to rely as strongly on learning their
environment as on a genetically transmitted knowledge of it. It not hard
to imagine that a baby growing up in a virtual reality governed by quite
unusual physics would learn these just as rapidly as the physics of its ances-
David Mumford
Figure 8d. Diffeomorphism from a cartoon eye to a real eye
tral world. Humans can read scanning electron microscope images, which
are produced by totally different reflectance rules from normal images. All
of this suggests the possibility of discovering universal pattern analysis algorithms which learn patterns from scratch. One of the great appeals of
the idea of pattern theory is the hope that the structure of the world can be
discovered in this way. It is in this spirit that we present the final example.
It is not an extensive theory like the previous three, but illustrates how the
minimum description length principle can lead one to uncover the hidden
structure of the world in a remarkably direct way.
We are concerned with the problem of stereo vision. If we view the
world with two eyes or with two cameras separated by a known distance,
and either identically oriented or with a known difference of orientations,
then we can use trigonometry to infer the 3-dimensional structure of the
world: see Figure 9. More precisely, the two imaging systems produce
two images, IL and IR (the left and right images). Suppose a point A in
the world visible in both images appears as AL E DL and AR E DR in
the domains of the two images. The coordinates of AL and AR plus the
World Object
Pattern Theory: A Unifying Perspective
Figure 9. The geometry of stereo vision, in a plane through the centers
of the two lenses
David Mumford
known geometry of the imaging system give the 3-dimensional coordinates
of A. However, to use this, we need to first find the pair of corresponding
points AL and AR: finding these is called the correspondence problem.
Notice from Figure 9 that the geometry of the imaging system gives us one
simplification: all points A in a fixed 3-dimensional plane 71, through the
centers of the two lenses, are seen as points AL E
and AR E fR, where £L
and £R are the intersections of it with the two focal planes, and are called
epipolar lines. Moreover, when we are looking at a single relatively smooth
surface S in the 3-dimensional world, S is visible from the left and right
eye as subdomains SL C DL and SR C DR and the corresponding points
on these subdomains define a diffeomorphism 1// : SL —> SR carrying each
epipolar line in the left domain to the corresponding epipolar line in the
right. This leads us to a problem like that in the last section. But there is a
further twist: at the edges of objects, each of the two eyes can typically see
a little further around one edge, producing pixels in one domain DL or DR
with no corresponding pixel in the other domain. In this way, the domain
is often segmented into subdomains corresponding to distinct objects.
My claim is that the minimum description length principle alone leads
you naturally to discover all this structure, without any prior knowledge
of 3-dimensions. The argument is summarized in Figure 10. In this figure, I have represented a series of increasingly complex stereo images in
diagrammatic form. Firstly, in order to represent the essentials concisely,
I have used only a single pair of epipolar lines lL and fR instead of the
full domains DL and DR. Secondly, instead of graphing the complex intensity function, we have used small symbols (squares, circles, triangles,
stars, etc.) to denote local intensity functions with various characteristics.
Thus a square on both lines represents local intensities which are similar
functions. On the left, at each stage in Figure 10, we see the plane IT in
the world, with the visible surface points, and the left and right eyes. In
the middle, we see the left and right images /L and IR which this scene
produces, as well as dotted lines connecting corresponding points AL and
AR. On the right we give a method of encoding the image data.
Stage 0 represents a simple flat object seen from the front: it produces
images IL and IR, but we assume that our pattern analysis begins with
naively encoding the images independently. At stage 1, the same scene is
seen, but now the analysis uses the much more concise method of encoding
only /L, the fixed translation d by which corresponding points differ and
a possible small residual A/(x) = IR(x) — /L (x d). Clearly this is more
concise. At stage 2, the scene is more complex: a surface of varying distance
is seen, hence the displacement between corresponding points (called the
disparity) is not constant. To adapt the previous encoding to this situation,
Pattern Theory: A Unifying Perspective
VIEW OF WORLD
(seen from above)
IMAGES IL and IR OF WORLD
from perspective of left and right eyes
DATA RECORDED
record raw images
Fit IR(x) - IL(x+d)
- record IL, d and
residual AL
frontally viewed surface
Better fit:
IR(x) - IL(x+d(x))
- record IL, Ave(d),
receding surface
Still better:
IC(x) = IR(x - d(x)/2)
- IL(x + d(x)/2),
where I el' I
- record lc, Ave(d),
occluding surface
IC as above,
d(x) from Ave(da),d'
reappearing surface
Figure 10. Discovering the world via MDL
David Muniford
one could take a mean value of d and have a bigger residual I. But this
residual could be quite big and a better scheme is replace the fixed d by
a function d(x) and encode /L, the mean and derivative (d, d') of d and
the residual I. Now in stage 3, we encounter a new wrinkle: the scene
consists in two surfaces, one occluding the other. Notice that a little bit
of the back surface is visible to one eye only. To include this complexity,
we go over to a more symmetrical treatment of the two eyes and encode a
combined cyclopean image /c (x), where
Ic(x) = I R(x
d(2) ),IL(x
) or their average
depending on whether the point is visible only to the right eye, only to
the left eye or to both eyes. To make this representation unique, it is easy
to see that we must require that d'(x)1 < 1. Then we encode the scene
via (/(7,d, d', AI). In the final stage 4, we introduce the possibility of a
surface disappearing behind another and then reappearing. The point is
that each surface has its own average disparity, and it now becomes more
efficient to record d by several means d„ , one for each surface, and the
derivative d'. Thus we see how the search for minimum length encoding
leads us naturally, first to the third coordinate of world points, then to
smooth descriptions of surfaces in terms of their tangent planes and finally
to explicit labelling of distinct surfaces in the visible field.
Although this approach might seem very abstract and impossible to
implement biologically, G. Hinton (unpublished) has developed neural net
theories incorporating both MDL and feed-back. These might be able to
learn stereo exactly as outlined in this section.
6. Pattern theory and cognitive information processing
The examples of the last section all concern pattern theory as a theory for
analyzing sensory input. The examples come from vision, but most of the
ideas could apply to hearing or touch too. The purpose of this section is to
ask the question: to what extent is pattern theory relevant to all cognitive
information processing, both "higher level" thinking as studied in cognitive
psychology and AI, and the output stages of an intelligent agent, motor
control and action planning. I believe that in many ways the same ideas
are applicable on a theoretical level and that there is physiological evidence
that the same algorithms are applied throughout the cortex.
In the introduction, we gave medical expert systems as another example of pattern theory. In this extension, we considered the data available
to a physician
symptoms, test results and the patient's history
Pattern Theory: A Unifying Perspective
an encoded version of the full state of the world, a "deformed image" in
Grenander's terminology. The full state of the world, the "pure image", in
this case means the diseases and processes present in the patient. Inferring
these hidden random variables can and has been studied as a problem in
Bayesian statistics, exactly as in Section 2: see, for instance, [Pearl 88],
[Lauritzen-Spiegelhalter 88]. In particular, describing the probability distribution on all the random variables as a Gibbs field, as in Section 5h,
has been shown to be a powerful technique for introducing realistic models of the probability distribution in the real world. Figure 11, from the
article [Lauritzen-Spiegelhalter 88], shows a simplified set of such random
variables and the graph on which a Gibbs distribution can be based.
Figure 11. Causal graph in a toy medical expert system
Whether or not pattern theory extends in an essential way to these
types of problems hinges on whether the transformations described in
Section 3 generate the kind of probability distributions encountered with
higher level variables. To answer this, it is essential to look at test cases
which are not too artificially simplified (as is done all too often in AI), but
which incorporate the typical sorts of complexities and complications of the
real world. While I do not think this question can be definitively answered
at present, I want to make a case that the four types of transformations
of Section 3 are indeed encoding mechanisms encountered at all levels of
cognitive information processing.
The first class of transformations, noise and blur, certainly occur at all
levels of thought. In the medical example, errors in tests, the inadequacies
David Mumford
of language in conveying the nature of a pain or symptom, etc. all belong
to this category. Uncertainty over facts, misinterpretations and confusing
factors are within this class. The simplest model leads to multi-dimensional
normal distributions on a vector P of "features" being analyzed.
The fourth category of transformation, "interruptions", also are obviously universal. In any cognitive sphere, the problem of separating the
relevant factors for a specific event or situation being analyzed from the
extraneous factors involved with everything else in the world, is clearly
central. The world is a complex place with many, many things happening
simultaneously, and highlighting the "figure" against the "ground" is not
just a sensory problem, but one encountered at every level. Another way
this problem crops up is that a complex of symptoms may result from one
underlying cause or from several, and, if several causes are present, their
effects have to teased apart in the process of pattern analysis. As proposed
in Section 4, pattern synthesis
actively comparing the results of one
cause with the presenting symptoms P followed by analysis of the residual,
the unexplained symptoms, is a universal algorithmic approach to these
The second of the transformations, "multi-scale superposition", can
be applied to higher level variables as follows: philosophers, psychologists
and AI researchers have all proposed systematizing the study of concepts
and categories by organizing them in hierarchies. Thus psychologists (see
[Rosch 78]) propose distinguishing superordinate categories, basic level categories and subordinate categories: for instance, a particular pet might
belong to the superordinate category "animal", the basic-level category
"dog" and the subordinate category "terrier". In AI, this leads to graphical structures called semantic nets for codifying the relationships between
categories (see [Findler 79]). These nets always include ordered links between categories, called isa links, meaning that one category is a special
case of another. I want to propose that cognitive multi-scale superposition
is precisely the fact that to analyze a specific situation or thing, some aspects result from the situation belonging to very general categories, others
from very specific facts about the situation that put it in very precise categories. Thus sensory thinking requires we deal with large shapes with various overall properties, supplemented with details about their various parts,
precise data on location, proportions, etc.; cognitive thinking requires we
deal with large ideas with various general properties, supplemented with
details about specific aspects, precise facts about occurrence, relationships,
Finally, how about "domain warping"? Consider a specific example
first. Associated to a cold is a variety of several dozen related symptoms.
Pattern Theory: A Unifying Perspective
A person may, however, be described as having a sore throat, a chest cold,
flu, etc.: in each case the profile of their symptoms shifts. This may be
modelled by a map from symptom to symptom, carrying for instance the
modal symptom of soreness of throat to that of coughing. The more general cognitive process captured by domain warping is that of making an
analogy. In an analogy, one situation with a set of participants in a specific
relationship to each other is mapped to another situation with new participants in the same relationship. This map is the / in Section 5c, and the
constraints on 1/), such as being a diffeomorphism, are now that it preserve
the appropriate relationships. The idea of domain warping applying to
cognitive concepts seems to suggest that higher level concepts should form
some kind of geometric space. At first this sounds crazy, but it should
be remembered that the entire cortex, high and low level areas alike, has
the structure of a 2-dimensional sheet. This 2-dimensional structure is
used in a multitude of ways to organize sensory and motor processes efficiently: in some cases, sensory maps (like the retinal response and patterns
of tactile responses) are laid out geometrically. In other cases, interleaved
stripes carry intra-hemispheric and inter-hemispheric connections. In still
other cases, there are "blobs" in which related responses cluster. But, in
all cases, adjacency in this 2D sheet allows a larger degree of cross-talk
and interaction than with non-adjacent areas and this seems to be used
to develop responses to related patterns. My suggestion is: is this spatial
adjacency used to structure abstract thought too*?
To conclude, we want to discuss briefly how pattern theory helps the
analysis of motor control and action planning, the output stage of a robot.
Control theory has long been recognized as the major mathematical tool
for analyzing these problems but it is not, in fact, all that different from
pattern theory. In Figure 12a, we give the customary diagram of what
control theory does. The controller is a black box which compares the
* I have argued elsewhere that the remarkable anatomical uniformity
of the neo-cortex suggests that common mechanisms, such as the 4 universal transformations of pattern theory, are used throughout the cortex
[Mumford 91-92, 93]. The referee has pointed out that "the uniformity
of structure may reflect common machinery at a lower level. For example, different computers may have similar basic mechanisms at the level
of registers, buses, etc., which is a low level of data handling. Similarly
in the brain, the apparent uniformity of structure may be at the level of
common lower-level mechanisms rather than the level of dealing with universal transformations". This is a certainly an alternative possibility, quite
opposite to my conjectural link between the high-level analysis of pattern
theory and the circuitry of the neo-cortex.
David Mumford
current observation of the state of the world with the desired state and
issues an updated motor command, which in turn affects the black box
called the world.
Controller
Observation of effect
Figure 12a. The flow chart of control theory
This diagram is very similar to Figure 4, which described how pattern
analysis and pattern synthesis formed a loop used in the algorithm for
reconstructing the hidden world variables from the observed sensory ones.
High-level
Synthetic •
motor pattern
Analysis of error
Figure 12b. A motor task via pattern theory
Figure 12b presents the modification of Figure 4 to a motor task. Here
a high-level area or "black box" is in a loop with a low-level area: the
high-level area compares the desired state with an analysis of the error
and generates an updated motor command sequence by pattern synthesis.
The low-level area, either by actually carrying out an action and observing its consequences, or by internal simulation, finds that it falls short in
various ways, and send its pattern analysis of this error back up. Notice
that the four transformations of Section 3 will occur or should be used
in the top-down pattern synthesis step. Noise and blur are the inevitable
consequences of the inability to control muscles perfectly, or eliminate external uncontrollable interference. Domain warping is the bread-and-butter
of control theory
speeding up or slowing down an action by modifying
the forces in order that it optimizes performance. Multi-scale superposition is what hierarchical control is all about: building up an action first in
large steps, then refining these steps in their parts, eventually leading to
Pattern Theory: A Unifying Perspective
detailed motor commands. Finally, interruptions are the terminations of
specific control programs, either by success or by unexpected events, where
quite new programs take over. In general, we seek to anticipate these and
set up successor programs beforehand, hence we need to actively synthesize
these as much as possible.
In summary, my belief is that pattern theory contains the germs of a
universal theory of thought itself, one which stands in opposition to the
accepted analysis of thought in terms of logic. The successes to date of
the theory are certainly insufficient to justify such a grandiose dream, but
no other theory has been more successful. The extraordinary similarity of
the structure of all parts of the human cortex to each other and of human
cortex with the cortex of the most primitive mammals suggests that a
relatively simple universal principal governs its operation, even in complex
and deep thinking (see [Mumford 91-92, 93] where these physiological links
are developed).