Neural Correlates of Conscious Self-Regulation of Emotion
Mario Beauregard,1,2,3 Johanne Le´ vesque,3,4 and Pierre Bourgouin1
1De´ partement de Radiologie, Faculte´ de Me´ decine, Universite´ de Montre´ al and Centre Hospitalier de l’Universite´ de
Montre´ al (CHUM), Hoˆ pital Notre-Dame, Montre´ al, Que´ bec, Canada H2L 4M1, 2Centre de Recherche en Sciences
Neurologiques, Faculte´ de Me´ decine, Universite´ de Montre´ al, Montre´ al, Que´ bec, Canada H3C 3J7, 3Centre de
Recherche, Institut Universitaire de Ge´ riatrie de Montre´ al, Montre´ al, Que´ bec, Canada H3W 1W5, and 4De´ partement de
Psychologie, Universite´ de Montre´ al, Montre´ al, Que´ bec, Canada H3C 3J7
A fundamental question about the relationship between cognition and emotion concerns the neural substrate underlying
emotional self-regulation. To address this issue, brain activation
was measured in normal male subjects while they either responded in a normal manner to erotic ﬁlm excerpts or voluntarily attempted to inhibit the sexual arousal induced by viewing
erotic stimuli. Results demonstrated that the sexual arousal
experienced, in response to the erotic ﬁlm excerpts, was associated with activation in “limbic” and paralimbic structures,
such as the right amygdala, right anterior temporal pole, and
hypothalamus. In addition, the attempted inhibition of the sexual arousal generated by viewing the erotic stimuli was associated with activation of the right superior frontal gyrus and right
anterior cingulate gyrus. No activation was found in limbic
areas. These ﬁndings reinforce the view that emotional selfregulation is normally implemented by a neural circuit comprising various prefrontal regions and subcortical limbic structures.
They also suggest that humans have the capacity to inﬂuence
the electrochemical dynamics of their brains, by voluntarily
changing the nature of the mind processes unfolding in the
psychological space.
Key words: emotional self-regulation; consciousness; volition; metacognition; prefrontal cortex; “limbic” structures; functional magnetic resonance imaging
Emotional self-regulation refers to the heterogeneous set of processes by which individuals inﬂuence, consciously and voluntarily,
which emotions they have, when they have them, and how they
experience and express these emotions . Given the
multicomponential nature of emotions—which comprise cognitive, experiential, behavioral, and physiological dimensions—
emotional self-regulation may be associated with changes in one
or more of these response domains . This form of
self-regulation involves decreasing, maintaining, or increasing
both negative and positive emotions , by using various cognitive regulatory processes such as rationalization, reappraisal, and suppression
 .
Disturbances of normal emotional self-regulation might be a
key factor in the genesis of depression and anxiety, both of which
may involve a chronic inability to suppress negative emotion
 . Regarding this issue, it has been postulated
that impulsive aggression and violence also arise as a consequence of defective regulation of emotional responses . Given that the ability to modulate emotions is at the
heart of the human experience, it is not surprising that the use of
emotional self-regulatory processes constitutes the core of several
modern psychotherapeutic approaches.
Despite the immense impact of emotional self-regulation for
the conduct of human affairs in daily life, few things are known
with respect to the neurobiological substrate subserving the psychological processes associated with the volitional modulation of
emotional responses. With respect to this question, Nauta 
and Tucker et al. have theorized that the frontal neocortex
and limbic/paralimbic structures are components of a frontolimbic network involved in the regulation of emotion. More recently,
Davidson and associates have proposed, on the basis of
various evidence from experimental lesion studies in animals and
clinical neuropsychological, psychophysiological, and functional
brain mapping studies in humans, that emotional self-regulation
may be normally implemented by a neural circuit consisting of
several regions of the prefrontal cortex (PFC) [e.g., orbitofrontal
PFC, dorsolateral PFC, anterior cingulate cortex (ACC)], and of
subcortical limbic structures, such as the amygdala and the hypothalamus. The present functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) study was undertaken to test the validity of this view.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Subjects. Ten healthy male (Caucasian) volunteers (age range, 20–42;
mean age, 23.5) participated in this study. Informed consent was obtained
from all subjects.
Received March 8, 2001; revised June 4, 2001; accepted June 28, 2001.
This work was supported by grants from National Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada (NSERC) and De´partement de Radiologie, Faculte´ de
Me´decine, Universite´ de Montre´al to M.B. We thank the staff of the De´partement
de Radiologie, Centre Hospitalier de l’Universite´ de Montre´al (CHUM), Hoˆpital
Notre-Dame, for their skillful technical assistance.
Correspondence should be addressed to Dr. Mario Beauregard, Centre de Recherche, Institut Universitaire de Ge´riatrie de Montre´al, 4565 Queen Mary Road,
Montre´al, Que´bec, Canada, H3W lW5. E-mail: .
Copyright © 2001 Society for Neuroscience
0270-6474/01/210001-06$15.00/0
This article is published in The Journal of Neuroscience, Rapid
Communications
peerreviewed papers online, not in print. Rapid Communications
are posted online approximately one month earlier than they
would appear if printed. They are listed in the Table of
Contents of the next open issue of JNeurosci. Cite this article
as: JNeurosci, 2001, 21:RC165 (1–6). The publication date is
the date of posting online at www.jneurosci.org.
 
The Journal of Neuroscience, 2001, Vol. 21 RC165 1 of 6
Behavioral procedures. Blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) signal
changes were measured during two experimental conditions, i.e., a sexual
arousal condition and an attempted inhibition condition. In the sexual
arousal condition, subjects viewed a series of erotic ﬁlm excerpts and
emotionally neutral ﬁlm excerpts. They were instructed to react normally
to both types of stimuli. In the case of the erotic ﬁlm excerpts, this meant
that the subjects had to allow themselves to become sexually aroused in
response to the erotic ﬁlm excerpts. In the attempted inhibition condition, subjects were instructed to inhibit any emotional reaction to both
categories of stimuli. These instructions meant that the subjects had to
voluntarily decrease the intensity of the sexual arousal felt in reaction to
the erotic ﬁlm excerpts. To accomplish that goal, subjects were encouraged to distance themselves from these stimuli, that is, to become a
detached observer. They were also instructed to look at the stimuli
directly during both experimental conditions.
Erotic ﬁlm excerpts were selected on the basis of previous work by our
group demonstrating the efﬁciency of such stimuli at bringing rapidly and
automatically a marked positive change in the subjective emotional
experience of healthy male subjects, change correlated with signiﬁcant
activation of limbic brain regions . These ﬁlm
excerpts depicted different kinds of sexual interactions (e.g., oral sex,
vaginal intercourse, etc.) between one woman and two or three men, two
women and one man, and between two or more women. The emotionally
neutral ﬁlm excerpts were matched to the erotic ﬁlm excerpts with
respect to the number and the gender of the individuals involved in
various social interactions (e.g., interviews, carpentry, etc). Erotic ﬁlm
excerpts were presented with their original sound tracks consisting of
instrumental music. To avoid any confounding effect attributable to the
information processing of language perceived in an auditory manner,
emotionally neutral music was superimposed on the neutral ﬁlm excerpts.
Both categories of ﬁlm excerpts were selected from a private bank of
validated stimuli created by the investigators.
The sexual arousal condition corresponded to one functional run and
consisted of the viewing of, ﬁrst, four blocks of emotionally neutral ﬁlm
excerpts and, then, four blocks of erotic ﬁlm excerpts. On the basis of
evidence gathered previously by our group, this design was adopted to
avoid contamination of the neutral stimuli by the erotic stimuli. Each
block lasted 39 sec. Blocks were separated by resting periods of 15 sec,
during which subjects viewed a blank cyan screen. The attempted inhibition condition corresponded to the other functional run and also
consisted of the viewing of, ﬁrst, four blocks of emotionally neutral ﬁlm
excerpts and, then, four blocks of erotic ﬁlm excerpts. The order of
presentation of the functional runs was counterbalanced across subjects.
In addition, the neutral and erotic stimuli that were used in the sexual
arousal condition for half of the subjects were presented for the other
half of the subjects in the attempted inhibition condition (and vice versa).
To assess the subjective responses of the subjects to the stimuli,
immediately at the end of each functional run, they were asked to rate
verbally—on a visual analog rating scale ranging from 0 (absence of any
emotional reaction) to 8 (strongest emotion ever felt in one’s lifetime)—
the average intensity of sexual arousal or primary emotions [e.g., sadness,
happiness, disgust, fear, anger, surprise ] felt during the
viewing of both categories of ﬁlm excerpts. For each functional run, an
average rating score was computed for the four blocks of erotic ﬁlm
excerpts and the four blocks of emotionally neutral ﬁlm excerpts. At the
end of the scanning session, subjects were also asked to complete a
“strategy questionnaire” in which they described the emotion regulation
strategies they used to inhibit the sexual arousal generated by the erotic
MRI. Echoplanar images (EPIs) were acquired on a 1.5 Tesla system
(Magnetom Vision, Siemens Electric, Erlangen, Germany). Twentyeight slices (5 mm thick) were acquired every 3 sec in an inclined axial
plane, aligned with the anterior commissure–posterior commissure axis.
These T2* weighted functional images were acquired using an EPI pulse
sequence [repetition time (TR)  0.8 msec; echo time (TE)  54 msec;
Flip angle  90°; ﬁeld of view (FOV)  215 mm; Matrix  64  64)].
After functional scanning, high-resolution data were acquired via a Tlweighted three-dimensional volume acquisition obtained using a gradient
echo pulse sequence (TR  9.7 msec; TE  4 msec; Flip angle  12°;
FOV  215 mm; Matrix  256  256).
Data were analyzed using Statistical Parametric Mapping software
(SPM99, Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London, UK).
Images for all subjects were realigned to correct for artifacts caused by
small head movements and spatially normalized into an MRI stereotactic
space . Images were then convolved in
space with a three-dimensional isotropic Gaussian kernel (12 mm full
width half maximum) to improve the signal-to-noise ratio and to accommodate for residual variations in functional neuroanatomy that usually
persist between subjects after spatial normalization.
For both sexual arousal and attempted inhibition conditions, a conventional subtraction method was used to contrast the brain activity
associated with the viewing of the erotic ﬁlm excerpts and that associated
with the viewing of the emotionally neutral ﬁlm excerpts. For the
statistical analysis, the time series of the images were correlated with the
delayed boxcar function that approximates the activation patterns, and a
ﬁxed effects general linear model for autocorrelated observations was
applied voxelwise. Voxel values for each contrast yielded a statistical
parametric map of the t statistic (SPM t), subsequently transformed to the
unit normal distribution (SPM Z). An a priori search strategy was used.
A whole-brain post hoc analysis was also performed. The a priori search
strategy predicted signiﬁcant activation in the PFC (orbitofrontal PFC,
dorsolateral PFC, anterior cingulate cortex), the amygdala, the temporal
pole, and the hypothalamus. The search volume corresponding to the
brain regions of interest was deﬁned a priori by tracing the neuroanatomical boundaries of these regions on the MR reference image. These
boundaries were also traced using the standard atlas of Talairach and
Tournoux . For this a priori search, a corrected probability threshold of p  0.05 was used. For the whole-brain post hoc analysis, a
corrected probability threshold of p  0.005 was used. Only clusters
showing a spatial extent of at least 10 contiguous voxels were kept for
image analysis.
Behavioral data
Phenomenologically, the viewing of the erotic ﬁlm excerpts in
both the sexual arousal and attempted inhibition conditions induced a transient state of sexual arousal in all subjects. The mean
level of reported sexual arousal was signiﬁcantly higher in the
sexual arousal condition (mean  5; range, 3–8) than in the
inhibition condition (mean  2; range, 1–4) ( p  0.005). For both
experimental conditions, the viewing of the erotic ﬁlm excerpts
did not produce changes in the emotional state other than sexual
arousal. Likewise, in both of these conditions, the viewing of the
emotionally neutral ﬁlm excerpts did not generate primary emotional responses. Furthermore, the strategy questionnaire indicated that, in the attempted inhibition condition, most subjects
succeeded at distancing themselves from the erotic stimuli, i.e., at
becoming a detached observer.
A priori search
When the brain activity associated with the viewing of the emotionally neutral ﬁlm excerpts was subtracted from that associated
with the viewing of the erotic ﬁlm clips in the sexual arousal
condition, signiﬁcant BOLD signal increases were found in the
right amygdala, the right anterior temporal pole [Brodmann area
(BA) 38], and the hypothalamus (Fig. 1, Table 1). In addition,
when the brain activity associated with the viewing of the emotionally neutral ﬁlm excerpts was subtracted from that associated
with the viewing of the erotic ﬁlm clips in the attempted inhibition condition, signiﬁcant loci of activation were noted in the right
superior frontal gyrus (BA 10) and the right anterior cingulate
gyrus (BA 32) (Fig. 2, Table 1). No signiﬁcant loci of activation
were detected in the amygdalas, the anterior temporal polar
region, and the hypothalamus (even for a low height threshold
value of p  0.1, uncorrected). With regard to individual data, the
same pattern was found; that is, right prefrontal activation was
seen in all 10 subjects, whereas no activation was noted in the
amygdala and the hypothalamus, and activation in the anterior
temporal pole was noted in only one subject.
2 of 6 J. Neurosci., 2001, Vol. 21
Beauregard et al. • Neural Correlates of Emotion Regulation
Whole-brain post hoc analysis
When the brain activity associated with the viewing of the emotionally neutral ﬁlm excerpts was subtracted from that associated
with the viewing of the erotic ﬁlm clips in the sexual arousal
condition, signiﬁcant BOLD signal increases were seen in the left
middle occipital gyrus (BA 19), the right superior occipital gyrus
(BA 19), the right inferior temporal gyrus (BA 37), the left
cerebellum, and the superior parietal lobule (BA 7), bilaterally
(Table 2). Moreover, when the brain activity associated with the
viewing of the emotionally neutral ﬁlm excerpts was subtracted
from that associated with the viewing of the erotic ﬁlm clips in the
attempted inhibition condition, signiﬁcant loci of activation were
found in the left middle occipital gyrus (BA 19), the right inferior
and superior occipital gyri (BA 19), the left superior occipital
gyrus (BA 19), the left inferior frontal gyrus (BA 44), and the
superior parietal lobule (BA 7), bilaterally (Table 2).
DISCUSSION
In agreement with the results of a previous study by our group
 , the viewing of erotic ﬁlm excerpts, in the
sexual arousal condition, produced a signiﬁcant activation of the
right amygdala, right anterior temporal pole (BA 38), and hypothalamus. These ﬁndings ﬁt with the various lines of evidence
suggesting that the amygdala plays a pivotal role in the evaluation
of the emotional signiﬁcance of stimuli , that the hypothalamus is a key brain structure
implicated in the neuroendocrine and autonomic expression of
emotion , and that the anterior temporal pole is
involved in the imparting of emotional color to subjective experience . In light of the anatomic projections that
the central nucleus of the amygdala sends to the hypothalamus,
and the basolateral nuclei of the amygdala sends to the temporal
pole , it appears conceivable that in the sexual
arousal condition, the right amygdala, the hypothalamus, and the
Statistical activation maps
are shown for limbic–paralimbic structures deﬁned a priori. Images are coronal sections for the data averaged across
subjects. The right hemisphere of the
brain corresponds to the right side of the
image. In the Sexual Arousal condition,
greater activation during the viewing of
erotic ﬁlm excerpts relative to the viewing of emotionally neutral ﬁlm excerpts
was noted in the right amygdala (A),
right anterior temporal pole (B), and
hypothalamus (C). In the Attempted Inhibition condition, no signiﬁcant loci of
activation were seen in the amygdalas
(D), anterior temporal polar region (E),
and hypothalamus (F).
Table 1. BOLD signal increases in the search volume deﬁned a priori (p < 0.05, corrected)
Talairach coordinates (mm)
Z statistic
Brodmann area
Sexual arousal condition
R amygdala
R anterior temporal pole
Hypothalamus
Attempted inhibition condition
R superior prefrontal gyrus
R anterior cingulate gyrus
Stereotaxic coordinates are derived from the human atlas of Talairach and Tournoux and refer to medial–lateral position (x) relative to medline (positive  right),
anterior–posterior position (y) relative to the anterior commissure (positive  anterior), and superior–inferior position (z) relative to the commissural line (positive 
superior). Designation of Brodmann areas for cortical areas are also based on this atlas. L, Left; R, right.
Beauregard et al. • Neural Correlates of Emotion Regulation
J. Neurosci., 2001, Vol. 21 3 of 6
right anterior temporal pole are functional components of a
neural circuit subserving the processing of the erotic visual stimuli. Within such a network, we surmise that, ﬁrst, the right
amygdala participated in the evaluation of the emotional content
of the complex perceptual information associated with the visual
processing of the erotic ﬁlm excerpts. Second, this brain structure
sent a message to the hypothalamus. Such modulation of the
hypothalamic activity then led to sexual arousal . Third, for this physiological arousal to become
fully conscious, in addition to sending outputs to the hypothalamus, the amygdala sent, in parallel, a message to the right anterior
temporal pole. Such a role for this brain region concurs with
recent work showing that this paralimbic associative cortical area
is correlated with attending to one’s own emotional experience
 .
The results of the attempted inhibition condition revealed that
the volitional inhibitory action produced by the male subjects, to
decrease the intensity of the sexual arousal produced by the erotic
ﬁlm excerpts, was associated with activation peaks in BA 10 of the
right dorsolateral PFC (superior frontal gyrus) and BA 32 of
the right ACC. Contrary to the pattern of brain activity seen in
the sexual arousal condition, in the attempted inhibition condition, no signiﬁcant loci of activation were noted in the amygdalas,
the anterior temporal polar region, and the hypothalamus (even
for a low height threshold value of p  0.1, uncorrected). Furthermore, the analysis of individual data revealed the same pattern, i.e., no signiﬁcant loci of activation was found in the amygdala, the anterior temporal polar region, and the hypothalamus
whenever the right superior frontal gyrus and right anterior
cingulate gyrus were activated. These ﬁndings provide some
support for the hypothesis that the dorsolateral PFC, the amygdala, and the hypothalamus participate in a neural circuit involved in emotional self-regulation . They
are also consistent with the results of a recent functional brain
imaging study showing that a cognitive task, such as choosing
labels that identify the emotional expression of faces, correlated
with simultaneous increased regional cerebral blood ﬂow (rCBF)
in the right prefrontal cortex and decreased rCBF in the amygdalas . In other respects, these results are
consistent with ﬁndings indicating that the dorsolateral PFC is
implicated in metacognitive/executive top-down processes, which
refer to the ability to monitor and control the information processing necessary to produce voluntary action .
These results also accord with the view that, by virtue of its
anatomic connections with brain regions implicated in the modulation of autonomic and endocrine functions, such as the amygdala, hypothalamus, and orbitofrontal PFC, the rostral-ventral
affective subdivision of the ACC is primarily involved in the
Statistical activation maps showing peaks of activation in prefrontal cortical regions deﬁned a priori during the
Attempted Inhibition condition. Images are coronal sections
for the data averaged across subjects. The right hemisphere of
the brain corresponds to the right side of the image. Signiﬁcant loci of activation were noted in the right superior frontal
gyrus (A) and right anterior cingulate gyrus (B).
Table 2. BOLD signal increases in the whole-brain post hoc analysis (p < 0.005, corrected)
Talairach coordinates (mm)
Z statistic
Sexual arousal condition
L middle occipital gyrus
R inferior temporal gyrus
R superior occipital gyrus
R superior parietal lobule
L superior parietal lobule
L cerebellum
Attempted inhibition condition
L middle occipital gyrus
R inferior occipital gyrus
R superior occipital gyrus
L superior parietal lobule
L superior occipital gyrus
R superior parietal lobule
L inferior frontal gyrus
L, Left; R, right.
4 of 6 J. Neurosci., 2001, Vol. 21
Beauregard et al. • Neural Correlates of Emotion Regulation
evaluation of emotional and motivational information and in the
regulation of emotional responses .
The whole-brain post hoc analysis revealed that in addition to
producing activation in the right amygdala, right anterior temporal pole, and hypothalamus, the sexual arousal condition also
induced signiﬁcant activation in the inferotemporal cortex, the
extrastriate visual cortex, the cerebellum, and the superior parietal lobule. Moreover, in addition to producing activation in the
right superior frontal gyrus and the right anterior cingulate gyrus,
the attempted inhibition condition was also associated with activation in the extrastriate visual cortex, the superior parietal
lobule, and the left inferior frontal gyrus.
Clinical neuropsychological data have demonstrated that cerebellar lesions can produce a blunting of effect . In light of these data, and on the basis of the fact
that cerebellar activation has often been noted in functional brain
imaging studies of emotion generated by emotionally laden visual
stimuli, one could argue that the cerebellar activation found here
suggests that the cerebellum is somehow related to the “feeling”
experience associated with sexual arousal. Further studies are
awaited to tackle this intriguing question.
With respect to the inferotemporal cortex, the results of a
recent magnetoencephalography study suggest
that this cortical region is involved in the recognition of the
various facial expressions of emotions. Given these ﬁndings and
the nature of the erotic ﬁlm excerpts used in this study, it seems
plausible that the inferotemporal activation seen here may have
something to do with such a function.
The activation of the extrastriate visual cortex is in keeping
with the results of several functional neuroimaging studies having
shown that, when compared with neutral visual stimuli, emotionally laden visual stimuli elicit increased activation in this brain
area . Assuming that viewing erotic stimuli
automatically leads to increased attentional tapping, the extrastriate cortical activation noted here is consistent with the hypothesis
that attention to visual stimuli can modulate neural activity in the
extrastriate visual cortex . With respect to this
issue, the results of a recent positron emission tomography study
 suggest that the amygdala may exert modulatory effects in extrastriate visual cortex during visual processing
of highly arousing emotional stimuli. Such a neuromodulatory
action could constitute an evolutionary beneﬁcial trait permitting
more efﬁcient attention to stimuli having a strong survival value.
Along the same lines, the activation noted here in the superior
parietal lobule, a brain region implicated in sustained attention to
emotionally neutral stimuli , might derive from
the impact of emotional arousal on attentional mechanisms that
are grounded neurally in this area of the parietal lobe.
The left inferior frontal activation seen in the attempted inhibition condition was localized in a portion of Broca’s area (BA
44). Functional brain imaging techniques have shown that this
cortical region is part of a neural circuit implementing the subvocal rehearsal component of verbal working memory . In the present context, it is possible that the
activation noted in this prefrontal cortical area was related to the
internal speech generated by the subjects during their attempt to
inhibit the sexual arousal associated with the visual processing of
the erotic ﬁlm excerpts.
The normal functioning of the neural network linking the right
dorsolateral PFC, right ACC, right amygdala, right anterior temporal pole, and hypothalamus may constitute a fundamental
psychobiological mechanism through which human beings can
consciously and willfully self-regulate their emotional responses,
using various metacognitive processes. From a phylogenetic perspective, such a circuit may implement one of the most remarkable human faculties that has emerged in the course of human
evolution. At both an individual and a collective level, a defect of
this neural circuitry (or of an analogous network involving a
prefrontal cortical modulation of negative emotional responses
associated with activation in limbic structures) may have disastrous psychological and social consequences. Ontologically, the
present ﬁndings suggest that humans have the capacity to inﬂuence the electrochemical dynamics of their brains, by voluntarily
changing the nature of the mind processes unfolding in the
psychological space.
Last, we acknowledge some of the limitations that characterize
the present study. First, the restriction to one arousal state makes
it difﬁcult to argue for the speciﬁcity, or generality, of the brain
ﬁndings for both the sexual arousal and attempted inhibition
conditions. Second, because there was no experimental condition
in which subjects had to voluntarily increase their arousal state, it
remains possible that the activations seen in the attempted inhibition condition reﬂected an effort to modulate the sexual arousal
induced by the erotic stimuli rather than an actual inhibition of
this arousal.