IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 14, NO. 2, JUNE 1995
An Adaptive Speckle Suppression Filter
for Medical Ultrasonic Imaging
Mustafa Karaman, M. Alper Kutay, and Gozde Bozdagi
Abstract- An adaptive smoothing technique for speckle sup-
pression in medical B-scan ultrasonic imaging is presented. The
technique is based on filtering with appropriately shaped and
sized local kernels. For each image pixel, a filtering kernel, which
fits to the local homogeneous region containing the processed
pixel, is obtained through a local statistics based region growing
technique. Performance of the proposed filter has been tested on
the phantom and tissue images. The results show that the filter
effectively reduces the speckle whie preserving the resolvable
details. The simulation results are presented in a comparative
way with two existing speckle suppression methods.
I. INTRODUCTION
ECAUSE of the coherent nature of phased array ultra-
B sound scanners, constructive and destructive interference
effects of backscattered echoes from unresolvable random
tissue inhomogeneities result in mottled B-scan images [ 11- .
This occurs especially in imaging organs such as liver and kid-
ney whose underlying structures are too small to be resolved
by ultrasound scanners. Speckle is the term used for granular
pattern that appears on B-scans due to the mottling and can be
considered as a kind of multiplicative noise. Speckle degrades
the image quality of B-scans, and hence reduces the ability of
a human observer to discriminate the fine details in diagnostic
examination. It also decreases the efficiency of further image
processing such as edge detection.
Various speckle reduction methods based on incoherent
processing and image postprocessing techniques have been
reported in the literature. Incoherent processing techniques are
based on the averaging of multiple images of the same scan
plane, where the images are obtained by varying transducer
frequency and/or view angle to achieve independent or par-
tially uncorrelated speckle patterns , . These imaging
techniques increase target-detection capability of phased array
scanning at the expense of increased system complexity. On
the other hand, speckle suppression schemes based on image
postprocessing involve nonadaptive or adaptive filtering of the
Manuscript received September 17, 1993; revised January 30, 1995. The
Associate Editor responsible for coordinating the review of this paper and
recommending its publication was R. Martin.
M. Karaman was with the Department of Electrical and Electronics En-
gineering, Bilkent University, Ankara, 06533 Turkey. He is now with the
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science and Bioengi-
neering Program, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2122 USA.
M. A. Kutay is with the Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineer-
ing, Bilkent University, Ankara, 06533 Turkey.
G. Bozdagi was with Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering,
Bilkent University, Ankara, 06533 Turkey. She is now with the Department of
Electrical Engineering, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14627 USA;
e-mail: .
IEEE Log Number 9411370.
B-scan image to smooth out speckle. These techniques do not
require any hardware modification in the image reconstruction
system, and hence have found a growing interest - .
Ultrasound B-scan images have some special features that
must be preserved by the filtering, such as bright large scale
interfaces between organs, structures with dimensions com-
parable to speckle size, and boundaries between two regions
with slightly different gray levels. Therefore, linear nonadap-
tive smoothing techniques used for other image processing
purposes may not be adequate for ultrasound images. Many
of such techniques introduce severe blurring and/or show
unacceptable performance in elimination of speckle. Various
adaptive filtering techniques for different applications, es-
pecially for removal of signal dependent noise, have been
reported in the literature [ 191- . Adaptive filtering schemes
based on image local statistics have been used for speckle
reduction in ultrasonic B-scan imaging , 181, -[131.
Identification of characteristic parameters of speckle statis-
tics is critical for speckle suppression techniques based on
adaptive postfiltering. It has been shown that the envelope
detected echo signal of the fully developed speckle has the
Rayleigh distribution with the mean proportional to the stan-
dard deviation , , , [lo]. Recently, Loupas ef al.
[ 1 11 have shown that nonlinear processing (such as logarithmic
compression) employed on ultrasound echo images affects the
speckle statistics in such a way that the local mean becomes
proportional to the local variance rather than the standard
deviation. This result has been used in adaptation of filter
parameters to smooth out speckle from B-scans , - .
In this study, an adaptive speckle suppression filter (ASSF)
based on smoothing of B-scan images using local statistics
is presented. The filter adaptation is achieved by using ap-
propriately shaped and sized local filtering kernels. Since no
limitation on kernel shape is imposed, each kernel effectively
fits an arbitrarily shaped homogeneous region containing the
processed pixel. Each kernel is obtained through a region
growing which employs image local statistics as the region
growing criteria. Performance of ASSF is tested on both
a tissue-mimicking phantom image and a liver image. The
results are presented in a comparative way with two speckle
suppression methods proposed in [ 1 11, [ 121.
In the next section, the adaptive speckle suppression, includ-
ing the measurements of speckle statistics on the phantom and
tissue images and filtering procedure, are presented. Section I11
covers the simulation results and comparison. Selection of the
filter parameters and computational complexity of the filter
are discussed in Section IV.
02784062/95$04.00 0 1995 IEEE
11. ADAPTIVE
SPECKLE SUPPRESSION
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 14, NO. 2, JUNE 1995
A. The Measurements
Various measurements on a phantom image and a liver
image are performed to examine the speckle statistics. These
measurements are variance/mean versus window size and vari-
ance versus mean. The phantom image (Fig. 4(a)) is a portion
of a phased array B-scan sector image. It is reconstructed
by digital processing of radio frequency data acquired from
a standard AIUM resolution phantom with a conventional
3.3-MHz, @-element linear array. The image has a 60-dB
display dynamic range resulting from logarithmic compression
of envelope detected echo. The pixel resolution of the phantom
image is about 0.2 mm. Further details about the phased array
data and reconstruction of the phantom image can be found
in and , respectively. The liver image (Fig. 9(a))
is obtained using a commercial scanner with a 3.5-MHz
curvilinear array. The display dynamic range of the image
is 50 dB and the pixel resolution is about 0.4 mm.
To choose a proper window size to represent the speckle
statistics, local mean and variance on speckle areas with on
speckle areas with no resolvable details are measured for
different sized square windows. The mean and variance are
computed as
m=-W/2 n=-W/2
(xi-m,j-n - ~ i , j ) ~ (2)
m=-W/2 n=-W/2
where xi,j is the pixel at the location ( i , j ) , and W x W
is the size of the square window. The ratios of variance to
mean for different window sizes are shown in Fig. 1. For
each window size, the variance and mean computations are
carried out at different locations on speckle regions and the
results are averaged. The error bars of the figure represent
one standard deviation of the averaged results. Fig. 1 shows
that the accuracy of estimation of the speckle statistics, as
expected, increases with window size. The asymptotic value
of the variance/mean of speckle is about 2.5 and 2.0 for the
phantom and liver images, respectively. The figure indicates
that the window sizes larger than 9 x 9 can approximate the
speckle statistics for both of the phantom and liver images.
The local variance, a;,j, and local mean, pi,j, at different
locations on speckle regions are measured to test their relation
(Fig. 2). In these measurements, a square window with a
size of 11 x 11 is used. Fig. 2 illustrates that the ratio of
variance to mean is constant and is about 2.5 and 2.0 for
the phantom and liver images, respectively. As a result, the
measurements indicate that the relation between variance and
mean of the speckle on the phantom and liver images is linear
[ 111. Furthermore, the measurements depicted in Fig. 2 fit to
the following signal-dependent noise model [ 111:
x = s + J ; ; n
where x, s, and n represent the observed signal, noise-free
signal, and noise, respectively. This model implies that, on
WINDOW SIZE, WxW (PIXELS)
WINDOW SIZE, WxW (PIXELS)
phantom image and (b) the liver image.
The local statistics computed on different windows for (a) the
homogeneous regions where s can be assumed constant, the
image variance is proportional to the mean.
B. The Filter
The signal-dependent noise model leads to use of smoothing
operators on the homogeneous regions where the signal can
be assumed constant. The local variance to mean ratio of
speckle can be easily measured on the image. Then, using
the measured parameter, it is possible to decide whether the
processed pixel is within a homogeneous region or not. In
general, if the local variance to mean ratio is larger than that
of speckle, then the corresponding pixel can be considered as
a resolvable object. Otherwise, it belongs to a homogeneous
region, and hence is subject to smoothing . The shape
of speckle pattern and average speckle size vary at different
locations of sector images. Therefore, it is highly desirable
to have arbitrarily shaped and sized homogeneous regions for
smoothing. The designed ASSF overcomes these problems in
KARAMAN et ul.: ADAF'TIVE SPECKLE SUPPRESSION FILTER
a=0.001, b=0.01, c=50
a=0.001, M . 0 5 . c=100 1
VARIANCE / MEAN
local statistics, a.
The statistical similarity bound, B(cr), as a function of normalized
this paper (cy0 = 2.5 and cy0 = 2.0 for the phantom and liver
images, respectively). According to the measurements depicted
in Fig. 1, the window size is chosen as 11 x 11 for all statistics
computations in this study if not stated otherwise. As the first
step in ASSF, ai,j for all (i, j ) and cy0 are computed and stored
in a table to be used in the region growing.
2) Region Growing Procedure: The region growing is used
to form groups of pixels satisfying a certain homogeneity crite-
rion , . Depending on the application, the homogeneity
criterion, which is the critical point in region growing, can be
a function of various image parameters, such as gray level,
texture, local statistics, and color similarities. Each parameter
characterizes the homogeneity from a different point of view.
In ASSF, the local statistics, cr,,j, are used as the quan-
... _. .. .
titative measure to obtain a homogeneous region for each
image pixel. A fixed sized square window, which accurately
represents the
statistics, is chosen to compute the
local statistics at each pixel location. In region growing, each
speckle on (a) the phantom image and (b) the liver image.
The linear relation between the local variance and mean of the
speckle suppression. This is achieved through a region growing
procedure which effectively fits the grown region to the
homogeneous area without imposing any shape constraint. The
region growing procedure employs a look-up table consisting
of statistical bounds for different values of local statistics,
instead of using a single hard bound as the growing criteria.
The overall procedure of ASSF can be described in three
main steps: computation of local statistics, region growing,
and application of the smoothing operator.
I ) Computation of Local Statistics: The local statistics is
computed using the mean and variance expressions given in
(1) and (2), respectively. For the sake of simplicity, a single
parameter representing the local variance to mean ratio for a
pixel located at ( i $ j ) is defined as
f f L J - -.
Also, the characteristic value of the local statistics of speckle
is denoted by (YO and will be used accordingly in the rest of
image pixel is taken as a seed point. Then, any pixel with
local statistics close to the seed pixel's local statistics within a
certain bound is included to the region of the seed pixel. This
search is repeated for all pixels which are spatially close to the
seed pixel within a certain distance bound. In other words, to
test whether a pixel (m, n) belongs to the homogeneous region
of a seed pixel (i,j), the following must be satisfied:
These tests are performed for all pixels (e.g., for all m and n)
to obtain the final homogeneous region for the seed pixel (i, j ) .
The connectivity, statistical similarity criterion, and spatial
distance bound, expressed in (5), (6), and (7), respectively, are
used to control the shape and size of the growing region. Test
of the connectivity is easily realized in the region growing by
lEEt TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING. VOL 14, NO 2. JUNE 1995
COLUMN NUMBER
COLUMN NUMBER
COLUMN NUMBER
COLUMN NUMBER
COLUMN NUMBER
Fig. 4. The phantoin iniagc: (a) original and liltered hq (h) HRGMF. (c) AWMF, (d) ASSF-MEAN. and (e) ASSF-MEDIAN.
following the neighboring pixels of the seed pixel andor pixels
already included in the region. The spatial distance bound, Dtl,
is the locality parameter and hence depends on the kernel size
used for computation of the local statistics. In ASSF, the Di,
is chosen in such a way that the total number of pixels in the
grown region does not exceed W 2 . The statistical similarity
bound, p( .), is chosen as a function of (Y,., as
where ( 1 , (1, and c are coefficients that depend on N O and
the desired smoothing level. The coefficient a is a biasing
factor which controls smoothing employed both on speckle
/ l ( f k , . , ) = a + t x - ~ l
KARAMAN PI (11.. ADAPTIVE SPECKLE SUPPRESSION FILTER
by (bl HRGMF, ( c ) AWMF, (dl ASSF-MEAN, and (e) ASSF-MEDIAN.
The magnified portions of the phantom image: (a) original and filtered
and signal, e.g., larger values of a result in higher smoothing
of both speckle and edges. The coefficient 6 is a scaling factor
used for adjusting the magnitude of statistical bound. Larger
NORMALIZED VARIANCE
(a) HRGMF, (b) AWMF, (c) ASSF-MEAN, and (d) ASSF-MEDIAN.
Histogram of the nonnalized variance of the filtered phantom images:
values of b increase smoothing level as far as c allows. The
third coefficient, c, controls the value and the sharpness of the
statistical threshold, and hence directly depends on NO. The
pixel with local statistics below this threshold is smoothed
more and vice versa. Since speckle statistics mainly depend
on the scanner specifications, the coefficients of (8) can be
determined beforehand and stored in a look-up table. For two
different sets of the coefficients, the P ( N ) for the normalized
N is shown in Fig. 3.
The region growing procedure described above results in
a connected, appropriately shaped and sized homogeneous
region for each seed pixel. Note that the grown region is not
necessarily symmetric around the seed pixel. Also note that,
in the limiting case, the grown region can have a unity size
that consists of only the seed pixel.
3) Application of Smoothing Operator: A smoothing oper-
ator (mean or median) is applied on each kernel obtained
through the region growing: The output corresponding to each
seed pixel is the meadmedian of the pixels within the grown
region associated with the seed pixel. After filtering of the
whole image, the neighboring regions with similar intensity
values are merged. Then, the output pixel values corresponding
to the seed pixels of the merged regions are updated by
applying the smoothing operator on the new kernels. The
merging is realized as follows. Consider the grown region of a
seed pixel located at (i.,j). Let this region be labeled by .Zi,j,
denotes the number of pixels in 2 i . j . If N,,j 5 Kb,
then Zi,J is not involved in the merging procedure. Otherwise,
each region Z,,,,, neighboring the region Zi, is merged to the
region Z;,j if the following is satisfied:
Here, ALL and Kh are positive constants and represent the
bounds for the gray level intensity and the number of pixels,
respectively.
COLUMN NUMBER
COLUMN NUMBER
COLUMN NUMBER
COLUMN NUMBER
Fig. 7. Pixel values along row 93 of the original and filtered phantom
images: (a) HRGMF, (b) AWMF, (c) ASSF-MEAN, and (d) ASSF-MEDIAN.
111. SIMULATIONS AND COMPARISON
The performance of ASSF is investigated on the phantom
and tissue images together with two recently reported methods
[ 1 11, [ 121 employing image local statistics in filter adaptation.
The filter proposed in [l 13 is an adaptive weighted median
filter (AWMF) whereas the other reported in is a homo-
geneous region growing mean filter (HRGMF). Each of these
methods is outlined here before presenting the simulations and
comparison.
A. The Methods
1) ASSF: The ASSF with two different smoothing opera-
tors, arithmetic mean and standard median, is considered here.
The overall procedure of ASSF can be outlined as follows:
Prepare the table for the region growing criteria (8).
Compute ai,j for all (z,j) ((l), (2), and (4)).
For all pixels:
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 14. NO. 2. JUNE 1995
COLUMN NUMBER
COLUMN NUMBER
COLUMN NUMBER
Fig. 8. The normalized variance distribution along row 93 of the original
and filtered liver images: (a) HRGMF, (b) AWMF, (c) ASSF-MEAN, and (d)
ASSF-MEDIAN.
--Grow the homogeneous region ((5)-(8)).
smoothing operator in the grown region.
the result.
For all pixels:
the neighboring regions (9).
the outputs by applying smoothing operator
The spatial distance bound Db of (7) is chosen in such a way
that the number of pixels in the grown region does not exceed
11 x 11, which is the window size used for the computations
of cui,j's. The bounds used for the region merging (9) are
= 5 and Kb = 5. Also, the coefficients of (8) are chosen
as a = 0.001, b = 0.01, and c = 50 for the phantom image
and a = 0.001, b = 0.05, and c = 100 for the tissue image.
2) HRGMF: The filtering kernels of HRGMF are obtained
through a split and merge procedure used in region growing
based segmentation. The kernel shape is restricted to be
on the merged regions.
KARAMAN cf d.: ADAF'TIVE SPECKLE SUPPRESSION FILTER
COLUMN NUMBER
COLUMN NUMBER
COLUMN NUMBER
COLUMN NUMBER
COLUMN NUMBER
Fig. 9. The liver image: (a) original and filtered hy (h) HRGMF, (c) AWMF. (d) ASSF-MEAN. and (e) ASSF-MEDIAN
rectangular. The procedure of HRGMF can be outlined as
follows: An initial seed region with size comparable to average
speckle size is chosen. If N, 5 QO, then the initial seed region
is taken as the final region. Otherwise, the initial seed region is
region (one at a time) until (v,
5 NO. Then, the final seed
region is grown by merging the neighboring pixels along a
row/column if as < QO where
contracted by splitting edge rows and columns of the current
-y(.rl. / - p L J ) * .
1 ' 1 J '25 s
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 14. NO. 2, JUNE 1995
.... .... ..
ASSF-MEDIAN
NORMALIZED VARIANCE
(a) HRGMF, (b) AWMF, (c) ASSF-MEAN, and (d) ASSF-MEDIAN.
Histogram of the normalized variance of the filtered liver images:
Here, S represents the merged row/column, z k , ~ are pixels
within S, QS is the number of pixels within S, and ,LL%,~ is
the mean of the current region excluding S. The growing
is continued until as > QO. The standard mean filtering is
applied on the final grown region and the output is assigned
to the seed pixel. In our simulations with HRGMF, the initial
seed region has a size of 7 x 7, and cy0 is 2.5 and 2.0 for the
phantom and tissue images, respectively.
3) AWMF: The weighted median processing in AWMF
is performed on a fixed running window with the weights
adjusted according to the local statistics. For filtering operation
on pixel (z,j), the pixel weights in the window with a size of
W x W are chosen as follows:
where W O is the central weight and g is a scale factor.
The negative weights are set to zero. If a,,J = 0, then
AWMF performs the maximum smoothing and behaves as a
standard median filter with a kernel size of W x W . If cy,,J is
sufficiently large, then it fully preserves the signal value. In our
simulations, the parameters of AWMF are chosen as W = 9
and WO = 99 for filtering of both the phantom and liver images
whereas the value of g is 5 and 7.5 for the phantom and liver
images, respectively.
wm,n = WO - gJ(i - m)2 + ( j - n)2a %>I
B. Simulation Results and Comparison
The performance of each filter outlined in the previous
subsections is evaluated qualitatively on the phantom and liver
images. Fig. 4 shows the original and filtered phantom images
using HRGMF, AWMF, ASSF with mean operator (ASSF-
MEAN), and ASSF with median operator (ASSF-MEDIAN).
The two portions of each image, showing a cyst structure
and distribution of the point reflectors, are magnified and
presented in Fig. 5. For each filtered image, the histogram
ROW NUMBER
ROW NUMBER
ROW NUMBER
ROW NUMBER
Fig. 11. Pixel values along column 205 of the original and filtered liver
images: (a) HRGMF, (b) AWMF, (c) ASSF-MEAN, and (d) ASSF-MEDIAN.
of the normalized local variance is given in Fig. 6, where the
local variance at each pixel is normalized to that of the original
image pixel. Also, pixel values and normalized local variance
along row 93 are given in Figs. 7 and 8, respectively. The
original and filtered liver images are shown in Fig. 9. The
histograms of normalized variances of the filtered images are
given in Fig. 10. Pixel values and local variance along the
column 205 are presented in Figs. 11 and 12, respectively.
Comparison of the filtered images (Figs. 4 and 9) together
with the variance histograms (Figs. 6 and 10) indicates that
each filter effectively smooths speckle regions on the images,
but each filter shows different action to preserve edges and
textural content of resolvable structures. The AWMF preserves
the edges and point targets relatively better than the HRGMF,
where the HRGMF performs partial smoothing in almost all
regions. The ASSF, especially ASSF-MEAN, does not smooth
the edges and preserves the textural content of resolvable
objects. The ASSF-MEDIAN acts as similar to the AWMF
KARAMAN et al.: ADAPTIVE SPECKLE SUPPRESSION FILTER
ROW NUMBER
ROW NUMBER
Fig. 12. The normalized variance distribution along column 205 of the
original and filtered liver images: (a) HRGMF, (b) AWMF, (c) ASSF-MEAN,
and (d) ASSF-MEDIAN.
in smoothing of low contrast lesions. It is illustrated in Fig. 5
that ASSF shows better performance in preserving the point
targets compared to the others. Fig. 5 depicts that ASSF-
MEAN fully preserves the textural content and edges of the
cyst while smoothing the speckle region surrounding the cyst.
The HRGMF and AWMF smooth the inside of the cyst as well
as the surrounding speckle region. Figs. 6 and 10 illustrate
that the number of highly smoothed and preserved pixels of
the ASSF images, indicated by the number of pixels with very
large and very small local variances, respectively, is larger
than that of any other filter. Figs. 7, 8, 11, and 12 illustrate the
action of each filter along a single image line. The normalized
variances corresponding to the output of ASSF along the
regions containing resolvable objects are relatively closer to
unity. In general, the simulation results show that each filter
can effectively suppress speckle and performance of ASSF-
MEAN to preserve the edges, point targets, and content of
low contrast lesions better than that of the other filters.
Iv. DISCUSSION
AND CONCLUSION
An adaptive filter for smoothing speckle from ultrasound B-
scan images is investigated. This filter employs a smoothing
operator (mean or median) on kernels obtained by the local
statistics based region growing. The filter makes use of local
image content to eliminate speckle effectively while preserving
resolvable details. Trade-off between smoothing and signal
preservation is controllable by the look-up table consisting of
statistical similarity bounds for different values of local sta-
tistics. Performance of the proposed filter has been evaluated
and compared to that of two other filters by simulations on the
B-scan phantom and tissue images. In these simulations, the
filter adaptation parameters have been chosen through various
trials to obtain good performance both in smoothing and in
signal preservation. Future studies should quantitate the filter
performance for various filter parameters using test phantoms
containing both high and low contrast details with different
size, contrast level, and spacing , .
Adaptation of ASSF, as well as those of HRGMF and
AWMF, is based on the image local statistics. Since the
adaptation criteria are based on the same ground, it may be
expected that the performances of the filters would be similar.
The better performance of ASSF in preserving resolvable
details, however, is the result of different schemes employed
in adaptation. In ASSF, adaptation of kernel shape as well
as size results in effective fitting of the smoothing window to
arbitrarily shaped and sized homogeneous regions. In addition,
the look-up table, consisting of statistical similarity bounds
used for the region growing, offers more efficient criteria to
obtain homogeneous regions, compared to the case of using a
tight bound such as (YO employed in HRGMF.
The window size used for computations of local statistics is
chosen as 11 x 11 by means of the measurements presented in
Fig. 1. The window size depends on the average speckle size
determined mainly by the scanner specifications. Therefore,
the window size used in this study may not be suitable for
other ultrasound scanners, and hence it must be measured prior
to the filtering. The window size must be large enough for
accurate measurement of local statistics. On the other hand,
it must be kept sufficiently small for accurate detection of
resolvable structures.
The characteristic value of fully developed speckle statistics,
CYO, is a critical factor in forming the look-up table of p( .) used
for the region growing. Generally, pixels with ai,j < (YO are
treated within the homogeneous region, and hence p(.) can
be sufficiently large to achieve a desired smoothing level. On
the other hand, for signal preservation, p(.) must be small
for those pixels with ai,j < (YO that correspond to resolvable
details. Since the speckle statistics depend on the scanner
specifications, for different scanners, the coefficients used
for forming the look-up table of p( .) must be appropriately
determined through various trials.
Smoothing using arbitrarily shaped and sized kernels can
produce some high-frequency artifacts on the output image.
The region merging procedure in ASSF is employed to avoid
such artifacts. The similarity of mean intensities of the neigh-
boring regions and the their sizes are used as the merging
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 14, NO. 2, JUNE 1995
criteria that are represented by A p and Kb, respectively, in
(9). Ap must be large enough to prevent the high-frequency
artifacts and, on the other hand, it must be small enough to
avoid blurring. Since the larger values of Kb can result in
merging of regions corresponding to the resolvable details, it
must be kept sufficiently small. These parameters also depend
on the imaging system, and hence must be properly chosen for
different ultrasound scanners. Also, speckle statistics may be
modified by signal processing employed in some commercial
scanners resulting in a nonlinear relation between speckle
variance and mean . Such effects must be compensated
prior to speckle suppression with ASSF as well as with
the methods employing filter adaptation based on the linear
relation between speckle variance and mean . The optimal
selection of the filter parameters and compensation of signal
processing effects independent to the scanner are the key to
clinical application of the ASSF presented in this paper. Future
studies should focus on this issue.
Computational complexity of ASSF is comparable to that of
HRGMF , since both of them involve similar processing,
whereas AWMF [ll] requires only computation of local
statistics and weighted median filtering and is computationally
more efficient than ASSF. The proposed filter, ASSF, is an
image postprocessing technique and is designed for off-line
applications. It can, however, be mapped on a special purpose
hardware for real-time applications.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Prof. M. O’Donnell of
University of Michigan for providing the phantom and tissue
image data and A. I r a q for cooperation in implementing the