Abnormal Event Detection in Videos
using Spatiotemporal Autoencoder
Yong Shean Chong
Yong Haur Tay
 
 
Lee Kong Chian Faculty of Engineering Science,
Universiti Tunku Abdul Rahman, 43000 Kajang, Malaysia.
January 9, 2017
We present an eﬃcient method for detecting anomalies in videos. Recent applications of convolutional neural networks have shown promises of
convolutional layers for object detection and recognition, especially in images. However, convolutional neural networks are supervised and require
labels as learning signals. We propose a spatiotemporal architecture for
anomaly detection in videos including crowded scenes. Our architecture
includes two main components, one for spatial feature representation, and
one for learning the temporal evolution of the spatial features. Experimental results on Avenue, Subway and UCSD benchmarks conﬁrm that
the detection accuracy of our method is comparable to state-of-the-art
methods at a considerable speed of up to 140 fps.
Introduction
With the rapid growth of video data, there is an increasing need not only for
recognition of objects and their behaviour, but in particular for detecting the
rare, interesting occurrences of unusual objects or suspicious behaviour in the
large body of ordinary data. Finding such abnormalities in videos is crucial for
applications ranging from automatic quality control to visual surveillance.
Meaningful events that are of interest in long video sequences, such as surveillance footage, often have an extremely low probability of occurring. As such,
manually detecting such events, or anomalies, is a very meticulous job that often requires more manpower than is generally available. This has prompted the
need for automated detection and segmentation of sequences of interest. However, present technology requires an enormous amount of conﬁguration eﬀorts
on each video stream prior to the deployment of the video analysis process, even
with that, those events are based on some predeﬁned heuristics, which makes
the detection model diﬃcult to generalize to diﬀerent surveillance scenes.
Video data is challenging to represent and model due to its high dimensionality, noise, and a huge variety of events and interactions. Anomalies are also
highly contextual, for example, running in a restaurant would be an anomaly,
 
but running at a park would be normal. Moreover, the deﬁnition of anomaly can
be ambiguous and often vaguely deﬁned. A person may think walking around
on a subway platform is normal, but some may think it should be ﬂagged as an
anomaly since it could be suspicious. These challenges have made it diﬃcult for
machine learning methods to identify video patterns that produce anomalies in
real-world applications.
There are many successful cases in the related ﬁeld of action recognition
 . However, these methods only applicable to labelled video footages
where events of interest are clearly deﬁned and does not involve highly occluded
scenes, such as crowded scenes. Furthermore, the cost of labelling every type of
event is extremely high. Even so, it is not guaranteed to cover every past and
future events. The recorded video footage is likely not long enough to capture all
types of activities, especially abnormal activities which rarely or never occurred.
Recent eﬀort on detecting anomalies by treating the task as a binary classiﬁcation problem (normal and abnormal) proved it being eﬀective and
accurate, but the practicality of such method is limited since footages of abnormal events are diﬃcult to obtain due to its rarity. Therefore, many researchers
have turned to models that can be trained using little to no supervision, including spatiotemporal features , dictionary learning and autoencoders
 . Unlike supervised methods, these methods only require unlabelled video
footages which contain little or no abnormal event, which are easy to obtain in
real-world applications. A description of these methodologies and their limitations are discussed in the next section.
This paper presents a novel framework to represent video data by a set
of general features, which are inferred automatically from a long video footage
through a deep learning approach. Speciﬁcally, a deep neural network composed
of a stack of convolutional autoencoders was used to process video frames in
an unsupervised manner that captured spatial structures in the data, which,
grouped together, compose the video representation. Then, this representation
is fed into a stack of convolutional temporal autoencoders to learn the regular
temporal patterns.
Our proposed method is domain free (i.e., not related to any speciﬁc task, no
domain expert required), does not require any additional human eﬀort, and can
be easily applied to diﬀerent scenes. To prove the eﬀectiveness of the proposed
method we apply the method to real-world datasets and show that our method
consistently outperforms similar methods while maintaining a short running
Our Contributions
The main characteristics of our approach and also the contributions of this
research are as follows:
• We wish to reduce the labor-intensive eﬀort in feature engineering that
results in a representation of the data that can support eﬀective machine
learning. This can be done by replacing low-level handcrafted features
with learned hierarchical features. With the help of autoencoders, we are
able to ﬁnd representative features by learning from data instead of forming suitable features based on our knowledge.
• We replace traditional sparse coding methods with autoencoders. Unlike
existing methods, there is no separation between extracting feature representation of videos and learning a model of features. In addition, by
having multiple layers of hidden units in autoencoder, hierarchical feature
learning can be achieved.
Related Work
Most of these abnormal instances are beforehand unknown, as this would require
predicting all the ways something could happen out of the norm. It is therefore
simply impossible to learn a model for all that is abnormal or irregular. But
how can we ﬁnd an anomaly without what to look for?
Since it is easier to get video data where the scene is normal in contrast
to obtaining what is abnormal, we could focus on a setting where the training
data contains only normal visual patterns.
A popular approach adopted by
researchers in this area is to ﬁrst learn the normal patterns from the training
videos, then anomalies are detected as events deviated from the normal patterns
 . The majority of the work on anomaly detection relies on the
extraction of local features from videos, that are then used to train a normalcy
Trajectories have long been popular in video analysis and anomaly detection . A common characteristic of trajectory-based approaches is
the deviation of nominal classes of object trajectories in a training phase, and
the comparison of new test trajectories against the nominal classes in an evaluation phase. A statistically signiﬁcant deviation from all classes indicates an
anomaly. However, the accuracy of trajectory analysis relies heavily on tracking,
which precise tracking still remains a signiﬁcant challenge in computer vision,
particularly in complex situations. Tracking-based approaches are suitable for
scenes with few objects but are impractical for detecting abnormal patterns in
a crowded or complex scene.
Non-tracking approaches that focus on spatiotemporal anomalies in videos
also exist. These rely mainly on extracting and analyzing local low-level visual
features, such as the histogram of oriented gradients , the histogram of
oriented ﬂows and optical ﬂow , by employing spatiotemporal video
volumes (dense sampling or interest point selection) . These local features
are then grouped in clusters, i.e., bags of visual words (BOV), according to
similarity metrics. Their popularity is due to their low computational cost, as
well as their ability to focus on abnormal behaviour, even in extremely crowded
scenes .
Another similar technique is sparse reconstruction .
fundamental underlying assumption of these methods is that any new feature
representation of a normal/anomalous event can be approximately modeled as
a (sparse) linear combination of feature representations (of previously observed
events) in a trained dictionary. This assumes that all previously observed events
are normal events.
However, since classical BOV approaches group similar volumes (summarize), they destroy all compositional information in the process of grouping
visual words. It is also required to pre-determine the number of clusters, which
can only be found through trial-and-error during testing time.
In addition,
codebook models require searching over a large space even during the time
of testing, making it impractical for real-time anomaly detection.
The success of deep learning methods in various applications consequently
caused the rise of such methods in anomaly detection. The term deep learning refers to learning a hierarchical set of features through multiple layers of
hidden nodes in an artiﬁcial neural network. Unlike previously stated methods, there is no need to deﬁne a speciﬁc set of features to extract from the
dataset – deep learning methods learn the useful features directly from the
data with minimal preprocessing. Speciﬁcally, convolutional neural networks
(ConvNet) have proved its eﬀectiveness in a wide range of applications such as
object recognition , person detection , and action recognition .
ConvNet consists of a stack of convolutional layers with a fully-connected layer
and a softmax classiﬁer, and convolutional autoencoder is essentially a ConvNet with its fully-connected layer and classiﬁer replaced by a mirrored stack of
convolutional layers. The authors of applied a 3D ConvNet on classifying
anomalies, whereas used an end-to-end convolutional autoencoder to detect
anomalies in surveillance videos. Their reported result proves the usefulness of
learned representation on videos through a stack of convolutional layers. On the
other hand, long short term memory (LSTM) model is well-known for learning
temporal patterns and predicting time series data. has recently proposed to
apply convolutional LSTMs for learning the regular temporal patterns in videos
and his ﬁndings show great promise of what deep neural network can learn.
Despite its simplicity, some limitations remain in these recently proposed
methods. Though 3D ConvNet performed excellently in learning discriminative features between the anomalies and the normal events, it is impractical
to apply in real-world scenarios due to the absence of video segments containing abnormal events. Meanwhile, in the convolutional autoencoder proposed
by , convolution and pooling operations are performed only spatially, even
though the proposed network takes multiple frames as input, because of the
2D convolutions, after the ﬁrst convolution layer, temporal information is collapsed completely . Besides, convolutional LSTM layers applied by are
memory-intensive – the training will need to be executed on very small minibatches, which results in slow training and testing time.
Methodology
The method described here is based on the principle that when an abnormal
event occurs, the most recent frames of video will be signiﬁcantly diﬀerent than
the older frames. Inspired by , we train an end-to-end model that consists of a
spatial feature extractor and a temporal encoder-decoder which together learns
the temporal patterns of the input volume of frames. The model is trained with
video volumes consists of only normal scenes, with the objective to minimize
the reconstruction error between the input video volume and the output video
volume reconstructed by the learned model. After the model is properly trained,
normal video volume is expected to have low reconstruction error, whereas video
volume consisting of abnormal scenes is expected to have high reconstruction
error. By thresholding on the error produced by each testing input volumes,
our system will be able to detect when an abnormal event occurs.
Our approach consists of three main stages:
Preprocessing
The task of this stage is to convert raw data to the aligned and acceptable
input for the model. Each frame is extracted from the raw videos and resized to
227 × 227. To ensure that the input images are all on the same scale, the pixel
values are scaled between 0 and 1 and subtracted every frame from its global
mean image for normalization. The mean image is calculated by averaging the
pixel values at each location of every frame in the training dataset. After that,
the images are converted to grayscale to reduce dimensionality. The processed
images are then normalized to have zero mean and unit variance.
The input to the model is video volumes, where each volume consists of 10
consecutive frames with various skipping strides. As the number of parameters
in this model is large, large amount of training data is needed. Following s
practice, we perform data augmentation in the temporal dimension to increase
the size of the training dataset. To generate these volumes, we concatenate
frames with stride-1, stride-2, and stride-3. For example, the ﬁrst stride-1 sequence is made up of frame {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10}, whereas the ﬁrst
stride-2 sequence contains frame number {1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 17, 19}, and
stride-3 sequence would contain frame number {1, 4, 7, 10, 13, 16, 19, 22, 25,
28}. Now the input is ready for model training.
Feature Learning
We propose a convolutional spatiotemporal autoencoder to learn the regular
patterns in the training videos. Our proposed architecture consists of two parts
— spatial autoencoder for learning spatial structures of each video frame, and
temporal encoder-decoder for learning temporal patterns of the encoded spatial
structures. As illustrated in Figure 1 and 2, the spatial encoder and decoder
have two convolutional and deconvolutional layers respectively, while the temporal encoder is a three-layer convolutional long short term memory (LSTM)
model. Convolutional layers are well-known for its superb performance in object recognition, while LSTM model is widely used for sequence learning and
time-series modelling and has proved its performance in applications such as
speech translation and handwriting recognition.
Autoencoder
Autoencoders, as the name suggests, consist of two stages: encoding and decoding. It was ﬁrst used to reduce dimensionality by setting the number of
encoder output units less than the input. The model is usually trained using
back-propagation in an unsupervised manner, by minimizing the reconstruction
error of the decoding results from the original inputs. With the activation function chosen to be nonlinear, an autoencoder can extract more useful features
than some common linear transformation methods such as PCA.
Spatial Convolution
The primary purpose of convolution in case of a convolutional network is to
extract features from the input image. Convolution preserves the spatial relationship between pixels by learning image features using small squares of input
data. Mathematically, convolution operation performs dot products between the
Figure 1: Our proposed network architecture. It takes a sequence of length T as
input, and output a reconstruction of the input sequence. The numbers at the
rightmost denote the output size of each layer. The spatial encoder takes one
frame at a time as input, after which T = 10 frames have been processed, the
encoded features of 10 frames are concatenated and fed into temporal encoder
for motion encoding. The decoders mirror the encoders to reconstruct the video
Figure 2: The zoomed-in architecture at time t, where t is the input vector at
this time step. The temporal encoder-decoder model has 3 convolutional LSTM
(ConvLSTM) layers.
ﬁlters and local regions of the input. Suppose that we have some n × n square
input layer which is followed by the convolutional layer. If we use an m × m
ﬁlter W, the convolutional layer output will be of size (n−m+1)×(n−m+1).
A convolutional network learns the values of these ﬁlters on its own during
the training process, although we still need to specify parameters such as the
number of ﬁlters, ﬁlter size, the number of layers before training. With more
number of ﬁlters we have, more image features get extracted and the better
the network becomes at recognizing patterns in unseen images. However, more
ﬁlters would add to computational time and exhaust memory faster, so we need
to ﬁnd balance by not setting the number of ﬁlters too large.
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)
In a traditional feedforward neural network, we assume that all inputs (and
outputs) are independent of each other. However, learning temporal dependencies between inputs are important in tasks involving sequences, for example, a
word predictor model should be able to derive information from the past inputs.
RNN works just like a feedforward network, except that the values of its output
vector are inﬂuenced not only by the input vector but also on the entire history
of inputs. In theory, RNNs can make use of information in arbitrarily long sequences, but in practice, they are limited to looking back only a few steps due
to vanishing gradients.
Long Short Term Memory (LSTM)
To overcome this problem, a variant of RNN is introduced: long short term
memory (LSTM) model which incorporates a recurrent gate called forget gate.
With the new structure, LSTMs prevent backpropagated errors from vanishing
or exploding, thus can work on long sequences and they can be stacked together
to capture higher level information. The formulation of a typical LSTM unit is
summarized with Figure 3 and equations (1) through (6).
ft = σ(Wf ⊗[ht−1, xt] + bf)
it = σ(Wi ⊗[ht−1, xt] + bi)
ˆCt = tanh(WC ⊗[ht−1, xt] + bC)
Ct = ft ⊗Ct−1 + it ⊗ˆCt
ot = σ(Wo ⊗[ht−1, xt] + bo)
ht = ot ⊗tanh(Ct)
Equation (1) represents the forget layer, (2) and (3) are where new information is added, (4) combines old and new information, whereas (5) and (6)
output what has been learned so far to the LSTM unit at the next timestep.
The variable xt denotes the input vector, ht denotes the hidden state, and Ct
denotes the cell state at time t. W are the trainable weight matrices, b are the
bias vectors, and the symbol ⊗denotes the Hadamard product.
Figure 3: The structure of a typical LSTM unit. The blue line represents an
optional peephole structure, which allows the internal state to look back (peep)
at the previous cell state Ct−1 for a better decision. Best viewed in colour.
Convolutional LSTM
A variant of the LSTM architecture, namely Convolutional Long Short-term
Memory (ConvLSTM) model was introduced by Shi et al.
in and has
been recently utilized by Patraucean et al. in for video frame prediction.
Compared to the usual fully connected LSTM (FC-LSTM), ConvLSTM has its
matrix operations replaced with convolutions. By using convolution for both
input-to-hidden and hidden-to-hidden connections, ConvLSTM requires fewer
weights and yield better spatial feature maps. The formulation of the ConvL-
STM unit can be summarized with (7) through (12).
ft = σ(Wf ∗[ht−1, xt, Ct−1] + bf)
it = σ(Wi ∗[ht−1, xt, Ct−1] + bi)
ˆCt = tanh(WC ∗[ht−1, xt] + bC)
Ct = ft ⊗Ct−1 + it ⊗ˆCt
ot = σ(Wo ∗[ht−1, xt, Ct−1] + bo)
ht = ot ⊗tanh(Ct)
While the equations are similar in nature to (1) through (6), the input
is fed in as images, while the set of weights for every connection is replaced
by convolutional ﬁlters (the symbol ∗denotes a convolution operation). This
allows ConvLSTM work better with images than the FC-LSTM due to its ability
to propagate spatial characteristics temporally through each ConvLSTM state.
Note that this convolutional variant also adds an optional ’peephole’ connections
to allow the unit to derive past information better.
Regularity Score
Once the model is trained, we can evaluate our models performance by feeding
in testing data and check whether it is capable of detecting abnormal events
while keeping false alarm rate low. To better compare with , we used the
same formula to calculate the regularity score for all frames, the only diﬀerence
being the learned model is of a diﬀerent kind. The reconstruction error of all
pixel values I in frame t of the video sequence is taken as the Euclidean distance
between the input frame and the reconstructed frame:
e(t) = ||x(t) −fW (x(t))||2
where fW is the learned weights by the spatiotemporal model.
compute the abnormality score sa(t) by scaling between 0 and 1. Subsequently,
regularity score sr(t) can be simply derived by subtracting abnormality score
sa(t) = e(t) −e(t)min
sr(t) = 1 −sa(t)
Anomaly Detection
Thresholding
It is straightforward to determine whether a video frame is normal or anomalous.
The reconstruction error of each frame determines whether the frame is classiﬁed
as anomalous. The threshold determines how sensitive we wish the detection
system to behave — for example, setting a low threshold makes the system
become sensitive to the happenings in the scene, where more alarms would
be triggered.
We obtain the true positive and false positive rate by setting
at diﬀerent error threshold in order to calculate the area under the receiver
operating characteristic (ROC) curve (AUC). The equal error rate (EER) is
obtained when false positive rate equals to the false negative rate.
Event count
Following the practice in , to reduce the noisy and unmeaningful minima
in the regularity score, we applied Persistence1D algorithm to group local
minima with a ﬁxed temporal window of 50 frames. We assume local minima
within 50 frames belong to the same abnormal event. This is a reasonable length
of the temporal window as an abnormal event should be at least 2-3 seconds
long to be meaningful (videos are captured at 24-25 fps).
Experiments
We train our model on ﬁve most commonly used benchmarking datasets: Avenue , UCSD Ped1 and Ped2 , Subway entrance and exit datasets .
All videos are taken from a ﬁxed position for each dataset. All training videos
contain only normal events. Testing videos have both normal and abnormal
In Avenue dataset, there are total 16 training and 21 testing video clips.
Each clips duration vary between less than a minute to two minutes long. The
normal scenes consist of people walking between staircase and subway entrance,
whereas the abnormal events are people running, walking in opposite direction,
loitering and etc. The challenges of this dataset include camera shakes and a
few outliers in the training data. Also, some normal pattern seldom appears in
the training data.
UCSD Ped1 dataset has 34 training and 36 testing video clips, where each
clip contains 200 frames. The videos consist of groups of people walking towards
and away from the camera. UCSD Ped2 dataset has 16 training and 12 testing
video clips, where the number of frames of each clip varies. The videos consist of
walking pedestrians parallel to the camera plane. Anomalies of the two datasets
include bikers, skaters, carts, wheelchairs and people walking in the grass area.
Subway entrance dataset is 1 hour 36 minutes long with 66 unusual events
of ﬁve diﬀerent types: walking in the wrong direction (WD), no payment (NP),
loitering (LT), irregular interactions between people (II), and miscellaneous (e.g.
sudden stop, running fast). First 20 minutes of the video is used for training.
Subway exit dataset is 43 minutes long with 19 unusual events of three
types: walking in the wrong direction (WD), loitering (LT), and miscellaneous
(e.g. sudden stop, looking around, a janitor cleaning the wall, gets oﬀthe train
and gets on the train again quickly. First 5 minutes of the video is used for
Model Parameters
We train the model by minimizing the reconstruction error of the input volume.
We use Adam optimizer to allow it taking the role of setting the learning rate
automatically based on the models weight update history. We use mini-batches
of size 64 and each training volume is trained for a maximum of 50 epochs or
until the reconstruction loss of validation data stop decreasing after 10 consecutive epochs. Hyperbolic tangent is chosen as the activation function of spatial
encoder and decoder. To ensure the symmetry of the encoding and decoding
function, we did not use rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU) despite its regularization
ability because activated values from ReLU have no upper bound.
Results and Analysis
Quantitative Analysis: ROC and Anomalous Event Count
Table 1 shows the frame-level AUC and EER of our and of other methods on all
ﬁve datasets. We outperform all other considered methods in respect to framelevel EER. We also provide the event count comparison for Avenue dataset and
Table 1: Comparison of area under ROC curve (AUC) and Equal Error Rate
(EER) of diﬀerent methods.
Higher AUC and lower EER are better.
papers did not publish their AUC/EER for avenue, subway entrance and exit
AUC/EER (%)
MPPCA 
HOFME 
ConvAE 
Table 2: Anomalous event and false alarm count detected by diﬀerent methods.
GT denotes groundtruth values of event count.
Anomalous Event Detected / False Alarm
smaller set
Subway Exit
Sparse combination
12/1 (smaller set)
Space-time MRF 
Online 
ConvAE 
the entrance and exit scenes in the Subway dataset in Table 2. For the entrance
scenes, we are better than since we detect the same number of anomalies
with less false alarms. For the exit scenes, we detected more abnormal events
compared to but at the expense of higher false alarm rate.
The event count breakdown according to type of event is presented in Table 3,
4 and 5 for Avenue dataset, Subway entrance and exit datasets respectively. All
throwing, loitering (LT) and irregular interaction (II) events are well captured
by our proposed system. These are strong abnormalities that are signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent from what was captured in the normal scenes. However, our system
does have diﬃculties in detecting certain types of event. Missed detection of
running and walking in opposite direction events are due to (1) the crowded
activities where multiple foreground events take place; and (2) the object of
interest is far away from the camera. Meanwhile, in Subway entrance and exit
scenes, some wrong direction events are missed. On the other hand, some no
payment (NP) events in Subway entrance scene are diﬃcult to detect due to
their similar motion compared to others walking through the barrier.
We also present a run-time analysis on our proposed abnormal event detec-
Table 3: Anomalous event and false alarm count detected by diﬀerent methods
on various event type in Avenue dataset.
Groundtruth
Table 4: Anomalous event and false alarm count detected by diﬀerent methods
on various event type in Subway Entrance dataset. WD: wrong direction; NP:
no payment; LT: loitering; II: irregular interaction; Misc.: miscellaneous.
Groundtruth
Table 5: Anomalous event and false alarm count detected by diﬀerent methods on various event type in Subway Exit dataset. WD: wrong direction; LT:
loitering; Misc.: miscellaneous.
Groundtruth
Table 6: Details of run-time during testing (second/frame).
Time (in sec)
Preprocessing
Representation
Classifying
0.2027 (∼5fps)
Figure 4: Regularity score of video #5 (top) and #15 (bottom) from the Avenue
tion system, on CPU (Intel Xeon E5-2620) and GPU (NVIDIA Maxwell Titan
X) respectively, in Table 6. The total time taken is well less than a quarter
second per frame for both CPU and GPU conﬁguration. Due to computational
intensive multiplication operations when feeding the input through the convolutional autoencoders, it is recommended to run on GPU for a better speed of
nearly 30 times faster than CPU.
Qualitative Analysis: Visualising Frame Regularity
Figure 4, 5, and 6 illustrate the output of the proposed system on samples of
the Avenue dataset, Subway entrance and exit scenes respectively; our method
detects anomalies correctly in these cases even in crowded scenes.
Almost all anomalies produce strong downward spikes which indicate a low
regularity score, including a diﬃcult-to-detect skateboarding activity as illus-
Figure 5: Regularity score of frames 115000-120000 from the Subway Entrance
Figure 6: Regularity score of frames 22500-37500 from the Subway Entrance
Figure 7: Regularity score of video #1, #8, #24 and #32 (from top to bottom)
from UCSD Ped1 dataset.
Figure 8: Regularity score of video #2, #4, #5 and #7 (from top to bottom)
from UCSD Ped2 dataset.
Figure 9: Comparing our method with ConvAE on Avenue dataset video #7
(top) and #8 (bottom). Best viewed in colour.
Figure 10: Comparing our method with ConvAE on Subway Exit video
frames 10000-22500. Best viewed in colour.
trated in Figure 7.
Comparing Our Method with 2D Convolutional Autoencoder
From Figure 9 and 10, it is easy to see that our method has detected more
abnormal events with fewer false alarms compared to . As observed in Figure
11, our method is able to produce higher regularity score during normal activities
and lower scores when there are abnormalities.
Figure 11: Comparing our method with ConvAE on Subway Entrance video
frames 120000-144000. Best viewed in colour.
Conclusion
In this research, we have successfully applied deep learning to the challenging video anomaly detection problem. We formulate anomaly detection as a
spatiotemporal sequence outlier detection problem and applied a combination
of spatial feature extractor and temporal sequencer ConvLSTM to tackle the
problem. The ConvLSTM layer not only preserves the advantages of FC-LSTM
but is also suitable for spatiotemporal data due to its inherent convolutional
structure. By incorporating convolutional feature extractor in both spatial and
temporal space into the encoding-decoding structure, we build an end-to-end
trainable model for video anomaly detection. The advantage of our model is
that it is semi-supervised – the only ingredient required is a long video segment
containing only normal events in a ﬁxed view. Despite the models ability to
detect abnormal events and its robustness to noise, depending on the activity
complexity in the scene, it may produce more false alarms compared to other
methods. For future work, we will investigate how to improve the result of video
anomaly detection by active learning – having human feedback to update the
learned model for better detection and reduced false alarms. One idea is to
add a supervised module to the current system, which the supervised module
works only on the video segments ﬁltered by our proposed method, then train
a discriminative model to classify anomalies when enough video data has been