High-for-Low and Low-for-High:
Efﬁcient Boundary Detection from Deep Object Features
and its Applications to High-Level Vision
Gedas Bertasius
University of Pennsylvania
 
Jianbo Shi
University of Pennsylvania
 
Lorenzo Torresani
Dartmouth College
 
Most of the current boundary detection systems rely exclusively on low-level features, such as color and texture.
However, perception studies suggest that humans employ
object-level reasoning when judging if a particular pixel
is a boundary. Inspired by this observation, in this work
we show how to predict boundaries by exploiting objectlevel features from a pretrained object-classiﬁcation network. Our method can be viewed as a High-for-Low approach where high-level object features inform the low-level
boundary detection process. Our model achieves state-ofthe-art performance on an established boundary detection
benchmark and it is efﬁcient to run.
Additionally, we show that due to the semantic nature of
our boundaries we can use them to aid a number of highlevel vision tasks. We demonstrate that by using our boundaries we improve the performance of state-of-the-art methods on the problems of semantic boundary labeling, semantic segmentation and object proposal generation. We can
view this process as a Low-for-High scheme, where lowlevel boundaries aid high-level vision tasks.
Thus, our contributions include a boundary detection
system that is accurate, efﬁcient, generalizes well to multiple datasets, and is also shown to improve existing stateof-the-art high-level vision methods on three distinct tasks.
1. Introduction
In the vision community, boundary detection has always
been considered a low-level problem. However, psychological studies suggest that when a human observer perceives
boundaries, object level reasoning is used . Despite these ﬁndings, most of the boundary detection methods rely exclusively on low-level color and gradient features. In this work, we present a method that uses objectlevel features to detect boundaries. We argue that using
object-level information to predict boundaries is more sim-
Low-Level Task
High-Level Tasks
Table 1: Summary of results achieved by our proposed
method (HFL) and state-of-the-art methods (SotA). We provide results on four vision tasks: Boundary Detection (BD),
Semantic Boundary Labeling (SBL), Semantic Segmentation (SS), and Object Proposal (OP). The evaluation metrics
include ODS F-score for BD task, max F-score (MF) and
average precision (AP) for SBL task, per image intersection over union (PI-IOU) for SS task, and max recall (MR)
for OP task. Our method produces better results in each of
these tasks according to these metrics.
ilar to how humans reason. Our boundary detection scheme
can be viewed as a High-for-Low approach where we use
high-level object features as cues for a low-level boundary
detection process. Throughout the rest of the paper, we refer to our proposed boundaries as High-for-Low boundaries
We present an efﬁcient deep network that uses objectlevel information to predict the boundaries. Our proposed
architecture reuses features from the sixteen convolutional
layers of the network of Simonyan et al. , which we
refer to as VGG net. The VGG net has been trained for
object classiﬁcation, and therefore, reusing its features allows our method to utilize high-level object information to
predict HFL boundaries. In the experimental section, we
demonstrate that using object-level features produces semantically meaningful boundaries and also achieves above
state-of-the-art boundary detection accuracy.
Additionally, we demonstrate that we can successfully
apply our HFL boundaries to a number of high-level vision
tasks. We show that by using HFL boundaries we improve
the results of three existing state-of-the-art methods on the
tasks of semantic boundary labeling, semantic segmenta-
 
tion and object proposal generation. Therefore, using HFL
boundaries to boost the results in high level vision tasks
can be viewed as a Low-for-High scheme, where boundaries
serve as low-level cues to aid high-level vision tasks.
We present the summarized results for the boundary detection and the three mentioned high-level vision tasks in
Table 1. Speciﬁcally, we compare our proposed method and
an appropriate state-of-the-art method for that task. As the
results indicate, we achieve better results in each of the tasks
for each presented evaluation metric. We present more detailed results for each of these tasks in the later sections.
In summary, our contributions are as follows. First, we
show that using object-level features for boundary detection produces perceptually informative boundaries that outperform prior state-of-the-art boundary detection methods.
Second, we demonstrate that we can use HFL boundaries
to enhance the performance on the high-level vision tasks
of semantic boundary labeling, semantic segmentation and
object proposal. Finally, our method can detect boundaries
in near-real time. Thus, we present a boundary detection
system that is accurate, efﬁcient, and is also applicable to
high level vision tasks.
2. Related Work
Most of the contour detection methods predict boundaries based purely on color, text, or other low-level features.
We can divide these methods into three broad categories:
spectral methods, supervised discriminative methods and
deep learning based methods.
Spectral methods formulate contour detection problem
as an eigenvalue problem. The solution to this problem is
then used to reason about the boundaries. The most successful approaches in this genre are the MCG detector , gPb
detector , PMI detector , and Normalized Cuts .
Some of the notable discriminative boundary detection
methods include sketch tokens (ST) , structured edges
(SE) and sparse code gradients (SCG) . While SCG
use supervised SVM learning , the latter two methods
rely on a random forest classiﬁer and models boundary detection as a classiﬁcation task.
Recently there have been attempts to apply deep learning
to the task of boundary detection. SCT is a sparse coding approach that reconstructs an image using a learned dictionary and then detect boundaries. Both N 4 ﬁelds and
DeepNet approaches use Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) to predict edges. N 4 ﬁelds rely on dictionary learning and the use of the Nearest Neighbor algorithm
within a CNN framework while DeepNet uses a traditional
CNN architecture to predict contours.
The most similar to our approach is DeepEdge ,
which uses a multi-scale bifurcated network to perform contour detection using object-level features.
However, we
show that our method achieves better results even without
Input Image
5504 Convolutional
Feature Maps
5504-Dimensional
Feature Vectors
Boundaries
Feature Interpolation & Concatenation
1100x1100x64
- Candidate Contour Points
Shared Weights for all
Candidate Points
Figure 1: An illustration of our architecture (best viewed in
color). First we extract a set of candidate contour points.
Then we upsample the image and feed it through 16 convolutional layers pretrained for object classiﬁcation. For each
candidate point, we ﬁnd its correspondence in each of the
feature maps and perform feature interpolation. This yields
a 5504-dimensional feature vector for each candidate point.
We feed each of these vectors to two fully connected layers
and store the predictions to produce a ﬁnal boundary map.
the complicated multi-scale and bifurcated architecture of
DeepEdge. Additionally, unlike DeepEdge, our system can
run in near-real time.
In comparison to prior approaches, we offer several contributions. First, we propose to use object-level information to predict boundaries. We argue that such an approach
leads to semantic boundaries, which are more consistent
with humans reasoning. Second, we avoid feature engineering by learning boundaries from human-annotated data.
Finally, we demonstrate excellent results for both low-level
and high-level vision tasks. For the boundary detection task,
our proposed HFL boundaries outperform all of the prior
methods according to both F-score metrics. Additionally,
we show that because HFL boundaries are based on objectlevel features, they can be used to improve performance in
the high-level vision tasks of semantic boundary labeling,
semantic segmentation, and object proposal generation.
3. Boundary Detection
In this section, we describe our proposed architecture
and the speciﬁc details on how we predict HFL boundaries
using our method. The detailed illustration of our architecture is presented in Figure 1.
Figure 2: A visualization of selected convolutional feature maps from VGG network (resized to the input image dimension).
Because VGG was optimized for an object classiﬁcation task, it produces high activation values on objects and their parts.
3.1. Selection of Candidate Contour Points
We ﬁrst extract a set of candidate contour points with
a high recall. Due to its efﬁciency and high recall performance, we use the SE edge detector . In practice, we
could eliminate this step and simply try to predict boundaries at every pixel. However, selecting a set of initial candidate contour points, greatly reduces the computational cost.
Since our goal is to build a boundary detector that is both accurate and efﬁcient, we use these candidate points to speed
up the computation of our method.
3.2. Object-Level Features
After selecting candidate contour points, we up-sample
the original input image to a larger dimension (for example
1100×1100). The up-sampling is done to minimize the loss
of information due to the input shrinkage caused by pooling
at the different layers. Afterwards, we feed the up-sampled
image through 16 convolutional layers of the VGG net.
We use the VGG net as our model because it has been
trained to recognize a large number of object classes (the
1000 categories of the ImageNet dataset ) and thus encodes object-level features that apply to many classes. To
preserve speciﬁc location information we utilize only the
16 convolutional layers of the VGG net. We don’t use fully
connected layers because they don’t preserve spatial information, which is crucial for accurate boundary detection.
We visualize some of the selected convolutional maps in
Figure 2. Note the high activation values around the various objects in the images, which conﬁrms our hypothesis
that the VGG net encodes object speciﬁc information in its
convolutional feature maps.
3.3. Feature Interpolation
Similarly to , we perform feature interpolation in deep layers. After the up-sampled image passes
through all 16 convolutional layers, for each selected candidate contour point we ﬁnd its corresponding point in the
feature maps. Due to the dimension differences in convolutional maps these correspondences are not exact. Thus
we perform feature interpolation by ﬁnding the four nearest
points and averaging their activation values. This is done
in each of the 5504 feature maps. Thus, this results in a
5504-dimensional vector for each candidate point.
We note that the interpolation of convolutional feature
maps is the crucial component that enables our system to
predict the boundaries efﬁciently.
Without feature interpolation, our method would need to independently process
the candidate edge points by analyzing a small image patch
around each point, as for example done in DeepEdge 
which feeds one patch at a time through a deep network.
However, when the number of candidate points is large
(e.g., DeepEdge considers about 15K points at each of 4 different scales), their patches overlap signiﬁcantly and thus a
large amount of computation is wasted by recalculating ﬁlter response values over the same pixels. Instead, we can
compute the features for all candidate points with a single
pass through the network by performing deep convolution
over the entire image (i.e., feeding the entire image rather
than one patch at a time) and then by interpolating the convolutional feature maps at the location of each candidate
edge point so as to produce its feature descriptor. Thanks to
this speedup, our method has a runtime of 1.2 seconds (using a K40 GPU), which is better than the runtimes of prior
deep-learning based edge detection methods .
3.4. Learning to Predict Boundaries
After performing feature interpolation, we feed the
5504-dimensional feature vectors corresponding to each of
the candidate contour points to two fully connected layers
that are optimized to the human agreement criterion. To be
more precise, we deﬁne our prediction objective as a fraction of human annotators agreeing on the presence of the
boundary at a particular pixel. Therefore, a learning objective aims at mimicking the judgement of the human labelers.
Finally, to detect HFL boundaries, we accumulate the
predictions from the fully connected layers for each of the
candidate points and produce a boundary probability map
as illustrated in Figure 1.
3.5. Implementation Details
In this section, we describe the details behind the training
procedure of our model. We use the Caffe library to
implement our network architecture.
In the training stage, we freeze the weights in all of the
convolutional layers. To learn the weights in the two fully
connected layers we train our model to optimize the least
squares error of the regression criterion that we described
in the previous subsection. To enforce regularization we set
a dropout rate of 0.5 in the fully connected layers.
Our training dataset includes 80K points from the
BSDS500 dataset . As described in the previous subsection, the labels represent the fraction of human annotators agreeing on the boundary presence. We divide the label space into four quartiles, and select an equal number of
samples for each quartile to balance the training dataset. In
addition to the training dataset, we also sample a hold-out
dataset of size 40, 000. We use this for the hard-positive
mining in order to reduce the number of false-negative
predictions.
For the ﬁrst 25 epochs we train the network on the original 80, 000 training samples. After the ﬁrst 25 epochs, we
test the network on the hold-out dataset and detect false negative predictions made by our network. We then augment
the original 80, 000 training samples with the false negatives and the same number of randomly selected true negatives. For the remaining 25 epochs, we train the network on
this augmented dataset.
3.6. Boundary Detection Results
In this section, we present our results on the BSDS500
dataset , which is the most established benchmark for
boundary detection. The quality of the predicted boundaries is evaluated using three standard measures: ﬁxed contour threshold (ODS), per-image best threshold (OIS), and
average precision (AP).
We compare our approach to the state-of-the-art based
on two different sets of BSDS500 ground truth boundaries.
First, we evaluate the accuracy by matching each of the
predicted boundary pixels with the ground truth boundaries
that were annotated by any of the human annotators. This
set of ground truth boundaries is referred to as “any”. We
present the results for “any” ground truth boundaries in the
lower half of Table 2. As indicated by the results, HFL
boundaries outperform all the prior methods according to
both F-score measures.
Recently, there has been some criticism raised about
the procedure for boundary detection evaluation on the
BSDS500 dataset. One issue with the BSDS500 dataset
involves the so called “orphan” boundaries: the bound-
Consensus GT
DeepNet 
DeepEdge 
N 4-ﬁelds 
N 4-ﬁelds 
DeepEdge 
DeepContour 
Table 2: Boundary detection results on BSDS500 benchmark. Upper half of the table illustrates the results for “consensus” ground-truth criterion while the lower half of the
table depicts the results for “any” ground-truth criterion. In
both cases, our method outperforms all prior methods according to both ODS (optimal dataset scale) and OIS (optimal image scale) metrics. We also report the run-time of
our method (‡ GPU time) in the FPS column (frames per
second), which shows that our algorithm is faster than prior
approaches based on deep learning .
Figure 5: Qualitative results on the BSDS benchmark. The
ﬁrst column of images represent input images. The second
column illustrates SE , while the third column depicts
HFL boundaries. Notice that SE boundaries are predicted
with low conﬁdence if there is no signiﬁcant change in color
between the object and the background. Instead, because
our model is deﬁned in terms of object-level features, it can
predict object boundaries with high conﬁdence even if there
is no signiﬁcant color variation in the scene.
aries that are marked by only one or two human annotators. These “orphan” boundaries comprise around 30% of
BSDS500 dataset but most of them are considered uninformative. However, the standard evaluation benchmark rewards the methods that predict these boundaries. To resolve
Weight Magnitude
Feature Map Number (Sorted in the Order from Early to Deep Layers)
Figure 6: We train a linear regression model and visualize
its weight magnitudes in order to understand which features
are used most heavily in the boundary prediction (this linear
regression is used only for the visualization purposes and
not for the accuracy analysis). Note how heavily weighted
features lie in the deepest layers of the network, i.e., the layers that are most closely associated with object information.
this issue we also evaluate our HFL boundaries on the so
called “consensus” set of ground truth boundaries. These
“consensus” boundaries involve only boundaries that are
marked by all of the human annotators and hence, are considered perceptually meaningful. In the upper half of Table 2, we present the results achieved by our method on the
“consensus” set of the ground truth boundaries. Our HFL
boundaries outperform or tie all the prior methods in each
of the three evaluation metrics, thus suggesting that HFL
boundaries are similar to the boundaries that humans annotated. We also report the runtimes in Table 2 and note that
our method runs faster than previous deep-learning based
edge detection systems .
Our proposed model computes a highly nonlinear function of the 5504-dimensional feature vector of each candidate point. Thus, it is difﬁcult to assess which features are
used most heavily by our edge predictor. However, we can
gain a better insight by replacing the nonlinear function with
a simple linear model. In Fig. 6 we show the weight magnitudes of a simple linear regression model (we stress that
this linear model is used only for feature visualization purposes). From this Figure, we observe that many important
features are located in the deepest layers of the VGG network. As shown in , these layers encode high-level object information, which conﬁrms our hypothesis that highlevel information is useful for boundary detection.
Finally, we present some qualitative results achieved by
our method in Figure 5. These examples illustrate the effective advantage that HFL boundaries provide over another
state-of-the-art edge detection system, the SE system .
Speciﬁcally, observe the parts of the image where there is a
boundary that separates an object from the background but
where the color change is pretty small. Notice that because
the SE boundary detection is based on low-level color and
texture features, it captures these boundaries with very low
conﬁdence. In comparison, because HFL boundaries rely
on object-level features, it detects these boundaries with
high conﬁdence.
4. High-Level Vision Applications
In this section, we describe our proposed Low-for-High
pipeline: using low-level boundaries to aid a number of
high-level vision tasks. We focus on the tasks of semantic
boundary labeling, semantic segmentation and object proposal generation. We show that using HFL boundaries improves the performance of state-of-the-art methods in each
of these high-level vision tasks.
4.1. Semantic Boundary Labeling
The task of semantic boundary labeling requires not only
to predict the boundaries but also to associate a speciﬁc
object class to each of the boundaries. This implies that
given our predicted boundaries we also need to label them
with object class information. We approach this problem
by adopting the ideas from the recent work on Fully Convolutional Networks (FCN) . Given an input image,
we concurrently feed it to our boundary-predicting network
(described in Section 3), and also through the FCN that was
pretrained for 20 Pascal VOC classes and the background
class. While our proposed network produces HFL boundaries, the FCN model predicts class probabilities for each
of the pixels. We can then merge the two output maps as
follows. For a given boundary point we consider a 9 × 9
grid around that point from each of the 21 FCN object-class
probability maps. We calculate the maximum value inside
each grid, and then label the boundary at a given pixel with
the object-class that corresponds to the maximum probability across these 21 maps. We apply this procedure for each
of the boundary points, in order to associate object-class
labels to the boundaries. Note that we consider the grids
around the boundary pixel because the output of the FCN
has a poor localization, and considering the grids rather than
individual pixels leads to higher accuracy.
We can also merge HFL boundaries with the state-ofthe-art DeepLab-CRF segmentation to obtain higher accuracy. We do this in a similar fashion as just described.
First, around a given boundary point we extract a 9 × 9
grid from the DeepLab-CRF segmentation. We then compute the mode value in the grid (excluding the background
class), and use the object-class corresponding to the mode
value as a label for the given boundary point. We do this for
each of the boundary points. By merging HFL boundaries
and the output of FCN or DeepLab-CRF, we get semantic
boundaries that are highly localized and also contain objectspeciﬁc information.
Semantic Boundary Labeling Results
In this section, we present semantic boundary labeling results on the SBD dataset , which includes ground truth
boundaries that are also labeled with one of 20 Pascal VOC
classes. The boundary detection accuracy for each class is
Method (Metric) aero bike bird boat bottle bus
chair cow table dog horse mbike person plant sheep sofa train
InvDet (MF)
42.6 49.5 15.7 16.8
43.0 40.8 22.6 18.1 26.6 10.2 18.0 35.2
11.2 22.2 32.0
HFL-FC8 (MF) 71.6 59.6 68.0 54.1
68.0 58.8 69.3 43.3 65.8 33.3 67.9 67.5
33.9 57.7 54.8
HFL-CRF (MF) 73.9 61.4 74.6 57.2
70.4 61.6 71.9 46.5 72.3 36.2 71.1 73.0
42.6 62.4 60.1
InvDet (AP)
33.6 31.3 17.3 10.7 16.4
HFL-FC8 (AP) 66.0 50.7 58.9 40.6
62.9 51.0 59.0 25.6 54.6 15.3 57.8 57.3
18.0 50.1 40.6
HFL-CRF (AP) 71.2 55.2 69.3 45.7
71.1 56.8 65.7 29.1 65.9 17.7 64.5 68.3
25.7 60.0 49.8
Table 3: Results of semantic boundary labeling on the SBD benchmark using the Max F-score (MF) and Average Precision
(AP) metrics. Our method (HFL) outperforms Inverse Detectors for all 20 categories according to both metrics. Note
that using the CRF output to label the boundaries produces better results than using the outputs from the FC8 layer of FCN.
evaluated using the maximum F-score (MF), and average
precision (AP) measures.
Labeling boundaries with the semantic object information is a novel and still relatively unexplored problem.
Therefore, we found only one other approach (Inverse Detectors) that tried to tackle this problem .
The basic idea behind Inverse Detectors consists of several steps.
First, generic boundaries in the image are detected. Then,
a number of object proposal boxes are generated. These
two sources of information are then used to construct the
features. Finally, a separate classiﬁer is used to label the
boundaries with the object-speciﬁc information.
Table 3 shows that our approach signiﬁcantly outperforms Inverse Detectors according to both the maximum Fscore and the average precision metrics for all twenty categories. As described in Section 4.1 we evaluate the two
variants of our method. Denoted by HFL-FC8 is the variant for which we label HFL boundaries with the outputs
from the last layer (FC8) of the pretrained FCN. We denote
with HFL-CRF the result of labeling our boundaries with
the output from the DeepLab-CRF . Among these two
variants, we show that the latter one produces better results.
This is expected since the CRF framework enforces spatial
coherence in the semantic segments.
In Figure 7, we present some of the qualitative results
produced by our method. We note that even with multiple
objects in the image, our method successfully recognizes
and localizes boundaries of each of the classes.
4.2. Semantic Segmentation
For the semantic segmentation task, we propose to
enhance the DeepLab-CRF with our predicted HFL
boundaries. DeepLab-CRF is a system comprised of a Fully
Convolutional Network (described in Section 4.1) and a
dense CRF applied on top of FCN predictions.
Speciﬁcally, in the CRF, the authors propose to use
a Gaussian kernel and a bilateral term including position
and color terms as the CRF features (see ). While in
most cases the proposed scheme works well, DeepLab-CRF
sometimes produces segmentations that are not spatially coherent, particularly for images containing small object re-
Figure 7: A visualization of the predicted semantic boundary labels. Images in the ﬁrst column are input examples.
Columns two and three show semantic HFL boundaries of
different object classes. Note that even with multiple objects appearing simultaneously, our method outputs precise
semantic boundaries.
We propose to address this issue by adding features
based on our predicted HFL boundaries in the CRF framework. Note that we use predicted boundaries from Section 3
and not the boundaries labeled with the object information
that we obtained in Section 4.1. We use the Normalized
Cut framework to generate our features.
First, we construct a pixel-wise afﬁnity matrix W using
our HFL boundaries. We measure the similarity between
two pixels as:
Wij = exp (−max
p∈ij {M(p)2
where Wij represents the similarity between pixels i and
j, p denotes the boundary point along the line segment ij
connecting pixels i and j, M depicts the magnitude of the
boundary at pixel p, and σ denotes the smoothness parameter, which is usually set to 14% of the maximum boundary
value in the image.
The intuitive idea is that two pixels are similar (i.e.
Wij = 1) if there is no boundary crossing the line connecting these two pixels (i.e. M(p) = 0
∀p ∈ij) or if the
boundary strength is low. We note that it is not necessary
to build a full afﬁnity matrix W. We build a sparse afﬁn-
Method (Dataset)
aero bike bird boat bottle
chair cow table dog horse mbike person plant sheep sofa train
DL-CRF (VOC)
78.6 41.1 83.5 75.3
83.1 76.6 80.8 37.8 72.1 66.5 64.7
47.4 86.6 77.9
DL-CRF+HFL (VOC) 77.9 41.2 83.1 74.4
85.5 76.1 80.6 35.7 71.0 66.6 64.3
47.0 87.1 77.9
DL-CRF (SBD)
74.2 68.0 81.9 64.6
86.3 78.3 84.3 41.6 78.0 49.9 82.0
49.8 79.5 70.1
DL-CRF+HFL (SBD) 75.1 69.2 81.6 64.8
86.4 78.1 84.1 41.2 77.8 50.4 81.6
49.1 79.5 70.4
DL-CRF (VOC)
46.1 28.0 48.5 54.5
57.6 34.1 47.3 19.5 61.4 41.6 42.5
41.0 61.2 31.9
DL-CRF+HFL (VOC) 47.5 27.6 50.4 63.5
57.9 38.7 47.2 21.1 57.3 41.2 43.7
42.1 70.9 34.6
DL-CRF (SBD)
59.4 36.5 58.0 38.6
58.1 44.7 59.6 25.8 51.8 28.1 59.0
33.4 62.1 41.0
DL-CRF+HFL (SBD) 63.4 42.5 58.4 41.3
61.2 45.7 61.4 28.4 55.5 31.5 61.4
34.2 67.1 45.1
Table 4: Semantic segmentation results on the SBD and VOC 2007 datasets. We measure the results according to PP-IOU
(per pixel) and PI-IOU (per image) evaluation metrics. We denote the original DeepLab-CRF system and our proposed
modiﬁcation as DL-CRF and DL-CRF+HFL, respectively. According to the PP-IOU metric, our proposed features (DL-
CRF+HFL) yield almost equivalent results as the original DeepLab-CRF system. However, based on PI-IOU metric, our
proposed features improve the mean accuracy by 3% and 1.9% on SBD and VOC 2007 datasets respectively.
ity matrix connecting every pair of pixels i and j that have
distance 5 or less from each other.
After building a boundary-based afﬁnity matrix W we
set Dii = P
i̸=j Wij and compute eigenvectors v of the
generalized eigenvalue system:
(D −W)v = λDv
We then resize the eigenvectors v to the original image
dimensions, and use them as additional features to the CRF
part of DeepLab-CRF system. In our experiments, we use
the 16 eigenvectors corresponding to the smallest eigenvalues, which results in 16 extra feature channels.
Note that the eigenvectors contain soft segmentation information. Because HFL boundaries predict object-level
contours with high conﬁdence, the eigenvectors often capture regions corresponding to objects. We visualize a few
selected eigenvectors in Figure 8. In the experimental section, we demonstrate that our proposed features make the
output produced by DeepLab-CRF more spatially coherent
and improve the segmentation accuracy according to one of
the metrics.
We also note that our proposed features are applicable to any generic method that incorporates CRF. For instance, even if DeepLab-CRF used an improved DeepLab
network architecture, our features would still be beneﬁcial
because they contribute directly to the CRF part and not the
DeepLab network part of the system.
Semantic Segmentation Results
In this section, we present semantic segmentation results
on the SBD and also Pascal VOC 2007 datasets,
which both provide ground truth segmentations for 20 Pascal VOC classes. We evaluate the results in terms of two
metrics. The ﬁrst metric measures the accuracy in terms of
pixel intersection-over-union averaged per pixel (PP-IOU)
across the 20 classes. According to this metric, the accuracy
is computed on a per pixel basis. As a result, the images that
contain large object regions are given more importance.
Figure 8: In this ﬁgure, the ﬁrst column depicts an input
image while the second and third columns illustrate two selected eigenvectors for that image. The eigenvectors contain
soft segmentation information. Because HFL boundaries
capture object-level boundaries, the resulting eigenvectors
primarily segment regions corresponding to the objects.
We observe that while DeepLab-CRF works well on the
images containing large object regions, it produces spatially
disjoint outputs for the images with smaller and object regions (see Figure 9). This issue is often being overlooked,
because according to the PP-IOU metric, the images with
large object regions are given more importance and thus
contribute more to the accuracy. However, certain applications may require accurate segmentation of small objects.
Therefore, in addition to PP-IOU, we also consider the PI-
IOU metric (pixel intersection-over-union averaged per image across the 20 classes), which gives equal weight to each
of the images.
For both of the metrics we compare the semantic segmentation results of a pure DeepLab-CRF and also a
modiﬁcation of DeepLab-CRF with our proposed features
added to the CRF framework. We present the results for
both of the metrics in Table 4.
Based on these results, we observe that according to
the ﬁrst metric (PP-IOU), our proposed features yield almost equivalent results as the original DeepLab-CRF system. However, according to the second metric (PI-IOU) our
features yield an average improvement of 3% and 1.9% in
Figure 9: An illustration of the more challenging semantic
segmentation examples. The ﬁrst column depicts the predictions achieved by DeepLab-CRF, while the second column illustrates the results after adding our proposed features to the CRF framework. The last column represents
ground truth segmentations. Notice how our proposed features render the predicted semantic segments more spatially
coherent and overall more accurate.
SBD and VOC 2007 datasets respectively.
We also visualize the qualitative results produced by both
approaches in Figure 9. Notice how our proposed features
make the segmentations look smoother relative to the segmentations produced by the original DeepLab-CRF system.
Once again, we want to stress that our HFL features
are applicable to any method that uses the CRF. Therefore,
based on the results presented in this section, we believe that
our proposed features could be beneﬁcial in a wide array of
problems that involve the use of the CRF framework.
4.3. Object Proposals
Finally, we show that our method produces object-level
boundaries that can be successfully exploited in an object
proposal scheme. Speciﬁcally we adopt the EdgeBoxes approach , which can be applied to any generic boundaries to produce a list of object proposal boxes. The original EdgeBoxes method uses SE boundaries to generate the
boxes. However, SE boundaries are predicted using lowlevel color and texture features, rather than object-level
Thus, here we validate the hypothesis that the
EdgeBoxes proposals can be improved by replacing the SE
boundaries with our HFL boundaries.
Object Proposal Results
In this section, we present object proposal results on the
Pascal VOC 2012 dataset . We evaluate the quality of
bounding-box proposals according to three metrics: area
under the curve (AUC), the number of proposals needed to
reach recall of 75%, and the maximum recall over 5000 object bounding-boxes. Additionally, we compute the accuracy for each of the metrics for three different intersection
N@75% Recall
N@75% Recall AUC N@75% Recall
Comparison of object proposal results.
compare the quality of object proposals using Structured
Edges and HFL boundaries. We evaluate the performance for three different IOU values and demonstrate that
using HFL boundaries produces better results for each evaluation metric and for each IOU value.
over union (IOU) values: 0.65, 0.7, and 0.75. We present
these results in Table 5. As described in Section 4.3, we use
EdgeBoxes , a package that uses generic boundaries, to
generate object proposals. We compare the quality of the
generated object proposals when using SE boundaries and
HFL boundaries. We demonstrate that for each IOU value
and for each of the three evaluation metrics, HFL boundaries produce better or equivalent results. This conﬁrms our
hypothesis that HFL boundaries can be used effectively for
high-level vision tasks such as generating object proposals.
5. Conclusions
In this work, we presented an efﬁcient architecture that
uses object-level information to predict semantically meaningful boundaries. Most prior edge detection methods rely
exclusively on low-level features, such as color or texture, to
detect the boundaries. However, perception studies suggest
that humans employ object-level reasoning when deciding
whether a given pixel is a boundary . Thus,
we propose a system that focuses on the semantic objectlevel cues rather than low level image information to detect
the boundaries. For this reason we refer to our boundary
detection scheme as a High-for-Low approach, where highlevel object features inform the low-level boundary detection process. In this paper we demonstrated that our proposed method produces boundaries that accurately separate
objects and the background in the image and also achieve
higher F-score compared to any prior work.
Additionally, we showed that, because HFL boundaries
are based on object-level features, they can be employed to
aid a number of high level vision tasks in a Low-for-High
fashion. We use our boundaries to boost the accuracy of
state-of-the-art methods on the high-level vision tasks of semantic boundary labeling, semantic segmentation, and object proposals generation. We show that using HFL boundaries leads to better results in each of these tasks.
To conclude, our boundary detection method is accurate,
efﬁcient, applicable to a variety of datasets, and also useful
for multiple high-level vision tasks. We plan to release the
source code for HFL upon the publication of the paper .
6. Acknowledgements
We thank Mohammad Haris Baig for the suggestions and
help with the software. This research was funded in part by
NSF award CNS-1205521.