IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTONOMOUS MENTAL DEVELOPMENT
Intrinsically Motivated Reinforcement Learning:
An Evolutionary Perspective
Satinder Singh, Richard L. Lewis, Andrew G. Barto, Fellow, IEEE, and Jonathan Sorg
Abstract—There is great interest in building intrinsic motivation into artiﬁcial systems using the reinforcement learning
framework. Yet, what intrinsic motivation may mean computationally, and how it may differ from extrinsic motivation,
remains a murky and controversial subject. In this article, we
adopt an evolutionary perspective and deﬁne a new optimal
reward framework that captures the pressure to design good
primary reward functions that lead to evolutionary success across
environments. The results of two computational experiments
show that optimal primary reward signals may yield both
emergent intrinsic and extrinsic motivation. The evolutionary
perspective and the associated optimal reward framework thus
lead to the conclusion that there are no hard and fast features
distinguishing intrinsic and extrinsic reward computationally.
Rather, the directness of the relationship between rewarding
behavior and evolutionary success varies along a continuum.
Index Terms—intrinsic motivation, reinforcement learning
I. INTRODUCTION
The term “intrinsically motivated” ﬁrst appeared (according
to Deci and Ryan ) in a 1950 paper by Harlow on
the manipulation behavior of rhesus monkeys. Harlow argued
that an intrinsic manipulation drive is needed to explain why
monkeys will energetically and persistently work for hours to
solve complicated mechanical puzzles without any extrinsic
rewards. Intrinsic motivation plays a wide role in human
development and learning, and researchers in many areas of
cognitive science have emphasized that intrinsically motivated
behavior is vital for intellectual growth.
This article addresses the question of how processes analogous to intrinsic motivation can be implemented in artiﬁcial
systems, with speciﬁc attention to the factors that may or may
not distinguish intrinsic motivation from extrinsic motivation,
where the latter refers to motivation generated by speciﬁc rewarding consequences of behavior, rather than by the behavior
There is a substantial history of research directed toward
creating artiﬁcial systems that employ processes analogous
to intrinsic motivation. Lenat’s AM system , for example, focused on heuristic deﬁnitions of “interestingness,” and
Schmidhuber – introduced methods for implementing
forms of curiosity using the framework of computational
Satinder Singh is with the Division of Computer Science & Engineering,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, email: .
Richard Lewis is with the Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, email: .
Andrew G. Barto is with the Department of Computer Science, University
of Massachusetts, Amherst, email: .
Jonathan Sorg is with the Division of Computer Science & Engineering,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, email: .
reinforcement learning (RL)1 . More recently, research
in this tradition has expanded, with contributions based on
a variety of more-or-less formal conceptions of how intrinsic
motivation might be rendered in computational terms. Reviews
of much of this literature are provided by Oudeyer and Kaplan
 , and Merrick and Maher .
Despite this recent attention, what intrinsic motivation may
mean computationally, and how it may differ from extrinsic
motivation, remains a murky and controversial subject. Singh
et al. introduced an evolutionary framework for addressing these questions, along with the results of computational
experiments that help to clarify some of these issues. They
formulated a notion of an optimal reward function given a
ﬁtness function, where the latter is analogous to what in nature
represents the degree of an animal’s reproductive success.
The present article describes this framework and some of
those experimental results, while discussing more fully the
notions of extrinsic and intrinsic rewards and presenting other
experimental results that involve model-based learning and
non-Markovian environments. In addition to emphasizing the
generality of the approach, these results illuminate some
additional issues surrounding the intrinsic/extrinsic reward
dichotomy. In our opinion, the evolutionary perspective we
adopt resolves what have been some of the most problematic
issues surrounding the topic of intrinsic motivation, including
the relationship of intrinsic and extrinsic motivation to primary
and secondary reward signals, and the ultimate source of both
forms of motivation.
Other researchers have reported interesting results of computational experiments involving evolutionary search for RL
reward functions , , , , , but they did not
directly address the motivational issues on which we focus.
Uchibe and Doya do address intrinsic reward in an
evolutionary context, but their aim and approach differ signiﬁcantly from ours. Following their earlier work , these
authors treat extrinsic rewards as constraints on learning, while
intrinsic rewards set the learning objective. This concept of
the relationship between extrinsic and intrinsic rewards is
technically interesting, but its relationship to the meanings of
these terms in psychology is not clear. The study closest to
ours is that of Elfwing et al. in which a genetic algorithm
is used to search for shaping rewards and other learning
algorithm parameters that improve an RL learning system’s
performance. We discuss how our approach is related to this
1We use the phrase computational RL because this framework is not a
theory of biological RL despite what it borrows from, and suggests about,
biological RL. However, in the following text we use just RL to refer to
computational RL.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTONOMOUS MENTAL DEVELOPMENT
study and others in Section VII.
II. COMPUTATIONAL REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
Rewards—more speciﬁcally, reward functions—in RL determine the problem the learning agent is trying to solve. RL
algorithms address the problem of how a behaving agent can
learn to approximate an optimal behavioral strategy, called
a policy, while interacting directly with its environment.
Roughly speaking, an optimal policy is one that maximizes
a measure of the total amount of reward the agent expects to
accumulate over its lifetime, where reward is delivered to the
agent over time via a scalar-valued signal.
In RL, rewards are thought of as the output of a “critic” that
evaluates the RL agent’s behavior. In the usual view of an RL
agent interacting with its environment (left panel of Figure 1),
rewards come from the agent’s environment, where the critic
resides. Some RL systems form value functions using, for
example, Temporal Difference (TD) algorithms , to assign
a value to each state that is an estimate of the amount of reward
expected over the future after that state is visited. For some
RL systems that use value functions, such as systems in the
form of an “actor-critic architecture” , the phrase “adaptive
critic” has been used to refer to the component that estimates
values for evaluating on-going behavior. It is important not
to confuse the adaptive critic with the critic in Figure 1. The
former resides within the RL agent and is not shown in the
The following correspondences to animal reward processes
underly the RL framework. Rewards in an RL system correspond to primary rewards, i.e., rewards that for animals
exert their effects through processes hard-wired by evolution
due to their relevance to reproductive success. Value functions
are the basis of secondary (or conditoned or higher-order)
rewards, whereby learned predictions of reward act as reward
themselves. The value function implemented by an adaptive
critic therefore corresponds to a secondary, or learned, reward
function. As we shall see, one should not equate this with
an intrinsic reward function. The local landscape of a value
function gives direction to an RL agent’s preferred behavior:
decisions are made to cause transitions to higher-valued states.
A close parallel can be drawn between the gradient of a value
function and incentive salience .
III. THE PLACE OF INTRINSIC MOTIVATION IN
REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
How is intrinsic motivation currently thought to ﬁt into
the standard RL framework?2 Barto et al. used the term
intrinsic reward to refer to rewards that produce analogs of
intrinsic motivation in RL agents, and extrinsic reward to refer
to rewards that deﬁne a speciﬁc task or rewarding outcome as
in standard RL applications. Most of the current approaches to
creating intrinsically motivated agents are based on deﬁning
2While we acknowledge the limitation of the RL approach in dealing with
many aspects of motivation, this article nevertheless focuses on the sources
and nature of reward functions for RL systems. We believe this focus allows
us to clarify issues facing not only the computational community but other
communities as well that are concerned with motivation in biological systems.
special types of reward functions and then employing standard RL learning procedures, an approach ﬁrst suggested by
Schmidhuber as a way to create an artiﬁcial analog of
curiosity.
Environment
!"#$%&'()!&*+%,&-$&#)
.&#$%&'()!&*+%,&-$&#)
2$6'%7)8+5&'(9)
8$&9'0,&9)
:$1+9+,&9)
;;4&+-'(<<)
Agent-environment interactions in reinforcement learning; adapted
from . Left panel: Primary reward is supplied to the agent from its
environment. Right panel: A reﬁnement in which the environment is factored
into and internal and external environment, with all reward coming form the
former. See text for further discussion
But let us step back and reconsider how intrinsic motivation
and RL might be related. As Sutton and Barto point
out (also see , ), the standard view of the RL agent,
and its associated terminology—as represented in the left
panel of Figure 1—is seriously misleading if one wishes
to relate this framework to animal reward systems and to
the psychologist’s notions of reward and motivation. First,
psychologists distinguish between rewards and reward signals.
For example, Schultz , writes that “Rewards are
objects or events that make us come back for more” whereas
reward signals are produced by reward neurons in the brain.
What in RL are called rewards would better be called reward
signals. Rewards in RL are abstract signals whose source and
meaning are irrelevant to RL theory and algorithms; they are
not objects or events, though they can sometimes be the result
of perceiving objects or events.
Second, the environment of an RL agent should not be
identiﬁed with the external environment of an animal. A less
misleading view requires dividing the environment into an
external environment and an internal environment. In terms
of animals, the internal environment consists of the systems
that are internal to the animal while still being parts of
the RL agent’s environment. The right panel of Figure 1
reﬁnes the usual RL picture by showing the environment’s
two components and adjusting terminology by using the labels
“RL Agent” and “Reward Signals.” Further, we label the RL
Agent’s output “Decisions” instead of “Actions,” reﬂecting
the fact that actions that effect the external environment are
generated by an animal’s internal environment, for example,
by its muscles, while the RL Agent makes decisions, such as
the decision to move in a certain way. In this article, however,
we retain the usual RL terms agent, reward, and action, but
it is important not to interpret them incorrectly. Similarly,
an “environment” in what follows should be understood to
consist of internal and external components. Note that these
reﬁnements do not materially change the RL framework; they
merely make it less abstract and less likely to encourage
misunderstanding.
This reﬁned view better reﬂects the fact that the sources of
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTONOMOUS MENTAL DEVELOPMENT
all of an animal’s reward signals are internal to the animal.
Therefore, the distinction between the internal and external
environments is not useful for distinguishing between rewards
that underlie intrinsically and extrinsically motivated behavior,
a point also emphasized by Oudeyer and Kaplan . It is
clear that rewards underlying both intrinsically and extrinsically motivated behavior depend in essential ways on information originating in both the internal and external environments.
For example, the motivational valence of the manipulation
experiences of Harlow’s monkeys was clearly derived, at least
in part, from properties of the monkeys’ external environments,
and the motivational inﬂuence of extrinsic food reward depends on an animal’s internal state of satiety.
If the distinction between internal and external environments is not useful for distinguishing intrinsic and extrinsic
motivation, we are still left with the question: What does it
mean in the computational RL framework to do something
“for its own sake” or because “it is inherently interesting or
enjoyable” ? One possibility, which has a long history
in psychology, is that extrinsic and intrinsic motivation map
onto primary and secondary reward signals, respectively. We
consider this view next, before introducing our alternative
evolutionary perspective.
IV. DO EXTRINSIC AND INTRINSIC MOTIVATION MAP
ONTO PRIMARY AND SECONDARY REWARD?
Among the most inﬂuential theories of motivation in psychology is the drive theory of Hull – . According to
Hull’s theory, all behavior is motivated either by an organism’s
survival and reproductive needs giving rise to primary drives
(such as hunger, thirst, sex, and the avoidance of pain) or
by derivative drives that have acquired their motivational
signiﬁcance through learning. Primary drives are the result
of physiological deﬁcits—“tissue needs”—, and they energize
behavior whose result is to reduce the deﬁcit. A key additional
feature of Hull’s theory is that a need reduction, and hence
a drive reduction, acts as a primary reinforcer for learning:
behavior that reduces a primary drive is reinforced. Additionally, through the process of secondary reinforcement in
which a neutral stimulus is paired with a primary reinforcer,
the formerly neutral stimulus becomes a secondary reinforcer,
i.e., acquires the reinforcing power of the primary reinforcer.
In this way, stimuli that predict primary reward, i.e., predict
a reduction in a primary drive, become rewarding themselves.
According to this inﬂuential theory (in its several variants), all
behavior is energized and directed by its relevance to primal
drives, either directly or as the result of learning through
secondary reinforcement.
Hull’s theory followed the principles of physiological homeostasis that maintains bodily conditions in approximate equilibrium despite external perturbations. Homeostasis is achieved
by processes that trigger compensatory reactions when the
value of a critical physiological variable departs from the range
required to keep the animal alive . Many other theories of
motivation also incorporate the idea that behavior is motivated
to counteract disturbances to an equilibrium condition. These
theories have been inﬂuential in the design of motivational
systems for artiﬁcial agents, as discussed in Savage’s review
of artiﬁcial motivational systems . Hull’s idea that reward
is generated by drive reduction is commonly used to connect
RL to a motivational system. Often this mechanism consists of
monitoring a collection of important variables, such as power
or fuel level, temperature, etc., and triggering appropriate
behavior when certain thresholds are reached. Drive reduction
is directly translated into a reward signal delivered to an RL
algorithm.
Among other motivational theories are those based on the
everyday experience that we engage in activities because we
enjoy doing them: we seek pleasurable experiences and avoid
unpleasant ones. This is the ancient principle of hedonism.
These theories of motivation hold that it is necessary to
refer to affective mental states to explain behavior, such as a
“feeling” of pleasantness or unpleasantness. Hedonic theories
are supported by many observations about food preferences
which suggest that “palatability” might offer a more parsimonious account of food preferences than tissue needs .
Animals will enthusiastically eat food that has no apparent
positive inﬂuence on tissue needs; characteristics of food such
as temperature and texture inﬂuence how much is eaten;
animals that are not hungry still have preferences for different
foods; animals have taste preferences from early infancy .
In addition, non-deprived animals will work enthusiastically
for electrical brain stimulation . Although it is clear that
biologically-primal needs have motivational signiﬁcance, facts
such as these showed that factors other than primary biological
needs exert strong motivational effects, and that these factors
do not derive their motivational potency as a result of learning
processes involving secondary reinforcement.
In addition to observations about animal food preferences
and responses to electrical brain stimulation, other observations showed that something important was missing from
drive-reduction theories of motivation. Under certain conditions, for example, hungry rats would rather explore unfamiliar
spaces than eat; they will endure the pain of crossing electriﬁed
grids to explore novel spaces; monkeys will bar-press for a
chance to look out of a window. Moreover, the opportunity
to explore can be used to reinforce other behavior. Deci and
Ryan chronicle these and a collection of similar ﬁndings
under the heading of intrinsic motivation.
Why did most psychologists reject the view that exploration,
manipulation, and other curiosity-related behaviors derived
their motivational potency only through secondary reinforcement, as would be required by a theory like Hull’s? There
are clear experimental results showing that such behavior is
motivationally energizing and rewarding on its own and not
because it predicts the satisfaction of a primary biological
need. Children spontaneously explore very soon after birth, so
there is little opportunity for them to experience the extensive
pairing of this behavior with the reduction of a biologically
primary drive that would be required to account for their
zeal for exploratory behavior. In addition, experimental results
show that the opportunity to explore retains its energizing
effect without needing to be re-paired with a primary reinforcer, whereas a secondary reinforcer will extinguish, that is,
will lose its reinforcing quality, unless often re-paired with
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTONOMOUS MENTAL DEVELOPMENT
the primary reinforcer it predicts. Berlyne summarized the
situation as follows:
As knowledge accumulated about the conditions that
govern exploratory behavior and about how quickly
it appears after birth, it seemed less and less likely
that this behavior could be a derivative of hunger,
thirst, sexual appetite, pain, fear of pain, and the
like, or that stimuli sought through exploration are
welcomed because they have previously accompanied satisfaction of these drives. (p. 26, Berlyne )
Note that the issue was not whether exploration, manipulation, and other curiosity-related behaviors are important for an
animal’s survival and reproductive success. Clearly they are if
deployed in the right way. Appropriately cautious exploration,
for example, clearly has survival value because it can enable
efﬁcient foraging and successful escape when those needs
arise. The issue was whether an animal is motivated to perform
these behaviors because previously in its own lifetime behaving
this way predicted decreases in biologically-primary drives, or
whether this motivation is built-in by the evolutionary process.
The preponderance of evidence supports the view that the
motivational forces driving these behaviors are built-in by the
evolutionary process.
V. EVOLUTIONARY PERSPECTIVE
It is therefore natural to investigate what an evolutionary
perspective might tell us about the nature of intrinsic reward
signals and how they might differ from extrinsic reward
signals. We adopt the view discussed above that intrinsic
reward is not the same as secondary reward. It is likely that
the evolutionary process gave exploration, play, discovery, etc.,
positive hedonic valence because these behaviors contributed
to reproductive success throughout evolution. Consequently,
we regard intrinsic rewards in the RL framework as primary
rewards, hard-wired from the start of the agent’s life. Like
any other primary reward in RL, they come to be predicted
by the value-function learning system. These predictions can
support secondary reinforcement so that predictors of intrinsically rewarding events can acquire rewarding qualities through
learning just as predictors of extrinsically rewarding events
The evolutionary perspective thus leads to an approach in
which adaptive agents, and therefore their reward functions,
are evaluated according to their expected ﬁtness given an
explicit ﬁtness function and some distribution of environments
of interest. The ﬁtness function maps trajectories of agentenvironment interactions to scalar ﬁtness values, and may
take any form (including functions that are similar in form
to discounted sums of extrinsic rewards). In our approach,
we search a space of primary reward functions for the one
that maximizes the expected ﬁtness of an RL agent that learns
using that reward function. Features of such an optimal reward
function3 and how these features relate to the environments
in which agent lifetimes are evaluated provide insight into
the relationship between extrinsic and intrinsic rewards (as
discussed in Section VI and thereafter).
We turn next to a formal framework that captures the requisite abstract properties of agents, environments, and ﬁtness
functions and deﬁnes the evolutionary search for good reward
functions as an optimization problem.
A. Optimal Reward Functions
As shown in the right panel of Figure 1, an agent A in
some (external) environment E receives an observation and
takes an action at each time step. The agent has an internal
environment that computes a state, a summary of history,
at every time step (e.g., in Markovian environments the last
observation is a perfect summary of history and thus state can
be just the last observation). The agent’s action is contingent
on the state. The reward function can in general depend on the
entire history of states or equivalently on the entire history of
observations and actions. Agent A’s goal or objective is to
attempt to maximize the cumulative reward it receives over
its lifetime. In general, deﬁning agent A includes making
very speciﬁc commitments to particular learning architectures,
representations, and algorithms as well as all parameters. Our
evolutionary framework abstracts away from these details to
deﬁne a notion of optimal reward function as follows.
For every agent A, there is a space of reward functions RA
that maps features of the history of observation-action pairs to
scalar primary reward values (the speciﬁc choice of features is
determined in deﬁning A). There is a distribution P over sequential decision making environments in some set E in which
we want our agent to perform well. A speciﬁc reward function
rA ∈RA and a sampled environment E ∼P(E) produces h,
the history of agent A adapting to environment E over its
lifetime using the reward function rA, i.e., h ∼⟨A(rA), E⟩,
where ⟨A(rA), E⟩makes explicit that agent A is using reward
function rA to interact with environment E and h ∼⟨·⟩
makes explicit that history h is sampled from the distribution
produced by the interaction ⟨·⟩. A given ﬁtness function F
produces a scalar evaluation F(h) for each such history h.
An optimal reward function r∗
A ∈RA is the reward function
that maximizes the expected ﬁtness over the distribution of
environments, i.e.,
A = arg max
rA∈RA EE∼P (E)Eh∼⟨A(rA),E⟩{F(h)},
where E denotes the expectation operator. A special reward
function in RA is the ﬁtness-based reward function, denoted
rF, that most directly translates ﬁtness F into an RL reward
function, i.e., the ﬁtness value of a lifetime-length history is the
cumulative ﬁtness-based reward for that history. For example,
if the ﬁtness value of a history was the number of children
3We use this term despite the fact that none of our arguments depend on
our search procedure ﬁnding true globally-optimal reward functions. We are
concerned with reward functions that confer advantages over others and not
with absolute optimality. Similarly, the fact that optimization is at the core of
the RL framework does not imply that what an RL system learns is optimal.
What matters is the process of improving, not the ﬁnal result.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTONOMOUS MENTAL DEVELOPMENT
produced, then a corresponding ﬁtness-based reward function
could assign unit reward to the state resulting from the birth
of a child and zero otherwise (additional concrete examples
are in our experimental results reported below).
Our formulation of optimal rewards is very general because
the constraints on A, RA, F, and E are minimal. Agent A is
constrained only to be an agent that uses a reward function
rA ∈RA to drive its search for good behavior policies. The
space RA is constrained to be representable by the internal
architecture of agent A as well as to contain the ﬁtness-based
reward rF. Fitness F is constrained only to be a function that
maps (lifetime-length) histories of agent-environment interactions to scalar ﬁtness values. The space E is constrained only
to be a (ﬁnite or inﬁnite) set of discrete-time decision making
environments (Markovian or non-Markovian4, and indeed our
empirical results will use both). Finally, the evolutionary or
ﬁtness pressure that deﬁnes optimal rewards is represented by
an optimization or search problem (Equation 1) unconstrained
by a commitment to any speciﬁc evolutionary process.5
Note an immediate consequence of Equation 1: in terms
of the expected ﬁtness achieved, the agent with the optimal
reward function will by deﬁnition outperform (in general,
and never do worse than) the same agent with the ﬁtnessbased reward function. Crucially, it is this possibility of
outperforming the ﬁtness-based reward in the amount of
ﬁtness achieved that produces the evolutionary pressure to
reward not just actions that directly enhance ﬁtness— what
might be termed extrinsically motivated behavior—but actions
that intermediate evolutionary success—what might be termed
intrinsically motivated behaviors.
B. Regularities Within and Across Environments
The above formulation of Equation 1 deﬁnes a search
problem—the search for r∗
A. This search is for a primary
reward function and is to be contrasted with the search
problem faced by an agent during its lifetime, that of learning
a good value function (and hence a good policy) speciﬁc
to its environment leading to history h ∼⟨A(rA), E⟩(cf.
Equation 1). These two (nested) searches are at the heart of our
evolutionary perspective on reward in this article. Speciﬁcally,
our concrete hypotheses are (1) the optimal reward r∗
from search will capture regularities across environments in
E as well as complex interactions between E and speciﬁc
structural properties of the agent A (note that the agent A
is part of its environment and is constant across all environments in E), and (2) the value functions learned by an agent
during its lifetime will capture regularities present within its
speciﬁc environment that are not necessarily shared across
environments. It is the ﬁrst hypothesis, that of the primary
reward capturing regularities across environments and between
4Speciﬁcally, we allow both for Markov decision processes, or MDPs, as
well as for partially observable MDPs, or POMDPs. See Sutton and Barto 
and Kaelbling et.al. for a discussion of the different mathematical
formalisms of RL problems.
5However, in many cases the space of reward functions will have structure
that can be exploited to gain computational efﬁciency, and many classes of
optimization algorithms might prove useful in a practical methodology for
creating reward functions for artiﬁcial agents.
environments and agents, that should lead to the emergence of
both extrinsic and intrinsic rewards, the former from objects
or other sources of primal needs present across environments
and the latter from behaviors such as play and exploration that
serve the agents well across environments in terms of expected
Next we describe experiments designed to test our hypotheses as well as to illustrate the emergence of both extrinsic and
intrinsic rewards in agents through search for optimal reward
functions.
VI. COMPUTATIONAL EXPERIMENTS
We now describe two sets of computational experiments in
which we directly specify the agent A with associated space
of reward functions RA, a ﬁtness function F, and a set of
environments E, and derive ˆr∗
A via (approximately) exhaustive search. These experiments are designed to serve three
purposes. First, they will provide concrete and transparent
illustrations of the basic optimal reward framework above.
Second, they will demonstrate the emergence of interesting
reward function properties that are not direct reﬂections of the
ﬁtness function—including features that might be intuitively
recognizable as candidates for plausible intrinsic and extrinsic rewards in natural agents. Third, they will demonstrate
the emergence of interesting reward functions that capture
regularities across environments, and similarly demonstrate
that value function learning by the agent captures regularities
within single environments.
A. Experiment 1: Emergent Intrinsic Reward for Play and
Manipulation
This ﬁrst experiment was designed to illustrate how our
optimal reward framework can lead to the emergence of
an intrinsic reward for actions such as playing with and
manipulating objects in the external environment, actions that
do not directly meet any primal needs (i.e., are not ﬁtness
inducing) and thus are not extrinsically motivating.
Boxes environments used in Experiment 1. Each boxes environment
is a 6 × 6 grid with two boxes that can contain food. The two boxes can be
in any two of the four corners of the grid; the locations are chosen randomly
for each environment. The agent has four (stochastic) movement actions in
the four cardinal directions, as well actions to open closed boxes and eat food
from the boxes when available. See text for further details.
(Boxes) Environments. We use a simulated physical space
shown by the 6 × 6 grid in Figure 2. It consists of four
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTONOMOUS MENTAL DEVELOPMENT
subspaces (of size 3 × 3). There are four movement actions,
North, South, East and West, that if successful move the
agent probabilistically in the direction implied, and if they fail
leave the agent in place. Actions fail if they would move the
agent into an outer bound of the grid or across a barrier, which
are represented by the thick black lines in the ﬁgure. Consequently, the agent has to navigate through gaps in the barriers
to move to adjacent subspaces. In each sampled environment
two boxes are placed in randomly chosen special locations
(from among the four corners and held ﬁxed throughout the
lifetime of the agent). This makes a uniform distribution over
a space of six environments (the six possible locations of two
indistinguishable boxes in the four corners). In addition to the
usual movement actions, the agent has two special actions:
open, which opens a box if it is closed and the agent is at
the location of the box and has no effect otherwise (when a
closed box is opened it transitions ﬁrst to a half-open state
for one time step and then automatically to an open state at
the next time step regardless of the action by the agent), and
eat, which has no effect unless the agent is at a box location,
the box at that location is half-open, and there happens to be
food (prey) in that box, in which case the agent consumes that
An open box closes with probability 0.1 at every time step.6
A closed box always contains food. The prey always escapes
when the box is open. Thus to consume food, the agent has
to ﬁnd a closed box, open it, and eat immediately in the next
time step when the box is half-open. When the agent consumes
food it feels satiated for one time step. The agent is hungry at
all other time steps. The agent-environment interaction is not
divided into trials or episodes. The agent’s observation is 6
dimensional: the x and y coordinates of the agent’s location,
the agent’s hunger-status, the open/half-open/closed status of
both boxes, as well the presence/absence of food in the square
where the agent is located. These environments are Markovian
because the agent senses the status of both boxes regardless of
location and because closed boxes always contain food; hence
each immediate observation is a state.
Fitness. Each time the agent eats food its ﬁtness is incremented by one. This is a surrogate for what in biology would
be reproductive success (we could just as well have replaced
the consumption of food event with a procreation event in our
abstract problem description). The ﬁtness objective, then, is to
maximize the amount of food eaten over the agent’s lifetime.
Recall that when the agent eats it becomes satiated for one
time step, and thus a direct translation of ﬁtness into reward
would assign a reward of c > 0 to all states in which the agent
is satiated and a reward of d < c to all other states. Thus, there
is a space of ﬁtness-based reward functions. We will refer to
ﬁtness-based reward functions in which d is constrained to be
exactly 0 as simple ﬁtness-based reward functions. Note that
our deﬁnition of ﬁtness is incremental or cumulative and thus
we can talk about the cumulative ﬁtness of even a partial (less
than lifetime) history.
6A memoryless distribution for box-closing was chosen to keep the environment Markovian for the agent; otherwise, there would be information
about the probability of a box closing from the history of observations based
on the amount of time the box had been open.
Agent. Our agent (A) uses the lookup-table ϵ-greedy Qlearning algorithm with the following choices for its
parameters: 1) Q0, the initial Q-function (we use small values
chosen uniformly randomly for each state-action pair from
the range [−0.001, 0.001]) that maps state-action pairs to their
expected discounted sum of future rewards, 2) α, the step-size,
or learning-rate parameter, and 3) ϵ, the exploration parameter
(at each time step the agent executes a random action with
probability ϵ and the greedy action with respect to the current
Q-function with probability (1 −ϵ)).
For each time step t, the current state is denoted st, the
current Q-function is denoted Qt, the agent executes an action
at, and the Q-learning update is as follows:
Qt+1(st, at) = (1−α)Qt(st, at)+α[rt+γ maxb(Qt(st+1, b)],
where rt is the reward speciﬁed by reward function rA for
the state st, and γ is a discount factor that makes immediate
reward more valuable than later reward (we use γ = 0.99
throughout).
We emphasize that the discount factor is an agent parameter
that does not enter into the ﬁtness calculation. That is, the
ﬁtness measure of a history remains the total amount of food
eaten in that history for any value of γ the agent uses in
its learning algorithm. It is well known that the form of
Q-learning used above will converge asymptotically to the
optimal Q-function7 and hence the optimal policy . Thus,
our agent uses its experience to continually adapt its action
selection policy to improve the discounted sum of rewards, as
speciﬁed by rA, that it will obtain over its future (remaining
in its lifetime). Note that the reward function is distinct from
the ﬁtness function F.
Space of Possible Rewards Functions. To make the search
for an optimal reward function tractable, each reward function
in the search space maps abstract features of each immediate
observation to a scalar value. Speciﬁcally, we considered
reward functions that ignore agent location and map each
possible combination of the status of the two boxes and the
agent’s hunger-status to values chosen in the range [−1.0, 1.0].
This range does not unduly restrict generality because one
can always add a constant to any reward function without
changing optimal behavior. Including the box-status features
allows the reward function to potentially encourage “playing
with” boxes while the hunger-status feature is required to
express the ﬁtness-based reward functions that differentiate
only between states in which the agent is satiated from all
other states (disregarding box-status and agent location).
psuedocode below describes how we use simulation to estimate
the mean cumulative ﬁtness for a reward function rA
given a particular setting of agent (Q-learning) parameters
set (α, ϵ)
for i = 1 to N do
Sample an environment Ei from E
In A, intialize Q-function
7Strictly speaking, convergence with probability one requires the step-size
parameter α to decrease appropriately over time, but for our purposes it
sufﬁces to keep it ﬁxed at a small value.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTONOMOUS MENTAL DEVELOPMENT
Generate a history hi over lifetime for A and Ei
Compute ﬁtness F(hi)
return average of {F(h1), . . . , F(hN)}
In the experiments we report below, we estimate the mean
cumulative ﬁtness of rA as the maximum estimate obtained
(using the pseudo-code above) over a coarse discretization
of the space of feasible (α, ϵ) pairs. Finding good reward
functions for a given ﬁtness function thus amounts to a large
search problem. We discretized the range [−1.0, 1.0] for each
feasible setting of the three reward features such that we
evaluated 54, 000 reward functions in the reward function
space. We chose the discretized values based on experimental
experience with the boxes environments with various reward
functions.
Note that our focus is on demonstrating the generality of
our framework and the nature of the reward functions found
rather than on developing efﬁcient algorithms for ﬁnding good
reward functions. Thus, we attempt to ﬁnd a good reward
function ˆr∗
A instead of attempting the usually intractable task
of ﬁnding the optimal reward function r∗
A, and we are not
concerned with the efﬁciency of the search process.
Results. Recall the importance of regularities within and
across environments to our hypotheses. In this experiment,
what is unchanged across environments is the presence of
two boxes and the rules governing food. What changes across
environments—but held ﬁxed within a single environment—
are the locations of the boxes.
We ran this experiment under two conditions. In the ﬁrst,
called the constant condition, the food always appears in
closed boxes throughout each agent’s lifetime of 10, 000 steps.
In the second, called the step condition, each agent’s lifetime
is 20, 000 steps, and food appears only in the second half
of the agent’s lifetime, i.e., there is never food in any of the
boxes for the ﬁrst half of the agent’s lifetime, after which food
always appears in a closed box. Thus in the step condition,
it is impossible to increase ﬁtness above zero until after the
10, 000th time step.
The step condition simulates (in extreme form) a developmental process in which the agent is allowed to “play” in
its environment for a period of time in the absence of any
ﬁtness-inducing events (in this case, the ﬁtness-inducing events
are positive, but in general there could also be negative ones
that risk physical harm). Thus, a reward function that confers
advantage through exposure to this ﬁrst phase must reward
events that have only a distal relationship to ﬁtness. Through
the agent’s learning processes, these rewards give rise to the
agent’s intrinsic motivation. Notice that this should happen in
both the step and constant conditions; we simply expect it to
be more striking in the step condition.
The left and middle panels of Figure 3 show the mean (over
200 sampled environments) cumulative ﬁtness as a function of
time within an agent’s lifetime under the two conditions. As
expected, in the step condition, ﬁtness remains zero under any
reward function for the ﬁrst 10, 000 steps. Also as expected,
the best reward function outperforms the best ﬁtness-based
reward function over the agent’s lifetime. The best ﬁtnessbased reward function is the best reward function in the reward
function space that satisﬁes the deﬁnition of a ﬁtness-based
reward function for this class of environments. We note that
the best ﬁtness-based reward function assigns a negative value
to states in which the agent is hungry (this makes the agent’s
initial Q-values optimistic and leads to efﬁcient exploration;
see Sutton and Barto for an explanation of this effect).
The best reward function outperforms the best simple ﬁtnessbased reward by a large margin (presumably because the latter
cannot make the initial Q-values optimistic).
Table I shows the best reward functions and best ﬁtnessbased reward functions for the two conditions of the experiment (e.g., the best reward function for the Step condition is
as follows: being satiated has a positive reward of 0.5 when
both boxes are open and 0.3 when one box is open, being
hungry with one box half-open has a small negative reward
of −0.01, and otherwise being hungry has a reward of −0.05.
Note that the agent will spend most of its time in this last
situation.) Of course, as expected and like the best ﬁtnessbased reward function, the best reward function has a high
positive reward for states in which the agent is satiated. More
interestingly, the best reward function in our reward function
space rewards opening boxes (by making their half-open state
rewarding relative to other states when the agent is hungry).
This makes the agent “play” with the boxes and as a result
learn the environment-speciﬁc policy to optimally navigate to
the location of the boxes and then open them during the ﬁrst
half of the step condition so that when food appears in the
second half, the agent is immediately ready to exploit that
situation.
The policy learned under the best reward function has an
interesting subtle aspect: it makes the agent run back and forth
between the two boxes, eating from both boxes, because this
leads to higher ﬁtness (in most environments)8 than staying
at, and taking food from, only one box. This can be seen
indirectly in the rightmost panel where the mean cumulative
number of times both boxes are open is plotted as a function
of time. It is clear that an agent learning with the overall
best reward function keeps both boxes open far more often
than one learning from the best ﬁtness-based reward function.
Indeed the behavior in the latter case is mainly to loiter near
(an arbitrary) one of the boxes and repeatedly wait for it to
close and then eat.
Finally, it is also noteworthy that there are other reward
functions that keep both boxes open even more often than the
best reward function (this is seen in the rightmost panel), but
this occurs at the expense of the agent not taking the time to
actually eat the food after opening a box. This suggests that
there is a ﬁne balance in the best reward function between
intrinsically motivating “playing” with and manipulating the
boxes and extrinsically motivating eating.
Summary. This experiment demonstrates that the evolutionary pressure to optimize ﬁtness captured in the optimal reward
8The agent could hang out at one box and repeatedly wait for it to close
randomly and then open it to eat, but the probability of an open box closing
was speciﬁcally (experimentally) chosen so that it is better for the agent in
the distribution over environments to repeatedly move between boxes to eat
from both. Speciﬁcally, an open box closes with probability 0.1 and thus on
average in 10 time steps, while the average number of time steps to optimally
travel between boxes across the 6 environments is less than 10 time steps.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTONOMOUS MENTAL DEVELOPMENT
Mean Fitness Growth (CONSTANT)
Time Step in an Agent Lifetime
Mean Cumulative Fitness
Best reward
Best fitness−based reward
Best simple fitness based reward
Other rewards
Mean Fitness Growth (STEP)
Time Step in an Agent Lifetime
Mean Cumulative Fitness
Best reward
Best fitness−based reward
Best simple fitness based reward
Other rewards
Mean Growth in Both Boxes Open (STEP)
Time Step in an Agent Lifetime
Mean Cumulative Both Boxes Open
Best reward
Best fitness−based reward
Best simple fitness based reward
Other rewards
Results from Boxes environments. The leftmost panel shows for the constant condition the mean cumulative (over agent lifetime) ﬁtness achieved by
all the reward functions sampled in our search for good reward functions. The middle panel shows the same results but for the step condition. The rightmost
panel shows for the step condition the mean cumulative growth in the number of time steps both boxes were open for all the reward functions explored.
In each panel, the curves for the best reward function, for the best ﬁtness-based reward function, and for the best simple ﬁtness-based reward functions are
distingusihed. See text for further details.
RESULTS FOR THE step AND constant CONDITIONS OF EXPERIMENT 1. EACH ROW OF PARAMETER VALUES DEFINES A REWARD FUNCTION BY
SPECIFYING REWARD VALUES FOR EACH OF SEVEN FEASIBLE COMBINATIONS OF STATE FEATURES. THE COLUMN HEADINGS O, NOT-O, AND HALF-O,
ARE SHORT FOR OPEN, NOT-OPEN AND HALF-OPEN RESPECTIVELY. SEE TEXT FOR FURTHER DETAILS.
REWARD TYPE
REWARD AS A FUNCTION OF STATE
not-o/half-o
not-o/not-o
Best ﬁtness-based
Best ﬁtness-based
framework can lead to the emergence of reward functions that
assign positive primary reward to activities that are not directly
associated with ﬁtness. This was especially evident in the step
condition of the Boxes experiment: during the ﬁrst half of the
agent’s lifetime, no ﬁtness-producing activities are possible,
but intrinsically rewarding activities (running between boxes
to keep both boxes open) are pursued that have ﬁtness payoff
later. The best (primary) reward captures the regularity of
needing to open boxes to eat across all environments, while
leaving the learning of the environment-speciﬁc navigation
policy for the agent to accomplish within its lifetime by
learning the (secondary reward) Q-value function.
B. Experiment 2: Emergent Intrinsic Reward Based on Internal Environment State
This second experiment was designed with two aims in
mind. The ﬁrst is to emphasize the generality of our optimal
reward framework by using a model-based learning agent in
non-Markovian environments instead of the model-free Qlearning agent in the Markovian environments of Experiment
1. The second is to demonstrate the emergence of optimal
reward functions that are contingent on features of the internal
environment (cf. Figure 1) of the agent rather than features of
the external environment (as, for example, boxes and their
status in Experiment 1).
(Foraging) Environments. We use the foraging environment illustrated in Figure 4. It consists of a 3 × 3 grid with
three dead-end corridors (as rows) separated by impassable
walls. The agent, represented by the bird, has four movement
actions available in every location which deterministically
move the agent in each of the cardinal directions. If the
intended direction is blocked by a wall or the boundary,
the action results in no movement. There is a food source,
represented by the worm, randomly located in one of the
three right-most locations at the end of each corridor. The
agent has an eat action, which consumes the worm when the
agent is at the worm’s location. The agent is hungry except
when it consumes a worm, which causes the agent to become
satiated for one time step. Immediately, the consumed worm
disappears and a new worm appears randomly in one of the
other two potential worm locations. This creates a distribution
over foraging environments based on random sequences of
worm appearances.
The agent observations are four-dimensional: the agent’s
x and y coordinates and whether it is hungry (binary), and
whether or not it is co-located with the worm (binary). The
agent cannot see the worm unless it is co-located with it. In the
environments of Experiment 1 the agent could also not see the
food unless it was co-located with it, but the food locations
were ﬁxed throughout an agent’s lifetime. Crucially, in the
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTONOMOUS MENTAL DEVELOPMENT
foraging environments here, the location of every new worm
within an agent’s lifetime is chosen randomly. Thus, unlike
the environments of Experiment 1, the foraging environments
here are non-Markovian because the agent’s past observations
predict where the worm cannot be (speciﬁcally, the worm
cannot be at any end-of-corridor location that the agent has
visited since the last time it ate the worm), and this information
is not available from just the current observation.
Foraging environments used in Experiment 2. Each foraging
environment is a 3×3 grid arranged in (row) corridors. The food represented
by a worm appears at the rightmost end of a corridor. The agent represented by
a bird has the usual movement actions in the four cardinal directions as well
as an eat action when co-located with the worm. Crucially, once the agent eats
a worm, a new worm appears at a random corridor-end location and the agent
cannot see the worm unless co-located with it. These foraging environments
are non-Markovian unlike the boxes environments of Experiment 1. See text
for further details.
Fitness. Each time the agent eats a worm, its ﬁtness is
incremented by one. The ﬁtness objective is to maximize the
number of worms eaten over an agent lifetime of 10, 000 time
steps. When the agent eats, it becomes satiated for one time
step, and thus a direct translation of ﬁtness into reward would
assign a positive reward to all states in which the agent is
satiated and a strictly lower reward to all other states. In
Experiment 1, because of the interaction of the choice of
reward values with the initial Q-value function, we needed
to consider a space of possible ﬁtness-based rewards. In this
experiment the agent does complete estimated-model-based
planning via dynamic programming at each time step and it
is easily seen that all ﬁtness-based rewards yield exactly the
same policy, and thus we deﬁne rF to map all satiated states
to 1.0 and all other states to 0.0.
Agent. We used a standard model-based learning agent for
this experiment. Speciﬁcally, the agent updates an estimated
model of its environment after each time step and always acts
greedily according to a (certainty equivalent) policy optimal
with respect to its latest estimated model. The transitiondynamics of the environment are estimated assuming that the
agent’s observations (x and y coordinates, hunger-status, colocated-with-worm-status) are Markovian, i.e., assuming that
these observations comprise a state.
Speciﬁcally, let ns,a be the number of times that action a
was taken in state s. Let ns,a,s′ be the number of times a
transition to state s′ occurred after action a was taken in state
s. The agent models the probability of a transition to s′ after
taking a in state s as ˆT(s′|s, a) =
ns,a .9 The optimal policy
with respect to the current model is computed at every time
step via repeated Q-value iteration: for all (s, a),
Qd(s, a) = rA(s, a) + γ
ˆT(s′|s, a) max
a′ Qd−1(s′, a′),
where Q0(s, a)
def= 0, γ = 0.99 is the discount factor,10 and
iteration is performed until the maximal (across state-action
pairs) absolute change in Q-values is less than a very small
threshold. If, after convergence, the Q-values of multiple
actions in a current state are equal, the agent selects randomly
among those equal-valued actions.
Space of Reward Functions. We selected a reward function
space consisting of linear combinations of the features of
the state of the internal environment, i.e., of the history, h,
of the observations and actions. This is another departure
from Experiment 1, where we used a tabular representation of
reward functions with features based solely on the immediate
observations from the external environment.
Our choice of reward-features for this domain is driven by
the following intuition. With a ﬁtness-based reward function
that only distinguishes satiated states from hungry states, even
the policy found via inﬁnite Q-value iteration on the estimated
model cannot, from most locations, take the agent to the
worm (and make it eat). This is because the agent cannot
see the worm’s location when it is not co-located with it.
Indeed there is little guidance from a ﬁtness-based reward
unless the agent is co-located with the worm. Reward functions
that encourage systematic exploration of the grid locations
could be far more effective in expected ﬁtness than the ﬁtnessbased reward function. In fact, unlike most applications of RL
wherein exploration serves a transient purpose to be eliminated
as soon as possible, here it is essential that the agent explore
persistently throughout its lifetime.
What kind of reward function could generate systematic
and persistent exploration? We consider the reward function
space rA(s, a) = βFφF(s) + βcφc(s, a, h), where βF and
βc are parameters of a linear reward function, feature φF(s)
is 1 when the agent is satiated in state s and 0 otherwise,
and feature φc(s, a, h) = 1 −
c(s,a,h), where c(s, a, h) is
the number of time steps since the agent previously executed
action a in state s within current history h11 (see Sutton 
for an earlier use of a similar feature with the similar goal of
encouraging exploration). Feature φc(s, a, h) captures inverserecency: the feature’s value is high when the agent has not
experienced the indicated state-action pair recently in history
h, and is low when the agent has experienced it recently. Note
that it is a feature of the history of the agent’s interaction
with the external environment and not a feature of the state
of the external environment. It can be thought of as a feature
9Before an observation-action pair is experienced (i.e., when ns,a = 0)
the transition model is initialized to the identity function: ˆT(s′|s, a) = 1 iff
10A discount factor is used to ensure convergence of Q-value iteration used
for planning. As for Experiment 1, we emphasize that the discount factor is
an agent parameter and does not effect the calculation of ﬁtness for a history.
11We encoded the feature in this way to normalize its value in the range
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTONOMOUS MENTAL DEVELOPMENT
maintained by the internal environment of the agent. When
the parameter βc is positive, the agent is rewarded for taking
actions that it has not taken recently from the current state.
Such a reward is not a stationary function of the external
environment’s state. Finally, feature φF(s) is a hunger-status
feature, and thus when βF = 1 and βc = 0, the reward
function is the ﬁtness-based reward function.
Finding a Good Reward Function. Our optimization
procedure adaptively samples reward vectors on the unit
sphere, as it can be shown that for the (linear) form of the
reward functions and for the agent presented here, searching
this subset is equivalent to searching the entire space. More
speciﬁcally, multiplying the linear reward function parameters
by a positive scalar preserves the relative magnitude and signs
of the rewards and thus we only need to search over the
possible directions of the parameter vector (βF and βc as a
2d vector) and not its magnitude. Our optimization procedure
samples reward vectors on the unit sphere using an adaptive
approach that samples more ﬁnely where needed; we test the
origin βc = βF = 0 separately (for the agents presented here,
this reward function results in random behavior).
RESULTS FROM THE FORAGING ENVIRONMENTS. THE FIRST COLUMN
PRESENTS THE DIFFERENT REWARD FUNCTION TYPES OF INTEREST IN
THIS EXPERIMENT. THE SECOND COLUMN SPECIFIES THE SETTING OF THE
TWO LINEAR REWARD FUNCTION PARAMETERS FOR EACH TYPE OF
REWARD FUNCTION. THE THIRD COLUMN PRESENTS THE MEAN
CUMULATIVE (OVER LIFETIME) FITNESS AND THE STANDARD DEVIATION
(OVER 200 RANDOMLY SAMPLED ENVIRONMENTS) ACHIEVED BY THE
AGENT WITH EACH REWARD FUNCTION TYPE. SEE TEXT FOR FURTHER
reward function
mean cumulative
60.51 ± 0.868
Fitness-based
1.086 ± 0.037
408.70 ± 13.685
Results. In this experiment, unchanged across foraging
environments are the motion dynamics and the action needed
to consume food when the agent is co-located with it. Changing across environments is the sequence of food-appearance
locations.
In Table II, we compare the agent using the ﬁtness-based
reward function rF with the agent using the (approximately)
best reward function ˆr∗
A. The ﬁtness in the rightmost column
of the table is cumulative over agent lifetimes of 10, 000 time
steps and averaged over 200 randomly sampled environments.
The table also shows the speciﬁc values of reward parameters.
Noteworthy is the relatively large coefﬁcient for the inverserecency feature relative to the coefﬁcient for the hunger-status
feature in the best reward. Clearly, an intrinsic reward for
executing state-action pairs not experienced recently emerges
in the best reward function.
As can be seen in the table, the best reward function significantly outperforms the ﬁtness-based reward function; indeed,
with the latter the agent gets stuck and fails to accumulate
ﬁtness in most of the sampled environments. Agents using the
best reward function, on the other hand, manage to achieve
several orders of magnitude improvement in the amount of
ﬁtness obtained despite being coupled with a model that is
wholly inadequate at predicting the food location (the partial
observability causes the Markovian model to “hallucinate”
about food at locations where the agent has experienced food
before). Indeed, the advantage conferred by the best reward
function is the (depth-ﬁrst search like) systematic and persistent exploration that results from rewarding the experiencing
of state-action pairs not experienced recently. Of course, the
best reward function also has a positive reward value for the
activity of eating (which leads to satiation), for otherwise the
agent would not eat the worm even when co-located with it
(except as an exploration effect).
To provide a reference point for the effect of exploration, we
also implemented an agent that acts purely randomly and thus
explores persistently though not systematically. As can been
seen from the results in the table, the random agent does much
better than the agent with the ﬁtness-based reward (which gets
stuck because the model hallucinates about food and thus the
agent does not explore systematically or persistently). The
agent with the best reward function, however, again outperforms the random agent (the former’s model also hallucinates
about food but the high positive coefﬁcient associated with the
inverse-recency feature overcomes this effect).
Summary. As in the results for Experiment 1, the best
reward function positively rewards the activity of eating. What
is most interesting about this experiment is that the agent’s
internal environment—which is of course invariant across the
distribution over external environments—provides an inverserecency feature. The best reward function exploits this feature
to intrinsically reward activities that lead to the agent experiencing state-action pairs it has not visited recently, leading
to systematic and persistent exploration. This exploration, in
turn, distally produces much greater ﬁtness than achieved
by an agent using the ﬁtness-based reward. Of course, the
environment-speciﬁc movements to explore and ﬁnd food
are the result of the agent’s planning processes executed
throughout its lifetime.
VII. RELATION TO OTHER RESEARCH
The study most closely related to ours is that of Elfwing et
al. in which a genetic algorithm is used to search for
“shaping rewards” and other learning algorithm parameters
that improve an RL learning system’s performance. Like ours,
this work uses an evolutionary framework to demonstrate
that performance can be improved by a suitable choice of
reward function. However, its focus on shaping rewards reveals important differences. The key fact about what Ng et
al. called shaping rewards is that adding them to an
RL agent’s primary reward function does not change what
policies are optimal.12 In other words, shaping rewards do
not alter the learning problem the agent is facing in the
sense that the optimal solution remains the same, but they
do offer the possibility—if suitably selected—of providing
more informative performance feedback which can accelerate
learning. Wiewiora showed that adding shaping rewards
12This use of the term shaping differs from its original meaning due to
Skinner .
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTONOMOUS MENTAL DEVELOPMENT
is equivalent to initializing the agent’s Q-function to non-zero
values. Since these initial values are eventually “learned away,”
the problem reverts asymptotically to the problem initially set
by the agent’s primary reward function.
Although some shaping rewards might be considered to be
intrinsic rewards, the fact that their inﬂuence disappears with
continued learning is at odds with what psychologists call
intrinsic rewards, which are as primary and as long-lived as an
animal’s more biologically-relevant primary rewards. From a
theoretical perspective, since shaping rewards disappear with
continued learning, they tend not to be useful in non-stationary
environments. For example, the Boxes environment of our
Experiment 1 with the step condition is non-stationary. Here, a
shaping reward for manipulating boxes would only be useful if
it lasted long enough to prevent the box-manipulating behavior
from extinguishing before it became useful for incrementing
ﬁtness in the second half of the agent’t life.
A more fundamental limitation of shaping rewards is that
their property of leaving optimal policies unaltered is of
limited use in situations where optimal policies cannot be
attained due to limitations of the agent’s learning algorithm
or of the circumstances under which the agent must operate.
For example, in our Experiment 1, agents’ lives are generally
not long enough to allow convergence to an optimal policy.
If they could learn over a long enough period of time in a
stationary environment, and with a learning algorithm and
state representation that ensured convergence to an optimal
policy, then a simple ﬁtness-based reward function would
allow convergence to a ﬁtness-maximizing policy. Even if this
were possible, though, the ﬁtness of the entire lifetime is the
most important factor, and this usually depends on learning
efﬁciency more than the asymptotic result. Sutton et al. 
make related observations about the limitations of asymptotic
optimality.
The need for a departure from shaping rewards is even more
clear in our Experiment 2 in which the agent cannot sense
the location of food and the planning algorithm uses a learned
model that makes the assumption that the environment is fully
observable. With these limitations, the optimal policy with
respect to the best ﬁtness-based reward function gets stuck
and is unable to systematically ﬁnd food via planning. Thus,
the best reward function should signiﬁcantly alter behavior
as achieved in our experiments by encouraging persistent
and systematic exploration; such an alteration—or indeed
any persistent alteration—can not be achieved via shaping
rewards. In general, a major function of intrinsic rewards is
to compensate for agent limitations, such as the short agent
lifetimes in Experiment 1 or the non-Markovian nature of the
environments in Experiment 2 (see for further exploration
of such compensation).
Although they did not directly touch on the issue of intrinsic
versus extrinsic reward, Samuelson and Swinkels put
forward a related view regarding the nature of peoples’ utility
functions. They argue that their analysis shows
. . . that if the agent fully understands the causal and
statistical structure of the world, the utility function
“maximize the expected number of your descendants” does strictly better than one that puts weight
on intermediate actions like eating and having sex.
In the absence of such a perfect prior understanding
of the world, however, there is evolutionary value
in placing utility on intermediate actions. (p. 120,
Samuelson and Swinkels )
Also related is research on transfer learning , which
focuses on how learning to perform one task is useful in
helping an agent learn to perform a different task. Multitask learning, also reviewed in , explores transfer across
multiple tasks dawn from a task distribution. Because our
methodology assesses agent ﬁtness over a task distribution,
it has implications for transfer learning, especially multi-task
learning, which remain to be explored. Good reward functions
found by searching reward-function space tap into common aspects of these tasks to facilitate learning across the distribution.
We are not aware of approaches to multi-task learning that
rely on such searches. Although the variable-reward approach
of Mehta et al. involves multiple reward functions, it is
quite different in that the tasks in the distribution differ in
their reward functions rather than in other features, and no
reward-function search is involved. However, the distinction
between agent-space and problem-space in Konidaris and
Barto’s approach to transfer learning is closely related to
our observations because agent-space is determined by features
associated with the agent that remain constant across multiple
tasks. Thus, in Experiment 2, for example, we could say that
the inverse-recency feature given signiﬁcant weight in the best
reward function is a feature of agent-space, suggesting that
the agent-space/problem-space distinction may be a natural
outcome of an evolutionary process.
The present paper used simple learning and planning agents
and thus does not address hierarchical RL and its implications for transfer learning, but our approach sets the stage for
further examination of the claim made by Barto et al. and
Singh et al. that intrinsic rewards facilitate the acquisition
of skills that can form reusable building blocks for behavioral
hierarchies. Evolutionary approaches to discovering useful
hierarchical structure for RL, such as the work of Elfwing et
al. , suggest that progress can be made in this direction.
VIII. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
We believe that the new optimal reward framework presented by Singh et al. and elaborated here clariﬁes the
computational role and origin of intrinsic and extrinsic motivation. More speciﬁcally, the experimental results support two
claims about the implications of the framework for intrinsic
and extrinsic motivation.
First, both intrinsic and extrinsic motivation can be understood as emergent properties of reward functions selected because they increase the ﬁtness of learning agents across some
distribution of environments. When coupled with learning, a
primary reward function that rewards behavior that is useful
across many environments can produce greater evolutionary
ﬁtness than a function exclusively rewarding behavior directly
related to ﬁtness. For example, in both experiments above,
eating is necessary for evolutionary success in all environments, so we see primary rewards generated by (satiated)
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTONOMOUS MENTAL DEVELOPMENT
states resulting immediately from eating-related behavior. But
optimal primary reward functions can also motivate richer
kinds of behavior less directly related to basic needs, such as
play and manipulation of the boxes in Experiment 1, that can
confer signiﬁcantly greater evolutionary ﬁtness to an agent.
This is because what is learned as a result of being intrinsically
motivated to play with and manipulate objects contributes,
within the lifetime of an agent, to that agent’s ability to survive
and reproduce.
Second, the difference between intrinsic and extrinsic motivation is one of degree—there are no hard and fast features that
distinguish them. A stimulus or activity comes to elicit reward
to the extent that it helps the agent attain evolutionary success
based on whatever the agent does to translate primary reward
to learned secondary reward, and through that to behavior
during its lifetime. What we call intrinsically rewarding stimuli
or activities are those that bear only a distal relationship to
evolutionary success. Extrinsically rewarding stimuli or events,
on the other hand, are those that have a more immediate and
direct relationship to evolutionary success. In fact, in a strict
sense, all stimuli or activities that elicit primary reward can
be considered intrinsically motivated because they bear only
a distal relationship to evolutionary success. Having sex is
more directly related to evolutionary success (e.g., as measured
by the longevity of one’s genes in the population) than is
childhood play, but both are merely predictors of evolutionary
success, not that success itself. Crucially, however, all across
this continuum the evolved (optimal) reward function has to
be ubiquitously useful across many different environments in
that the behavior learned from the reward function in each
environment has to be good for that environment.
The experiments also clearly demonstrate that learning
(speciﬁcally RL) exploits regularities within a single agent’s
lifetime, while the (evolutionary) reward function optimization exploits regularities across environments and agents. For
example, in Experiment 1 the location of the boxes did not
change within a single agent’s lifetime (though they varied
across environments) and so the value function learned via
RL captured those within-environment regularities. Even more
potentially signiﬁcant and interesting is the role of the internal
environment (cf. right panel in Figure 1) that remains relatively
unchanged across individuals (whether within or across generations). This can lead the optimal primary reward function to
encourage behaviors that involve features from this part of the
agent’s environment. In general, this might include behaviors
that we think of as involving curiosity, novelty, surprise,
and other internally-mediated features usually associated with
intrinsic reward. Speciﬁcally, in Experiment 2 this led the
primary reward to encourage the behavior of experiencing
state-action pairs that had not been experienced recently.
This in turn led to systematic and persistent exploration
behavior by the agent which was beneﬁcial across foraging
environments. Although our observations do not support the
view that dependence on internal environment states is a
deﬁning characteristic of intrinsic motivation, they nonetheless
provide an explanation for why the archetypical examples of
intrinsically rewarding behavior often exhibit this dependency.
Prominent among the environmental features that are shared
across populations of evolving agents are features of the
agents’ internal environments.
Our optimal reward framework and experimental results
thus explain why evolution would give exploration, manipulation, play, etc. positive hedonic valence, i.e., make them
rewarding, along with stimuli and activities that are more
directly related to evolutionary success. The distinction between intrinsic and extrinsic motivation is therefore a matter of
degree, but their source and role is computationally clear: both
intrinsic and extrinsic motivation are emergent properties of a
process that adjusts reward functions in pursuit of improved
evolutionary success.
Finally, our optimal reward framework also has implications
for a basic tenet of RL:
...the reward signal is not the place to impart to the
agent prior knowledge about how to achieve what
we want it to do. ... The reward signal is your way
of communicating to the robot what you want it to
achieve, not how you want it achieved. (p. 56, Sutton
and Barto )
This remains good cautionary advice for the agent designer
attempting to impart prior knowledge through the reward
function heuristically. The limitations of this approach is illustrated by many examples in which the agent learns to achieve
rewarded subgoals without learning to achieve a problem’s
ultimate goal (e.g., ). However, our results demonstrate
that reward functions do exist that incorporate prior knowledge
in a way that produces signiﬁcant gains in performance toward
the ultimate goal of maximizing ﬁtness. That these reward
functions are the result of extensive search supports the essential role that evolution has in making biological reinforcement
learning a useful component of adaptive natural intelligence.
Acknowledgements
Satinder Singh and Jonathan Sorg were supported by
AFOSR grant FA9550-08-1-0418 and by NSF grant IIS
0905146. Richard Lewis was supported by ONR grant
N000140310087 and by NSF grant IIS 0905146. Andrew
Barto was supported by AFOSR grant FA9550-08-1-0418.
Any opinions, ﬁndings, conclusions or recommendations expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reﬂect the views of the sponsors.