User Evaluation Framework of Recommender Systems
Department of Computer Science
Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong
 
Human Computer Interaction Group
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne
 
This paper explores the evaluation issues of recommender
systems particularly from users’ perspective. We first show
results of literature surveys on human psychological decision
theory and trust building in online environments. Based on
the results, we propose an evaluation framework aimed at
assessing a recommender’s practical ability in providing
decision support benefits to end-users from various aspects. It
includes both accuracy/effort measures and a user-trust
model of subjective constructs, and a corresponding sample
questionnaire design.
Author Keywords
Recommender systems, user evaluation, adaptive decision
theory, trust building, decision accuracy and effort.
ACM Classification
H5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI):
Miscellaneous.
INTRODUCTION
Recommender systems emerged as an independent research
area since the appearance of papers on “collaborative
filtering” in the mid-1990s to resolve the recommendation
problem . The automated collaborative filtering (ACF)
originated as an information filtering technique that used
group opinions to recommend information items to
individuals. For instance, the user will be recommended
items that people with similar tastes and preferences liked
in the past. Various collaborative algorithms based on data
mining and machine learning techniques (e.g. K-nearest
neighbor, clustering, classifier learning) have been
developed to reach the goal. A typical application is
MovieLens that predicts the attractiveness of an unseen
movie for a given user based on a combination of the rating
scores derived from her nearest neighbors . At
Amazon.com, the “people who bought this book also
bought” was also one example of the commercial adoptions
of this technology. Recently, Bonhard et al. showed ways to
improve the user-user collaborative filtering techniques by
including information on the demographics similarity .
In the case that relationship among products is stronger than
among customers, content-based recommender methods
have been often used to compute the set of items that are
similar to what the user has preferred in the past . For
example, Pandora, an online music recommender tool, can
suggest a sequence of music the user would probably like
according to the features (e.g. genre, musician) of ones that
she has indicated her preferences on.
recommender
preference-based or knowledge-based systems, has been
mainly oriented for high-involvement products with welldefined features (such as computers, houses, cars), for
which selection a user is willing to spend considerable
effort in order to avoid any financial damage . In
such systems, a preference model is usually explicitly
established for each user.
Researchers have previously indicated the challenges for
different types of recommenders. For example, as for the
collaborative system, its main limitations are new user
problem (i.e. a new user having very few ratings would not
be able to get accurate recommendations), new item
problem (i.e. until the new item is rated by a substantial
number of users, the system would not be able to
recommend it), and sparsity (i.e. the number of ratings is
very small compared to the number of ratings that need to
be predicted) . In order to address these problems, the
hybrid recommendation approach combining two or more
techniques
combination
content-based
collaborative filtering) has been increasingly explored .
Recently, advanced techniques that involve more types of
social resources such as tags and social ties (e.g., friendship
or membership) have also emerged in order to improve the
similarity accuracy between users or items, and classified
into a new branch called social recommender systems [27,
However, few studies have stood from users’ angles to
consider their cognitive acceptance of recommendations.
Moreover, the question is how to evaluate a recommender
in terms of its actual impacts on empowering users to make
better decisions, except mathematical algorithm accuracy.
In the following, we will first show literature reviews on
decision theory from the psychology domain to understand
heuristics,
recommender is inherently a decision support to assist users
in making choices. Furthermore, the user-trust building
issues that have been promoted in online environments will
be discussed and related to specific research questions to
recommenders.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise,
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior
specific permission and/or a fee.
Workshop SRS’10, February 7, 2010, Hong Kong, China.
Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-60558-995-4/10/01...$10.00
ADAPTIVE DECISION MAKER
The goal of a decision support system is to aid the user in
making an informed decision consistent with her objectives.
The elicitation of user preferences is fundamental for the
recommender system to generate products or services that
may interest its users. Most of preference elicitation
procedures in recent recommender systems can be
classified into two main technologies: implicit preference
elicitation which has aimed to infer user preferences
according to her demographic data, personality, past
navigation and purchase behavior, tags, and so on ;
and explicit preference elicitation that has emphasized on
explicitly asking for the user’s preferences during
interaction, such as her rating on an item (in collaborative
filtering systems) or stating value functions over item
features (in utility-based systems). However, recommender
systems, that simply depend on initially obtained user
preferences to predict recommendations, may not help the
user make an accurate decision.
According to the adaptive decision theory , user
preferences are inherently adaptive and constructive
depending on the current decision task and environment,
and hence their initial preferences can be uncertain and
erroneous. They may lack the motivation to answer
demanding initial elicitation questions prior to any
perceived benefits , and they may not have the domain
knowledge to answer the questions correctly.
As a matter of fact, in the last four decades, the classical
decision theory has evolved into two conceptual shifts. One
shift is the discovery of adaptive and constructive nature of
human decision making. Individuals have several decision
strategies at their disposal and when faced with a decision
they select a strategy depending on a variety of factors
related to the task, the context, and individual differences.
Additional studies indicated that individuals often do not
possess well-defined preferences on many objects and
situations, but construct them in a highly context-dependent
fashion during the decision process .
Another shift has occurred in the field of prescriptive
decision making and it is called value-focused thinking
 , different from the traditional attribute-focused
thinking. In this approach, once a decision problem is
recognized, fundamental and relevant values are first
identified to creatively identify possible alternatives and to
carefully assess their desirability .
Based on the two shifts, researchers in areas of decision
theory have identified the following typical phenomena that
may occur in a person's adaptive decision process.
Context-dependent preferences. An important implication
of the constructive nature of preferences is that decisions
and decision processes are highly contingent upon a variety
of factors characterizing decision problems. First, choice
among options is context (or menu) dependent. The relative
value of an option depends not only on the characteristics of
that option, but also upon characteristics of other options in
the choice set. For example, the relative attractiveness of x
compared to y often depends on the presence or absence of
a third option z . Second, preference among options
also depends upon how the valuation question is asked.
Strategically equivalent methods for eliciting preferences
can lead to systematically different preference orderings.
Third, choice among options depends upon how the choice
set is represented (framed) or displayed. Finally, the process
used to make a choice depends on the complexity of the
decision tasks: the use of simple decision heuristics
increases with task complexity .
Four decision metagoals. Evidence from behavioral
studies indicates four main metagoals driving human
decision making. Although individuals clearly aim at
maximizing the accuracy of their decisions, they are often
willing to tradeoff accuracy to reduce cognitive effort. Also,
because of their social and emotional nature, when making
minimize/maximize
negative/positive emotions and maximize the ease of
justifying a decision . When faced with a decision,
people make critical assessments of the four metagoals
contingent on the decision task (e.g. number of alternatives)
and the decision environment (e.g. how information is
presented to the decision maker). Especially in unfamiliar
and complex decision conditions, decision makers reassess
the metagoals and switch from one strategy to another as
they learn more about the task structure and the
environment during the course of decision making .
Anchoring effect. Researchers also suggested that people
use an anchor-and-adjust strategy to solve a variety of
estimation problems. For example, when asked questions
about information that people do not know, they may
spontaneously anchor on information that comes to mind
and adjust their responses in a direction that seems
appropriate . This heuristic is helpful, but the final
estimate might be biased toward the initial anchor value
Tradeoff avoidance. Decision problems often involve
conflict among values, because no one option is best on all
attributes of values, and conflict has long been recognized
as a major source of decision difficulty . Thus, many
researchers argued that making tradeoffs between more of
one thing and less of another is a crucial aspect of highquality and rational decision making . However,
decision makers often avoid explicit tradeoffs, relying
instead on an array of non-compensatory decision strategies
 . The explanation for tradeoff avoidance is that
tradeoffs can be difficult for emotional as well as cognitive
reasons .
Means objectives. According to value-focused thinking
(VFT), the decision maker should qualitatively distinguish
between fundamental and means objectives. Fundamental
objectives should reflect what the decision maker really
wants to accomplish with a decision, while means
objectives simply help to achieve other objectives .
However, inadequate elicitation questions can easily
circumscribe a user in thinking about means objectives
rather than fundamental objectives. For example, a traveler
lives near Geneva and wants to be in Malaga by 3:00 pm
(her fundamental objective), but if she was asked to state
departure time first, she would have to formulate a means
objective (i.e. departure at 10:00 am), even though there is a
direct flight that leaves at 2:00 pm.
Therefore, as suggested in , metaphorically speaking,
preference elicitation is best viewed as architecture
(building a set of values) rather than archeology
(uncovering existing values). In order to avoid human
decision biases, preference elicitation tools must attempt to
quickly collect as much preference data as possible so that
users can begin working towards their goals. Furthermore,
they must also be able to resolve potential conflicting
preferences, discover hidden preferences, and make
reasonable decisions about tradeoffs with competing user
Unfortunately, most of current recommender system
designs did not recognize the importance of these
implications. In order to help the user make an accurate and
confident decision, we have been mainly engaged to realize
a decision aid that can embody all of the requirements. In
addition, by means of user experience research, we have
attempted to derive more useful principles for the
development of an intelligent and adaptive preferencebased recommender system.
TRUST BUILDING IN ONLINE ENVIRONMENTS
The second challenge is about how to build user trust in
recommender systems. Less attention has been paid in
related work to evaluating and improving the recommender
system from the aspect of users’ subjective attitudes.
Among the many factors, the perception of the
recommender’s trustworthiness would be most prominent
as it facilitates long-term relationship and encourages
potential repeat interactions and purchases .
Trust has been in nature regarded as a key factor to the
success of e-commerce . Due to the lack of face-to-face
interaction with consumers in online environments, users’
actions undertake a higher degree of uncertainty and risk
than in traditional settings. As a result, trust is indeed
difficult to build and easy to lose with the virtual store,
which has impeded customers from actively participating in
e-commerce environments .
The definition of trust has varied from study to study. The
most frequently cited definition of trust in various contexts
is the “willingness to be vulnerable” proposed by Mayer et
al. . Adapting from this definition, Chopra and Wallace
defined trust in the electronic environment as the
“willingness to rely on a specific other, based on confidence
that one’s trust will lead to positive outcomes.” More
specifically, consumer trust in online shopping was defined
as “the willingness of a consumer to expose himself/herself
to the possibility of loss during an Internet shopping
transaction, based on the expectation that the merchant will
engage in generally acceptable practices, and will be able to
deliver the promised products or services.” 
As these definitions indicate, consumer trust is essentially
leading to behavioral intentions , referred as “trusting
intentions” by McKnight et al. . Consistent with the
Theory of Planned Behavior , consumer trust (as a
belief) will influence customer intentions. Empirical studies
have shown that trust in an e-commerce website increases
customer intention to purchase a product from the website,
as well as intention to return to it for future use. Other
potential trusting intentions include providing personal
information (email, phone number and credit card number)
and continuing to transact with the website .
Many researchers have also experimentally investigated the
antecedents of on-line trust. For example, Pavlou and
Chellappa explained how perceived privacy and perceived
security promote trust in e-commerce transactions . De
Ruyter et al. examined the impact of organizational
reputation, relative advantage and perceived risk on trust in
e-service and customer behavior intentions . Jarvenpaa
et al. validated that the perceived size of an Internet store
and its perceived reputation are positively related to
consumers’ initial trust in the store .
The effect of experience with website interface on trust
formation has been also investigated based on the
Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) . TAM has
long been considered a robust framework for understanding
how users develop attributes towards technology and when
they decide to adopt it. It posits that intention to voluntarily
accept and use a new information technology (IT) is
determined by two beliefs: the perceives usefulness of using
the new IT, and the perceived ease of use of the new IT.
Hampton-Sosa
established a trust model and demonstrated that both the
perceived usefulness and the perceived ease of use of the
website are positively associated with customer trust in the
online company and customer’ intentions to purchase and
return . Gefen et al. expanded TAM to include a
familiarity and trust aspect of e-commerce adoption, and
found that repeat customers’ purchase intentions were
influenced by both their trust in the e-vendor and their
perceived usefulness of the website, whereas potential
customers were only influenced by their trust .
Hassanein and Head identified the positive influence of
social presence on customers’ perceived usefulness of an ecommerce website and their trust in the online vendor .
In the domain of recommender systems, trust value has
been also noticed but it has been mainly used to empower
the prediction of user interests, especially for the
collaborative filtering (CF) systems . For instance,
O'Donovan and Smyth have proposed a method to
incorporate the trustworthiness of partners into the standard
computation process in CF frameworks in order to increase
the predictive accuracy of recommendations . Similarly,
Massa and Bhattacharjee developed a trust-aware technique
taking into account the “web of trust” provided by each user
to estimate the relevance of users’ tastes in addition to
similarity measure . Few literatures have highlighted
the importance of user trust in recommender systems and
proposed effective techniques to achieve it. The studies
done by Swearingen and Sinha showed the positive role of
transparency, familiarity of the recommended items and the
process for receiving recommendations in trust achievement
 . Zimmerman and Kurapati described a method of
exposing the reflective history in user interface to increase
user trust in TV recommender .
However, the limitations are that there is still lack of indepth investigations of the concrete system design features
that could be developed to promote user trust, and lack of
empirical studies to measure real-users’ trust formation and
the influential constructs that could be most contributive to
users’ behavioral intentions in a recommender system.
Considering these limitations, our main objective is to
explore the crucial antecedents of trustworthiness for
recommender systems and their exact nature in providing
benefits to users. Concretely, driven by the above decision
theory findings and trust issues, we have built an evaluation
framework aimed at including all of crucial standards to
assess a recommender’s true ability.
EVALUATION FRAMEWORK
As a matter of fact, identifying the appropriate criteria for
evaluating the true benefits of a recommender system is a
challenging issue. Most of related user studies purely focused
on users’ objective performance such as their interaction
cycles and task completion time , less on decision
accuracy that the user can eventually achieve, and subjective
effort that the user cognitively perceived in processing
information. Moreover, as mentioned above, the consumer
trust should be also included as a key standard, such as
whether the recommender could significantly help to increase
users’ competence-inspired trust and furthermore their
behavioral intention to purchase a product or intention to
return to it for repeated uses.
Decision Accuracy and Decision Effort
According to , two key considerations underlying a
user’s decision strategy selection are: the accuracy of a
strategy in yielding a “good” decision, and the “cognitive
effort” required of a strategy in making a decision. All else
being equal, decision makers prefer more accurate choices
and less effortful choices. Unfortunately, strategies yielding
more accurate choices are often more effortful (such as
weighted additive rule), and easy strategies can sometimes
yield lower levels of accuracy (e.g. elimination-by-aspects).
Therefore, they view strategy selection to be the result of a
compromise between the desire to make the most correct
decision and the desire to minimize effort. Typically, when
alternatives are numerous and difficult to compare, like when
the complexity of the decision environment is high, decision
makers are usually willing to settle for imperfect accuracy of
their decisions in return for a reduction in effort. The
observation is well supported by and consistent with
the idea of bounded rationality .
A standard assumption in past research on decision support
systems is that decision makers who are provided with
decisions aids that have adequate information processing
capabilities will use these tools to analyze problems in
greater depth and, as a result, make better decisions .
However, empirical studies also showed that because
feedback on effort expenditure tends to be immediate while
feedback on accuracy is subject to delay and ambiguity, the
use of decision aids does not necessarily enhance decision
making quality, but merely leads individuals to reduce effort
Given this mixed evidence, it cannot be assumed that the use
of interaction decision aids will definitely enhance users’
decision quality. Thus, an open question to recommender
systems is that whether they could enable users to reach the
optimal level of accuracy under the acceptable amount of
effort users are willing to exert during their interaction with
the system. In the following, we introduce our accuracyeffort measurement model, derived from the ACE (Accuracy,
Confidence, Effort) framework that we have previously built
for preference-based product recommenders . Decision
accuracy and decision effort are respectively evaluated from
both objective and subjective dimensions and their tradeoff
relationship is also included as shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1. The accuracy and effort measurement model.
Objective and Perceived Decision Accuracy
In related work, decision accuracy has been measured
adaptive to different experimental situations or purposes. In
Payne et al.’s simulations, the accuracy of a particular
heuristic strategy was defined by comparing its produced
choice against the standard of a normative model like the
weighted additive rule (WADD) . The performance
measures of precision and recall have been commonly
applied to test an information retrieval system’s accuracy
based on a set of ground truths (previously collected items
that are relevant the user's information need) . In the
condition of user experience researches, Haubl and Trifts
suggested three indicators of a user’s decision quality:
increased probability of a non-dominated alternative selected
for purchase, reduced probability of switching to another
alternative after making the initial purchase decision, and a
higher degree of confidence in purchase decisions . In
our case, we considered two facets: objective decision
accuracy and perceived accuracy.
Objective Decision Accuracy. It is defined as the
quantitative accuracy a user can eventually achieve by using
the assigned decision system to make a choice. More
specifically, it can be measured by the fraction of participants
whose final option found with the decision tool agrees with
the target option that they find after reviewing all available
options in an offline setting. This procedure is known as the
switching task. Switching refers to whether a user switches to
another choice of product after reviewing all products instead
of standing by the choice made with the tool. In our previous
experiments , the “switching” task was supported by
both sorting and comparison facilities. Subjects were
encouraged to switch whenever they saw an alternative they
preferred over their initial choice.
A lower switching fraction, thus, means that the decision
system allows higher decision accuracy since most users are
able to find their best choice with it. On the contrary, a higher
switching fraction implies that the system is not very capable
of guiding users to obtain what they truly want. For
expensive products, such inaccurate tools may cause both
financial damage and emotional burden to a decision maker.
Perceived Accuracy. Besides objective accuracy, it is also
valuable to measure the degree of accuracy users subjectively
perceived while using the system, which is also called
decision confidence in some literatures . The confidence
judgment is important since it would be likely associated
with users’ competence perception of the system or even
their intention to purchase the chosen product. The variable is
concretely assessed either by asking subjects to express any
opinions on the interface or directly requiring them to rate a
statement like “I am confident that the product I just
‘purchased’ is really the best choice for me” on a Likert scale
ranging from “strongly disagree” to “strongly agree”.
Objective and Perceived Decision Effort
According to the accuracy-effort framework , another
important criterion of evaluating a decision system’s benefit
is the amount of decision effort users expend to make their
choice. So far, the most common measure appearing in
related literatures is the number of interaction cycles or task
time that the user actually took while using the tool to reach
an option that she believes to be the target option. For
example, session length (the number of recommendation
cycles) was regarded as an importance factor of
distinguishing the Dynamic Critiquing system with its
compared work like FindMe interfaces . In our model,
we not only care about how much objective effort users
actually consumed, but also their perceived cognitive effort,
which we hope would indicate the amount of subjective
effort people exert.
Objective Effort. The objective effort is concretely reflected
by two dimensions: the task completion time and the
interaction effort. The interaction effort was either simply
defined as the total interaction cycles users were involved, or
divided into more detailed constructs if they were necessary
to indicate an average participant’s effort distribution. For
instance, in an online shopping setting, the interaction effort
may be consumed in browsing alternatives, specifying
filtering criteria, viewing products’ detailed information,
putting multiple products into a consideration set, and so on.
Such effort components were also referred to Elementary
Information Processes (EIPs) for a decision strategy’s effort
decomposition .
Perceived Cognitive Effort. Cognitive decision effort
indicates the psychological cost of processing information. It
represents the ease with which the subject can perform the
task of obtaining and processing the relevant information in
order to enable her to arrive at her decision. Normally, two or
more scale items (e.g. “I easily found the information I was
looking for”) can be used to measure the construct perceived
effort. The respondents were told to mark each of items on a
Likert scale ranging from “Strongly Disagree” to “Strongly
Trust Model for Recommender Systems
As indicated before, trust is seen as a long term relationship
between a user and the organization that the recommender
system represents. Therefore, trust issues are critical to study
especially for recommender systems used in e-commerce
traditional
salesperson,
subsequent
relationship, is replaced by a product recommender agent.
Studies showed that customer trust is positively associated
with customers' intention to transact, purchase a product, and
return to the website . These results have mainly been
derived from online shops' ability to ensure security, privacy
and reputation, i.e., the integrity and benevolence aspects of
trust formation, and less from a system’s competence such as
a recommender system’s ability to explain its result.
These open issues led us to develop a trust model for
building user trust in recommender systems, especially
focusing on the role of competence constructs. The term
“trust” is theoretically defined by a combination of trusting
beliefs and trusting intentions, in accordance with the Theory
of Planned Behavior (TPB) asserting that behavior is
influenced by behavior intention and that intention is
determined by attitudes and beliefs . So we first introduce
TPB and Technology Acceptance Model, based on which our
trust model has been established.
Theory of Planned Behavior
In psychology, the theory of planned behavior (TPB) is a
theory about the link between attitudes and behavior. It was
proposed by Icek Ajzen as an extension of the theory of
reasoned action (TRA) . It is one of the most predictive
persuasion theories. It has been applied to studies of the
relations among beliefs, attitudes, behavioral intentions and
behaviors in various fields such as advertising, public
relations, campaigns, healthcare, etc.
TPB posits that individual behavior is driven by behavioral
intentions where behavioral intentions are a function of an
individual’s attitude toward the behavior, the subjective
norms surrounding the performance of the behavior, and the
individual’s perception of the ease with which the behavior
can be performed (behavioral control) (see Figure 2).
Attitude toward the behavior is defined as the individual’s
positive or negative feeling about performing a behavior. It is
determined through an assessment of one’s beliefs regarding
the consequences arising from a behavior and an evaluation
of the desirability of these consequences. Subjective norm is
defined as an individual’s perception of whether people think
their significant others wanted them to perform the behavior.
The contribution of the opinion of any given referent is
weighted by the motivation that an individual has to comply
with the wishes of that referent. Behavioral control is defined
as one’s perception of the difficulty of performing a
behavior. TPB views the control that people have over their
behavior as lying on a continuum from behaviors that are
easily performed to those requiring considerable effort,
resources, etc.
Figure 2. The model of Theory of Planned Behavior .
Technology acceptance model is another influential
extension of Ajzen and Fishbein’s theory of reasoned action
(TRA) . Some online trust models were built based on it
especially when they examined user experience with Web
technologies.
It was developed by Fred Davis and Richard Bagozzi to
model how users come to accept and use a technology .
The model suggests that when users are presented with a new
software package, a number of factors (replacing many of
TRA's attitude measures) influence their decision about how
and when they will use it.
TAM posits that perceived usefulness and perceived ease of
use determine an individual's intention to use a system, with
intention to use serving as a mediator of actual system use.
Perceived usefulness is also seen as being directly impacted
by perceived ease of use. Formally, perceived usefulness
(PU) was defined as “the degree to which a person believes
that using a particular system would enhance his or her job
performance”, and perceived ease-of-use (PEOU) is “the
degree to which a person believes that using a particular
system would be free from effort” .
Trust Model
Inspired by the two theories, our trust model consists of four
main components specific to recommender systems: system
design features, competence constructs, trustworthiness of
the system and trusting intentions (see Figure 3 of the model)
System Design Features. The system features basically deal
with all design aspects of a recommender system that will
probably contribute to the promotion of its overall
competence perceptions. Concretely, they include the
interface display techniques such as the explanation-based
interface to give system transparency, the recommendation
quality to reflect users’ perception of the recommender
algorithm’s accuracy and the user-system interaction models
like the allowed degree of user control.
Competence Constructs. It is widely accepted that
competence, benevolence and integrity explain a major
portion of a trustee’s trustworthiness . Among them, we
believe that the competence perception would be most
reflective of system design qualities of the recommender.
Based on TAM and related works , we include
typical constructs of perceived ease of use, perceived
usefulness,
additional
assessment
enjoyment. Moreover the two subjective measurements of
decision accuracy and decision effort are also involved to
represent the system’s decision support quality.
Trustworthiness.
“trustworthiness”
credibility) is the main positive influence on trusting
intentions . In our model, it is generally assessed by
two major constructs: trust in recommendations and users’
overall satisfactory degree with the recommender interface.
Trusting Intentions. Trusting intention is the extent to
which the user is willing to depend on the technical party in a
given situation . We include in our model the intention to
purchase (i.e. purchase a product from the website where the
recommender is found) and the intention to return (i.e. return
to the recommender system for more products information),
as most of e-commerce based trust models emphasize. In
addition, we added the intention to save effort to address
whether the recommender system could allow its users to
benefit from the built trust. That is, whether upon
establishing a certain trust level with the recommender at the
first visit, users will more readily accept the recommended
items, rather than exerting extra effort to process all
information themselves, once returning to use it.
Figure 3. The user-trust model for recommender systems.
Therefore, as shown in Figure 3, all subjective variables are
grouped into four categories. During the user evaluation of a
system, in addition to analyzing each single variable, it will
be also interesting to identify the relationships between
different variables through correlation analysis. For instance,
how the perceptions of system-design features are associated
Trustworthiness
intentions
Competence
constructs
System design
with specific constructs of competence assessments, and how
the competence constructs influence trust promotions, which
would furthermore affect trusting intentions.
Table 1 lists all of the questions that can be adopted to
measure these subjective variables. Most of them came from
existing literatures where they have been repeatedly shown to
exhibit strong content validity and reliability. Each question
is required to respond on a 5-point Likert Scale ranging from
“strongly disagree” to “strongly agree”.
Table 1. Questions to measure subjective constructs in our
trust model.
Question responded on a 5-point Likert scale
from “strongly disagree” to “strongly agree”
Subjective perceptions of system-design features
Transparency
I understand why the products were returned
through the explanations in the interface.
Recommendation
This interface gave me some really good
recommendations.
User control
I felt in control of specifying and changing my
preferences in this interface.
Overall competence perceptions
Perceived ease of
I find this interface easy to use.
This interface is competent to help me effectively
find products I really like.
usefulness
I find this interface is useful to improve my
“shopping” performance.
I found my visit to this interface enjoyable.
confidence
I am confident that the product I just “purchased” is
really the best choice for me.
I easily found the information I was looking for.
Perceived effort
Looking for a product using this interface required
too much effort (reverse scale).
Trustworthiness
I feel that this interface is trustworthy.
recommendations
I trust the recommended products since they were
consistent with my preferences.
Satisfaction
My overall satisfaction with the interface is high.
Trusting intentions
Intention to
I would purchase the product I just chose if given
the opportunity.
If I had to search for a product online in the future
and an interface like this was available, I would be
very likely to use it.
Intention to
I don't like this interface, so I would not use it again
(reverse scale).
Intention to save
effort in next visit
If I had a chance to use this interface again, I
would likely make my choice more quickly.
CONCLUSION
Thus, as a summary, our evaluation framework is mainly
composed of two important components: the accuracy-effort
measures and the user-trust model. The objective accuracy
and effort are respectively measured by observing users’
switching rate, recording their interaction effort and time
consumed to accomplish their search tasks. Regarding
subjective measures such as perceived accuracy, perceived
effort and trust-related constructs, a post-study questionnaire
is designed to ask for users’ subjective opinions and
comments after they finished their decision tasks with the
assigned recommender system.
We have previously conducted a series of user studies with
the goal of consolidating the evaluation framework. For
example, example-critiquing systems, that support users to
provide explicit feedbacks to recommendations, have been
mainly tested regarding users’ decision accuracy and
decision effort . The user evaluations found that
the system can significantly improve decision accuracy
compared to non-critiquing systems, while demanding
similar level of effort. Another user study on organizationbased explanation interface identified the explanation’s
positive role in increasing users’ competence perception and
return intention as focused in the trust model . The user
study on hybrid critiquing interface (integrated with systemsuggested critiques) took both of users’ decision performance
and subjective perceptions into consideration .
Given the importance of these evaluation criteria as implied
by researches on adaptive decision theory and online-trust
building, we believe that this evaluation framework will be
useful and scalable to the evaluation of recommender
systems in a broad domain including recent social
recommender systems . In fact, we have started to extend
the subjective constructs with more aspects, such as diversity,
novelty, attractiveness, and test their practicability in
domains of public tastes (e.g. movie, music). In the future,
we will continually validate and refine the framework in
different system scenarios in order to generalize its
applicable value.