NATURE BIOTECHNOLOGY VOLUME 25 NUMBER 3 MARCH 2007
A human phenome-interactome network of protein
complexes implicated in genetic disorders
Kasper Lage1,6, E Olof Karlberg1,6, Zenia M Størling1, Páll Í Ólason1, Anders G Pedersen1, Olga Rigina1,
Anders M Hinsby1, Zeynep Tümer2, Flemming Pociot3,4, Niels Tommerup2, Yves Moreau5 & Søren Brunak1
We performed a systematic, large-scale analysis of human
protein complexes comprising gene products implicated in many
different categories of human disease to create a phenomeinteractome network. This was done by integrating qualitycontrolled interactions of human proteins with a validated,
computationally derived phenotype similarity score, permitting
identification of previously unknown complexes likely to be
associated with disease. Using a phenomic ranking of protein
complexes linked to human disease, we developed a Bayesian
predictor that in 298 of 669 linkage intervals correctly ranks
the known disease-causing protein as the top candidate, and in
870 intervals with no identified disease-causing gene, provides
novel candidates implicated in disorders such as retinitis
pigmentosa, epithelial ovarian cancer, inflammatory bowel
disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Alzheimer disease, type
2 diabetes and coronary heart disease. Our publicly available
draft of protein complexes associated with pathology comprises
506 complexes, which reveal functional relationships between
disease-promoting genes that will inform future experimentation.
Several diseases with overlapping clinical manifestations are caused by
mutations in different genes that are part of the same functional module.
In such instances, the clinical overlap can be attributed to mutations in
single genes rendering the complete module dysfunctional1. This concept
has been applied to searches for disease genes by several computational
methods, including, for example, schemes based on Gene Ontology
annotations and gene expression data2–12. The advent of proteome-wide
interaction screens in model organisms has revealed the modularity of
the cellular interactome and that many genes exert their functions as
components of protein complexes such as cellular machines, rigid structures, dynamic signaling or metabolic networks and post-translational
modification systems13.
Analyses involving model organisms, and more recently humans, show
that direct and indirect interactions often occur between protein pairs
responsible for similar phenotypes14–22. In humans this relationship can,
for example, be observed in various inherited ataxias20. These findings
hint at the widespread association of protein complexes with human
disease and the likelihood that defects in several proteins, alone or in
combination, can cause overlapping clinical manifestations. Systematic
investigation of these complexes would help to elucidate cellular mechanisms underlying various disorders and prioritize positional candidates
identified, for example, by linkage analysis or association studies.
Our strategy is predicated on the simple assumption that mutations
in different members of a protein complex (predicted from protein-protein interaction data) lead to comparable phenotypes, the similarities of
which can be automatically recognized by text mining. Computational
integration of phenotypic data with a high-confidence interaction network of human proteins is required to perform such an analysis for many
human diseases simultaneously. This creates a phenome-interactome network. However, there is no single standard vocabulary for phenotypic
annotation in humans. Furthermore, protein interaction data are noisy,
are scattered among different databases and contain many false positive
interactions23. Additionally, only a few large-scale protein interaction
studies have been finalized for the human proteome24,25 rendering the
coverage of human protein interaction data too low for a systematic study
of protein complexes associated with human disease. Thus, extensive data
integration, including conservative incorporation of protein interaction
data from model organisms, streamlining of human phenotype data and
thorough testing of the resulting method, is required for the systematic
investigation of protein complexes associated with human disease.
Construction of a quality-controlled interaction network of human proteins and implementation of a thoroughly benchmarked computational
phenotype similarity score allowed us to analyze a human phenomeinteractome network. The results show that the 506 disease-associated
protein complexes span a wide range of inherited disease categories. We
furthermore trained a Bayesian predictor to prioritize candidates in 870
linkage intervals by assigning candidates to protein complexes and ranking these complexes based on the phenotypes associated with its members
by text mining. The key steps in our approach are illustrated in Figure
1. Four disease-specific case studies are presented to illustrate how the
complexes can be exploited to generate novel hypotheses, which directly
suggest specific validation experiments involving particular patientderived materials.
1Center for Biological Sequence Analysis, BioCentrum-DTU, Technical University
of Denmark, Building 208, DK-2800 Lyngby, Denmark. 2Wilhelm Johannsen
Centre for Functional Genome Research, Department of Cellular and Molecular
Medicine, The Panum Institute, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3, DK-
2200, Copenhagen N, Denmark. 3Institute for Clinical Science, University of
Lund, SE – 22100 Lund, Sweden. 4Steno Diabetes Center, Niels Steensesvej 2,
DK-2820 Gentofte, Denmark. 5Department of Electrical Engineering, Faculty of
Engineering, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, B–3001 Heverlee, Belgium.6These
authors contributed equally to this work. Correspondence should be addressed to
S.B. ( ).
Published online 7 March 2007; doi:10.1038/nbt1295
© 2007 Nature Publishing Group 
VOLUME 25 NUMBER 3 MARCH 2007 NATURE BIOTECHNOLOGY
Measuring phenotype similarity scores
Text mining techniques are well suited for investigating phenotypegenotype relationships8,11,12,14,26–28. Inspired by such techniques, we
created a scoring scheme that quantitatively measures the phenotypic
overlap of Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM)29 records
(Supplementary Fig. 1 online). For every record we created a phenotype
vector consisting of weighted medical terms present in the record, which
represent the phenotype described in that particular record. The parsing
of the OMIM records was done using MetaMap Transfer30 (MMTx),
a program that maps text to the Unified Medical Language System
(UMLS)31 metathesaurus (MTH) concepts. The pairwise phenotypic
overlap between records was quantified by calculating the cosine of the
angle between normalized vector pairs32, which is a standard measure
in such analyses. Essentially, the method amounts to detecting words
(from the UMLS vocabulary) that are (i) common to the description
of the two phenotypes and (ii) do not occur too frequently among all
phenotype descriptions and thus are informative about the phenotype
under consideration.
Even though our approach is comparable to successful methods
reported in other contexts28, there are a number of problems surrounding
the use of MMTx and UMLS33, and it is not obvious that the cosine distance between phenotype vectors can accurately capture and quantify the
phenotypic overlap between record pairs. To evaluate the reliability of our
method, we extracted a large set of ~7,000 OMIM record pairs, which had
a high degree of phenotypic overlap. This assertion of phenotypic overlap
was based on a combination of the opinion of expert OMIM curators and
experts familiar with the diseases under consideration (Supplementary
Methods online). To evaluate the phenotypic overlap of record pairs in
this set, we manually curated 100 random record pairs. This evaluation
showed that over 90% of the pairs consist of records with a high degree
of phenotypic overlap (Supplementary Table 1 online).
The reliability of the phenotype similarity score was then tested by fitting a calibration curve of the score against the overlap with the OMIM
record pairs (that is, the percentage of the pairs with a given score found
among the record pairs). This demonstrates their direct correlation
(Supplementary Fig. 2 online). The higher the phenotype similarity
score between records measured by our text-mining scheme, the higher
the probability that the records had been independently evaluated to
have a phenotypic overlap by the OMIM curators, so that indeed the
constructed phenotype vectors and scoring scheme produce a reliable
measure of phenotypic overlap between OMIM records.
Constructing a scored network of human protein interactions
We created a human protein interaction network by pooling human
interaction data from several of the largest databases and increased the
coverage by transferring data from model organisms. We then devised
and tested a network-wide confidence score for all interactions. This score
relies on network topology and furthermore considers (i) that interactions from large-scale experiments generally contain more false positives
than interactions from small-scale experiments23, and (ii) that interactions are more reliable if they have been reproduced in more than one
independent interaction experiment23. The reliability of this score as a
measure of interaction confidence was confirmed by fitting a calibration
curve of the score against overlap with a high-confidence set of about
35,000 human interactions (Supplementary Fig. 3 online). The resulting
network contains ~343,000 unique interactions between ~8,500 human
proteins. Of these, ~62,000 are high-confidence interactions.
Testing the predictor on 1,404 linkage intervals
We trained a Bayesian predictor to rank known disease-causing proteins in linkage intervals, by assigning candidates to protein complexes
and ranking these complexes based on the phenotypes assigned to their
members by text mining. The predictor was validated by fivefold crossvalidation on a total of 1,404 linkage intervals containing an average of
109 candidates and including one candidate known to be involved in the
particular disease. For ranking candidates, the Bayesian predictor takes as
input the patient phenotype (e.g., Leber congenital amaurosis) and a linkage interval, and the candidates are ranked by the following three steps
(Fig. 1). First, a given positional candidate is queried for high-scoring
interaction partners (termed a virtual pull-down of the protein). These
interaction partners compose the candidate complex. Second, proteins
known to be involved in disease are identified in the candidate complex,
and pairwise scores of the phenotypic overlap between diseases of these
proteins and the candidate phenotype are assigned. Third, based on the
phenotypes represented in the candidate complex, the Bayesian predictor
awards a posterior probability score to the candidate in the complex. All
candidates in the linkage interval are ranked on the basis of this score.
The biological interpretation of a high-scoring candidate is that this protein is likely to be involved in the molecular pathology of the disorder
of interest, because it is part of a high-confidence candidate complex
in which some proteins are known to be involved in highly similar (or
identical) disorders.
Performance of the Bayesian model relying on phenomic
scoring of protein complexes associated with disease
The results of prioritizing candidates in the 1,404 test linkage intervals
show that the predictor has both good precision and recall (Fig. 2a).
For each disease, we consider the known disease gene as the relevant
gene. Our method makes a prediction for a disease if the top-scoring
gene for this disease has a score above the threshold of 0.1. This threshold is chosen because predictions scoring below 0.1 approximate the
chance of picking the correct gene randomly. The retrieved gene is then
this top-scoring gene. Precision (at a given threshold) is the proportion of relevant genes among all retrieved genes (no. of relevant genes
retrieved/no. of genes retrieved). Recall is the fraction of the relevant
genes that have been retrieved at the same threshold (no. of relevant
genes retrieved/no. of relevant genes). For the 1,404 linkage intervals,
there are 669 different predictions with a score above 0.1. Among these,
there were 298 correctly identified disease genes, so that the precision
at this threshold is 45% (that is, 45% of the candidates that ranked
number one with a score above 0.1 are correctly identified as genes
causing disease) (Fig. 2a)—a level of precision far superior to random
prediction. At this threshold, the recall is 21%. A plot of precision versus
prediction score cutoff shows proportionality between the score and
the chance that the candidate is correct. Candidates scoring above 0.9
are correct in more than 65% of the cases (Fig. 2a). Thus, high-scoring candidates are very likely to be correct, and the score awarded to a
candidate is a direct indication of the chance that the gene contributes
to the disease in question.
There were two main types of failures to identify the relevant genes.
Either the proteins coded by the relevant genes do not have an interaction partner that is involved in a relevant phenotype (which applies to
59% of all intervals), or there is a gene in the region considered a better candidate by the predictor (which applies to 26% of all intervals).
These 26% could in theory be correct predictions, as suggested by manual
inspection of false predictions with high posterior probabilities. By far
the most common failure is the lack of interaction partners involved in
similar diseases. In 75% of such cases there were no candidates that scored
above the threshold of 0.1. These failures could either be due to a lack
of data or because some disease proteins do not interact with proteins
involved in similar diseases. It seems most likely that the failures are due
to a combination of both.
A N A LY S I S
© 2007 Nature Publishing Group 
NATURE BIOTECHNOLOGY VOLUME 25 NUMBER 3 MARCH 2007
We also tested a predictor trained on large-scale protein interaction data from which bias related to human diseases was eliminated
(Supplementary Methods online). Here we observed a comparable
precision to the predictor trained on the full protein interaction data
set (Fig. 2b). Using these data, the precision above 0.1 is 25%, and above
0.9, it is 58%. Therefore, although the performance is slightly lower, it
is still very high. These results illustrate the value of large-scale protein
interaction data from model organisms, if subjected to stringent quality
control. The much lower recall (2.3%) is to be expected with less data.
This shows that it is possible to accurately identify disease genes using
data from model organisms that were not produced specifically to investigate disease relationships.
Because mutational analysis of candidates in linkage intervals is
extremely demanding in terms of resources, our method should be valuable for identifying highly likely candidates and thereby facilitating the
discovery of novel genes involved in human disease.
Predicting novel disease gene candidates
OMIM contains 870 intervals linked to diseases for which there are no
confirmed disease-causing genes. We ranked the genes in these intervals
by the method depicted in Figure 1. The full set of predictions above the
threshold of 0.1 can be seen in the Supplementary Data. We present the
best-scoring candidates made by our predictor in Supplementary Table 2
online. In each of the 91 represented intervals at least one candidate scores
above 0.2. In some intervals there are also candidates scoring in the range
0.1–0.2, these are included for completeness, so the table contains a total
of 113 candidates in 91 intervals.
All predictions in Supplementary Table 2 were followed up by independent literature studies, where we investigated the distance of the predicted gene to the closest published high-resolution marker. Seven genes
were located >20 Mb from such markers (labeled * in Supplementary
Table 2 online). We also investigated whether the candidates had previously been associated with the respective disorders, and whether there
were inconsistencies between candidates we proposed and those proposed by other groups for the same diseases and intervals.
Twenty-four of the predictions point to genes that are most likely true
positives, but where the causative mutation has not yet been identified
(annotated with “2” or “2#” in Supplementary Table 2 online). In these
cases, our predictions should be seen as further evidence that the genes
are involved in the respective diseases. Seven predictions point to genes
where a causative mutation has been identified (annotated with “3” in
Supplementary Table 2 online). Together, these constitute 31 predictions
most likely to be true. Of these, 25 are the best scoring in the interval, and
6 are scored second or lower. Sixteen predictions point to genes for which
literature studies show that a different gene is strongly incriminated in
the disease, most likely rendering the prediction wrong (annotated with
“1#” in Supplementary Table 2 online). Of these, 11 are the best-scoring
candidate in the interval and 5 score second or lower. When considering
Linkage interval,
with N candidates
found in genetic
studies to be
associated with
the patient
Patient phenotype
Leber congenital
Pairwise similarity of protein phenotype
and patient phenotype
Not involved in
similar disease
Figure 1 Steps in scoring each candidate in a linkage interval. First, a virtual pull-down of each candidate identifies putative protein complexes including
the candidate. Each complex is named the candidate complex. Second, proteins responsible for promoting disease are identified in the candidate complex,
and the pairwise similarity to the patient phenotype is measured by text-mining. In this case, proteins that are involved in different disorders comparable to
Leber congenital amaurosis are colored according to the clinical overlap with this phenotype. The last step involves scoring and ranking the candidates by the
Bayesian predictor. Each candidate is scored based on phenotypes associated with the proteins in the candidate complex, and all candidates in the interval
are ranked based on this score.
A N A LY S I S
© 2007 Nature Publishing Group 
VOLUME 25 NUMBER 3 MARCH 2007 NATURE BIOTECHNOLOGY
only the best-scoring candidate in each interval (as we have done in the
benchmark), 25 are most likely true positives and 11 are most likely negatives. Thus, the precision is 69%—even better than the precision in the
benchmark, where predictions above 0.2 have a precision of 49%. Sixtysix of the candidates belong to intervals where there is no evidence in
the literature regarding a gene(s) that contributes to the pathology. We
consider these as novel candidates. All complexes underlying the candidates scoring 0.1 or above are available for download from the database
supporting this work.
To exemplify the candidate protein complexes underlying the scoring
of the Bayesian predictor, we present four case studies of the novel candidates from Supplementary Table 2 online. Similar analysis can be carried
out for all 506 complexes in the data set, pointing to specific approaches
toward validation of the proposed relationships.
Case studies
Retinitis pigmentosa is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group
of disorders. Common traits are night blindness, constricted visual field
and retinal dystrophy. In an associated interval on 2p15–p11 (ref. 34), the
Bayesian predictor points to LOC130951 with a score of 0.5232. This protein is uncharacterized but evolutionarily conserved, and it is putatively
involved in the disease based on an interaction with CRX25,35 (Fig. 3a).
CRX is a homeobox transcription factor known to be involved in retinitis
pigmentosa and cone rod dystrophy36. The candidature of LOC130951 is
not obvious, and because both interaction studies reporting the interaction to CRX are large scale, including thousands of interactions, it seems
unlikely that LOC130951 would have been chosen as a suitable candidate
by manual investigation of the interval.
Epithelial ovarian cancer arises as a result of genetic alterations in the
ovarian surface epithelium. In an associated interval on 3p25–p22 (ref.
37), the Bayesian predictor points to Fanconi anemia group D2 protein
(FANCD2) with a score of 0.9981. This protein is placed in a complex
with breast cancer type 2 susceptibility protein (BRCA2), breast cancer
type 1 susceptibility protein (BRCA1) and nibrin isoform 1 (NBN), all
of which are involved in ovarian cancer, breast cancer or chromosomal
instability disorders38–41 (Fig. 3b). Furthermore, other proteins involved
in cancer can be identified in the complex (Supplementary Data and
Supplementary Fig. 4 online). FANCD2 is part of the BRCA pathway in
cisplatin-sensitive cells42 and is known to be involved in different types
of cancer43. However, to our knowledge, a mutation in this gene has
never been demonstrated in epithelial ovarian cancer, and we consider
it to be a likely candidate in epithelial ovarian cancer in families with
linkage to 3p22–p25.
Inflammatory bowel disease is characterized by chronic, relapsing
intestinal inflammation. In an associated interval on 6p44,45, the Bayesian
predictor points to receptor-interacting serine/threonine protein kinase
(RIPK1) as the most likely candidate with a score of 0.9984 (Fig. 3c).
The candidate complex includes the signaling proteins tumor necrosis
factor receptor 2 (TNFRSF1B), tumor necrosis factor precursor (TNF)
and tumor necrosis factor receptor precursor (TNFRSF1A), all known
to be associated with inflammatory bowel disease or other inflammatory disorders. Furthermore, other proteins involved in inflammation
and immune responses can be observed in the complex (Supplementary
Data and Supplementary Fig. 5 online). We thus identified a positional
candidate, which is placed centrally in a complex of proteins known to
be involved in inflammatory bowel disease and other types of inflammation. We note that RIPK1 lies 20.6 Mb from the closest high-resolution
marker published. However, considering that all of 6q was screened for
candidates, and that several genes lying far from the published markers
are most likely true predictions in Supplementary Table 2 online, we
believe that RIPK1 is a very likely candidate involved in inflammatory
bowel disease.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) with frontotemporal dementia is a
degenerative motor neuron disorder characterized by muscular atrophy,
progressive motor neuron function loss and bulbar paralysis. In many
families, hereditary ALS is associated with frontotemporal dementia
and linkage has been shown to an area on 9q21–q22 (ref. 46). Here, the
Bayesian predictor points to two likely candidates: bicaudal D homolog
2 (BICD2) and cytoplasmic isoleucyl-tRNA synthetase (IARS), scoring 0.4351 and 0.2154, respectively. Although BICD2 is scored highest,
Prediction score cutoff
Figure 2 Performance of the Bayesian predictor. (a) A plot of recall of the
predictor against precision shows that precision for high-scoring candidates
can approach 65%. We also trained a predictor only on large-scale data
where we had removed all data that were related to diseases that were
represented in the test set. (b) Prediction score cutoff is plotted for both the
predictor trained on all protein interaction data in our network (green line)
and the predictor trained only on unbiased large-scale data (blue line). The
precision of these two approaches is comparable, showing that it is possible
to find disease genes with very high precision, even with unbiased largescale data inferred from model organisms, if these data are scored correctly.
A N A LY S I S
© 2007 Nature Publishing Group 
NATURE BIOTECHNOLOGY VOLUME 25 NUMBER 3 MARCH 2007
both candidates are awarded good scores and
are plausible candidates for contributing to
ALS associated with dementia. However, investigation of the candidate complexes suggests
that BICD2 is more likely to be involved in
nonfamilial ALS not associated with dementia,
because it is part of a complex with dynactin,
which is associated with ALS without dementia. IARS is in a complex with superoxide dismutase 1, a protein known to be involved in
familial ALS47 including dementia (Fig. 3d).
Also, the IARS complex contains molecular
chaperones and other proteins that have been
connected to the disease and other types of
dementias (Supplementary Fig. 6 online), and
the interaction data underlying the complex
is highly reproducible (Supplementary Data
online). Both candidates are likely, but the
candidate complex underlying IARS is seemingly more relevant to familial ALS, and it is
plausible that IARS could be involved in the
disease in families with linkage to 9q21–q22.
Because little is known about this disorder, the complex revealed here is
an interesting new lead concerning its underlying causes.
These case studies indicate the value of data mining our phenomeinteractome network and integrating interaction data across multiple
organisms for positional candidate prioritization. In the case of retinitis
pigmentosa and ALS with frontotemporal dementia, the predictor identifies nonobvious candidates in novel putative complexes supported by
a network of reproducible interaction data from humans and multiple
model organisms. In the cases of inflammatory bowel disease and epithelial ovarian cancer, we identify partly characterized complexes, where
several members are known to be involved in the patient phenotype.
However, because there are ~500 positional candidates in the case of
inflammatory bowel disease, it would require extensive literature studies
to reveal this network and candidate by manual data integration. We thus
believe that RIPK1 would probably not have been identified as a good
candidate despite prior knowledge of its involvement in a known network
contributing to inflammatory responses.
DISCUSSION
We have recently witnessed the emergence of integrative methods for
identifying probable disease genes in linkage intervals associated with disease based on data integration involving, for example, Gene Ontology categories and expression data2–12. Traditionally these methods are compared
by measuring average fold enrichment of positional probability
(Supplementary Methods online). If a method ranks the true candidate
in the top 10% of all candidates in 50% of the linkage intervals, there is
a tenfold enrichment in the successful predictions intervals and fivefold
enrichment on average. We show that our method increases the probability 108.8 times for the successful predictions and 23.1 times on average,
significantly outperforming the other computational methods for positional candidate prioritization, which report 5.6–31.2 times enrichment
in the successful linkage intervals to 3.8 to 19.4 times enrichment on
average (Supplementary Table 3 online). The most common failure of
our method to correctly identify the disease gene results from the inability
to find interaction partners associated with a similar phenotype as the
relevant protein. This could result from either a lack of data or the failure
of these proteins to interact with proteins involved in similar phenotypes.
In 75% of these cases, failure to identify another candidate scoring over
0.1 eliminates the possibility of an incorrect prediction.
Our ability to assign candidates to high-confidence protein complexes and rank these complexes in terms of phenomics has permitted
us to present a first draft of 506 protein complexes associated with
human disease. The success of our method can be attributed to a combination of factors. First, we integrate experimental protein interaction
data with a phenotype similarity scheme, thereby taking advantage of
the complete clinical spectrum of related human diseases. Also, we use
Figure 3 Case studies of four candidate
complexes. (a–d) These candidate complexes
are subjected to virtual pull-down with the bestscoring candidate in retinitis pigmentosa 28
(RP28) (a), epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC)
(b), inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) (c) and
a high-scoring candidate in amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS) with frontotemporal dementia
(d). Solid black circles (c) represent proteins
that are the high-scoring candidates in the four
disorders. Numbered circles are proteins that
interact with the candidate proteins. Colored
nodes are proteins identified by our phenotypesimilarity scheme. Gray proteins are not predicted
by our phenotype-similarity scheme to be
implicated in any disease.
A N A LY S I S
© 2007 Nature Publishing Group 
VOLUME 25 NUMBER 3 MARCH 2007 NATURE BIOTECHNOLOGY
high-confidence protein complexes for identifying novel candidates,
thus ensuring that we take advantage of the full protein network context
of the candidate, which we show is well suited for functional association
of proteins with diseases. Only three of the previously published methods use protein interaction data3,21,22. Whereas one21 relies completely
on unscored binary interaction pairs to identify candidates in identical
diseases, others3,22 incorporate unscored human protein interaction data
as one of the weaker sources of information. The two latter methods do
not take advantage of cross-species integration of interaction data and
none of the three integrate phenotypic descriptions as we have done.
Furthermore, two approaches3,21 search only for candidates implicated
in identical diseases and do not take advantage of information from
different diseases with a phenotypic overlap. Another method22 relies
on provision of a training set and could theoretically be trained using
proteins involved in nonidentical but overlapping phenotypes. These
methods report 10.0–15.4 times enrichment in the successful linkage
intervals and 5.0–10.0 times enrichment on average (Supplementary
Table 3 online). All three methods are innovative and of high quality,
but the difference in performance can readily be explained by recalling that the use of high-confidence protein complexes and data about
overlapping phenotypes is much better at inferring functional associations than the search for unscored single-interaction partners involved
in identical phenotypes only. The complexes generated in the training
and validation of the method provide a valuable resource for further
investigations by researchers investigating these diseases, because the
complexes place the disease-causing proteins in a functional context
relative to other disease-associated proteins. We have created a database
of these two data sets (available from 
providing a draft of 506 putative human disease complexes, determined
by the current resolution of data. Our validation shows that the score
associated with each complex can be used as a reliable indication of the
quality of the data underlying the complex.
Design choices of the Bayesian predictor. We have strived to make optimal design
choices to guarantee the quality of the methodology. First, for the phenotype
similarity score, we opted for the UMLS vocabulary, because it is a well-known
resource for this type of analysis, and MMTx for the term mapping. There are
some limitations when using MMTx and UMLS (see Supplementary Methods
online), but we concluded that these are well suited for our analysis, and improvement of these resources is beyond the scope of this work. Second, we chose term
frequency–inverse document frequency (tf-idf) as the term-weighting strategy.
Compared with unweighted vectors and idf term weighting, tf-idf performed
better (Supplementary Fig. 7 online). Third, we used the cosine similarity measure between phenotype vectors, because it is a well-accepted similarity measure
for weighted-term vectors. We demonstrate the robustness of this measure on
phenotype vectors constructed from a different text source, weighting method
and vocabulary (Supplementary Fig. 8 online). Finally, for reporting likely candidates, a threshold of 0.1 on the Bayesian score was chosen on the basis of our
benchmark. Using these design choices we created a Bayesian model that was
trained and validated using fivefold cross-validation. Additionally, the model was
thoroughly optimized to get the optimal separation of signal to noise from the
phenotype similarity scheme, the protein interaction data and the other parameters in the model. This was done using a genetic algorithm (Supplementary
Methods online).
Filtering irrelevant semantic types from UMLS. The UMLS vocabulary was manually checked for semantic types that were obviously not clinically relevant (for
example, STY|T066|Machine Activity, STY|T068|Human-caused Phenomenon or
Process, STY|T093|Health Care Related Organization, STY|T097|Professional or
Occupational Group). Terms belonging to these semantic types were filtered out
and do not appear in the phenotype vectors. This procedure helps in limiting the
phenotype vectors to relevant medical terms to as large an extent as possible.
Phenotype similarity scores. Both the text and clinical synopsis parts of each
OMIM record were parsed with MMTx ( (for a discussion on the recall, precision and well documented problems of MMTx see
Supplementary Methods online) to find the occurrence of medical terms in
a subset of the UMLS vocabulary31, where a number of obviously nonclinical
semantic type categories had been removed. Phenotype vectors for each record
were constructed so that the value of each dimension in the vector represents the
number of occurrences of that term in that particular record. Because many relevant terms (for example, mental retardation) are very frequent in OMIM, we also
assigned a weight to every extracted term in a phenotype vector. This was done by
comparing the frequency with which the term was used in the record in question
to its mention the term in all records (that is, all of OMIM). This weight is called
tf-idf48 (Supplementary Methods online) and markedly improves the predictive
quality of the data (Supplementary Methods online). Furthermore, this procedure
normalizes the term weight using the length of the specific record and the total
length of all records. This normalization reduces negative bias in relation to short
records, and positive bias in relation to long records. Once vectors for all records
had been constructed, pairwise similarity was calculated as the cosine of the angle
between the OMIM vectors after normalization32. We used the cosine measure
as a natural similarity score for two vectors, because it is a standard measure used
in this type of text-mining analysis and it is fast to calculate. We note a small bias
against some of the phenotype vectors used to predict because of less well curated
and described phenotype records in the prediction set than in the benchmarking
set (Supplementary Table 4 online). We believe this bias is largely caused by less
extensive annotation by the OMIM curators of records describing loci where the
disease gene has not been identified. The result is fewer predictions than expected
from the benchmark. However, it is important to note that the predictions we do
get are of equal quality to the benchmarking case, because the posterior probability
score relies on the quality of the data used for the prediction.
Validating the phenotype similarity score. To investigate to what extent our
phenotype vector cosine scores could correctly assign phenotype similarity
between scored records, we fitted a curve of the score against the overlap in
OMIM record pairs that had a high degree of phenotypic overlap (Supplementary
Methods online). The curve shows that the computational phenotype similarity
score is directly correlated to the probability of overlap with these record pairs
(Supplementary Fig. 2 online)
Constructing a scored human protein interaction network. Protein interaction
data were downloaded from MINT49, BIND50, IntAct51, KEGG annotated protein-protein interactions (PPrel), KEGG Enzymes involved in neighboring steps
(ECrel)52 and Reactome proteins involved in the same complex, indirect complex,
reaction or neighboring reaction53. All human data were pooled, and to increase
the coverage of interactions, interolog data (the transfer of protein interactions
between orthologous protein pairs in different organisms)54 were included by a
method similar to that reported by Lehner and Fraser55. Interactions were transferred from 17 eukaryotic organisms and added to the network. Orthology was
assigned using the Inparanoid database56 with strict thresholds. To obtain a global
interaction score for all interactions in the network, we constructed a probabilistic
protein interaction score that took into account the topology of the interaction
network surrounding the interaction, the experimental setup (large-scale vs. smallscale) and the number of different publications in which the interaction had been
detected (Supplementary Methods online).
Making a virtual pull-down. A virtual pull-down of a given protein was done by
querying the interaction network for all interactions of the protein (and subsequently all interactions between the interacting proteins) and only retaining the
interactions over a given score threshold as defined by the genetic algorithm in
the training steps of the Bayesian predictor. This means that the resulting interactions all are of high confidence and supported by network topology, different
publications, reliable small-scale interaction experiments, reproducibility or a
combination of these.
Identifying proteins involved in diseases in the candidate complexes. Ensembl
Mart ( was used to associate
proteins to phenotypes and identify proteins involved in disease in the candidate
complexes.
A N A LY S I S
© 2007 Nature Publishing Group 
NATURE BIOTECHNOLOGY VOLUME 25 NUMBER 3 MARCH 2007
Making the benchmarking cases. A list of 3,256 disease genes was initially
downloaded from the Disease Gene table in GeneCards ( 
gov/cards/). GeneCards mines several different databases, including OMIM, for
text describing the disease genes in this table. For some of the disease genes the
entries in GeneCards are sentences, originating from OMIM, specifically stating that defects in particular genes lead to particular diseases. To exclude genes
associated to diseases by circumstantial evidence, and only include genes in which
genetic defects were known to be causative in relation to the particular disorders,
we included genes in the benchmarking set only if GeneCards had found such
sentences in OMIM in relation to the gene. Because OMIM is a database manually curated by disease experts, we consider such statements from OMIM to be
trustworthy. However, to double-check that no mistakes were made by GeneCards
in the extraction procedure, or in the curation process by OMIM, we randomly
selected 50 of these statements and manually checked (i) that such statements
were actually present in the relevant OMIM files and (ii) that the statements were
supported by cited literature. In these 50 cases no discrepancies were found, and
this investigation led us to consider that all of the statements are correct. This procedure led to a subset of 963 genes and their corresponding proteins. These genes
and proteins were associated with their respective phenotypes using GeneCards
references to OMIM diseases. This showed that the 963 genes are involved in
1,404 distinct phenotypes, which were used for the training and validation of
the Bayesian predictor. Benchmarking cases were made by associating the genes
to distinct phenotypes using the annotation in GeneCards and by assigning the
genes to artificial linkage intervals. This was done by including a random number
of genes upstream and downstream of the known disease gene. The interval sizes
were randomized so that they have a distribution similar to the intervals in OMIM
morbidmap, for which no gene has been identified, leading to an average of 108.8
genes in each of the 1,404 linkage intervals.
Training and validating the Bayesian model. Training and benchmarking of the
Bayesian model were done by fivefold cross-validation on the benchmarking set.
The set of 1,404 benchmarking cases was split into five sets and the Bayesian
model trained and optimized on four of these fractions (Supplementary Methods
online). Subsequently, the optimized model was used to rank candidates in benchmarking cases made on the last fifth of the data set. This was done for all combinations of the five fractions. The benchmarking results can be seen in Supplementary
Table 5 online.
Bayesian disease gene predictor. The goal is to compute, for each candidate in
a critical interval, the probability that this is the disease-related protein. High
probabilities should be assigned to candidates that interact with one or more
proteins involved in disorders that are phenotypically similar to the one being
investigated. This logic is expressed in the form of a probabilistic model, and we
use Bayes’ theorem to compute the probabilities. The model includes parameters
for (i) the probability that a candidate protein has any reported interaction partners, (ii) protein interaction score, (iii) the number of interaction partners that
are involved in similar disorders and (iv) computational phenotype similarity
score. All parameters are estimated from our data sets for both disease- and nondisease-associated genes, where we see that the parameter values are different in
the two cases. The probability that protein number i (among N candidates) is the
disease-associated one, is computed as follows:
P(DATA | dis = i) × P(dis = i)
P(DATA | dis = j) × P(dis = j)
P(dis = i | DATA) =
where P(dis = i|DATA) is the posterior probability that candidate number i is the
disease-related protein after evaluating all the data. P(dis = i) is the prior probability that candidate number i is the disease-causing protein, before evaluating any
data. The prior value was set to 1/N for all candidates. The term P(DATA|dis = i)
is the probability of obtaining the observed data if candidate number i was in
fact the correct one. This likelihood is computed from the interaction data and
any associated phenotype descriptions, and using the estimated parameters, in a
straightforward manner (Supplementary Methods online).
Case studies. Case studies were made by downloading complex data available for
all putative disease complexes ( and creating an
interactive graph in the free software cytoscape ( Data
in these files combined with literature studies were used to generate the hypotheses. More data on the case studies can be found in Supplementary Data online.
Proteins are named by using the corresponding gene name according to HUGO
gene nomenclature ( 
Note: Supplementary information is available on the Nature Biotechnology website.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to thank Ulrik de Lichtenberg and Thomas Skøt Jensen for critical
reading of the manuscript, editing and help in developing the protein interaction
score. We also thank Christopher Workman and Zoltan Szallasi for valuable
discussions and help with the manuscript. Y.M. is supported by K.U. Leuven GOA
AMBioRICS, CoE EF/05/007 SymBioSys, BELSPO IUAP P6/25 BioMaGNet, EU-
FP6-NoE Biopattern and EU-FP6-MC-EST Bioptrain. Z.M.S. is supported by an EU
Biosapiens (NoE), FP6 grant. The Center for Biological Sequence Analysis and the
Wilhelm Johannsen Center for Functional Genome Research are supported by the
Danish National Research Foundation.
COMPETING INTERESTS STATEMENT
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Published online at 
Reprints and permissions information is available online at 
reprintsandpermissions/
1. Brunner, H.G. & van Driel, M.A. From syndrome families to functional genomics. Nat.
Rev. Genet. 5, 545–551 .
2. Adie, E.A., Adams, R.R., Evans, K.L., Porteous, D.J. & Pickard, B.S. Speeding disease
gene discovery by sequence-based candidate prioritization. BMC Bioinformatics 6, 55
3. Franke, L. et al. Reconstruction of a functional human gene network, with an application for prioritizing positional candidate genes. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 78, 1011–1025
4. Franke, L. et al. TEAM: a tool for the integration of expression, and linkage and association maps. Eur. J. Hum. Genet. 12, 633–638 .
5. Turner, F.S., Clutterbuck, D.R. & Semple, C.A. POCUS: mining genomic sequence
annotation to predict disease genes. Genome Biol. 4, R75 .
6. Perez-Iratxeta, C., Bork, P. & Andrade, M.A. Association of genes to genetically inherited
diseases using data mining. Nat. Genet. 31, 316–319 .
7. Perez-Iratxeta, C., Wjst, M., Bork, P. & Andrade, M.A. G2D: a tool for mining genes
associated with disease. BMC Genet. 6, 45 .
8. Masseroli, M., Galati, O. & Pinciroli, F. GFINDer: genetic disease and phenotype location
statistical analysis and mining of dynamically annotated gene lists. Nucleic Acids Res.
33, W717–W723 .
9. van Driel, M.A., Cuelenaere, K., Kemmeren, P.P., Leunissen, J.A. & Brunner, H.G. A new
web-based data mining tool for the identification of candidate genes for human genetic
disorders. Eur. J. Hum. Genet. 11, 57–63 .
10. van Driel, M.A. et al. GeneSeeker: extraction and integration of human disease-related
information from web-based genetic databases. Nucleic Acids Res. 33, W758–761
11. Hristovski, D., Peterlin, B., Mitchell, J.A. & Humphrey, S.M. Using literature-based
discovery to identify disease candidate genes. Int. J. Med. Inform. 74, 289–298
12. Freudenberg, J. & Propping, P. A similarity-based method for genome-wide prediction
of disease-relevant human genes. Bioinformatics 18 Suppl 2, S110–S115 .
13. Barabasi, A.L. & Oltvai, Z.N. Network biology: understanding the cell’s functional organization. Nat. Rev. Genet. 5, 101–113 .
14. van Driel, M.A., Bruggeman, J., Vriend, G., Brunner, H.G. & Leunissen, J.A. A text-mining analysis of the human phenome. Eur. J. Hum. Genet. 14, 535–542 .
15. Gavin, A.C. et al. Proteome survey reveals modularity of the yeast cell machinery. Nature
16. Giot, L. et al. A protein interaction map of Drosophila melanogaster. Science 302,
1727–1736 .
17. Walhout, A.J. et al. Integrating interactome, phenome, and transcriptome mapping data
for the C. elegans germline. Curr. Biol. 12, 1952–1958 .
18. Boulton, S.J. et al. Combined functional genomic maps of the C. elegans DNA damage
response. Science 295, 127–131 .
19. Gandhi, T.K. et al. Analysis of the human protein interactome and comparison with
yeast, worm and fly interaction datasets. Nat. Genet. 38, 285–293 .
20. Lim, J. et al. A protein-protein interaction network for human inherited ataxias and
disorders of Purkinje cell degeneration. Cell 125, 801–814 .
21. Oti, M., Snel, B., Huynen, M.A. & Brunner, H.G. Predicting disease genes using proteinprotein interactions. J. Med. Genet. .
22. Aerts, S. et al. Gene prioritization through genomic data fusion. Nat. Biotechnol. 24,
537–544 .
23. von Mering, C. et al. Comparative assessment of large-scale data sets of protein-protein
interactions. Nature 417, 399–403 .
24. Rual, J.F. et al. Towards a proteome-scale map of the human protein-protein interaction
network. Nature 437, 1173–1178 .
A N A LY S I S
© 2007 Nature Publishing Group 
VOLUME 25 NUMBER 3 MARCH 2007 NATURE BIOTECHNOLOGY
25. Stelzl, U. et al. A human protein-protein interaction network: a resource for annotating
the proteome. Cell 122, 957–968 .
26. Korbel, J.O. et al. Systematic association of genes to phenotypes by genome and literature mining. PLoS Biol. 3, e134 .
27. Schijvenaars, B.J. et al. Thesaurus-based disambiguation of gene symbols. BMC
Bioinformatics 6, 149 .
28. Butte, A.J. & Kohane, I.S. Creation and implications of a phenome-genome network.
Nat. Biotechnol. 24, 55–62 .
29. Hamosh, A., Scott, A.F., Amberger, J.S., Bocchini, C.A. & McKusick, V.A. Online
Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM), a knowledgebase of human genes and genetic
disorders. Nucleic Acids Res. 33 (Database Issue), D514–D517 .
30. Aronson, A.R. Effective mapping of biomedical text to the UMLS Metathesaurus: the
MetaMap program. Proc. AMIA Symp. 17–21 .
31. Bodenreider, O. The Unified Medical Language System (UMLS): integrating biomedical
terminology. Nucleic Acids Res. 32, D267–D270 .
32. Gerard Salton, M.J.M. Introduction to Modern Information Retrieval .
33. Divita, G., Tse, T. & Roth, L. Failure analysis of MetaMap Transfer (MMTx). Medinfo 11,
763–767 .
34. Gu, S., Kumaramanickavel, G., Srikumari, C.R., Denton, M.J. & Gal, A. Autosomal
recessive retinitis pigmentosa locus RP28 maps between D2S1337 and D2S286 on
chromosome 2p11–p15 in an Indian family. J. Med. Genet. 36, 705–707 .
35. Ito, T. et al. A comprehensive two-hybrid analysis to explore the yeast protein interactome. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 4569–4574 .
36. Sohocki, M.M. et al. A range of clinical phenotypes associated with mutations in
CRX, a photoreceptor transcription-factor gene. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 63, 1307–1315
37. Sekine, M. et al. Localization of a novel susceptibility gene for familial ovarian cancer
to chromosome 3p22–p25. Hum. Mol. Genet. 10, 1421–1429 .
38. Demuth, I. et al. An inducible null mutant murine model of Nijmegen breakage syndrome
proves the essential function of NBS1 in chromosomal stability and cell viability. Hum.
Mol. Genet. 13, 2385–2397 .
39. Matsuura, S. et al. Positional cloning of the gene for Nijmegen breakage syndrome. Nat.
Genet. 19, 179–181 .
40. Castilla, L.H. et al. Mutations in the BRCA1 gene in families with early-onset breast and
ovarian cancer. Nat. Genet. 8, 387–391 .
41. Lancaster, J.M. et al. BRCA2 mutations in primary breast and ovarian cancers. Nat.
Genet. 13, 238–240 .
42. Taniguchi, T. et al. Disruption of the Fanconi anemia–BRCA pathway in cisplatinsensitive ovarian tumors. Nat. Med. 9, 568–574 .
43. Thompson, L.H. Unraveling the Fanconi anemia–DNA repair connection. Nat. Genet.
37, 921–922 .
44. Dechairo, B. et al. Replication and extension studies of inflammatory bowel disease
susceptibility regions confirm linkage to chromosome 6p (IBD3). Eur. J. Hum. Genet.
9, 627–633 .
45. Hampe, J. et al. Linkage of inflammatory bowel disease to human chromosome 6p.
Am. J. Hum. Genet. 65, 1647–1655 .
46. Hosler, B.A. et al. Linkage of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with frontotemporal
dementia to chromosome 9q21–q22. J.A.M.A. 284, 1664–1669 .
47. Koyama, S. et al. Alteration of familial ALS-linked mutant SOD1 solubility with disease
progression: its modulation by the proteasome and Hsp70. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 343, 719–730 .
48. Polavarapu, N. et al. Investigation into biomedical literature classification using support vector machines. Proc. IEEE Comput. Syst. Bioinform. Conf., 366–374 .
49. Zanzoni, A. et al. MINT: a Molecular INTeraction database. FEBS Lett. 513, 135–140
50. Bader, G.D., Betel, D. & Hogue, C.W. BIND: the Biomolecular Interaction Network
Database. Nucleic Acids Res. 31, 248–250 .
51. Hermjakob, H. et al. IntAct: an open source molecular interaction database. Nucleic
Acids Res. 32 (Database Issue), D452–D455 .
52. Kanehisa, M. et al. From genomics to chemical genomics: new developments in KEGG.
Nucleic Acids Res. 34, D354–D357 .
53. Joshi-Tope, G. et al. Reactome: a knowledgebase of biological pathways. Nucleic Acids
Res. 33, D428–D432 .
54. Walhout, A.J. et al. Protein interaction mapping in C. elegans using proteins involved
in vulval development. Science 287, 116–122 .
55. Lehner, B. & Fraser, A.G. A first-draft human protein-interaction map. Genome Biol.
5, R63 .
56. O’Brien, K.P., Remm, M. & Sonnhammer, E.L. Inparanoid: a comprehensive database of eukaryotic orthologs. Nucleic Acids Res. 33 (Database Issue), D476–D480
A N A LY S I S
© 2007 Nature Publishing Group