Challenges and Opportunities of Context-Aware Information Access
Gareth J. F. Jones
Centre for Digital Video Processing
Dublin City University
Glasnevin, Dublin 9, Ireland
 
Ubiquitous computing environments embedding a wide
range of pervasive computing technologies provide a challenging and exciting new domain for information access.
Individuals working in these environments are increasingly
permanently connected to rich information resources. An
appealing opportunity of these environments is the potential
to deliver useful information to individuals either from their
previous information experiences or external sources. This
information should enrich their life experiences or make
them more effective in their endeavours. Information access in ubiquitous computing environments can be made
“context-aware” by exploiting the wide range context data
available describing the environment, the searcher and the
information itself. Realising such a vision of reliable, timely
and appropriate identiﬁcation and delivery of information
in this way poses numerous challenges. A central theme in
achieving context-aware information access is the combination of information retrieval with multiple dimensions of
available context data. Potential context data sources, include the user’s current task, inputs from environmental and
biometric sensors, associated with the user’s current context, previous contexts, and document context, which can be
exploited using a variety of technologies to create new and
exciting possibilities for information access.
Introduction
In a few short years information retrieval systems have
emerged from being the domain of librarians and information search specialists to become a near ubiquitous tool of
all computer users.
Current commercial information retrieval systems, such as Google, can achieve high accuracy document retrieval from a collection of billions of
web pages with remarkable speed in response to short unstructured search requests. However, impressive as current
search engines are, they are actually quite restricted in their
functionality. Signiﬁcantly they take no account of the context in which the search is taking place. This means that
the same documents are retrieved for every user entering a
particular search request, whatever their background may
be, whether they have viewed individual documents before,
wherever the user may be, and whatever they may be doing
or whatever their state of mind may be. Users, of course,
live and work in real-world contexts. For example, they
may remember where they were when they read something
before or what they read just afterwards, their mood may
change while carrying a search for information, or the relevance of information may vary depending on the location
or time of retrieval. One of the aims of current research
in information access is to take account of these and other
context factors to improve the accuracy and efﬁciency of the
user’s search experience.
The limitations of current search technologies will become increasingly apparent as advances in computing systems extend the scale of and environment for information
management systems. While digital information archives
such as the World Wide Web are continuing to expand
rapidly, ongoing improvements in the capacity of information storage devices, technologies for information capture and distribution networks mean that the already rapid
growth in the amount and variety of accessible online information is set to accelerate dramatically in the next few
years. At present, this rising data capacity is enabling signiﬁcant increases in the storage of multimedia information
in the form of images, audio and video documents.
the same time, advances in networked computing are creating infrastructures that mean users are effectively becoming embedded in active pervasive computing environments.
These embedded users are permanently connected to rich
online information resources, but more signiﬁcantly these
environments enable the capture of a user’s activities and
physical states, attributes of their environment and features
associated with documents. Captured data can range from
collecting documents that a user accesses or creates on a
computer, to information captured from sensors, such as
Proceedings of the 2005 International Workshop on Ubiquitous Data Management (UDM’05)
0-7695-2411-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE
multimedia video and audio recordings of the user’s activities or simple environmental sensors monitoring location,
light levels, temperature, etc. Data captured in this way can
be used to record context data associated with user activities, the context in which new documents or content are generated, or the context in which existing material is accessed.
This context data can potentially be used to identify relevant
content in subsequent information retrieval phases. From a
complementary perspective context data captured from the
user during the search process itself can be used to guide the
retrieval process to help identify content relevant to the user
in their current context. The full realization of utilizing all
the data available from these networks presents many challenges to information access technologies, but the potential
rewards from successfully doing so represent a compelling
reason to pursue this research.
This paper begins by considering the motivation for and
applications of context-aware information access (CAIA).
It then explores issues in context-aware information indexing and subsequent implications for context-aware information retrieval. The paper reviews existing research projects,
including some of our own work at DCU, which focus directly on technologies pertinent to this area, and concludes
with some thoughts about their integration to form ubiquitous CAIA applications.
Why Context-Aware Information Access?
The desire to ﬁnd out about new things or to recall facts
or experiences from the past is a natural human characteristic.
Throughout history peoples have explored their
environment to discover new things; more recently, ﬁrstly
through libraries, then the published media, and currently
via the internet, people have sought to satisfy their seemingly inexhaustible desire for information from larger and
more heterogeneous data sources.
Whether for work or
pleasure, people are always in need of information. The
ready adoption of the internet and search engines by both
specialist and general users provides ample evidence that
if information is available, people will access it. But aside
from explicit information sources, such as published books
and articles, and informally produced web pages, many
other sources of information are potentially available for
collection into permanent archives derived from ephemeral
activities. These may be personal experiences such as social
activities, for example watching movies or sports events,
or listening to music can be viewed as activities worthy of
recording and collecting into information archives, or more
formal activities, such as lectures, presentations, debates
and discussions or business meetings.
Beyond this, advances in wearable computing mean that
it will soon be possible to capture a digital record of all
activities carried out in a person’s lifetime. This could include all the documents ever viewed or written by a person, but also video records of places visited and people met,
and much more besides. The contents of these archives can
be labelled with context data associated with their capture.
Issues relating to these emerging archives, commonly referred to as Human Digital Memories, are becoming a major research focus . It is a natural component of this
paradigm of information capture that context annotation can
also be associated with each occasion on which a document
is accessed. Humans make extensive use of context when
remembering things, so it is a logical development to argue
that information access technologies should seek to do the
same . Of course, we often do activities merely to enjoy
them at the time, but the act of remembering events is itself
often pleasurable. Being able to efﬁciently retrieve them
from an archive “memory” of our past experiences is thus a
desirable goal.
As an example of the emergence of a this type of technology and associated user behaviour, consider digital photography. Users are increasingly generating personal digital photographic archives. These collections of ﬁles are
often archived on computers and various other storage media. As an individual’s digital photograph collection grows
it becomes increasingly difﬁcult to search the set of available images. Search is currently only possible based on
ﬁlenames and directory structures. On many occasions it
would be desirable to search based on persons, objects or
places, or possibly events depicted in photographs. However, automated analysis of the semantic contents of images
is currently a long way short of reliable annotation of this
sort, and it is improbable that anyone except the keenest
photographer would manually generate this level of rich annotation. It is though relatively easy to record context information associated with the taking of a photograph, for
example the time at which the image was taken and its location, captured using GPS measurements. This data can be
used to look up the associated named location at various levels of granularity via a gazetteer, and absolute and relative
descriptions of the time, e.g. yesterday, Wednesday morning, in January, in the Spring . Using external sources of
information details such as the World Wide Web, prevailing weather conditions can be labelled, and even expected
light levels, e.g. hot weather, nighttime, can be labelled
automatically. By gathering context data together associated with multiple images together, further metadata can be
inferred, such as labelling of groups of images associated
with speciﬁc events . Once labelled in this way the user
can explore the image collection for one of their own photographs using remembered metadata, or use the metadata
to search for suitable images from a published collection,
e.g. springtime photographs of cherry blossom near the
Imperial Palace in Tokyo. Within the CDVP at DCU we
are developing a system to support user searching of digital
Proceedings of the 2005 International Workshop on Ubiquitous Data Management (UDM’05)
0-7695-2411-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE
photograph archives using these context labels within the
Mediassist project. The current demonstration system enables context based searching of an archive of several thousand images utilizing metadata ﬁelds of the form described
above. This will be extended to searching with a combination of context metadata and automatically indexed visual
content features.
The vision of fully functional HDMs goes far beyond
this single task gathering of information and context, to
the proactive collection of all details of an individual’s life.
CAIA can be concerned only with retrieval from existing
and next-generation HDM personal archives, but such retrieval systems also have enormous potential for applications able to proactively select and deliver new information,
the existence of which the user may be unaware, to them
that may be of assistance or interest in their current situation. A limited version of this idea of proactive memory
augmentation already appears in the information retrieval
agents developed using the Remembrance Agent described
in . Finding information of this type that relates either
to a user’s current context or to a speciﬁc past experience
will only be possible if contextual information itself forms
part of the information capture and searching process. For
example, users may be able to recall where and when they
read a document with much greater clarity than the contents
of the document itself. Or a search engine may be able to respond different depending on how the user is feeling based
on biometric responses.
Appropriate selected information will be relevant to the
user’s current context. Thus the user may be using a conventional desktop computer and fully engaged in the searching process, but if they are away from their desktop they
are probably more likely to be engaged in other activities.
However, as discussed earlier, they are still likely to be connected to a computer network via a mobile device. Selection
and delivery of relevant information to mobile users carrying mobile computers provides both challenges in terms of
appropriate form and timing of delivery, and opportunities
to exploit physical context information associated with the
user embedded in the sensor rich networked environment.
Paradigms for Context-Aware Information
It should be clear from the discussion so far that there
is a complex relationship between context and documents
and users. Context is associated with the creation of documents, the contents of documents, relates to previous and
current access to documents, the user’s previous context, the
user’s current context and possibly a prediction of the user’s
future context . In terms of using and interacting with information and associated context, the user’s search context
is a vital feature. A user working with a desktop computer
will most likely be fully engaged with the search process,
and have access to a large high quality screen for data entry,
manipulation and browsing. A user accessing information
using a mobile pervasive computing device is more likely
to be primarily engaged in other activities, and only has access to a physically small device to interact with. In order
to better understand these search modalities and begin to
establish how permanently available proactive information
applications might work, this section explores successively
more complex context-aware search paradigms.
Interactive and Proactive Retrieval of Previously Seen Information
Current search engines make no distinction between
users looking for documents that they have not seen before
and items that they have viewed previously, possibly many
times. Research suggests that on average around two-thirds
of information that people utilize is contained in sources
with which they have interacted previously . Given that
users will often remember context features associated with
this information, it makes sense to gather together previously seen information and enable users to search this subset of the information available to them.
This scenario is addressed directly in the “Stuff I’ve Seen
(SIS)” system developed by Microsoft . SIS contains a
local index of documents, including emails, web pages, images and diary entries, written or accessed by an individual user. Along with the document contents, SLS stores
context metadata of dates, authors, text previews and image
thumbnails. Utilization of a local index in this way enables
very rapid searching and query reﬁnement. Users are able
to restrict searching to individual data sources, and to use
standard text information retrieval methods to order lists by
document contents, but also to sort the rank and ﬁlter documents based on other metadata features. The interface is
designed to enable rapid browsing of retrieved subsets of
the collection by showing thumbnails of images and short
300 character introductory previews of text documents. By
launching local searching whenever metadata ﬁltering widgets are manipulated queries can be efﬁciently iteratively
adjusted with rapid feedback to ﬁnd desired information.
The functionality of SIS systems is clearly important for
HDMs technologies. However, an important feature of the
SLS prototypes is the requirement for the users to actively
interact with the system to locate the desired information.
This means that the user must give their full attention to
the search process, and also signiﬁcantly they must have
a large high quality interface to the system available and
that sufﬁcient computing power must be available for very
rapid iterative searching as the query is reﬁned. While it is
likely to be inevitable that the user will sometimes need to
work hard with any system to locate more difﬁcult to ﬁnd
Proceedings of the 2005 International Workshop on Ubiquitous Data Management (UDM’05)
0-7695-2411-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE
previously seen information, the requirement of this to be
the expected mode of searching will limit the scope for the
exploitation of this type of system. This will be particularly
true for more complex HDMs, which will often include hard
to browse multimedia content, and need to be available to
mobile users.
An alternative to interactive searching of previously seen
“stuff” is provided by the Remembrance Agent (RA) applications developed by Rhodes .
The basic search
paradigm of RAs is to look at the content and other data associated with the user’s current working context and proactively search for available information which might currently be of interest to the user. The basic version of the RM
was implemented into the emacs text editor. While a user
is working on a new document, the RM takes the text that is
currently being entered and uses it to form a search request
for documents relating to this content which may be of interest to the writer. For example, this would search for related
references while developing a new academic paper. An development of the basic RM is seen in the “Marginal Notes”
system which augments a standard web browser. When a
web page is downloaded it is rewritten before it is displayed
to include a margin at the side of the window. The web page
is segmented based on the HTML markup and proactively
formed into “requests” and used to search available content.
Notes relating to the highest scoring documents for each request are then inserted into the margin. The note contains
a brief description of the suggested text, a series of circles
representing the relevance of the suggestion, and a link to
obtain more information. The note consists of a subject,
date, and author for the suggested text, the exact composition of the note can be customized. Placing the mouse over
a suggestion note produces a list of the ﬁve keywords that
were most important in determining its selection. Clicking
on a suggestion note opens a new browser window that displays the full text of the associated document.
While these RM systems introduce the concept of proactive searching of previously accessed content, they are still
implemented on desktop computers and do not take account
of context information associated with the documents or the
user’s current context.
Mobile Users
As well as the established paradigm of using search engines on desktop computer, as described earlier, mobile
users are increasingly permanently connected to ubiquitous
wireless computer networks via their mobile phone or PDA.
This gives them direct access to information that may be of
assistance to them in their current context. Working with
these small devices means that high levels of interaction are
difﬁcult, and it is thus important to exploit whatever information is available to maximise retrieval precision. Since
the information that a user is looking for when mobile will
often relate in some way to their current context or an anticipated future one, it is natural to seek methods by which
this data might be incorporated in information searching.
Proactive retrieval, where the user does not have to break
off from their current activities to look for potentially useful information, is thus a particularly appealing scenario for
mobile information delivery. This scenario builds on the
basic Remembrance Agent methods outlined in the previous section to incorporate context data. A mobile version
of the RM incorporating context is provided by the “Jimminy” system. Jimminy searches for information based on
a person’s physical environment, including location, people
nearby, time of day, and subject of conversation. Processing
is performed on a shoulder-mounted “wearable computer”
and suggestions presented on a head-mounted display. The
ultimate goal is that all information about the wearer’s physical environment will be available to Jimminy through automatic sensors. Jimminy is a general architecture able to
plug-in any sensor that can be attached to a wearable computer. Information not available from sensors can be entered
into the system by hand, for example the topic of conversation can be entered manually in the form of text notes. Notes
entered into the wearable computer can be manually tagged
with people present, subject, location, and time stamped.
Search is performed using a retrieval engine called Savant
which incorporates context ﬁelds in the retrieval process.
Jimminy provides a starting point to the potential of
mobile proactive memory augmentation and information
searching applications. However, it falls short of addressing many signiﬁcant issues. In our previous work we have
explored a number of aspects of context and information
retrieval for mobile applications . One of the important conclusions of Rhodes’s work was the observation that
for mobile users precision is generally more important than
recall. This will be especially true of ubiquitous proactive
retrieval where the user has not actively entered a search request. In this scenario we regard each retrieval brought to
the attention of the user as an intrusion. Therefore the aim
should be only to deliver items that are both relevant and
cannot be handled automatically via some form of agent acting on the user’s behalf. Further, even when it is determined
that the information needs to be delivered to the user, it still
needs to be presented in the most appropriate mode .
While it has been demonstrated within Mediassist and
elsewhere that context can be used effectively in information searching, it has not been formally demonstrated that
incorporating context into the search process is able to improve precision in ranked retrieval, although we hypothesize that it is. There are a number of open research questions
here. Which context ﬁelds should be incorporated into the
retrieval process? How should this data be integrated into
retrieval models? What other issues need to be addressed
Proceedings of the 2005 International Workshop on Ubiquitous Data Management (UDM’05)
0-7695-2411-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE
for effective context-aware retrieval on mobile devices?
Human Digital Memories
Beyond retrieval in the context of previously seen documents and the issues of retrieval to mobile devices, this
section provides an introduction to the search needs of Human Digital Memory (HDM) technologies. HDM systems
are typically envisaged as creating archives of every document created or viewed by a user during their lifetime together with temporally related documents, and increasingly
include multimedia video, image and audio content captured from the user’s personal life experiences. This content is captured in real-time during the user’s daily activities.
Life-time personal archives created in this way are going to
be, by today’s standards, physically huge; but the greater
long-term challenge is automatically ﬁnding interesting or
relevant content from within these large highly heterogeneous collections, and delivering it in a form that is useful.
The emergence of these technologies realizes the vision
of Vannevar Bush’s Memex described in 1945 as “a device in which an individual stores all his books, records,
and communications, and which is mechanized so that it
may be consulted with exceeding speed and ﬂexibility” 
Bush could not foresee exactly how the Memex would be
achieved, but he did envisage two fundamental components:
annotation and links. Annotation makes the archive searchable and describes individual items and potentially collections of items. Linking items within an archive provides a
vital source of context information which will often make
the stored items meaningful. Examples of current research
exploring HDM systems include the Microsoft MyLifeBits
project and personal Life Logs at the University of
Tokyo . These projects are raising many interesting questions relating to the reuse of captured data, but research into
useful applications exploiting these resources is currently at
a very early stage.
A question which often arises with respect to HDM
archives is: do they have any real value? The best answer
to this probably lies in recognising the value that individuals already place on photo albums, framed photos, personal
letters, newspaper clippings, and home movies and videos.
While many of these items are accessed only rarely, perhaps
only a few times in a lifetime, they are treasured .
MyLifeBits 
The MyLifeBits project is an effort to implement a personal digital store of all information a user
encounters in their lifetime.
Assuming that the requirements of sufﬁcient storage capacity have been met, the next
requirement is to consider how to locate interesting items
within the archive of all this information. It is daunting to
attempt any type of organisation. Given the scale of the
archive it is not only difﬁcult to ﬁnd desired items, and indeed the existence of many will have been forgotten about.
The user might even have difﬁcultly recalling the significance of individual items when they are retrieved from
the archive. Given these considerations, MyLifeBits is designed based on a number of guiding principles:
• the user must not be constrained to organize items
within a strict hierarchy.
• there should be many ways of visualizing the contents
to help understand the signiﬁcance of items.
• the value of non-text media is dependent on annotations.
• authoring tools create two-way links to media that they
include in new media - referred to as “transclusion”.
Searching for and realizing the true value of items within
large collections will depend on the quality of these annotations, but also vitally, as realised by Vannevar Bush, on the
links between items. A photograph may be labelled with the
date on which it was taken, which may remind you of the
season, or an event. However, by linking other photos and
items associated with this event, and possibly related events
involving the same people, a “story” can be constructed out
of the items. These links are crucial because they can provide context and commentary for individual items. Pointers
from video keyframes to the original video provide the full
context in which it was captured. For others, perhaps children or grandchildren, in the future to have any appreciation
of the contents of a parent’s HDM, annotations and stories
are vital. Additionally, sharing of content among those involved in the items in the collection, colleagues, family and
friends, can result in multiple annotations and lead to snowballing effect on the value of the content.
Links between items are fundamental to the MyLifeBits
database. A link indicates that one item annotates another
one. One item can annotate any number of other items,
and may be annotated by any number of others. Searching on the items is currently limited to allowing multiple
views based on timelines and searching based on text annotations. The system encourages manual text annotation of
items. It also supports audio annotations which are passed
to a speech recognition system to make them searchable.
Life Logs 
Unlike the MyLifeBits project which is exploring the development of complete HDM archives, the
University of Tokyo Life Logs focuses on the capture and
searching of personal life experience multimedia collections recording daily life.
A prototype system captures
data from a wearable camera, a microphone and various
context sensors, including location via a GPS receiver, an
acceleration sensor, a gyro sensor and a brain wave analyzer. The user is also able to add text annotations to data
Proceedings of the 2005 International Workshop on Ubiquitous Data Management (UDM’05)
0-7695-2411-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE
as it is captured. Data is recorded onto a laptop computer
which also harvests further information from the internet
including, prevailing weather conditions at the user’s location, news from the day, all web pages browsed by the user
and other online news sources. The system can also record
copies of all ﬁles opened and edited by the user including
emails and word processed documents. GPS locations are
converted to textual descriptions using gazetteers to identify
regions, but also details of buildings and businesses. Similarly, times can be converted from speciﬁc dates, hours,
minutes and seconds, and to relative days, weeks, months
and seasons. Since indexing and interpreting much of the
captured video and audio media is difﬁcult, computationally
expensive and often highly subjective, one of the effective
implemented features of this system is to search using the
context data. For example, they would be able to look for
an item recording a spring meeting on a sunny day outside
an Italian restaurant in Ginza.
One of the key issues addressed in the life logs research
is working with the sheer volume of captured multimedia
data . While use of the captured context can lead to useful retrieval based on remembered cues, the amount of content available for browsing is vast. Stated bluntly, manual
searching of a one month video would typically take longer
than the length of the recording. This problem becomes
even more apparent when considering that the archive might
include years of data, and possibly be gathered from many
users. It is thus desirable to identify key material from the
archive based on some form of summarization criteria. Objective analysis of the content is unlikely to be able to distinguish between scenes that the user regards as signiﬁcant
or insigniﬁcant. The key idea introduced in is the desire
to identify key scenes from the life log based on the user’s
subjective experience. This is based on collected brain wave
activity which is interpreted as indicating whether the user
is paying attention to the current scene around them. The
system proceeds by ﬁrst using low-level feature analysis to
identify likely shot boundaries in the record video data. The
brain wave activity level is then used to identify shots likely
to be the most signiﬁcant to the user. Various methods of
content selection are explored in the original reported work.
In more recent work the project explored identiﬁcation of
keyframes within video based on spatio-temporal sampling
of context data . Various criteria for selecting keyframes
including absolute changes in time and location, and rates
of change. Once identiﬁed keyframes can be subjected to
computationally intensive processing to extract signiﬁcant
visual features. One of the features currently under investigation is the identiﬁcation of conversation scenes. The
extent of the visual features that can currently be reliably
identiﬁed is obviously limited, but the general framework
developed here provides an excellent testbed for exploring
future developments in image processing.
Further Sources of Context
The context features discussed so far are generally easily identiﬁed and are becoming increasingly easy to capture. However, developments in sensor technologies and
further exploration of context associated with documents
and searching can be used to gather and annotate a range
of additional context attributes which might usefully be exploited in retrieval.
Biometric Context
Recent studies have demonstrated that a number of
classes of a person’s emotional states can be recognised
automatically using non-intrusive physiological measurements . e,g. recognising surprise or amusement. These generally focus on easily measurable physiological features, and, unlike the work described in , are
largely non-intrusive. In a previous experimental study we
illustrated that cognitive engagement in an emotional state
can have a detrimental impact on the ability of subjects to
successfully undertake a decision-making task which required them learn about the task environment . This
task was based on a earlier study used to explore the decision making ability of affect-impaired patients . This
earlier study showed a clear correlation between galvanic
skin conductivity and the anticipated outcome of actions
in the task for normal affect-unimpaired subjects. Taking
this existing work together, we hypothesize that users of
information retrieval systems produce measurable physiological responses as their search progresses. Utilizing this
data would require the system to differentiate between signals arising from the search process itself and the impact on
the user of the content of retrieved information. The physiological measurements could then be correlated with a user’s
emotional states arising from the search process, e.g. success, failure, frustration, etc.
Psychological studies have shown that emotional states
can be interpreted in terms of three dimensions: arousal,
valence and control . We are currently exploring the interpretation of audio signals using these dimensions for affect labelling of multimedia data . At present, we are
working with movies and TV footage, but this system could
be adapted to process the contents of HDM archives. Other
work already incorporates visual features in its interpretation of arousal and valance , and we intend to extend
our system to include these features as well. Labelling of
documents in this way would enable searching for retrieval
of items captured with a strong emotional component, e.g.
excitement or sadness.
Once the physiological responses to events during interactive information searching have been understood, it is interesting to consider how search engine algorithms might
be made adaptive to respond to this information to improve
Proceedings of the 2005 International Workshop on Ubiquitous Data Management (UDM’05)
0-7695-2411-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE
TEMPORAL EVENT LINKS
QUERY/PROFILE
PREVIOUS SEARCH
Figure 1. Multiple link and context sources in a context annotated document collection.
the effectiveness of search. For example, to reduce anger
or frustration, possible methods available include emphasising the presentation of completely new information which
is highly ranked rather than presenting “more of the same”
information which might be also be highly ranked.
Context of Information Access
Context can be associated with documents when they are
created, and with the user when a search request is entered.
An extension of context labelling is to dynamically annotate documents with details of the context in which they are
retrieved. Exactly what annotations should be made would
obviously depend on the data available, but we could think
in terms of the standard attributes of location and time, and
also biometric data gathered from the user. Biometric data
could be used both to gauge the likely relevance of the retrieved items, and to record the user’s reaction to the retrieved information itself. An additional feature could also
be to annotate the document with the query used to retrieve
it, and whether it was found to be relevant to this query.
Note, this does not imply that this document should always
be expected to have the same relevance relationship to this
query, but it is potentially useful information.
Recent years have seen much research into the exploitation of inter-document links to improve information retrieval effectiveness. The most well known method of using linkage structures is the PageRank algorithm which
formed part of the original Google search engine.
use of links between items in a HDM is emphasised in
MyLifeBits to describe stories, and the linking of photographs within digital collections is a current active research area, for example and within our own Mediassist project. In this work inter-document links are concerned
either with links generated when items are created, logical
links between items forming an “event” or “story”, and links
created by web users to point to signiﬁcant or related pages.
Related retrieved items could be dynamically linked to other
documents retrieved in response to a query. In effect the
query places documents into a context, preserving this context by linking retrieved documents, particularly if they are
labelled as relevant, enables richer descriptions of stories
and events to be developed, and potentially sharing of annotations. Figure 1 illustrates this situation of multiple types
of inter-document links and context annotations. The link
structure will become ever richer as documents continue to
be retrieved in response to further search requests. As discussed earlier, when trying to recall the details of a speciﬁc
document, a user will often recall the context in which it
was viewed, by annotating documents with related context
data each time they are accessed, this data will be available
for use in future search requests when the user wants to ﬁnd
the same document, or contextually related (encompassing
all possible interpretations of context) documents, again in
the future. The overall aim must be to more reliably retrieve
documents in future search operations.
Ubiquitous
Context-Aware
Information
Proactive context-aware delivery of information to mobile users from HDMs and other sources combines all the
issues explored in this paper. A non-intrusive version of
this system would form a type of augmented memory or information assistant.
Proceedings of the 2005 International Workshop on Ubiquitous Data Management (UDM’05)
0-7695-2411-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE
Putting together a system which can deliver information
to a user is only part of the requirement; the information
delivered must be useful and enrich the user’s experience
of their environment. Information delivery must be reliable
and timely, and in a form suitable for the user’s current activities. This raises issues of detecting the user’s likely current activity, and deciding if or when to deliver information,
and how much information and in what media it should be
delivered. We thus arrive at a system incorporating some
form of personal assistant agent which can manage information searching, selection, and delivery, and determine
whether to summarize the information, or transform it into
another media. For example to present details in a map as
a sequence of audio directions to a user who cannot safely
or conveniently look at a map while driving or walking, or
as a textual list to a navigator. These issues are explored in
more detail in our earlier work .
Work on HDM searching currently makes much use of
interactive exploration of context as part of the query development process . In order for these archives to be
useful to users in their daily life, retrieval from HDMs must
be effective when using mobile devices with the attendant
difﬁculties of user interaction explored earlier.
Work carried out to date has only begun to explore the
potential of HDM technologies, information access on mobile devices and the exploitation of context in information
access. There are many interesting areas for further exploration. For example, a speculative idea for intimate integration of biometric data into the search process arises from
 . In this work, Antonio Damasio speculates that humans
re-experience a weaker physiological manifestation of the
states associated with something that they are remembering. An interesting question raised by this observation is
whether this experience might be captured during search as
the user remembers a document what they are looking for
and then be exploited to help them ﬁnd it again.
Acknowledgement
This work is partially funded by Science Foundation Ireland under grant 03/IN.3/I361.