ORIGINAL PAPER
Bridging gaps between several forms of granular computing
Didier Dubois1 • Henri Prade1
Received: 23 July 2015 / Accepted: 15 October 2015 / Published online: 5 January 2016
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
Two important ideas at the core of Zadeh’s
seminal contributions to fuzzy logic and approximate reasoning are the notions of granulation and that of possibilistic uncertainty. In this paper, elaborating on the basis
of some formal analogy, recently laid bare by the authors,
between possibility theory and formal concept analysis, we
suggest other bridges between theories for which the concept of granulation is central. We highlight the common
features between the notion of extensional fuzzy set with
respect to a similarity relation and the notion of formal
concept. We also discuss the case of fuzzy rough sets.
Thus, we point out some fruitful cross-fertilizations
between the possibilistic representation of information and
several views of granulation emphasizing the idea of
clusters of points that can be identiﬁed respectively on the
basis of their closeness, or of their common labeling in
terms of properties.
Possibility theory  Formal concept analysis 
Extensional fuzzy set  Rough set  Granulation
1 Introduction
The issue of how to describe items is at the basis of any
representation framework and naturally involves notions of
similarity and uncertainty. Similarity is instrumental for
grouping items having close or common features on the
one hand. On the other hand, there is a need for coping with
the fact that information may be incomplete or not precise
enough, which is a source of uncertainty. In the non-
Boolean setting these notions can be couched in the setting
of fuzzy sets . It has been already emphasized
in Dubois and Prade that fuzzy set membership
functions can be interpreted diversely, in terms of similarity , uncertainty
 and even preferences . These different views have generally led to
distinct families of important developments in data analysis
and learning, in approximate reasoning, and in decision
making, respectively.
The idea of granulation is at the heart of any knowledge
representation system, as it points out that mathematical
universes of discourse must be partitioned in agreement
with the limitations of human perception. Generally we
work with more or less well-deﬁned partitions of idealized
measurement scales; for instance the real line is too reﬁned
for human limited perception of closeness. Zadeh 
has emphasized the importance of granulation and granular
computing and the need to cast them in a non-Boolean
setting, introducing the idea of a fuzzy granules: indeed
indistinguishability between two quantities gradually takes
place when they get closer to each other, so that the
threshold under which they become indistinguishable is
fuzzy. Moreover, he makes it clear that uncertainty due to
granular descriptions is possibilistic rather than probabilistic, generally.
This discussion paper intends to illustrate the idea that
some links can be established at the theoretical level
between different concerns related to granular computing,
on the basis of formal analogies that can be laid bare
between the corresponding formal settings. In the following, we successively consider four settings: possibility
theory , formal
& Didier Dubois
 
IRIT, CNRS & Universite´ de Toulouse, Toulouse, France
Granul. Comput. 1:115–126
DOI 10.1007/s41066-015-0008-8
extensional fuzzy sets and rough sets , and the connection between extensional fuzzy sets and fuzzy rough sets was noticed by
Boixader et al. ).
Here, we ﬁrst illustrate the interest of the parallel
between possibility theory and formal concept analysis that
we initiated in Dubois et al. and further developed
in Djouadi et al. , Dubois and Prade . We
recall the links between FCA and the formalism of rough
sets in the special case of equivalence relations. Then, we
indicate that this worth-noticing parallel carries over to the
theory of extensional fuzzy sets and fuzzy rough sets,
relying on previous technical studies. Interestingly enough,
such links echo concerns often expressed by Zadeh in the
last decade about the need for developing the ideas of
granulation and granular computing in the setting of fuzzy
sets . The aim of this position paper is to
encourage cooperation between schools of research that
handle similar notions in various ﬁelds around the idea of
granular computing.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 considers
possibility theory and formal concept analysis in the crisp
case. It shows that the four set functions naturally associated with the possibility theory setting have counterparts in
the formal concept analysis framework. The beneﬁt of
introducing more operators in the latter theory is exempliﬁed by recalling a connection, not considered in standard
formal concept analysis, which granulates a formal context
into independent formal sub-contexts. Finally, the bridge
with rough sets is obtained by restricting to relations
between objects, and it shows the formal analogy between
concepts and clusters, independent subcontexts and granules. Then, Sect. 3 considers the non-Boolean case. It
recalls the theory of extensional fuzzy sets and the representation of fuzzy extensions of equivalence relations.
Then it parallels two views of granulation, namely the one
at work in formal concept analysis and the one underlying
the theory of extensional fuzzy sets. Finally, we bring
fuzzy rough sets into the picture.
2 From formal concept analysis to possibility
Formal concept analysis associates any considered object
with the set of its properties, via a formal context modeled
by a binary relation R, a subset of the Cartesian product of
the set of objects O and the set of properties P.
An object is denoted by x, or xi in case we consider
several ones at the same time. It is interesting to notice that
in fact, an object may either refer to a particular, unique
item, or to a generic item representative of a class of items
sharing the same description. A subset of objects will be
denoted by a capital letter X, and we shall write
X ¼ fx1; . . .; xi; . . .; xmg. A set of objects associated with
their respective sets of properties deﬁnes a formal context
R  O  P . An object x is
associated with its description, denoted by oðxÞ. In the
following, we only consider simple descriptions, expressible in terms of a subset Y of properties yj, namely,
Y ¼ fy1; . . .; yj; . . .; yng. Let RðxÞ ¼ fy 2 Pjðx; yÞ 2 Rg be
the set of properties of object x, and R1ðyÞ ¼ fx 2
Ojðx; yÞ 2 Rg is the set of objects having property y. In
such a case, we shall write oðxÞ ¼ RðxÞ ¼ Y.
The classical setting of formal concept analysis deﬁned
from a formal context relies on a single operator RM that
associates a subset of objects with the set of properties they
RMðXÞ ¼ fy 2 PjR1ðyÞ  Xg ¼ \x2XRðxÞ:
RMðXÞ is a partial conceptual characterization of objects in
X. Objects in X have all properties in RMðXÞ, but they may
have some others (that are not shared by all objects in X).
Conversely, R1MðYÞ ¼ fx 2 OjRðxÞ  Yg ¼ \y2YR1ðyÞ
is the set X of objects having all properties in Y.
In the setting of FCA, a formal concept is deﬁned as a pair ðX; YÞ 2 O  P such that
RMðXÞ ¼ Y and R1MðYÞ ¼ X:
In this case Y is also the maximal set of properties shared
by all objects in X. It forms a Galois connection, and we
Granul. Comput. 1:115–126
Proposition 1
 The following
properties of pairs (X, Y) are equivalent
RMðXÞ ¼ Y and R1MðYÞ ¼ X
(X, Y) is maximal such that X  Y  R
A formal concept (X, Y) is, thus, a maximal sub-rectangle in the formal context R. Let R be the set union of all
formal concepts extracted from R. Then R ¼ R, by
construction.
2.1 Describing imprecise objects using possibility
distributions
In contrast with formal contexts, a useful kind of structured
description of objects is in terms of attributes . Let a, and A ¼ fa1; . . .; ak; . . .; arg, respectively
denote an attribute, and a set of attributes. The value of
attribute a for x is denoted by aðxÞ ¼ u, where u belongs
to the attribute domain Ua. In this case, we shall write
oðxÞ ¼ ða1ðxÞ; . . .; akðxÞ; . . .; arðxÞÞ ¼ ðu1; . . .; uk; . . .; urÞ.
This corresponds to a completely informed situation where
all the considered attribute values are known for x. When
this is not the case, the precise value akðxÞ will be replaced
by the possibility distribution pakðxÞ. Such a possibility
distribution is a mapping from Uak to ,
or more generally any linearly ordered scale. Then
pakðxÞðuÞ 2 ½0; 1 estimates to what extent it is possible that
the value of ak for x is u. 0 means impossibility; several
distinct values may be fully possible (i.e., at degree 1). The
characteristic function of an ordinary subset is a particular
case of a possibility distribution. Precise information corresponds to the characteristic function of singletons.
An elementary property y can then be viewed as a subset
Ay of a single attribute domain Ua, i.e., y  Ua. Note that
while Y is a conjunctive set of properties (for instance an
object possesses all properties in Y), property y, is a disjunctive set Ay of mutually exclusive values, one of which
is the value of a single-valued attribute that is ill-known for
some object x.
Four set functions in possibility theory are now recalled
 , emphasizing the symmetrical
roles played by the object x and the attribute value u, a
point of view unusual in possibility theory, but echoing the
symmetrical role played by objects and properties in formal
concept analysis. See Dubois and Prade for a more
complete introduction to the use of the four set functions in
possibility theory.
2.2 Set functions in possibility theory
Let paðxÞðuÞ denote the possibility that object x has value
u 2 U according to attribute a. For simplicity, we only
consider the single-valued attribute case here (the actual
value of x is not a set). The function paðÞðÞ deﬁnes a fuzzy
set over O  U (objects vs. attribute domain). We assume
that pa is bi-normalized: 8x 2 O; 9u 2 U; paðxÞðuÞ ¼ 1 and
8u 2 U; 9x 2 O; paðxÞðuÞ ¼ 1. This means that for any
object x, there is some fully possible value for attribute a,
and that for any value u there is an object x that takes this
value. Let X be a set of objects, and y  U be a property.
Then, one can deﬁne four set functions, each deﬁned in two
domains, respectively, the set of objects and the attribute
Possibility measures , denoted by P:
PuðXÞ ¼ max
x2X paðxÞðuÞ
PxðyÞ ¼ max
u2y paðxÞðuÞ:
PuðXÞ estimates to what extent it is possible that there
is an object in X having value u, while PxðyÞ is the
possibility that object x has property y. Function P is
an indicator of non-empty intersection of the fuzzy set,
whose membership function is the possibility distribution, with an ordinary subset. They are measures of
‘‘potential possibility’’. Clearly, P is max-decomposable with respect to set union.
The dual measures of necessity N (or ‘‘actual necessity’’) :
NuðXÞ ¼ min
x62X 1  paðxÞðuÞ
NxðyÞ ¼ min
u62y 1  paðxÞðuÞ:
NuðXÞ estimates to what extent it is certain (necessarily
true) that all objects that have value u lie in X, while
NxðyÞ is the certainty that object x has property y. Note
NxðyÞ ¼ 1  PxðyÞ where
N may be viewed as an indicator of inclusion of the
fuzzy set whose membership function is the possibility
distribution into an ordinary subset. And N is mindecomposable with respect to set intersection.
The measures of ‘‘actual (or guaranteed) possibility’’
 
DuðXÞ ¼ min
x2X paðxÞðuÞ
DxðyÞ ¼ min
u2y paðxÞðuÞ
DuðXÞ estimates to what extent it is possible that all
objects in X have value u, while DxðyÞ estimates the
possibility that object x may take any value in y. D may
be viewed as a degree of inclusion of an ordinary
subset into the fuzzy set whose membership function is
the possibility distribution. D is min-decomposable
with respect to set union.
Granul. Comput. 1:115–126
The dual measures of ‘‘potential necessity or certainty’’
 
ruðXÞ ¼1  min
x62X paðxÞðuÞ
rxðyÞ ¼1  min
u62y paðxÞðuÞ
ruðXÞ estimates to what extent there exists at least one
object outside X that has a low degree of possibility of
having value u, while rxðyÞ is the degree to which
there is an impossible value for aðxÞ outside y. Note
that rxðyÞ ¼ 1  DxðyÞ. r is an indicator of non-full
coverage of the considered universe by the fuzzy set
whose membership function is the possibility distribution together with an ordinary subset. r is maxdecomposable with respect to set intersection.
2.3 Application to the formal context setting
In Dubois et al. , the setting of formal concept
analysis has been enlarged with the introduction of three
other operators. We now recall these four operators. They
are counterpart, in the setting of a formal context, of the
above set functions from possibility theory.
Namely, let R be the formal context (viewed as a Boolean table). Then knowing only that an object x has some
property y, the set R1ðyÞ ¼ fx 2 Ojðx; yÞ 2 Rg is the set
of possible objects pointed out by the elementary piece of
knowledge ‘‘the object has property y’’ (in the context R).
This suggests a possibilistic reading of formal concept
analysis: a formal counterpart of possibility theory set
functions can be laid bare in this framework.Then, four
remarkable sets can be associated with a subset X of objects
(the notations have been chosen here in order to emphasize
the parallel with possibility theory) :
The set RPðXÞ of properties that are possessed by at
least one object in X:
RPðXÞ ¼ fy 2 PjR1ðyÞ \ X 6¼ ;g ¼ [x2XRðxÞ:
Clearly, we have RPðX1 [ X2Þ ¼ RPðX1Þ [ RPðX2Þ:
The set RNðXÞ of properties s. t. any object that satisﬁes
one of them is necessarily in X:
RNðXÞ ¼ fy 2 PjR1ðyÞ  Xg ¼ \x62XRðxÞ;
where the overbar denotes complementation. In other
words, possessing any property in RNðXÞ is a sufﬁcient
condition for belonging to X. Moreover, we have
RNðX1 \X2Þ ¼ RNðX1Þ\RNðX2Þ and RNðXÞ ¼ RPXÞ ¼
The set RMðXÞ of properties shared by all objects in X:
RMðXÞ ¼ fy 2 PjR1ðyÞ  Xg ¼ \x2XRðxÞ:
In other words, satisfying all properties in RMðXÞ is a
necessary condition for an object to belong to X.
Clearly, RMðX1 [ X2Þ ¼ RMðX1Þ \ RMðX2Þ:
The set RrðXÞ of properties that are not satisﬁed by at
least one object in X.
R5ðXÞ ¼ fy 2 PjR1ðyÞ [ X 6¼ Og ¼ [x62XRðxÞ:
R5ðXÞ ¼ RMðXÞ ¼ PnRMðXÞ.
words, in context R, for any property in R5ðXÞ, there
exists at least one object outside X that misses it.
Moreover, we have R5ðX1 \ X2Þ ¼ R5ðX1Þ [ R5ðX2Þ:
A number of remarks are worth noticing:
In negative similarity to RMðXÞ, RPðXÞ provides a
negative conceptual characterization of objects in
X since it gathers all the properties that are never
satisﬁed by any object in X.
RNðXÞ \ RMðXÞ is the set of properties possessed by all
objects in X and only by them.
RPðXÞ and RNðXÞ are isonotonic (they become larger
when X increases), while RMðXÞ and R5ðXÞ are
antitonic (they become smaller when X increases).
The four subsets RPðXÞ, RNðXÞ, RMðXÞ, and R5ðXÞ have
been considered (with different notations) without any
mention of possibility theory by different authors. The
standard operator in FCA is RM. Du¨ntsch et al. 
calls RM a sufﬁciency operator, and its representation
capabilities are studied in the theory of Boolean algebras.
Taking inspiration as the previous authors from rough sets
Pawlak , Yao also consider these four
subsets. In both cases, the four operators were introduced.
See also .
The interest of the bridge between possibility theory and
FCA is that it enables a systematic investigation of alternative connections between objects and properties to be
carried out; they differ from the standard Galois connection
2.4 Application to formal context decomposition
It can be checked that R5 deﬁnes the same Galois connection as the one deﬁned from RM, while RN (or equivalently RP) induces another kind of connection, which is
now described.
The connection deﬁned from RN proceeds in a similar
formal way as when deﬁning formal concepts . Namely, let us consider
pairs (X, Y) s.t. RNðXÞ ¼ Y and R1NðYÞ ¼ X. We can
show these pairs also satisfy RPðXÞ ¼ Y and R1PðYÞ ¼ X.
Granul. Comput. 1:115–126
Moreover, the pairs (X, Y) s.t. RNðXÞ ¼ Y and R1NðYÞ ¼
X allow us to characterize independent sub-contexts (i.e.,
that have no common objects and no common properties),
and are thus of interest for the decomposition of a formal
context into smaller independent ones. These results are
expressed through the following:
Proposition 2
 The following
properties of pairs (X, Y) are equivalent
RNðXÞ ¼ Y and R1NðYÞ ¼ X
RNðXÞ ¼ Y and R1NðYÞ ¼ X
RPðXÞ ¼ Y and R1PðYÞ ¼ X
R  ðX  YÞ [ ðX  YÞ
Thus, (X, Y) and ðX; YÞ are two independent sub-contexts in R, in the sense that there is no object/property pair
(x, y) from context R in X  Y nor in X  Y. There is no
minimality requirement in the inclusion property 4 of the
above proposition. In particular, the pair ðO; PÞ trivially
satisﬁes it. However, this result leads to a decomposition of
R into a disjoint union of minimal independent sub-contexts. Indeed, suppose two pairs ðX1; Y1Þ, ðX2; Y2Þ satisfy
the above proposition. It implies that for instance, the pair
ðX1 \ X2; Y1 \ Y2Þ satisﬁes it 
ðX;YÞ:RNðXÞ¼Y;R1NðYÞ¼X
ðX  YÞ [ ðX  YÞ:
In general, R R.
 . Figure 1 presents a
formal context. Pairs ðf6; 7; 8g; fc; d; egÞ, ðf5; 6; 7; 8g;
fd; egÞ, ðf2; 3; 4g; fg; hgÞ are examples of formal concepts, while pairs ðf5; 6; 7; 8g; fa; b; c; d; egÞ, ðf2; 3; 4g;
ðff; g; hgÞ, ðf1g; figÞ are minimal subcontexts. And it can
be checked that
R f5; 6; 7; 8g  fa; b; c; d; eg [ f2; 3; 4g  ff; g; hg [ f1g  fig:
The connection ðRP; R1PÞ has been originally introduced by Georgescu and Popescu and studied in the
framework of multivalued data tables with entries in a
residuated lattice, but its practical signiﬁcance for Boolean
data tables was not really discussed. These authors call a
pair of operators (f, g), where f : 2Obj ! 2Prop; g : 2Prop !
2Obj relating the subsets of objects and properties, a conjugated pair of operators if and only if
X \ gðYÞ ¼ ; () fðXÞ \ Y ¼ ;:
It is easy to see that ðRP; R1PÞ is a conjugated pair
of operators. To see it note that RPðXÞ \ Y ¼ ; also
[x2XðRðxÞ \ YÞ ¼ ;.
R \ ðX  YÞ ¼ ;. So, by symmetry, it is equivalent to
R1PðYÞ \ X ¼ ;:
In terms of the dual operator N, the conjugation property
reads Y  RNðXÞ () X  R1NðYÞ. However, this connection is not a Galois connection. One reason is that
iterating RN and R1N does not yield an idempotent operation. Of course the same holds for R1PðRPðXÞÞ,
RPðR1PðYÞÞ, RNðR1NðYÞÞ. For instance, on the data
table of Fig. 1, R1Nðfa; c; d; egÞ ¼ f7; 8g, RNðf7; 8gÞ ¼
fag and R1NðfagÞ ¼ ;.
Through the notions of formal sub-contexts and of formal
concepts, one sees two aspects of granulation at work.
Namely, on the one hand independent sub-contexts are
separated granules, while inside each sub-context, formal
concepts (X, Y) are identiﬁed where each object in X is
associated with each property in Y, which can be viewed as a
cluster. Note that in the special case when a formal context
can be decomposed into independent formal concepts (i.e.,
each minimal sub-context is a formal concept), we have a
perfect granulation: two objects are either identical in terms
of properties, or they do not have any property in common.
However, in the general case, objects in the extension of a
formal concept may not be fully similar since they may also
possess properties outside the intension of the concept. They
are only similar with respect to the properties associated to
Fig. 1 Formal concepts and sub-contexts
Granul. Comput. 1:115–126
the formal concept. In practice, it may be interesting to
introduce some tolerance in the deﬁnition of formal subcontexts and concepts , leading to a more permissive and approximate view
of granules or clusters.
Besides, the above results can be also expressed in terms
of bipartite graph clustering, where
There are two kinds of nodes corresponding to objects
and properties.
Formal concepts correspond to sets of object nodes
connected to all nodes in subsets of property nodes.
The decomposition into independent subcontexts corresponds to connected components of the bipartite
graph (each node of one set being related to at least one
node of another set of the opposite type).
One can then take advantage of this exact parallel between
formal concept analysis and bipartite graph analysis
 .
2.5 From formal concept analysis to rough sets
The concept of granulation is even more central in rough
set theory . Rough set theory focuses on the
impossibility to precisely describe any set of objects when
the properties used to describe them are not enough discriminant. One connection between FCA and rough sets is
that the latter also start from a data table like a formal
context (we assume Boolean attributes in the following).
Let Xy be the set of objects satisfying the property y. Then
there exists a partition generated on O by the family of
subsets fXy : y 2 Pg, each element of which is an interpretation of the propositional language induced by properties in P, i.e. it is of the form y2PXey
y , ey 2 f1; 1g,
y ¼ Xy if ey ¼ 1, and Xey
y ¼ Xy if ey ¼ 1. If R is
the formal context, then two objects x and x0 are said to be
indiscernible (they are in the same element of the partition)
properties
RðxÞ ¼ Rðx0Þ). It enables the data table to be reduced to the
case where no two lines in R are equal.
The rough set approach considers the above partition of
the universe O of objects, say X1; . . .; Xk induced by the
properties via the equivalence relation E deﬁned by
Eðx; x0Þ ¼ 1 if and only if RðxÞ ¼ Rðx0Þ and 0 otherwise.
So, all that is known about any object in O is which subset
of the partition it belongs to. So each subset X of objects is
only known in terms of its upper and lower approximations, a pair ðX; XÞ such that
fXi; Xi \ X 6¼ ;g and X ¼
fXi; Xi  Xg:
It is clear that ðA \ BÞ  A \ B and A [ B  ðA [ BÞ.
Note that an equivalence class of relation E corresponds to
a specialization of both a formal concept and a formal
independent subcontext.
To summarize the links between rough sets and FCA, a
formal concept can be viewed as a 2-dimensional extension
of an equivalence class. A formal context is a 2-dimensional extension of equivalence relation if it can be
decomposed into a disjoint union of elementary sub-contexts, each of which forms a single formal concept. In that
case, the context we start with is the perfect extension of
the equivalence relation to the 2-dimensional setting.
Another way of putting together FCA and rough sets
consist in putting both on a cube of oppositions, whereby
their connections to possibility theory functions can be
highlighted; see Ciucci et al. .
2.6 Clusters and granules
Assume now a general relation S between objects, that is
S  O  O. It can be viewed as a directed graph whose
nodes form the set O. We assume the relation is serial, that
is 8x 2 O; SðxÞ 6¼ ;, and its converse S1 is serial too; we
say that S is biserial. The deﬁnition of a formal concept then
is a maximal Cartesian product A  B  O  O contained
in S. We can still deﬁne it as satisfying the two equalities
SMðAÞ ¼ B and S1MðBÞ ¼ A. Suppose the relation S is
symmetrical, in order to capture some idea of proximity.
Then, the maximal Cartesian products A  B contained in S
are of the form C  C  S, i.e., they are maximal cliques in
the non-directed graph associated to S: the two equalities
deﬁning formal concepts then boil down to a single one:
SMðCÞ ¼ \x2CSðxÞ ¼ C;
which expresses the fact that each node in C is related to all
nodes in C, and corresponds to one major feature of a
cluster. We call the set C a tight cluster, because each
element in C is close to all other elements in C. Note that S
must be reﬂexive (an element is close to itself), otherwise
there is no such tight cluster. Then it is enough to require
that C  SMðCÞ since the other inclusion trivially holds.
Alternatively we can consider minimal Cartesian products A  B such that S  ðA  BÞ [ ðA  BÞ, which satisfy
the two equalities SPðAÞ ¼ B and S1PðBÞ ¼ A. If the
relation S is symmetrical, it corresponds to the minimal
Cartesian products B  B such that S  ðB  BÞ [ ðB  BÞ.
They satisfy the equality
SPðBÞ ¼ [x2BSðxÞ ¼ B;
This is because the identity (7) is equivalent to
S  ðB  BÞ [ ðB  BÞ:
If S is reﬂexive, it is enough to require that SPðAÞ  A
instead of (7) since the other inclusion trivially holds.
Granul. Comput. 1:115–126
Minimal subsets G that satisfy (8) are such that each
element of G is related to at least one element of B and to
none outside G. This is the other expected property of a
cluster, but we can call it a loose granule. Loose granules
of S form the set GðSÞ and correspond to maximal connected components in the non-directed graph associated to
S. Note that tight clusters can only be found inside loose
granules: for any tight cluster A, there exists a loose
granule containing it. Tight clusters and loose granules
cannot be told apart if the relation S is moreover transitive.
Proposition 3
Consider a symmetric serial relation S.
Then S ¼ E is an equivalence relation if and only if its
loose granules and tight clusters coincide.
If S ¼ E is an equivalence relation, it is easy to
check that loose granules and tight clusters coincide.
Conversely, if loose granules and tight clusters in S coincide, then an element in a loose granule is connected to all
elements in this granule and to none outside. So S corresponds to a partition, and is an equivalence relation. h
It is also clear that the relation S ¼ \G2GðSÞðG  GÞ [
ðG  GÞ is transitive, and is actually the transitive closure
cl(S) of S. As the transitive closure of S is reﬂexive, it is
thus be an equivalence relation. So loose granules form a
partition of O. More precisely:
Proposition 4
Consider a symmetric serial relation S.
The tight clusters of cl(S) are the loose granules of S.
Let B be a loose granule of S. Since the graph with
nodes in B is connected, all nodes in B will be related to all
nodes in B in the graph of the transitive closure of S, but
not to any node outside B. Hence B is a tight cluster of
cl(S). If B is not contained in a loose granule of S, then it is
made of more than one connected component, hence they
remain disconnected via transitive closure. So, B will not
be a loose granule of cl(S), a fortiori not a tight one. h
So it can be seen that a reﬂexive and symmetric relation
represents a partition of separated loose granules, each
possibly containing several tight clusters (that may overlap), which makes it very similar to a formal context.
3 Extensional fuzzy sets and fuzzy contexts
The concept of extensional fuzzy set with respect to a fuzzy
equality, proposed in Ho¨hle , Valverde , further developed by Boixader et al. , Klawonn ,
and Recassens also embeds ideas of granulation. It
is a multivalued extension of the decomposition of a relation into tight clusters and loose granules recalled above.
This approach has mathematical roots in category theory
and Heyting algebras , whereby a multivalued
notion of equality is used. As we are going to see, although
deﬁned in a different algebraic setting and on the basis of a
completely different intuition, it is also closely related to
the gradual version of formal concept analysis .
3.1 Fuzzy singletons and extensional hulls
Let E be a fuzzy similarity relation deﬁned on a universe U.
For simplicity, we assume the use of the scale 0; 1
supposed to be
reﬂexive (Eðu; uÞ ¼ 1),
symmetric (Eðu; vÞ ¼ Eðv; uÞ),
-transitive (i.e.,  is
increasing in the broad sense, associative, commutative and
such that 0  0 ¼ 0, 1  a ¼ a). It was ﬁrst proposed by
Zadeh when  ¼ min.
Such a fuzzy relation models a form of proximity
between elements of the set U. Relation E is sometimes
also called ‘‘fuzzy equivalence’’ ,
‘‘(fuzzy) equality relation’’ , or ‘‘(fuzzy)
indistinguishability relation’’ , or yet
‘‘indiscernibility relation’’ . Note that the
terms ‘‘indistinguishability’’ and ‘‘equality’’ refer to quite
intuitions,
understood as the weak version of an equivalence relation
 . Indeed, one may argue that the
1-cut of a fuzzy equality should be the standard equality
(i.e. Eðu; vÞ 6¼ 1 if u 6¼ v), i.e., separability holds. On the
contrary, the name indistinguishability relation is denying
separability.
following,
separability.
Interesting choices for operation  are min, product or
the Łukasiewicz t-norm a Ł b ¼ maxð0; a þ b  1Þ. Fuzzy
similarity relation are the negative of distances or metrics
 . The min-transitivity makes a fuzzy similarity closely related to an ultrametric. The Ł-transitivity corresponds to the triangular
inequality.
A fuzzy set F is said to be extensional with respect to E
 iff
8u; v; FðuÞ  Eðu; vÞ
E be obtained as F
EðvÞ ¼ maxu2U FðuÞEðu;vÞ.
It is clear that due to the properties of E, it always holds
that F  F
E. Moreover F
E can be written as EPðFÞ as
it is the fuzzy set contains all elements in the vicinity of F.
So, Eq. (9) can be written as F
EðvÞ ¼ F. Equation (9)
generalizes the condition SPðBÞ ¼ B in Eq. (7), so that we
can also write it as EPðBÞ ¼ B.
Granul. Comput. 1:115–126
Consider now the implication connective ! associated
to  by residuation, i.e., we assume a  b
The extensionality of F is obviously equivalent to
8u; v; FðuÞ $ FðvÞ
where a $ b ¼ minða ! b; b ! aÞ, using residuation and
the symmetry of E. Equation (10) generalizes the property
(8) S  ðB  BÞ [ ðB  BÞ to multivalued relations.
The extensional hull ^F of a fuzzy set F (w.r.t. E) is then
^F ¼ inffGjF  G and G is extensional w.r.t. Eg:
It is obvious that F
E is extensional (EPðF
E, since E is -transitive)
and is the extensional hull of F.
An important example of extensional fuzzy set is
obtained by considering an element u and the fuzzy set Fu
of elements similar to it, that is FuðvÞ ¼ Eðu; vÞ (it is a line
of matrix E). Fu is clearly the extensional hull of the singleton fug. Note that FvðuÞ ¼ FuðvÞ, and that if FvðuÞ ¼ 1
then Fv ¼ Fu. Fu is the fuzzy counterpart of an equivalence
class. Klawonn calls it a ‘‘fuzzy point’’, understood
as the largest cluster of indiscernible entities around u, as
per the fuzzy similarity relation E.
Each fuzzy set Fv can be seen as a fuzzy loose granule.
It is an atomic entity inside U that cannot be split, if an
observer whose myopic eyesight is modeled by the fuzzy
similarity E. If E is an equivalence relation (for instance,
the 1-cut of a fuzzy similarity is clearly an equivalence
relation), Fu is just the equivalence class of u. The extensional hull of a crisp subset A  U is the union of extensional hulls of all elements in the set:
l ^AðuÞ ¼ sup
An interesting question whether any extensional fuzzy set
takes this form. An extensional fuzzy set would then
always consist of the fuzzy union of fuzzy extensional hulls
of singletons, as in the crisp case. It would hold if an
extensional fuzzy set coincides with the extensional hull of
its core. But the latter property is not true. For instance,
consider a fuzzy set F containing strictly Fu but with the
same core A. Clearly, its extensional hull EPðFÞ strictly
contains Fu but also has the same core A (an equivalence
class of the 1-cut of E). Hence it is not of the form [u2AFu.
Ho¨hle and Klawonn call a fuzzy singleton F (w.r.t. E) a
non-empty fuzzy set (i.e., maxu FðuÞ ¼ 1) such that
FðuÞ  FðvÞ
In particular we equivalently have FðuÞ
FðvÞ ! Eðu; vÞ;
8v 2 U, that is,
v2U FðvÞ ! Eðu; vÞ:
Considering maximal fuzzy singletons, we generalize the
FCA operator: they are such that F ¼ EDðFÞ, since the
composition on the right-hand side of the above inequality
extends operation D. Clearly, the union of two such fuzzy
singletons is not a fuzzy singleton. In fact, a fuzzy singleton is a greatest fuzzy set satisfying (12). Maximal
fuzzy singletons are the multivalued version of the notion
of tight cluster, i.e., the specialization of a formal concept
to relations over a set.1
Using a -transitive similarity relation we can prove that
extensional
singletons
singletons.
Proposition 5
If E is a -transitive similarity relation,
and w 2 U a singleton, then FwðuÞ  FwðvÞ
Note that letting F ¼ Fw in (12), we again get
the expression of the transitivity of E. Hence Fw satisﬁes
What this result shows is that fuzzy versions of tight
clusters and loose granules in the sense of a fuzzy similarity relation coincide with equivalence classes Fu, just
like in the classical case for equivalence relations. Due
to -transitivity, it holds that EDðFuÞ ¼ EPðFuÞ ¼ Fu;
8u 2 U. One question to be solved is whether there are
other fuzzy sets that are at the same time extensional and
are fuzzy singletons, that is whether EDðFÞ ¼ EPðFÞ ¼ F
implies that F is just the extensional hull of a singleton (a
fuzzy similarity class). Note that extensional hulls of crisp
subsets other than singletons do not qualify as candidates
as EDðAÞ ¼ \u2AEDðfugÞ and EPðAÞ ¼ [u2AEPðfugÞ.
Valverde considers the converse
problem of generating a fuzzy relation from a family of
subsets. Given a family F of fuzzy sets F the coarsest
equivalence relation EF such that all fuzzy sets F 2 F are
extensional is
EFðu; vÞ ¼
FðuÞ $ FðvÞ:
In the crisp case, take F as fAi : yi 2 Pg. Then it simply
says that two elements are related if and only if they belong
to the same sets Ai (they share the same properties). This
equation is extended to the case where the properties are
more or less important by Beˇlohla´vek .
While the coarsest fuzzy similarity relation EF such that
all fuzzy sets F 2 F are extensional is provided above by
Valverde result (13), the ﬁnest such fuzzy similarity relation EF is of the form
1 The term ‘‘singleton’’ here means that fuzzy singletons are atomic
entities as per the indistinguishability relation E.
Granul. Comput. 1:115–126
EFðu; vÞ ¼1 if u ¼ v
FðuÞ  FðvÞ otherwise.
Moreover, Klawonn addresses the case when a
collection of normalized fuzzy sets can be viewed as
forming a family of fuzzy points. If 8Fi 2 F; 9ui; such that
FiðuiÞ ¼ 1, then the fact that F is a family of fuzzy points
with respect to E is equivalent to the following inequality:
8Fi; Fj 2 F,
FiðuÞ  FjðuÞ
FiðvÞ $ FjðvÞ
This condition is a fuzzy counterpart of the fact that
equivalence classes (here generalized to fuzzy points) are
3.2 Extensional fuzzy sets and FCA: analogies
In the Boolean case, the mathematical expressions (6) and
(7) are special cases of formal concept analysis expressions. Similarly, in the multivalued case, we can generalize
identities (9, 10, 12) to the setting of FCA. First, the
counterpart to (9) using a formal multivalued context is:
XðxÞ  Rðx; yÞ
YðyÞ  R1ðy; xÞ
It is the multivalued version of the third point of Proposition 2 that operates a decomposition into disjoint subcontexts. It is equivalent to the counterpart of (10) and point 4
of Proposition 2 from Sect. 2.4), namely:
8x; y; XðxÞ $ YðyÞ
As already said, in the fuzzy similarity setting, there is only
one Eq. (9) instead of two in FCA because the fuzzy
similarity relation is symmetric. This indicates that the idea
of extensional fuzzy set bears a strong analogy with the
notion of formal sub-context Indeed, (16) expresses that if
an object x of X has property y then this property is in Y,
and conversely if a property y of Y applies to an object x
then this object is in X, i.e., (X, Y) is an independent subcontext; so an independent subcontext is extensional.
Moreover, we can deal with a fuzzy extension of the notion
of formal sub-context since
Eqs. (16) and (17) make sense in 0; 1
, and not only in
In fact, the decomposition of R into minimal contexts
(forming relation R in Eq. (4) above the example of Sect.
2.4) corresponds to the construction of the coarsest fuzzy
similarity relation induced by a family of fuzzy sets as per
Eq. (13). To see it, just consider instead of the family F the
set of conjugated pairs obtained from the context R. More
generally, a fuzzy relation R on U generates a family FðRÞ
of fuzzy sets Fu such that FuðvÞ ¼ Rðu; vÞ; 8u 2 U. Considering the coarsest fuzzy similarity relation EFðRÞ, it is
clear that R  EFðRÞ just like R  R in the context
decomposition framework.
Likewise, multivalued counterparts of formal concepts,
as per Proposition 1 can be deﬁned:
XðxÞ  YðyÞ
which is equivalent to Beˇlohla´vek 8x; y,
XðxÞ ! Rðx; yÞ
YðyÞ ! R1ðy; xÞ
one can see a parallel between the idea of a fuzzy point [a
maximal fuzzy singleton in the sense of (12)] and the
notion of formal concept. Indeed, Eq. (19) expresses that if
a property y is in Y, any object x of X should possess it, and
conversely if an object x is in X, any property y in Y should
be possessed by it. And Eq. (12) of fuzzy singletons can
also be expressed as FðuÞ
Eðu; vÞ ! FðvÞ, from residuation, so that we do have that F ¼ EDðFÞ and a pair of
fuzzy points (F, F) is like a formal concept. So a concept
(X, Y) is similar to a fuzzy point. Equations (18) and (19) in
fact provide a fuzzy extension of the notion of formal
concept in the sense developed in Beˇlohla´vek ,
whose similarity with the extensional fuzzy set construction is thus laid bare.
It is clear that forming the union of fuzzy formal concepts in a context R yields a relation R  R (with equality
in the crisp case). It is the counterpart of the ﬁnest fuzzy
similarity relation in Eq. (14) induced by a family of fuzzy
sets, while decomposing R into formal contexts yields a
relation R, deﬁned by Eq. (4), that contains R, and reminds
us of the coarsest relation induced by a family of fuzzy sets
(13). The obvious inclusion R  R is clearly the counterpart of Eq. (15).
Thus, we have exhibited a formal resemblance between
two quite different views of a granulation process. There is
a big difference between them, though. One is induced by
an approximate equality relation, while the other is based
on a binary relation deﬁned on the Cartesian product of two
different sets. In the former case, due to the properties of
the fuzzy similarity relation what corresponds to concepts
in FCA, and what corresponds to minimal independent subcontexts are the same (they are fuzzy points). Moreover,
the fuzzy extensionality problem is to derive a fuzzy similarity relation from any family of fuzzy sets, while in FCA
the issue is to ﬁnd ‘‘maximal singletons’’ and minimal
independent subrelations induced by any binary relation.
However the common algebraic setting for both problems
is a building block of fuzzy FCA as developed by
Granul. Comput. 1:115–126
Beˇlohla´vek . This algebraic setting, also used by
Klawonn in his approach to extensional fuzzy sets,
is the one of residuated lattices.
Lastly, the ﬁrst part of expression (16) and the expression (18) are also the starting points respectively of the
implication-based and of the conjunction-based views of a
fuzzy rule ‘‘if x is in ~X then y is in ~Y’’ . Fuzzy rules deﬁned via these two equations indeed
correspond to two different ways of granulating a relation
or function deﬁned from the universe containing the
(fuzzy) subset ~X to the universe containing the (fuzzy)
subset ~Y. Klawonn shows that the counterpart to
inequality (15) is instrumental in the solution of fuzzy
relational equations induced by the speciﬁcation of fuzzy
rules, especially if the fuzzy relation must be constructed
using the conjunction-based view. In some sense the
modeling of fuzzy rules and fuzzy formal concept analysis
rely on the same basic algebraic setting and the same basic
equations but have opposite programs. While fuzzy FCA
tries to extract concepts from fuzzy relations modeling
many-valued contexts, with a view to derive interpretable association rules, the other program is to synthesize fuzzy relations between input to output spaces from
fuzzy rules expressed in natural language. The formal
relations between the two areas are thus worth studying
further. For instance, Beˇlohla´vek tries to derive
implicative rules from fuzzy formal contexts, using the
same equation (inf ! composition) as the one that turns a
set of implicative rules into a fuzzy relation .
3.3 Fuzzy rough sets and similarity relations
Rough sets can be extended by replacing an equivalence
relation by a fuzzy similarity relation , thus introducing degrees of possibility and necessity
that an element belongs to a given crisp set, due to the
fuzzy granulation of the referential. There is an extensive
literature on fuzzy rough sets that seems to be unrelated to the Ho¨hle–Klawonn
view of extensional fuzzy sets recalled above, that also
relies on similarity relations, and induces a form of granulation of the referential. The bridge between fuzzy rough
sets and extensional fuzzy sets is however made in
Recassens .
The notion of extensional fuzzy set with respect to a
similarity relation clearly generalizes the notion of exact
set in rough set theory, that is formed by the union of
equivalence classes. The so-called extensional hull of a
fuzzy set, viewed as the smallest extensional fuzzy set
containing it, is formally the same as the upper approximation of this fuzzy set by means of the partition formed
by the fuzzy singletons. In particular the extensional hull ^X
of a set X [of the form (11)] does coincide with the upper
fuzzy approximation of set A in the sense of fuzzy rough
sets . In the theory of extensional
fuzzy sets, the lower approximation of a fuzzy set F takes
the following form Boixader et al. , Recassens
FEðuÞ ¼ inf
u2U Eðu; vÞ ! FðvÞ
with a residuated implication ! with respect to a t-norm .
FE is the largest extensional fuzzy set included in F,
namely it is such that FEðuÞ  Eðu; vÞ
FðvÞ; 8u 2 U. In
other words, FE is of the form ENðFÞ in the sense of
necessity functions. However, we do not have that FE ¼
E in general, which suggests that such approximation
pairs may fail to have all properties of usual rough sets.
This approach thus differs from Dubois and Prade 
where the chosen implication in (20) is Kleene’s, so that
the lower approximation is precisely deﬁned by F
respecting the duality between upper and lower approximations, but possibly failing the extensionality property.
The connection between extensionality and rough sets has
been very recently discussed by Chakraborty in the
setting originally described by Higgs , that inspired
Ho¨hle and Klawonn, and in the fuzzy set setting in
Recassens , Chapter 3.
So, pairs ðF
E; FEÞ can be viewed as fuzzy rough sets.
They provide the approximate description of fuzzy sets by
means of fuzzy points in the sense of a fuzzy similarity
relation, just like rough sets in the more elementary setting
of a crisp equivalence relation. In Ruspini , and the
literature on similarity-based reasoning , a fuzzy set is always understood as the
extensional hull of a crisp set. The connections and difference of points of view between fuzzy rough sets and
similarity-based reasoning after Ruspini, have already been
emphasised . While rough sets
and granulation insist on the idea that elements of the
referential cannot be distinguished, the idea of similarity,
often then termed fuzzy equality, and viewed as the negative of a distance, insists on making a difference between
elements however close they can be. If obeying separability, fuzzy similarity relations are then more tailored to
interpolation purposes than to classiﬁcation.
4 Concluding remarks
The idea of granulation Zadeh is based on the
notion of cluster whereby
Granul. Comput. 1:115–126
any pair of members of a cluster should be closely
related in some sense;
any member of a cluster should be sufﬁciently
separated from any member from outside the cluster.
The paper has provided a discussion of several areas, where
the idea of granulation is central, and notions of closeness
and separation can be deﬁned. On this ground, similarities
between different settings like possibility theory, formal
concept analysis, extensional fuzzy sets, and rough sets
have been laid bare. Similar structures were found to be at
work in such settings. This kind of attempt may lead to
mutual enrichments between theories, as in the parallel
between possibility theory and formal concept analysis.
It is clear that such formal links should be further
investigated in more general representation frameworks
such as pattern structures , but also using algebraic structures
beyond residuated lattices exploited in Beˇlohla´vek .
Indeed, the many-valued FCA suffers from two limitations.
First, one may object to the fact that most of the time, the
negation in residuated lattice is not involutive, which may
make the decomposition of fuzzy contexts into independent
subcontexts more difﬁcult: it may be difﬁcult to write
Eq. (17) in the form of Point 4 of Proposition 2. One way to
do so is to interpret implication as a ! b ¼ nða  nðbÞÞ in
(17) for an involutive negation n. But then the underlying
conjunction associated to ! through residuation will no
longer be associative nor commutative . A study of multivalued FCA using nonassociative, non-commutative conjunctions is carried out
by Medina et al. , using so-called multi-adjoint
concept lattices. Lastly, it seems to be idealistic to assume
that the degrees of satisfaction of all properties of objects
can be measured on the same non-Boolean scale. This
assumption may be problematic when processing real non-
Boolean data. This issue is taken up at the theoretical level
by Medina and Ojeda-Aciego using multi-adjoint
concept lattices.