HAL Id: hal-01255074
 
Submitted on 23 Feb 2016
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of scientific research documents, whether they are published or not.
The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
Detection of Overlapping Acoustic Events using a
Temporally-Constrained Probabilistic Model
Emmanouil Benetos, Grégoire Lafay, Mathieu Lagrange, Mark D. Plumbley
To cite this version:
Emmanouil Benetos, Grégoire Lafay, Mathieu Lagrange, Mark D. Plumbley. Detection of Overlapping
Acoustic Events using a Temporally-Constrained Probabilistic Model. ICASSP, Mar 2016, Shanghai,
China. ￿hal-01255074v2￿
DETECTION OF OVERLAPPING ACOUSTIC EVENTS USING
A TEMPORALLY-CONSTRAINED PROBABILISTIC MODEL
Emmanouil Benetos1, Gr´egoire Lafay2, Mathieu Lagrange2, and Mark D. Plumbley3
1 Centre for Digital Music, Queen Mary University of London, UK
2 IRCCYN, CNRS, ´Ecole Centrale de Nantes, France
3 Centre for Vision, Speech and Signal Processing, University of Surrey, UK
In this paper, a system for overlapping acoustic event detection is
proposed, which models the temporal evolution of sound events. The
system is based on probabilistic latent component analysis, supporting the use of a sound event dictionary where each exemplar consists of a succession of spectral templates. The temporal succession of the templates is controlled through event class-wise Hidden
Markov Models (HMMs). As input time/frequency representation,
the Equivalent Rectangular Bandwidth (ERB) spectrogram is used.
Experiments are carried out on polyphonic datasets of ofﬁce sounds
generated using an acoustic scene simulator, as well as real and synthesized monophonic datasets for comparative purposes.
show that the proposed system outperforms several state-of-the-art
methods for overlapping acoustic event detection on the same task,
using both frame-based and event-based metrics, and is robust to
varying event density and noise levels.
Index Terms— Acoustic event detection, probabilistic latent
component analysis, hidden Markov models
1. INTRODUCTION
Acoustic event detection, also called sound event detection, is a central topic in the emerging ﬁeld of acoustic scene analysis. The main
goal of the aforementioned task is to label temporal regions within
an audio recording, resulting in a symbolic description with start
and end times, as well as labels for each instance of a speciﬁc event
type . Applications for acoustic event detection are numerous, including but not limited to security and surveillance, urban planning,
smart homes, acoustic ecology, and organisation/navigation of sound
archives .
The majority of research in acoustic event detection is directed
towards detecting only one event at a given time segment, which
is also referred to as monophonic event detection, or detection of
non-overlapping acoustic events. Methods that address the problem of detecting overlapping events from audio (also called polyphonic event detection) include the work by Heittola et al. on using
a context-dependent Hidden Markov Model (HMM) with multiple
path decoding . Gemmeke et al. proposed the use of using vectorized time-frequency patches of pre-extracted isolated events within
the context of non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) . Dennis
et al. detect overlapping sound events using local spectrogram
features and a Generalised Hough Transform voting system. A more
EB is supported by a Royal Academy of Engineering Research Fellowship (grant no. RF/128). MDP was partly supported by UK Engineering
and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) Grants EP/L027119/1,
EP/L027119/2 and EP/M507088/1.
recent approach for event detection uses multilabel deep neural networks with spectral features as inputs . In addition, as part of
the IEEE AASP challenge on Detection and Classiﬁcation of acoustic scenes and events (DCASE) , a baseline system was created
using NMF with beta-divergence. Finally, also part of the DCASE
challenge, Vuegen et al. proposed a system based on Gaussian
mixture models (GMMs), with MFCCs as input features.
In this paper, a method for polyphonic event detection is proposed, based on probabilistic latent component analysis (PLCA the probabilistic counterpart of NMF). The proposed event detection system is adapted from , which was created for automatic
music transcription. Here, a dictionary of pre-extracted events is
created, which expresses each exemplar as a succession of spectral
templates. Temporal constraints modelling the evolution of each
produced sound event are incorporated in the proposed model, using event-wise HMMs. Experiments are carried out using the polyphonic event detection dataset from the DCASE challenge, generated using isolated sounds recorded at Queen Mary University of
London, as well as a new dataset generated using isolated sounds
from IRCCYN, France, in order to test the proposed method’s generalization capabilities. Comparative experiments are also made using real and synthesized monophonic datasets. Results show that
the system outperforms several state-of-the-art methods for detecting overlapping events, using several types of evaluation metrics.
On relation to prior work: in contrast with the NMF-based systems of , which model events using either vectorized or 2dimensional time-frequency patches, events are here modelled as a
temporal succession of spectral templates, leading to a computationally efﬁcient model. Also, in contrast with , this model proposes
an event class-exemplar-sound state hierarchy, which expresses a test
event as a linear combination of exemplars for that speciﬁc event
The outline of this paper is as follows. The proposed system
is presented in Section 2. Evaluation, including a description of
the train/test datasets, evaluation metrics, and results, is presented
in Section 3. The paper concludes with a discussion in Section 4.
2. PROPOSED SYSTEM
2.1. Motivation
The overall aim of the proposed work is the creation a computationally efﬁcient dictionary-based system for overlapping acoustic
event detection that expresses a sound event as a combination of exemplars. Each exemplar consists of a series of spectral templates
each corresponding to a sound state, the order of which is controlled using temporal constraints. Thus, the model is able to ex-
SPECTROGRAM
PROCESSING
DICTIONARY
Fig. 1. Proposed system diagram.
ploit spectro-temporal features without resorting to computationally
expensive convolutional formulations or vectorized timefrequency patches .
The proposed system adapts the model of , which was proposed for the task of automatic music transcription, and is based
on PLCA , a spectrogram factorization method which supports
the detection of overlapping sound events. In contrast to , the
proposed model does not support shift-invariance across a logfrequency representation, as the concept of musical tuning does
not apply to everyday sounds.
Instead, as input time-frequency
representation, we propose the use of the Equivalent Rectangular
Bandwidth (ERB) spectrogram , which provides a more compact representation compared to the STFT spectrogram. A diagram
for the proposed system is shown in Fig. 1.
2.2. Model
The proposed model takes as input a normalised time-frequency representation Vf,t (f is the frequency index and t is the time index) and
approximates it as a bivariate probability distribution P(f, t). In this
work, Vf,t is created by processing the input signal with an Equivalent Rectangular Bandwidth (ERB) ﬁlterbank . This auditorymotivated ﬁlterbank uses 250 ﬁlters, linearly spaced between 5Hz
and 10.8kHz on the ERB scale, and is computed using the method
of , where each subband is partitioned into disjoint 23ms time
frames, and the rms is computed for each frame.
A linear preemphasis ﬁlter is applied to Vf,t in order to boost high frequencies,
which in the case of sound event detection carry useful information.
The model decomposes P(f, t) into a series of spectral templates per event class, exemplar index, and sound state, as well as
probability distributions for event activations, exemplar contributions per class, and sound state activations per class. The model
is formulated as:
P(f, t) = P(t)
P(f|q, c, s)P(s|t)P(c|s, t)P(q|s, t)
where s denotes the sound event class, c denotes the exemplar index,
and q the sound state index. P(t) is deﬁned as P
f Vf,t, which is
a known quantity. P(f|q, c, s) is a 4-dimensional tensor that contains the pre-extracted spectral templates for event s, exemplar c and
sound state q. P(s|t) is the time-varying event activation (which
is the main output used for evaluation). P(c|s, t) denotes the timevarying exemplar contribution for producing a speciﬁc event. Finally, P(q|s, t) is the sound state activation per event class, across
P(s|t) and P(c|s, t) can be estimated using iterative update
rules through the Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm .
For the E-step, the following posterior is computed:
P(q, c, s|f, t) =
P(f|q, c, s)P(s|t)P(c|s, t)P(q|s, t)
q,c,s P(f|q, c, s)P(s|t)P(c|s, t)P(q|s, t)
For the M-step, P(s|t) and P(c|s, t) are updated using the posterior
q,c,f P(q, c, s|f, t)Vf,t
s,q,c,f P(q, c, s|f, t)Vf,t
P(c|s, t) =
q,f P(q, c, s|f, t)Vf,t
c,q,f P(q, c, s|f, t)Vf,t
2.3. Temporal constraints
Without any temporal constraints, P(q|s, t) can be estimated using
an iterative update rule similar to (3) or (4). In this system however,
temporal constraints on the order of the sound states are introduced
through the use of hidden Markov models (HMMs). One HMM is
created per event class, which has the sound states q as hidden states.
Thus, the basic elements of the event-wise HMMs are: the sound
state priors P(q(s)
1 ), the sound state transitions P(q(s)
observations Pt( ¯ft|q(s)
). Here, ¯f corresponds to the sequence of
observed spectra from all time frames, ¯ft is the observed spectrum
at the t-th time frame, and q(s)
is the value of the hidden state at the
t-th time frame.
On linking the event-wise HMMs with the model of (1), the following assumption is made:
P(q|s = i, t) = Pt(qs=i
thus, the sound state activations per event are assumed to be produced by the posteriors of the HMM corresponding to event i. Following , the observation probability is calculated as:
P( ¯ft|q(s)
where P(ft|q(s)
) is the approximated spectrum for a given sound
state and event class. This is because in PLCA-based models Vf,t
represents the number of times f has been drawn at the t-th time
frame .
For estimating the unknown HMM parameters, the EM algorithm is again used. For the E-step, the HMM posterior per event
class is computed as:
Pt( ¯f, q(s)
Pt( ¯f, q(s)
where αt(q(s)
) and βt(q(s)
) are the forward and backward variables for the s-th HMM, respectively, and can be estimated using
the forward-backward algorithm . The posterior for the sound
state transitions Pt(q(s)
| ¯f) is computed as in .
In the M-step, the sound state priors and transitions per event
class are estimated from the posterior of (7):
1 ) = P1(q(s)
Overall, for estimating all unknown parameters (P(s|t), P(c|s, t),
P(q|s, t)), both the PLCA-based and the HMM-based update rules
are used in an iterative fashion. For the E-step, the model posterior
is computed using (2), followed by the HMM posteriors of (7). For
the M-step, P(s|t) and P(c|s, t) are estimated using (3) and (4),
respectively. P(q(s)
1 ) and P(q(s)
) are estimated using (8) and
(9), respectively. Finally, P(q|s, t) is estimated using (5). For this
implementation, the algorithm was set to 30 iterations.
time (sec)
Event Class #
Event Class #
Fig. 2. (a) The event activation P(s, t) for a recording of the DCASE
OS test dataset. (b) The post-processed event-roll. Class IDs 1-16
are described in Sec. 3.1.
2.4. Post-processing
The output of the proposed model is the event activation, weighted
by P(t): P(s, t) = P(t)P(s|t). This is a non-binary representation, which needs to be converted into a list of detected events per
time frame. Here, P(s, t) is post-processed by performing median
ﬁltering across time, (with an 180ms span), followed by thresholding (values are estimated using a development set, cf. subsection
3.1). Finally, events with a small duration (shorter than 60ms) are
removed. Fig. 2 shows an example event activation, along with the
post-processed binary event-roll which is used for evaluation.
3. EVALUATION
3.1. Training Data
For constructing the pre-extracted dictionary P(f|q, c, s), the IEEE
DCASE Event Detection training dataset was used .
dataset contains isolated sounds recorded in an ofﬁce environment
at Queen Mary University of London, and covers 16 event classes
(s ∈{1, ..., 16}): alert, clearing throat, cough, door slam, drawer,
keyboard click, keys, door knock, laughter, mouse click, page turn,
pen drop, phone, printer, speech, and switch. Each class contains
20 exemplars (c ∈{1, ..., 20}). In this work, the number of sound
states was set to 3 (q ∈{1, 2, 3}) following experimentation. In
order to extract the sound state templates, each isolated sound ERB
spectrogram was split into 3 segments with equal duration. PLCA
with a single component was applied to each segment in order to
extract a single sound state spectral template. For tuning system
parameters for the polyphonic and monophonic datasets, the development datasets for the IEEE DCASE Ofﬁce Synthetic and Ofﬁce
Live challenge were used, respectively.
3.2. Test Data
For testing, 2 polyphonic datasets of artiﬁcially concatenated ofﬁce
sounds were used, with varying levels of polyphony and SNR. In
addition, 3 monophonic datasets (1 real and 2 synthesized) of ofﬁce
sounds were also used, for comparative purposes.
On the polyphonic datasets, ﬁrstly the test dataset for the IEEE
DCASE Ofﬁce Synthetic (OS) challenge was used . The dataset
contains 12 recordings of 2min duration each, with 3 different event
density levels (low, mid, high) and 3 different SNR levels (-6dB,
Stowell et al. 
Vuegen et al. 
Heittola et al. 
Gemmeke et al. 
Proposed System
Table 1. Event detection results for the polyphonic DCASE OS test
0dB, and 6dB). The recordings were generated by concatenating
isolated ofﬁce sounds recorded at Queen Mary University of London (using different sources than the ones used for the training
dataset of subsection 3.1), using the acoustic scene synthesizer of
 . This dataset allows for a detailed evaluation wrt the proposed
method’s capabilities on different polyphony and background noise
levels. The second polyphonic dataset uses the same event groundtruth with the OS dataset, as well as the same noise level and event
density settings, but was instead generated using samples recorded
at the ´Ecole Centrale de Nantes, France. This second dataset, which
will be called OS-IRCCYN dataset from now on, thus allows for
evaluating the proposed method’s generalization capabilities.
For comparative purposes, 3 monophonic datasets of ofﬁce
sounds were used. Firstly, the Ofﬁce Live (OL) dataset from the
DCASE challenge was used , which contains 11 scripted recordings of event sequences recorded at Queen Mary University of
London. The second and third monophonic datasets were generated
using the acoustic scene synthesizer of , and each include 22
recordings of variable duration (1-3min), using as basis the annotations for the OL dataset. Both synthesized datasets were generated
using isolated sounds recorded at the ´Ecole Centrale de Nantes, thus
are useful for testing the proposed method’s generalization capabilities. The second monophonic dataset was generated using the
instance simulation process, while the third dataset was generated
using the abstract simulation process (see for more details).
3.3. Metrics
For evaluation, the same set of metrics used for the IEEE DCASE
event detection tasks was used . Speciﬁcally, 3 different metrics are used: frame-based, event-based, and class-wise event-based.
Frame-based evaluation is performed on a 10ms step using the postprocessed event activation, while event-based and class-wise eventbased evaluation consider each event to be correctly detected if its
onset is within a ±100ms onset tolerance. In all cases, the F-measure
is reported (Ff, Feb, and Fcweb, respectively).
3.4. Results
This subsection presents evaluation results using the proposed
method, as well as comparisons using the publicly available systems
of (using a frame stacking-based NMF approach), (using an
MFCC-GMM approach), as well as the NMF-based baseline system
for the IEEE DCASE challenge . For the 1st test dataset, results
are also shown for the HMM-based multiple path decoding system
of , as reported in the DCASE challenge.
Event detection results using the OS test dataset for the proposed
method and the aforementioned comparative systems are presented
in Table 1, averaged across all recordings. It can be seen that the
proposed method outperforms all comparative approaches using the
low density
medium density
high density
Fig. 3. Event detection results for the proposed system on the polyphonic DCASE OS dataset for (a) varying event density (b) varying
SNR levels.
Stowell et al. 
Vuegen et al. 
Gemmeke et al. 
Proposed System
Table 2. Event detection results for the polyphonic OS-IRCCYN
test dataset.
3 different metrics. It is worth pointing out that frame-based metrics are generally larger than event-based metrics, which shows that
more work can be done in grouping frame activations into contiguous events with a start and end time. Additional information on the
proposed method’s performance is presented in Fig. 3, showing results for groups of recordings with speciﬁc polyphony and SNR levels. It is worth noting that frame-based performance is stable across
different polyphony levels, whereas event-based metrics drop with
increased event density. On SNR levels, again frame-based metrics are more stable compared to event-based metrics with increased
noise level. This shows that while the system can detect events irrespective of density and noise levels, tracking and grouping events in
noisy multisource environments would require an alternate approach
to the one presented in Section 2.4.
Results using the OS-IRCCYN dataset are shown in Table 2, for
the proposed and comparative methods, averaged across all recordings.
A signiﬁcant drop compared to the OS dataset results can
be seen across all methods, which can be attributed to the different recording equipment and conditions used to generate the isolated samples compared to the OS dataset. In particular, a significant drop is reported for , while the baseline system of is
relatively robust. The proposed method ranks best across all metrics, although the results clearly indicate that source- and recording
condition-independent polyphonic event detection is a problem that
would need to be addressed in the future.
Comparative results on the proposed method’s performance for
monophonic event detection are shown in Table 3, using the OL
dataset, as well as the synthesized instance and abstract datasets using samples from IRCCYN. For the OL dataset, the method of 
Vuegen et al. 
Stowell et al. 
Gemmeke et al. 
Proposed System
Vuegen et al. 
Stowell et al. 
Gemmeke et al. 
Proposed System
Vuegen et al. 
Stowell et al. 
Gemmeke et al. 
Proposed System
Table 3. Monophonic event detection results for the OL (top group),
instance (middle group) and abstract (bottom group) datasets .
ranks best across all metrics, followed by the proposed method (it
should be noted that was also trained on the OL development
dataset). This changes when using the IRCCYN-generated monophonic sequences, where the proposed method shows better generalization capabilities across all metrics. Still, there is a signiﬁcant gap
between the performance of frame-based metrics and event-based
metrics, which again indicates that aggregating frame-based detections for building coherent events requires a methodology that goes
beyond thresholding and minimum duration pruning.
Finally, regarding runtimes, the proposed method performs at
about 0.7 × real-time using a Sony VAIO S15 laptop (Intel Core i5,
2.5 GHz) using a Matlab implementation. This shows that the proposed approach can be used in applications requiring computational
efﬁciency, such as for real-time event detection.
4. DISCUSSION
This paper proposed a computationally efﬁcient method for polyphonic acoustic event detection based on an HMM-constrained
PLCA-based model with an event class-exemplar-sound state hierarchy. As input time-frequency representation, the ERB spectrogram was used. Experiments on both polyphonic and monophonic
datasets of ofﬁce sounds showed that the proposed method outperforms other approaches in the literature. The Matlab code for the
system can be found online1.
However, results also show that the problem of overlapping
event detection is still far from being solved. Of particular importance for future research would be the adaptation of event detection
systems to various recording environments and conditions, different
sound sources, and variable noise levels. In addition, the template
extraction process of section 3.1 will be revised, as to use a different
number of sound states per event class. Another issue in need to be
resolved would be the discrepancy between frame-based metrics and
event-based metrics, which shows that an additional post-processing
step is needed in order to track and form coherent events across
time. To that end, future work will focus on a transduction postprocessing step for converting the non-binary event activation into
a list of events with start and end times, using as basis probabilistic
machine learning methods for sequential data.
1 
sound-event-detection-plca
5. REFERENCES
 D. Stowell, D. Giannoulis, E. Benetos, M. Lagrange, and M. D.
Plumbley, “Detection and classiﬁcation of acoustic scenes and
events,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, vol. 17, no. 10, pp.
1733–1746, Oct. 2015.
 A. J. Eronen, V. T. Peltonen, J. T. Tuomi, A. P. Klapuri,
S. Fagerlund, T. Sorsa, G. Lorho, and J. Huopaniemi, “Audiobased context recognition,”
IEEE Transactions on Audio,
Speech, and Language Processing, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 321–329,
 T. Heittola, A. Mesaros, A. Eronen, and T. Virtanen, “Contextdependent sound event detection,” EURASIP Journal on Audio, Speech, and Music Processing, vol. 2013, 2013.
 J. Dennis, H.D. Tran, and E.S. Chng,
“Overlapping sound
event recognition using local spectrogram features and the generalised hough transform,” Pattern Recognition Letters, vol.
34, no. 9, pp. 1085–1093, 2013.
 J. F. Gemmeke, L. Vuegen, P. Karsmakers, B. Vanrumste, and
H. Van hamme, “An exemplar-based NMF approach to audio
event detection,” in 2013 IEEE Workshop on Applications of
Signal Processing to Audio and Acoustics, Oct. 2013.
 E. Cakir, T. Heittola, H. Huttunen, and T. Virtanen,
“Polyphonic sound event detection using multi label deep neural networks,” in International Joint Conference on Neural Networks,
July 2015.
 D. Giannoulis, E. Benetos, D. Stowell, M. Rossignol, M. Lagrange, and M. D. Plumbley, “Detection and classiﬁcation of
acoustic scenes and events: an IEEE AASP challenge,”
IEEE Workshop on Applications of Signal Processing to Audio and Acoustics, New Paltz, NY, USA, Oct. 2013.
 L. Vuegen, B. Van Den Broeck, P. Karsmakers, J. F. Gemmeke, B. Vanrumste, and H. Van hamme, “An MFCC-GMM
approach for event detection and classiﬁcation,” IEEE AASP
DCASE Challenge, 2013,
 
ac.uk/sceneseventschallenge/abstracts/OS/
 E. Benetos and T. Weyde, “An efﬁcient temporally-constrained
probabilistic model for multiple-instrument music transcription,” in 16th International Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference (ISMIR), Malaga, Spain, October 2015, pp.
 C. V. Cotton and D. P. W. Ellis, “Spectral vs. spectro-temporal
features for acoustic event detection,” in IEEE Workshop on
Applications of Signal Processing to Audio and Acoustics, New
Paltz, NY, USA, 2011, pp. 69–72.
 A. Mesaros, T. Heittola, and A. Klapuri, “Latent semantic analysis in sound event detection,” in European Signal Processing
Conference, Barcelona, Spain, 2011, pp. 1307–1311.
 E. Benetos, M. Lagrange, and S. Dixon, “Characterisation of
acoustic scenes using a temporally-constrained shift-invariant
in 15th International Conference on Digital Audio
Effects (DAFx), York, UK, Sept. 2012, pp. 317–323.
 J. F. Gemmeke, T. Virtanen, and A. Hurmalainen, “Exemplarbased sparse representations for noise robust automatic speech
recognition,” IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, vol. 19, no. 7, pp. 2067–2080, Sept. 2011.
 M. Shashanka, B. Raj, and P. Smaragdis, “Probabilistic latent
variable models as nonnegative factorizations,” Computational
Intelligence and Neuroscience, 2008, Article ID 947438.
 B. C. J. Moore, “Frequency analysis and masking,” in Hearing
– Handbook of Perception and Cognition, B. C. J. Moore, Ed.,
pp. 161–205. Academic Press, San Diego, CA, 2nd edition,
 E. Vincent, N. Bertin, and R. Badeau,
“Adaptive harmonic
spectral decomposition for multiple pitch estimation,” IEEE
Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, vol.
18, no. 3, pp. 528–537, Mar. 2010.
 A. P. Dempster, N. M. Laird, and D. B. Rubin, “Maximum
likelihood from incomplete data via the EM algorithm,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 1–38,
 G. Mysore, A Non-negative Framework for Joint Modeling of
Spectral Structure and Temporal Dynamics in Sound Mixtures,
Ph.D. thesis, Stanford University, USA, June 2010.
 L. R. Rabiner, “A tutorial on hidden Markov models and selected applications in speech recognition,” Proceedings of the
IEEE, vol. 77, no. 2, pp. 257–286, Feb. 1989.
 M. Lagrange, G. Lafay, M. Rossignol, E. Benetos, and
A. Roebel, “An evaluation framework for event detection using a morphological model of acoustic scenes,” ArXiv e-prints,
Jan. 2015, arXiv:1502.00141 [stat.ML].