Empirical analysis of web-based user-object bipartite networks
Ming-Sheng Shang1, Linyuan L¨u2, Yi-Cheng Zhang1,2 and Tao Zhou2,3(a)
1Web Science Center, School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology,
610054 Chengdu, P. R. China
2Department of Physics, University of Fribourg, CH-1700 Fribourg, Switzerland
3Department of Modern Physics, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, P. R. China
PACS 89.75.Hc – Networks and genealogical trees
PACS 89.75.-k – Complex systems
PACS 89.20.Ff – Computer science and technology
Abstract. - Understanding the structure and evolution of web-based user-object networks is a
signiﬁcant task since they play a crucial role in e-commerce nowadays. This Letter reports the
empirical analysis on two large-scale web sites, audioscrobbler.com and del.icio.us, where users are
connected with music groups and bookmarks, respectively. The degree distributions and degreedegree correlations for both users and objects are reported. We propose a new index, named
collaborative clustering coeﬃcient, to quantify the clustering behavior based on the collaborative
selection.
Accordingly, the clustering properties and clustering-degree correlations are investigated. We report some novel phenomena well characterizing the selection mechanism of web users
and outline the relevance of these phenomena to the information recommendation problem.
Introduction.
The last decade has witnessed
tremendous activities devoted to the understanding of
complex networks .
A particular class of networks
is the bipartite networks, whose nodes are divided into
two sets X and Y , and only the connection between two
nodes in diﬀerent sets is allowed. Many systems are naturally modeled as bipartite networks : the human sexual
network consists of men and women, the metabolic network consists of chemical substances and chemical reactions, the collaboration network consists of acts and
actors, the Internet telephone network consists of personal
computers and phone numbers , etc. In addition to
the empirical analysis on the above-mentioned bipartite
networks, great eﬀort has been made in how to characterize bipartite networks , how to project bipartite
networks into monopartite networks and how to
model bipartite networks .
An important class of bipartite networks is the webbased user-object networks, which play the central role in
e-commerce for many online selling sites and online services sites .
This class of networks has two speciﬁc
evolving mechanisms diﬀerent from the well-understood
act-actor bipartite networks and human sexual networks.
Firstly, connections between existent users and objects are
(a)Corresponding author: 
Fig. 1: (Color online) Illustration of a small user-object bipartite network.
generated moment by moment while this does not happen
in act-actor networks (e.g., one can not add authors to
a scientiﬁc paper after its publication). Secondly, users
are active (to select) while objects are passive (to be selected). This is diﬀerent from the human sexual networks
where in principle both men and women are active. In
Ming-Sheng Shang, Linyuan L¨u, Yi-Cheng Zhang, Tao Zhou
Table 1: The basic properties of the two data sets. N, M and E denote the numbers of users, objects and edges, respectively.
⟨k⟩and ⟨d⟩are the average user degree and average object degree. Cu and Co are the collaborative clustering coeﬃcients
for users and objects, and for comparison, ¯so and ¯su are the average similarities over all object pairs and over all user pairs,
respectively. The user selection is considered to be highly clustered since Cu ≫¯so.
Audioscrobbler.com
9.96 × 10−5
4.82 × 10−3
Del.icio.us
4.64 × 10−4
8.10 × 10−4
a word, the user-object networks are driven by selection
of users while the human sexual networks are driven by
matches. Bianconi et al. investigated the eﬀects of
the selection mechanisms of users on the network evolution. Lambiotte and Ausloos analyzed the webbased bipartite network consisted of listeners and music groups, especially, they developed a percolation-based
method to uncover the social communities and music genres. Zhou et al. proposed a method to better measure the user similarity in general user-object bipartite
networks, which has found its applications in personalized recommendations.
Huang et al. analyzed the
user-object networks (called consumer-product networks
in Ref. ) to better understand the purchase behavior
in e-commerce settings1. Gruji´c et al. studied the
clustering patterns and degree correlations of user-movie
bipartite networks according to the large-scale Internet
Movie Database (IMDb), and applied a spectral analysis
method to detect communities in the projected weighted
networks. They found the monopartite networks for both
users and movies exhibit an assortative behavior while the
bipartite network shows a disassortative mixing pattern.
This Letter reports the empirical analysis on two
well-known web sites, audioscrobbler.com and del.icio.us,
where users are connected with music groups and bookmarks, respectively. Our main ﬁndings are threefold: (i)
All the object-degree distributions are power-law, while
the user-degree distributions obey stretched exponential
functions. (ii) The networks exhibit disassortative mixing
patterns, indicating that the fresh users tend to view popular objects and the unpopular objects are usually collected
by very active users. (iii) We propose a new index, named
collaborative clustering coeﬃcient, to quantify the clustering behavior based on the collaborative connections. The
two networks are of high collaborative clustering coeﬃcients for both users and objects. For the lower-degree
objects, a negative correlation between the object collaborative clustering coeﬃcient and the object degree is
observed, which disappears when the degree exceeds the
average object degree. For audioscrobbler.com, the user
collaborative clustering coeﬃcient is strongly negatively
correlated with the user degree, decaying in an exponen-
1Instead of the direct analysis on bipartite networks, Huang et
al. concentrated on the monopartite networks obtained from the
bipartite networks.
Slope=0.76
Audioscrobbler.com
Del.icio.us
Slope=0.66
Fig. 2: Distributions of user degrees, which obey the stretched
exponential form .
We therefore plot the cumulative
distribution P(k) instead of p(k) and show the linear ﬁttings
of log(−logP(k)) vs. logk in the insets.
tial form for low degrees.
Basic Concepts. –
Figure 1 illustrates a small bipartite network that consists of six users and eight objects.
The degree of user i, denoted by ki, is deﬁned as the number of objects connected to i. Analogously, the degree of
object α, denoted by dα, is the number of users connected
For example, as shown in Fig.
1, ki = dα = 3.
The density function, p(k), is the probability that a randomly selected user is of degree k, while the cumulative
function, P(k), denotes the probability that a randomly
selected user is of degree no less than k. The nearest neighbors’ degree for user i, denoted by dnn(i), is deﬁned as the
average degree over all the objects connected to i. For
Empirical analysis of web-based user-object bipartite networks
Audioscrobbler.com
Slope=-1.8
Slope=-2.5
Del.icio.us
Fig. 3: Distributions of object degrees, which are power-law
(they can pass the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test with threshold
quantile 0.9) with exponents obtained by using the maximum
likelihood estimation .
example, as shown in Fig.
1, dnn(i) =
The degree-dependent nearest neighbors’ degree, dnn(k) is
the average nearest neighbors’ degree over all the users of
degree k, that is, dnn(k) = ⟨dnn(i)⟩ki=k. Corresponding
deﬁnitions for objects, say p(d), P(d), knn(α) and knn(d),
are similar and thus omitted here.
The traditional clustering coeﬃcient cannot be used
to quantify the clustering pattern of a bipartite network
since it always give a zero value. Lind et al. proposed
a variant counting the rectangular relations instead of triadic clustering, which can be applied to general bipartite
networks. However, this Letter aims at a special class of
bipartite networks, and thus we propose a new index to
better characterize the clustering patterns resulted from
the collaborative interests of users. A standard measure
of object similarity according to the collaborative selection
is the Jaccard similarity , sαβ = |Γα
S Γβ|, where Γα
and Γβ are the sets of neighboring nodes of α and β, respectively. Obviously, sαβ = sβα and 0 ≤sαβ ≤1 for any
α and β. For example, as shown in Fig. 1, sαβ = sβγ = 1
and sαγ = 1
2. The collaborative clustering coeﬃcient of
user i is then deﬁned as the average similarity between
i’s selected objects: Cu(i) =
α̸=β sαβ, where
α and β run over all i’s neighboring objects. For example, as shown in Fig. 1, the collaborative clustering coeﬃcient of user i is Cu(i) =
18. The user collaborative
Audioscrobbler.com
Del.icio.us
Fig. 4: The degree-dependent nearest neighbors’ degree, dnn(k),
as a function of user-degree, k.
clustering coeﬃcient of the whole network is deﬁned as
i Cu(i), where i runs over all users with degrees larger than 1 and N ′ denotes the number of these
users. The degree-dependent collaborative clustering coef-
ﬁcient, Cu(k), is deﬁned as the average collaborative clustering coeﬃcient over all the k-degree users. Corresponding deﬁnitions for objects are as following: (i) Co(α) =
i̸=j sij, where sij = |Γi
S Γj| is the Jaccard similarity between users i and j; (ii) Co =
where M ′ denotes the number of objects with degrees
larger than 1; (iii) Co(d) is the average collaborative clustering coeﬃcient over all the d-degree objects.
This Letter analyzes two data sets. One is
downloaded from audioscrobbler.com2 in January 2005 by
Lambiotte and Ausloos , which consists of a listing of users, together with the list of music groups the
users own in their libraries. Detailed information about
this data set can be found in Refs. . The other is
a random sampling of 104 users together with their collected bookmarks (URLs) from del.icio.us3 in May 2008
 . Table 1 summarizes the basic statistics of these two
data sets.
2Audioscrobbler.com is a well-known collaborative ﬁltering web
site that allows user to create the personal web pages as their music
libraries and to discover new music groups form other users’ libraries.
3Del.icio.us is one of the most popular social bookmarking web
sites, which allows users not only to store and organize personal
bookmarks, but also to look into other users’ collections and ﬁnd
what they might be interested in.
Ming-Sheng Shang, Linyuan L¨u, Yi-Cheng Zhang, Tao Zhou
Audioscrobbler.com
Del.icio.us
Fig. 5: The degree-dependent nearest neighbors’ degree, knn(d),
as a function of object-degree, d.
Empirical Results. –
Figure 2 reports the degree
distributions for users, which do not follow either the
power-law form or the exponential form.
In fact, they
lie in between exponential and power-law forms, and can
be well ﬁtted by the so-called stretched exponential distributions , as p(k) ∼kµ−1exp
, where k0 is
a constant and 0 ≤µ ≤1 is the characteristic exponent.
The borderline µ = 1 corresponds to the usual exponential distribution. For µ smaller than one, the distribution
presents a clear curvature in a log-log plot. The exponent
µ can be determined by considering the cumulative distribution P(k) ∼exp
, which can be rewritten
as log(−logP(k)) ∼µlogk.
Therefore, Using logk as
x-axis and log(−logP(k)) as y-axis, if the corresponding
curve can be well ﬁtted by a straight line, then the slope
equals µ. Accordingly, as shown in Fig. 2, the exponents
µ for audioscrobbler.com and del.icio.us are 0.76 and 0.66
respectively. These results have reﬁned the previous statistics , where the exponential function is directly used
to ﬁt the user degree distribution of audioscrobbler.com.
As shown in Fig. 3, all the object-degree distributions are
power laws, as p(d) ∼d−φ. The exponents, φ, obtained
by the maximum likelihood estimation , are shown in
the corresponding ﬁgures.
As shown in Fig.
4 and Fig.
5, for both users and
objects, the degree is negatively correlated with the average nearest neighbors’ degree, exhibiting a disassortative
mixing pattern. This result is in accordance with the usermovie bipartite network , indicating that the fresh
Audioscrobbler.com
Slope = -0.0083
Del.icio.us
Fig. 6: (Color online) The clustering-degree correlations for
users. Blue dash lines denote the collaborative clustering coef-
ﬁcients of the whole networks, Cu. The inset displays the early
decaying behavior of Cu(k) for audioscrobbler.com, which can
be well ﬁtted by an exponential form as Cu(k) ∼e−0.0083k.
users tend to view popular objects and the unpopular objects are usually collected by very active users. The correlation between dnn and k is stronger than this between
knn and d, which may be caused by the fact that the users
are active while the objects are passive.
Table 1 reports the user collaborative clustering coeﬃcients and object collaborative clustering coeﬃcients
for the whole networks.
For comparison, we calculate
the average user similarity over all user pairs,
i̸=j sij, and the average object similarity over
all object pairs, ¯so =
α̸=β sαβ. The connections
for both users and objects are considered to be highly
clustered since Cu ≫¯so and Co ≫¯su. The clusteringdegree correlations for users are reported in Fig. 6. For
audioscrobbler.com, a remarkable negative correlation for
small-degree users is observed. Actually, Cu(k) decays in
an exponential form for small k. This result agrees with
our daily experience that a heavy listener generally has
broader interests of music4.
In contrast, for del.icio.us
a weakly positive correlation is observed for small-degree
4In the statistical level, the collaborative clustering coeﬃcient
reﬂects the diversity of a user’s tastes: the higher coeﬃcient corresponds to the narrower tastes.
Empirical analysis of web-based user-object bipartite networks
Audioscrobbler.com
Del.icio.us
Fig. 7: (Color online) The clustering-degree correlations for
objects. Blue dash lines denote the collaborative clustering coeﬃcients of the whole networks, Co.
The insets display the
early decaying behavior of Co(d), with the read dash lines denoting the average object degrees.
users. One reason for the diﬀerence between audioscrobbler.com and del.icio.us is that the collections in audioscrobbler.com only reﬂect the particular tastes of music, while the collections of URLs contain countless topics
wherein music is just a very small one.
In audioscrobbler.com, collections of a heavy listener (i.e., large-degree
user) usually consist of several music genres, each of which
contains a considerable number of music groups, while
most of the music groups collected by a small-degree user
belong to one genre. However, in del.icio.us, even for a
very-small-degree user, his/her few collected URLs can be
of highly diverse topics. Therefore, for del.icio.us, one can
not infer that a small-degree user has limited interests.
In addition, collections of music groups are mainly determined by personalized interests, while we have checked
that in del.icio.us, many bookmarks are less personalized,
that is, they can not well reﬂect the personal interests of
users. For example, online tools like translators and search
engines, and information services webs like the train schedules and air ticket centers are frequently collected. However, till now, we are not fully understood the origins of
those nontrivial correlations, a future exploration making
use of content-based or topic-based analysis on the URLs
may provide a clearer picture.
Figure 7 reports the clustering-degree correlations for
objects. For the lower-degree objects, a negative correlation between the object collaborative clustering coeﬃcient and the object degree is observed, which disappears
at about the average object degree. This result suggests
that the unpopular objects (i.e., small-degree objects) may
be more important than indicated by their degrees, since
the collections of unpopular objects can be considered as
a good indicator for the common interests–it is not very
meaningful if two users both select a popular object, while
if a very unpopular object is simultaneously selected by
two users, there must be some common tastes shared by
these two users. In fact, the empirical result clear shows
that the users commonly collected some unpopular objects have much higher similarity to each other than the
average. The information contained by those small-degree
objects, usually having little eﬀect in previous algorithms,
may be utilized for better community detection and information recommendation.
Conclusion and Discussion. –
Today, the exploding information confronts us with an information overload: we are facing too many alternatives to be able to
ﬁnd out what we really need. The collaborative ﬁltering
web sites provide a promising way to help us in automatically ﬁnding out the relevant objects by analyzing our
past activities. In principle, all our past activities can be
stored in the user-object networks (maybe in a weighted
manner), which play the central role in those online services. This Letter reports the empirical analysis of two
user-object networks based on the data downloaded from
audioscrobbler.com and del.icio.us. We found that all the
object-degree distributions are power-law while the userdegree distributions obey stretched exponential functions,
which reﬁnes the previous results . For both users and
objects, the connections display disassortative mixing patterns, in accordance with the observations in user-movie
networks . We proposed a new index, named collaborative clustering coeﬃcient, to quantify the clustering
behavior based on the collaborative selection. The connections for both users and objects are considered to be
highly clustered since the collaborative clustering coeﬃcients are much larger than the corresponding background
similarities.
A problem closely related to the analysis of web-based
user-object bipartite networks is how to recommend objects to users in a personalized manner . The empirical results reported in this Letter provide some insights
in the design of recommendation algorithms. For example, as shown in Fig. 4, the average degree of collected objects is negatively correlated with the user’s degree, and
the fresh users tend to select very popular objects, that
is, they have not well established their personalities and
their collections are mostly popularity-based. This phenomenon gives an empirical explanation of the so-called
Ming-Sheng Shang, Linyuan L¨u, Yi-Cheng Zhang, Tao Zhou
cold-start problem , namely the personalized recommendations to the very-small-degree users are often inaccurate. In addition, if we compare the signiﬁcance of the
user collaborative clustering coeﬃcient, Cu/ ¯so, and the
signiﬁcance of the object collaborative clustering coeﬃcient, Co/ ¯su, we will ﬁnd that for both audioscrobbler.com
and del.icio.usm, the former (268.07 and 72.84) are much
larger than the latter (4.11 and 6.79). Therefore, the fact
that some users have commonly selected an object does
not imply that they are much more similar to each other
than two random users, however the objects selected by a
user are statistically much more similar to each other than
two random objects. The collaborative ﬁltering techniques
have two categories in general : one is user-based,
which recommends to the target user the objects collected
by the users sharing similar tastes; the other is objectbased, which recommends the objects similar to the ones
the target user preferred in the past. The comparison between Cu/ ¯so and Co/ ¯su indicates that the object-based
collaborative ﬁltering will perform better, and such a kind
of comparison can be considered as a helpful evidence before the choice between any user-based and object-based
algorithms . Furthermore, the clustering-degree correlations reported in Fig. 7 suggest that the small-degree
objects actually play a more signiﬁcant role than indicated
by their degrees. In fact, we have already demonstrated
that to emphasize the impacts of small-degree objects can
remarkably enhance the recommendation algorithms’ accuracies . We think the further in-depth analysis
of information contained by the small-degree objects can
ﬁnd its applications in the design of more eﬃcient and
accurate recommendation algorithms.
We acknowledge the valuable suggestions and comments
from Bosiljka Tadic and Renaud Lambiotte. This work
was partially supported by Swiss National Science Foundation (grant no. 200020-121848), the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant Nos. 60973069 and
90924011. M.S.S. acknowledges the China Postdoctoral
Science Foundation under Grant No. 20080431273 and the
Sino-Swiss Science and Technology Cooperation (SSSTC)
Project EG 20-032009. T.Z. acknowledges the National
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant Nos.
60744003 and 10635040.