Feature Hashing for Large Scale Multitask Learning
Kilian Weinberger
 
Anirban Dasgupta
 
Josh Attenberg
 
John Langford
 
Alex Smola
 
Yahoo! Research, 2821 Mission College Blvd., Santa Clara, CA 95051 USA
Keywords: kernels, concentration inequalities, document classiﬁcation, classiﬁer personalization, multitask learning
Empirical evidence suggests that hashing is an
effective strategy for dimensionality reduction
and practical nonparametric estimation. In this
paper we provide exponential tail bounds for feature hashing and show that the interaction between random subspaces is negligible with high
probability.
We demonstrate the feasibility of
this approach with experimental results for a new
use case — multitask learning with hundreds of
thousands of tasks.
1. Introduction
Kernel methods use inner products as the basic tool for
comparisons between objects.
That is, given objects
x1, . . . , xn ∈X for some domain X, they rely on
k(xi, xj) := ⟨φ(xi), φ(xj)⟩
to compare the features φ(xi) of xi and φ(xj) of xj respectively.
Eq. (1) is often famously referred to as the kernel-trick. It
allows the use of inner products between very high dimensional feature vectors φ(xi) and φ(xj) implicitly through
the deﬁnition of a positive semi-deﬁnite kernel matrix k
without ever having to compute a vector φ(xi) directly.
This can be particularly powerful in classiﬁcation settings
where the original input representation has a non-linear decision boundary. Often, linear separability can be achieved
in a high dimensional feature space φ(xi).
In practice, for example in text classiﬁcation, researchers
Preliminary work. Under review by the International Conference
on Machine Learning (ICML). Do not distribute.
frequently encounter the opposite problem: the original input space is almost linearly separable (often because of the
existence of handcrafted non-linear features), yet, the training set may be prohibitively large in size and very high dimensional. In such a case, there is no need to map the input
vectors into a higher dimensional feature space. Instead,
limited memory makes storing a kernel matrix infeasible.
For this common scenario several authors have recently
proposed an alternative, but highly complimentary variation of the kernel-trick, which we refer to as the
hashing-trick: one hashes the high dimensional input vectors x into a lower dimensional feature space Rm with
φ : X →Rm . The
parameter vector of a classiﬁer can therefore live in Rm
instead of in Rn with kernel matrices or Rd in the original input space, where m ≪n and m ≪d. Different
from random projections, the hashing-trick preserves sparsity and introduces no additional overhead to store projection matrices.
To our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to provide exponential
tail bounds on the canonical distortion of these hashed inner
products. We also show that the hashing-trick can be particularly powerful in multi-task learning scenarios where the
original feature spaces are the cross-product of the data, X,
and the set of tasks, U. We show that one can use different
hash functions for each task φ1, . . . , φ|U| to map the data
into one joint space with little interference.
While many potential applications exist for the hashingtrick, as a particular case study we focus on collaborative
email spam ﬁltering. In this scenario, hundreds of thousands of users collectively label emails as spam or notspam, and each user expects a personalized classiﬁer that
reﬂects their particular preferences. Here, the set of tasks,
U, is the number of email users (this can be very large for
open systems such as Yahoo MailTMor GmailTM), and the
feature space spans the union of vocabularies in multitudes
Feature Hashing for Large Scale Multitask Learning
of languages.
This paper makes four main contributions:
1. In section 2 we introduce specialized hash functions with unbiased inner-products that are directly applicable to a large
variety of kernel-methods. 2. In section 3 we provide exponential tail bounds that help explain why hashed feature vectors have repeatedly lead to, at times surprisingly,
strong empirical results. 3. Also in section 3 we show that
the interference between independently hashed subspaces
is negligible with high probability, which allows large-scale
multi-task learning in a very compressed space. 4. In section 5 we introduce collaborative email-spam ﬁltering as a
novel application for hash representations and provide experimental results on large-scale real-world spam data sets.
2. Hash Functions
We introduce a variant on the hash kernel proposed by . This scheme is modiﬁed through the introduction of a signed sum of hashed features whereas the original
hash kernels use an unsigned sum. This modiﬁcation leads
to an unbiased estimate, which we demonstrate and further
utilize in the following section.
Deﬁnition 1 Denote by h a hash function h : N →
{1, . . . , m}. Moreover, denote by ξ a hash function ξ :
N →{±1}. Then for vectors x, x′ ∈ℓ2 we deﬁne the
hashed feature map φ and the corresponding inner product
and ⟨x, x′⟩φ :=
φ(h,ξ)(x), φ(h,ξ)(x′)
Although the hash functions in deﬁnition 1 are deﬁned over
the natural numbers N, in practice we often consider hash
functions over arbitrary strings. These are equivalent, since
each ﬁnite-length string can be represented by a unique natural number.
Usually, we abbreviate the notation φ(h,ξ)(·) by just φ(·).
Two hash functions φ and φ′ are different when φ = φ(h,ξ)
and φ′ = φ(h′,ξ′) such that either h′ ̸= h or ξ ̸= ξ′. The
purpose of the binary hash ξ is to remove the bias inherent
in the hash kernel of .
In a multi-task setting, we obtain instances in combination
with tasks, (x, u) ∈X × U. We can naturally extend our
deﬁnition 1 to hash pairs, and will write φu(x) = φ(x, u).
3. Analysis
The following section is dedicated to theoretical analysis
of hash kernels and their applications. In this sense, the
present paper continues where falls short:
we prove exponential tail bounds. These bounds hold for
general hash kernels, which we later apply to show how
hashing enables us to do large-scale multitask learning ef-
ﬁciently. We start with a simple lemma about the bias and
variance of the hash kernel. The proof of this lemma appears in appendix A.
Lemma 2 The
Eφ[⟨x, x′⟩φ]
Moreover, the variance is
, and thus, for
∥x∥2 = ∥x′∥2 = 1, σ2
This suggests that typical values of the hash kernel should
be concentrated within O(
√m) of the target value. We use
Chebyshev’s inequality to show that half of all observations
are within a range of
2σ. This, together with an indirect
application of Talagrand’s convex distance inequality via
the result of , enables us to construct
exponential tail bounds.
3.1. Concentration of Measure Bounds
In this subsection we show that under a hashed feature-map
the length of each vector is preserved with high probability.
Talagrand’s inequality is a key tool for the
proof of the following theorem (detailed in the appendix B).
Theorem 3 Let ǫ < 1 be a ﬁxed constant and x be a given
instance such that ∥x∥2 = 1. If m ≥72 log(1/δ)/ǫ2 and
log(1/δ) log(m/δ), we have that
φ −1| ≥ǫ] ≤2δ.
Note that an analogous result would also hold for the original hash kernel of , the only modiﬁcation being the associated bias terms. The above result can
also be utilized to show a concentration bound on the inner
product between two general vectors x and x′.
Corollary 4 For two vectors x and x′, let us deﬁne
σ := max(σx,x, σx′,x′, σx−x′,x−x′)
, ∥x −x′∥∞
Also let ∆= ∥x∥2 + ∥x′∥2 + ∥x −x′∥2.
ǫ2 log(1/δ)) and η = O(
log(m/δ)), then we have that
| ⟨x, x′⟩φ−⟨x, x′⟩|>ǫ∆/2
The proof for this corollary can be found in appendix C. We
can also extend the bound in Theorem 3 for the maximal
Feature Hashing for Large Scale Multitask Learning
canonical distortion over large sets of distances between
vectors as follows:
Corollary 5 If
ǫ2 log(n/δ))
log(m/δ)). Denote by X = {x1, . . . , xn} a set of vectors
which satisfy ∥xi −xj∥∞≤η ∥xi −xj∥2 for all pairs i, j.
In this case with probability 1 −δ we have for all i, j
| ∥xi −xj∥2
φ −∥xi −xj∥2
This means that the number of observations n (or correspondingly the size of the un-hashed kernel matrix) only
enters logarithmically in the analysis.
Proof We apply the bound of Theorem 3 to each distance
individually. Note that each vector xi −xj satisﬁes the
conditions of the theorem, and hence for each vector xi −
xj, we preserve the distance upto a factor of (1 ± ǫ) with
probability 1 −
n2 . Taking the union bound over all pairs
gives us the result.
3.2. Multiple Hashing
Note that the tightness of the union bound in Corollary 5
depends crucially on the magnitude of η. In other words,
for large values of η, that is, whenever some terms in x
are very large, even a single collision can already lead to
signiﬁcant distortions of the embedding. This issue can
be amended by trading off sparsity with variance. A vector of unit length may be written as (1, 0, 0, 0, . . .), or
2, 0, . . .
, or more generally as a vector with c
nonzero terms of magnitude c−1
2 . This is relevant, for instance whenever the magnitudes of x follow a known pattern, e.g. when representing documents as bags of words
since we may simply hash frequent words several times.
The following corollary gives an intuition as to how the
conﬁdence bounds scale in terms of the replications:
Lemma 6 If we let x′ =
√c(x, . . . , x) then:
1. It is norm preserving: ∥x∥2 = ∥x′∥2 .
2. It reduces component magnitude by
√c = ∥x′∥∞
3. Variance increases to σ2
Applying Lemma 6 to Theorem 3, a large magnitude can
be decreased at the cost of an increased variance.
3.3. Approximate Orthogonality
For multitask learning, we must learn a different parameter
vector for each related task. When mapped into the same
hash-feature space we want to ensure that there is little interaction between the different parameter vectors. Let U be
a set of different tasks, u ∈U being a speciﬁc one. Let w be
a combination of the parameter vectors of tasks in U \ {u}.
We show that for any observation x for task u, the interaction of w with x in the hashed feature space is minimal.
For each x, let the image of x under the hash feature-map
for task u be denoted as φu(x) = φ(ξ,h)((x, u)).
Theorem 7 Let w ∈Rm be a parameter vector for tasks
in U \ {u}. In this case the value of the inner product
⟨w, φu(x)⟩is bounded by
Pr {|⟨w, φu(x)⟩| > ǫ} ≤2e
2+ǫ∥w∥∞∥x∥∞/3
We use Bernstein’s inequality ,
which states that for independent random variables Xj,
with E [Xj] = 0, if C > 0 is such that |Xj| ≤C, then
We have to compute the concentration property of
⟨w, φu(x)⟩= P
j xjξ(j)wh(j). Let Xj = xjξ(j)wh(j).
By the deﬁnition of h and ξ, Xj are independent. Also,
for each j, since w depends only on the hash-functions for
U \ {u}, wh(j) is independent of ξ(j). Thus, E[Xj] =
xjξ(j)wh(j)
= 0. For each j, we also have |Xj| <
∥x∥∞∥w∥∞=: C. Finally, P
j ] is given by
(xjξ(j)wh(j))2
The claim follows by plugging both terms and C into the
Bernstein inequality (5).
Theorem 7 bounds the inﬂuence of unrelated tasks with any
particular instance. In section 5 we demonstrate the realworld applicability with empirical results on a large-scale
multi-task learning problem.
4. Applications
The advantage of feature hashing is that it allows for signiﬁcant storage compression for parameter vectors: storing
w in the raw feature space naively requires O(d) numbers,
when w ∈Rd. By hashing, we are able to reduce this to
O(m) numbers while avoiding costly matrix-vector multiplications common in Locally Sensitive Hashing. In addition, the sparsity of the resulting vector is preserved.
Feature Hashing for Large Scale Multitask Learning
The beneﬁts of the hashing-trick leads to applications in
almost all areas of machine learning and beyond. In particular, feature hashing is extremely useful whenever large
numbers of parameters with redundancies need to be stored
within bounded memory capacity.
Personalization
One powerful application of feature
hashing is found in multitask learning. Theorem 7 allows
us to hash multiple classiﬁers for different tasks into one
feature space with little interaction. To illustrate, we explore this setting in the context of spam-classiﬁer personalization.
Suppose we have thousands of users U and want to perform related but not identical classiﬁcation tasks for each
of the them. Users provide labeled data by marking emails
as spam or not-spam. Ideally, for each user u ∈U, we
want to learn a predictor wu based on the data of that user
solely. However, webmail users are notoriously lazy in labeling emails and even those that do not contribute to the
training data expect a working spam ﬁlter. Therefore, we
also need to learn an additional global predictor w0 to allow
data sharing amongst all users.
Storing all predictors wi requires O(d × (|U| + 1)) memory. In a task like collaborative spam-ﬁltering, |U|, the
number of users can be in the hundreds of thousands and
the size of the vocabulary is usually in the order of millions.
The naive way of dealing with this is to eliminate all infrequent tokens. However, spammers target this
memory-vulnerability by maliciously misspelling words
and thereby creating highly infrequent but spam-typical
tokens that “fall under the radar” of conventional classi-
ﬁers. Instead, if all words are hashed into a ﬁnite-sized
feature vector, infrequent but class-indicative tokens get a
chance to contribute to the classiﬁcation outcome. Further,
large scale spam-ﬁlters (e.g. Yahoo MailTMor GMailTM)
typically have severe memory and time constraints, since
they have to handle billions of emails per day. To guarantee a ﬁnite-size memory footprint we hash all weight vectors w0, . . . , w|U| into a joint, signiﬁcantly smaller, feature
space Rm with different hash functions φ0, . . . , φ|U|. The
resulting hashed-weight vector wh ∈Rm can then be written as:
wh = φ0(w0) +
Note that in practice the weight vector wh can be learned
directly in the hashed space. All un-hashed weight vectors
never need to be computed. Given a new document/email
x of user u ∈U, the prediction task now consists of calculating ⟨φ0(x) + φu(x), wh⟩. Due to hashing we have two
sources of error – distortion ǫd of the hashed inner products and the interference with other hashed weight vectors
ǫi. More precisely:
⟨φ0(x) + φu(x), wh⟩= ⟨x, w0 + wu⟩+ ǫd + ǫi.
The interference error consists of all collisions between
φ0(x) or φu(x) with hash functions of other users,
⟨φ0(x), φv(wv)⟩+
⟨φu(x), φv(wv)⟩.
To show that ǫi is small with high probability we can
apply Theorem 7 twice, once for each term of (8).
We consider each user’s classiﬁcation to be a separate
task, and since P
v∈U,v̸=0 wv is independent of the hashfunction φ0, the conditions of Theorem 7 apply with w =
v̸=0 wv and we can employ it to bound the second term,
v∈U,v̸=0 ⟨φu(x), φu(wv)⟩.
The second application is
identical except that all subscripts “0” are substituted with
“u”. For lack of space we do not derive the exact bounds.
The distortion error occurs because each hash function that
is utilized by user u can self-collide:
| ⟨φv(x), φv(wv)⟩−⟨x, wv⟩|.
To show that ǫd is small with high probability, we apply
Corollary 4 once for each possible values of v.
In section 5 we show experimental results for this setting. The empirical results are stronger than the theoretical
bounds derived in this subsection—our technique outperforms a single global classiﬁer on hundreds thousands of
users. We discuss an intuitive explanation in section 5.
Massively Multiclass Estimation
We can also regard
massively multi-class classiﬁcation as a multitask problem,
and apply feature hashing in a way similar to the personalization setting. Instead of using a different hash function for each user, we use a different hash function for each
 apply feature hashing to problems with
a high number of categories. They show empirically that
joint hashing of the feature vector φ(x, y) can be efﬁciently
achieved for problems with millions of features and thousands of classes.
Collaborative Filtering
Assume that we are given a very
large sparse matrix M where the entry Mij indicates what
action user i took on instance j. A common example for
actions and instances is user-ratings of movies (Bennett &
Lanning, ). A successful method for ﬁnding common factors amongst users and instances for predicting unobserved
actions is to factorize M into M = U ⊤W. If we have
millions of users performing millions of actions, storing U
Feature Hashing for Large Scale Multitask Learning
Figure 1. The hashed personalization summarized in a schematic
layout. Each token is duplicated and one copy is individualized
(e.g. by concatenating each word with a unique user identiﬁer).
Then, the global hash function maps all tokens into a low dimensional feature space where the document is classiﬁed.
and W in memory quickly becomes infeasible. Instead, we
may choose to compress the matrices U and W using hashing. For U, W ∈Rn×d denote by u, w ∈Rm vectors with
j,k:h(j,k)=i
ξ(j, k)Ujk and wi =
j,k:h′(j,k)=i
ξ′(j, k)Wjk.
where (h, ξ) and (h′, ξ′) are independently chosen hash
functions. This allows us to approximate matrix elements
Mij = [U ⊤W]ij via
ξ(k, i)ξ′(k, j)uh(k,i)wh′(k,j).
This gives a compressed vector representation of M that
can be efﬁciently stored.
5. Results
We evaluated our algorithm in the setting of personalization.
As data set, we used a proprietary email spamclassiﬁcation task of n = 3.2 million emails, properly
anonymized, collected from |U| = 433167 users. Each
email is labeled as spam or not-spam by one user in U. After tokenization, the data set consists of 40 million unique
For all experiments in this paper, we used the Vowpal Wabbit implementation1 of stochastic gradient descent on a
square-loss. In the mail-spam literature the misclassiﬁcation of not-spam is considered to be much more harmful
than misclassiﬁcation of spam. We therefore follow the
convention to set the classiﬁcation threshold during test
time such that exactly 1% of the not −spam test data is
classiﬁed as spam Our implementation of the personalized
hash functions is illustrated in Figure 1. To obtain a personalized hash function φu for user u, we concatenate a unique
user-id to each word in the email and then hash the newly
generated tokens with the same global hash function.
1 
Figure 2. The decrease of uncaught spam over the baseline classiﬁer averaged over all users. The classiﬁcation threshold was
chosen to keep the not-spam misclassiﬁcation ﬁxed at 1%.
The hashed global classiﬁer (global-hashed) converges relatively
soon, showing that the distortion error ǫd vanishes. The personalized classiﬁer results in an average improvement of up to 30%.
The data set was collected over a span of 14 days. We
used the ﬁrst 10 days for training and the remaining 4 days
for testing. As baseline, we chose the purely global classi-
ﬁer trained over all users and hashed into 226 dimensional
space. As 226 far exceeds the total number of unique words
we can regard the baseline to be representative for the classiﬁcation without hashing. All results are reported as the
amount of spam that passed the ﬁlter undetected, relative
to this baseline (eg. a value of 0.80 indicates a 20% reduction in spam for the user)2.
Figure 2 displays the average amount of spam in users’ inboxes as a function of the number of hash keys m, relative
to the baseline above. In addition to the baseline, we evaluate two different settings.
global-hashed
represents
spam catch-rate of the global classiﬁer after hashing
⟨φ0(w0), φ0(x)⟩.
At m = 226 this is identical to the
baseline. Early convergence at m = 222 suggests that at
this point hash collisions have no impact on the classiﬁcation error and the baseline is indeed equivalent to that
obtainable without hashing.
In the personalized setting each user u ∈U gets her own
classiﬁer φu(wu) as well as the global classiﬁer φ0(w0).
Without hashing the feature space explodes, as the cross
product of u = 400K users and n = 40M tokens results
in 16 trillion possible unique personalized features. Figure 2 shows that despite aggressive hashing, personalization results in a 30% spam reduction once the hash table is
indexed by 22 bits.
2As part of our data sharing agreement, we agreed not to include absolute classiﬁcation error-rates.
Feature Hashing for Large Scale Multitask Learning
Figure 3. Results for users clustered by training emails. For example, the bucket consists of all users with eight to ﬁfteen
training emails. Although users in buckets with large amounts of
training data do beneﬁt more from the personalized classiﬁer (upto 65% reduction in spam), even users that did not contribute to
the training corpus at all obtain almost 20% spam-reduction.
User clustering
One hypothesis for the strong results in
Figure 2 might originate from the non-uniform distribution
of user votes — it is possible that using personalization and
feature hashing we beneﬁt a small number of users who
have labeled many emails, degrading the performance of
most users (who have labeled few or no emails) in the process. In fact, in real life, a large fraction of email users do
not contribute at all to the training corpus and only interact
with the classiﬁer during test time. The personalized version of the test email Φu(xu) is then hashed into buckets
of other tokens and only adds interference noise ǫi to the
classiﬁcation.
In order to show that we improve the performance of most
users, it is therefore important that we not only report averaged results over all emails, but explicitly examine the
effects of the personalized classiﬁer for users depending
on their contribution to the training set. To this end, we
place users into exponentially growing buckets based on
their number of training emails and compute the relative
reduction of uncaught spam for each bucket individually.
Figure 3 shows the results on a per-bucket basis. We do not
compare against a purely local approach, with no global
component, since for a large fraction of users—those without training data—this approach cannot outperform random guessing.
It might appear rather surprising that users in the bucket
with none or very little training emails (the line of bucket
 is identical to bucket ) also beneﬁt from personalization. After all, their personalized classiﬁer was never
trained and can only add noise at test-time. The classiﬁer
improvement of this bucket can be explained by the subjective deﬁnition of spam and not-spam. In the personalized setting the individual component of user labeling is
absorbed by the local classiﬁers and the global classiﬁer
represents the common deﬁnition of spam and not-spam.
In other words, the global part of the personalized classi-
ﬁer obtains better generalization properties, beneﬁting all
6. Related Work
A number of researchers have tackled related, albeit different problems.
 use Bochner’s theorem and sampling to obtain approximate inner products for Radial Basis Function kernels. extend this
to sparse approximation of weighted combinations of basis functions. This is computationally efﬁcient for many
function spaces. Note that the representation is dense.
 take a complementary approach: for sparse
feature vectors, φ(x), they devise a scheme of reducing the
number of nonzero terms even further. While this is in principle desirable, it does not resolve the problem of φ(x) being high dimensional. More succinctly, it is necessary to
express the function in the dual representation rather than
expressing f as a linear function, where w is unlikely to be
compactly represented: f(x) = ⟨φ(x), w⟩.
 provides computationally efﬁcient randomization schemes for dimensionality reduction. Instead
of performing a dense d·m dimensional matrix vector multiplication to reduce the dimensionality for a vector of dimensionality d to one of dimensionality m, as is required
by the algorithm of , he only requires 1
of that computation by designing a matrix consisting only
of entries {−1, 0, 1}. Pioneered by , there has been a line of work on improving the complexity of
random projection by using various code-matrices in order to preprocess the input vectors. Some of our theoretical
bounds are derivable from that of .
A related construction is the CountMin sketch of which stores counts in
a number of replicates of a hash table. This leads to good
concentration inequalities for range and point queries.
 propose a hash kernel to deal with the issue of computational efﬁciency by a very simple algorithm:
high-dimensional vectors are compressed by adding up all
coordinates which have the same hash value — one only
needs to perform as many calculations as there are nonzero
terms in the vector. This is a signiﬁcant computational saving over locality sensitive hashing .
Several additional works provide motivation for the investigation of hashing representations. For example, provide empirical evidence that the hash-
Feature Hashing for Large Scale Multitask Learning
ing trick can be used to effectively reduce the memory
footprint on many sparse learning problems by an order of
magnitude via removal of the dictionary. Our experimental results validate this, and show that much more radical
compression levels are achievable. In addition, released the Vowpal Wabbit fast online learning software which uses a hash representation similar to
that discussed here.
7. Conclusion
In this paper we analyze the hashing-trick for dimensionality reduction theoretically and empirically. As part of our
theoretical analysis we introduce unbiased hash functions
and provide exponential tail bounds for hash kernels. These
give further inside into hash-spaces and explain previously
made empirical observations. We also derive that random
subspaces of the hashed space are likely to not interact,
which makes multitask learning with many tasks possible.
Our empirical results validate this on a real-world application within the context of spam ﬁltering. Here we demonstrate that even with a very large number of tasks and
features, all mapped into a joint lower dimensional hashspace, one can obtain impressive classiﬁcation results with
ﬁnite memory guarantee.