A CRITICAL STUDY OF EFFECT OF WEB-BASED SOFTWARE TOOLS
IN FINDING AND SHARING DIGITAL RESOURCES:
A LITERATURE REVIEW.
INTRODUCTION
As cited in , Tim Berners-Lee,
observe, “I have always imagined the information space as
something to which everyone has immediate and intuitive
access, and not just to browse, but to create” We live in an
era of wired, globalized world in which sharing,
communication, finding and collaboration are possible 24
hours a day and 7 days a week because of the
advancement in technologies. Similarly learners can
access, share and find digital resources 24/7, by using web
2.0 tools at the click of the mouse. Advancement in
technologies is made at tremendous rate because of the
shrinking of half-life period of knowledge and distances has
reduced, making world a global village. In 1965, Gordon
Moore predicted that, the number of transistors on a chip
will double about every two years, hence there is
advancement in hardware, and software with the same
pace, similarly the web is changing too (Moore's Law ). It has
morphed from static HTML pages where readers could find
and copy information to interactive services, where visitors
can create, share, find, collaborate and post information
 .
MUNTAJEEB ALI BAIG
Objectives of the Study
The problem investigated in this research related with
studying the effect of web-based software tools in finding
and sharing digital resources. Its objectives were to:
Review the Effect of Web 2.0 tools in finding and
sharing the digital resources.
Study the Effect of Web 2.0 tools in collaborating
learning, through literature review.
Study the Effect of Web 2.0 tools in communication in
an online learning, through literature review.
Identify Web 2.0 tools for finding and sharing digital
resources.
Methods adopted
The literature is reviewed by using data base of open
educational resources and websites. The open
educational research source Directory of Open Access
Journals (DOAJ) is searched for finding Abstracts and
Journals to study effect of Web 2.0 tools for finding and
sharing digital resources. By using the following
combinations of key words “Web 2.0 tools for sharing”,
“Web 2.0 tools for searching” “Effectiveness and Web2.0
Assistant Professor, Marathwada College of Education, Aurangabad.
The purpose of this paper is to review the effect of web-based software tools for finding and sharing digital resources. A
positive correlation between learning and studying through online tools has been found in recent researches. In
traditional classroom, searching resources are limited to the library and sharing of resources is limited to the walls of
classroom, but with the advent of internet and electronic media it is possible to search and share resources beyond four
walls. The objective of the study is to review the effect of web-based tools and enlist web-based tools for sharing and
finding digital resources using web 2.0 technologies. Open Educational Resources were used to study the effect of Web
2.0 tools for finding and sharing digital resources. From this study, it is found that, Web 2.0 tools are versatile and effective,
because of the features like, user centre, user control & communication, and making teaching learning process learner
Keywords: Web-Based Software Tools, Digital Resources, Sharing, Finding, Web 2.0, Social Software.
RESEARCH PAPERS
i-manager’s Journal of Educational Technology Vol.
October - December
tools”, “Educational use of Web 2.0 tools”, “Blogs and
effective learning”, “Social Networking and Collaboration”,
and “Wikis and learning”, a data base is analysed to study
the effect of Web 2.0 tools. In these search more than 100
studies has been identified, which supports effect of
Web2.0 tools towards learning. In findings, few researches
shows ineffectiveness of Web 2.0 tools, because of factors,
such as use of only informal sharing and communication,
insecurity in social networking and reluctant of institution to
use Web 2.0 tools. Beside Journals other useful database
such as Reference Books, Reference Sources, and Reports,
Websites and Handbooks on Research, are also reviewed
for the study of Web 2.0 tools.
Literature review from Books, Journals, Reports and
What is Web 2.0?
The World Wide Web provides digital resources, by helping
learners to search, share and collaborate learning, which
has surpassed the reach of the traditional classroom. In
Kahn study ), Web
makes possible learning experiences that are open,
flexible and distributed, providing opportunities for
engaging, interactive and efficient instruction. In Dills and
Romiszowsk study ),
more than 40 instructional paradigms seeking to advance
and improve the online learning experience beyond the
traditional classroom. The concept of “Web 2.0” became
popular during a conference brainstorming session
between O' Reilly and Media Live International. As cited in
 , Dale Dougherty observed that “far
from having "crashed", the web was more important than
ever, with exciting new applications and sites popping up
with surprising regularity”. Web 2.0 is defined as the,
advanced Internet technology and applications including
blogs, wikis, RSS (Really Simple Syndication) and social
bookmarking. The two major components of Web 2.0 are
the technological advances enabled by Ajax
(Asynchronous JavaScript and XML) and other new
applications such as RSS and Eclipse and the user
empowerment that they support .
Web 2.0 and Social Networking Sites (SNS)
A typical Web 2.0 phenomenon is social software. As cited
in , Clay Shirky defines social
software as, “software that supports group interaction, the
group interaction may be one to many and many to many,
examples are E-mail, Listserv, Discussion Forum, Blogs,
Second Life and Virtual Classroom. The Social Software uses
as a collaborative medium that allows users to
communicate, work together, share and publish their ideas
and thoughts with high degree of self-organisation (Rollett,
Lux , Strohmaier , Dösinger , & Tochtermann , p. 7). In Skiba's
study, ), he observed
that, these tools is used to create social network
applications and online social networks, are also called as
social networking tools and they let users to create selfprofile and connect to others to build and maintain a
personal network. The examples of social networking sites
(SNS) for collaboration are My Space, Facebook and
LinkedIn are few to name from the huge list of Social
Networking Sites (SNS). As cited in ,
Boyd and Ellison observe SNS as “web-based services that
allow individuals to (i) construct a public or semi-public
profile within a bounded system, (ii) articulate a list of other
users with whom they share a connection, and (iii) view and
traverse their list of connections and those made by others
within the system”. Thus in SNS learners share and
collaborate with a list of people who are in the list of offline
as well as online network; they are also creating a profile
within a bounded system.
As cited in ), John Markoff
observed in an article published in The New York Times, that
the next phase in the web's evolution, is Web 3.0. The Web
3.0 is also called Semantic Web; it is the third generation of
Web technologies and services that emphasized a
machine-facilitated understanding of information on the
Web in order to facilitate information aggregation and to
offer a more productive and intuitive user experience.
Web X.0 or Web 4.0
“Web X.0” is the next phase evolution, in Web X.0 higher
level intelligence, Web X.0 is also known as “Intelligent Web”
or “Smart Web”. In a Web X.0 application, a software
agent(s) roaming on the internet or simply residing on the
computer could reason and communicate with other such
RESEARCH PAPERS
i-manager’s Journal of Educational Technology Vol.
October - December
agents and systems and work collaboratively to
accomplish things on the behalf of system administrator
 .
Before the advent of modern communication
technologies i.e., Learning 1.0, the teacher holds the
dominant position in the teaching learning process, and,
while there may be dialog between teacher and learner,
the teacher is the authoritative source. Thus the
environment is constrained to space and time and it is not
learner centred. In the learning 2.0 paradigm, the learner
centric model is evolved and constraint on space and time
has been disappearing entirely. And collaboration, sharing
and communication are becoming more prevalent
between learner and teacher and also between learner
and learner (Cobb, n.d., pp. 11-22).
Tools for finding and sharing digital resources
In their book, ,
William and Katherine Horton, classified online tools based
on accessing, offering and creating e learning. It requires
tools that are reliable, simple to operate, and capable of
displaying content precisely as intended. Accessing digital
resources requires several types of tools and Web browser is
the most basic and important tool, which helps in finding,
navigating, displaying, and playing digital resources.
Digital resources are offered by tools such as Web Servers,
Collaborating tools, Learning Management System,
Content Management System and Virtual Classroom
Systems. Digital Resources are authored with course
authoring tools and web site authoring tools . In this research classification of
software is made according to least Web 2.0 features
available to most Web 2.0 features available in the tools.
Some of the features of Web 2.0 tools are (i) user-centered
and user control of content features, (ii) the ability to
interconnect applications using technologies like
Application Program Interfaces (API) and XML-based Web
services, and (iii) the feature to form communities and
collaborate. (Cobb, n.d., p. 27). Following are the list of
tools for searching and sharing digital resources. In,
appendix detailed list of tools is given, for Searching,
Sharing digital resources with web addresses.
Tools for communication and sharing digital resources
Podcasting
Podcasting might be the least “Web 2.0” tools, because it
used more as a broadcast medium than for production
medium. As cited in ), Salmon,
observe podcasts as digital media files that play audio and
or/ audio vision (also known as Vodcasts) that are made
available from a website, can be opened and / or
downloaded and played on a computer, or downloaded
from a website to be played on a small portable player
designed to play the sound and / or vision. Collaborative
learning is the most effective learning because here
learners interact, learn by doing and share their
experiences & knowledge, similarly learners who are visual
learners can benefitted from Vodcast and dyslexic can
benefit from podcast instead learning through reading.
Podcast can be used for taking interview, recording
activities & conference sessions and then share that
information broadly, thus learners learn by doing rather
simply just hearing (Cobb, n.d., pp. 35-38).
A blog is a personal website that contains content
organised like a journal or a diary. In a blog most recent
entry is posted at the top and they are displayed in reverse
chronological order. The earliest blogs were Userland and
LiveJournal, and the most popular blogs are Bloggers and
Wordpress, these blogs are user friendly and easy to create.
Blogs are connected and linked with each other to form
network, which is commonly called as 'blogoshpere'. Really
Simple Syndication (RSS) is used to read and subscribe
blogs, RSS aggregate blog summaries produced by blog
software . Blogs can help learners
to collaborate learning and research, and the expression
of diverse views, perspectives and opinions. It also helps
learners in developing group projects by co-producing
content (e.g., collaborative writing projects for teachers
and students, group e-portfolios, and group journals)
 . Blogs foster the development of a
learning community since it is linked and connected to
form a network among the learners. Learners can share
opinion with each other, and support with each other with
RESEARCH PAPERS
i-manager’s Journal of Educational Technology Vol.
October - December
commentary and answers to questions, similarly it also give
learners an opportunity to articulate learning and authority
for creating digital resources in learning. Blogs develops
skills in writing and research, and it also supports digital
literacy as the learners learns to critically assess and evaluate
various online resources .
Video on demand
Website providing services for online video are user friendly
and provides tool to edit, produced, and upload videos on
servers. The videos produced can be disseminated either
through streaming or progressive download and they can
be embedded into blogs, social networking sites (SNS) and
personal websites. The use of video on demand can be
made by learners and educators by recording and
publishing conference sessions, interviewing experts and
capturing stories to bring learning objectives to life (Cobb,
n.d., pp. 44-47). Online video services are YouTube,
TeacherTube, Vimeo, BlipTv and Yahoo Video.
Slide and Digital images Sharing Tools
Slide and photo sharing websites are used for sharing
presentation and images online. One such website is
SlideShare, where users can view as well as download
presentation; they can also comment on them, mark them
as a favourite and easily share them. Digital images can be
shared by using services Flickr; one can post images from
learning events, create a stock of images that one might
use in multiple online education experiences, or
encourage learners to share images that support learning
activities (Cobb, n.d., pp. 48-52).
Virtual Reality
Virtual Reality 2.0 (VR 2.0) is a new generation of online
environment where users can communicate, share and
find digital resources and interact with each other using
avatars, and can define and generate its content. VR 2.0 is
based on Web 2.0 concepts such as mashups of different
applications and tools, the concepts of social networking
and user generated content and the idea that the Web
may replace the desktop as the main operating system
and become the central entity for different applications. VR
2.0 has many uses and institutions are using Second Life as
a platform for their own activities. Harvard University was
one of the first to have its presence in Second Life and
conducted a seminar for Law students in this environment
 . As cited
in ,
Scardamalia and Bereiter observe, that situation with a
scientific community in which a group of scientists
generates new knowledge and then shares it with the rest of
the community that should also be the ideal for other forms
of learning in schools, higher education and job training.
The second life enables learners to meet with each other in
virtual environment at the same time and they can access,
find, collaborate, share and interact with each other, in a similar
way as that in a real conference or seminar, similarly there is
even voice, and text chat is possible (Cobb, n.d., p. 56).
Social Bookmarking
To enhance and support learning activities Social
Bookmarking is used in education institutions. In social
bookmarking it is possible to share and find bookmarks with
other people. A learner can bookmark various digital
resources for referring in future and also share with their colearners. For each bookmarked item, it is possible to see
how many other users have bookmarked the same item
and also visit the bookmarks of each of these users to find
related items of interest.
A Wiki is a user friendly and user editable website that allows
the user to easily add, remove, edit and change content
with appropriate referencing in a similar way as a
blackboard in a classroom . Wikis are
originated in Hawaii, “Wiki” means fast and it is ackronym of
“What I Know Is” , suggesting rapidly Web
environments can be deployed using the technology. Web
2.0 technologies are widely applied in Wikis, which are
open, dynamic websites with collaboratively constructed
knowledge, information, and resources, which are freely
available to any Internet user. There are large numbers of
tools available for sharing and finding digital resources and
also for developing collaborative knowledge, for example
Wikipedia, Wikitionary, Wikisource, Wikimedia Commons,
Wikispecies, Wikinews and Wikiuniversity. Wikis can be used
in education to supplement face to face classes by
providing information and resources, or it can be
integrated as a part of blended courses or as a main
RESEARCH PAPERS
i-manager’s Journal of Educational Technology Vol.
October - December
component of an online environment. Wikis may also be
used as an alternative to course management system
(CMS) (e.g., Moodle, Blackboard, etc.) . Wikipedia is an excellent example of the
possibilities for collaborative creation of meaningful
content through sharing. In wikis users can author, edit, and
organize Web content using a standard browser. As cited in
 , Simens observe,
the connectivists' theory, claims that it is important not only
to transfer information and create information resource,
but also to create such an environment, which will foster
integration of information into students' knowledge
networks. This process is supported by the Web 2.0 tools for
interaction among students and interaction of studentteacher such as chat, blog, forum and wiki.
Social Networking
Man is a social animal and it has nature to form
communities, and communicate with each other, he is
satisfied only when he shares and communication with his
fellow beings. As cited in , Freeman observe that, social networking is
not an exact science and may reasonably be termed as a
social catalyst in discovering the method in which
problems are solved organisations are run to the degree in
which individuals succeed in achieving goals. Social
Networking sites (SNS) are having mashups of Web 2.0 tools
for finding, sharing and communication of digital
resources. The social networking site MySpace, for instance
offers a blogging component, and Facebook integrated
and enhance its application, thus making different features
like, YouTube, Flickr, del.icio.us, and SlideShare to integrate
into uniform Facebook environment (Cobb, n.d., p. 64 &
65). Facebook and MySpace not only helps in building
community and sharing resources around education
events, but it also helps in accessing and managing digital
resources for learning through a Personal Learning
Environment.
Tools for finding digital resources
Digital Resources can be found by the learners' easily and
efficiently because of the mashups of different services
and applications of Web 2.0 features available in Websites.
Similarly tagging also helps in finding digital resources in an
online learning. Data base for digital resources are found
with the help of Search Engines like, Google, Bing, Yahoo,
most of these search engines use Web 2.0 technology,
which increases search result relevance. In most of the
social networking sites (SNS) and now on search engines,
Mashups and tagging (which are modular functionality of
Web 2.0) are used for having different services and features
added on one platform. Following are some of the tools for
finding digital resources:
Google Directory
The Google directory is collection of links arranged into
hierarchical subcategories.
Flickr Storm
Digital images can be search by just entering tag and a list
of images in the form of thumbnails is displayed, these
images can be downloaded later by adding it into tray.
Licensed images are filtered by the “advanced” features
including creative commons. .
Rank Speed
RankSpeed is a tool for finding the best websites and
products by doing a sentiment analysis on the Twitter/
blogosphere .
Rippol Video Intelligent discovery
Videos are discovered using the butterfly effect network, a
system of algorithms based on videos liked by the user, this
system of algorithm was developed by Rippol Team
 .
Latest events on Social Networking sites (SNS) such as Twitter
and Facebook can be searched with the help of Tinker;
these events can be created and followed by choosing a
keyword .
This search engine is a new way to find, analyze, organize
and share information on any topic, from any source
(including documents by users). Lumifi read user, highlight
terms relevant to user's interest, and discover information
one might have missed .
Space Time
This is unique type of search engines for finding queries and
display digital resources in the form 3 dimensional spaces
from popular search engines like Google, YouTube, RSS,
eBay, Yahoo and Flickr .
This is the first semantic Web search engines available, it
offers over 300 search sources and a smart interface that
contextualizes what is entered in search engines. For
example, enter a US ZIP code and whonu presents a set of
links to geocode tools including maps, weather maps, and
public events in Google calendar .
This website narrows the search of topical web pages to a
certain time period in an interactive timeline; it is very
helpful for research. Clicking on a particular day produces
results ordered reverse chronologically from that day
backwards .
Omgili is a discussion based engine. A list of search term
answered by the members to questions results in addition
to the standard search, similarly questions can be asked,
whose answer may be given with relevant links .
This is a visual search engine for pictures or videos selected
from several sources including Buzznet, flick, iStockphoto,
Fotolia and YouTube, navigation is simple just clicking on
any image takes to the source page, a detailed license
and copyright is also provided .
From open educational resource it has been found that,
web tools provide effective experiences by involving,
engaging and interacting learner with content and peers.
Web 2.0 tools are reliable and simple to operate, they are
easy to access and offers digital resources through search
engines and web links. Web 2.0 tools are the devices which
help in communicating, collaborating and sharing digital
resources; some of the tools are Podcast, Blogs, Social
Bookmarks and Wikis. As compared to Web 1.0 tools, the
Web 2.0 tools are user friendly and versatile, these tools are
used to find and share digital resources in real time. These
tools also facilitate learning by creating and producing
knowledge, which creates a feel of self-discovery of
knowledge among learners. Podcast helps learner in
collaborative learning and it is the most effective learning
because learner interact and learn by doing. Blogs, SNS
and Wikis give opportunity to articulate learning, construct
knowledge and develop skills in writing and research.
Conclusion
Thus from the above findings, one can conclude that Webbased technologies are most effective in finding and
sharing digital resources. These tools are used as effective
devices in classroom by teacher for making their teaching
process effective, similarly learner also find these tools
engaging and interesting because of the features as
interactivity, collaborating and user centered. These tools
help learners to share their files and work in group to create
knowledge through collaboration. The social software and
social networking sites (SNS) provide learner an opportunity
to articulate knowledge through collaborative work and
sharing of ideas and thoughts. The social software and SNS
not only helps in building community and sharing resources
around education events, but it also helps in accessing
and managing digital resources for learning through a
Personal Learning Environment. Web 2.0 tools and Social
Networking Sites (SNS) develop socialization among learner
through group interaction and collaboration, examples of
these websites are My Space, Facebook and LinkedIn. In
traditional teaching the dominant position is held by the
teacher, but in web based teaching the learner is at the
center of the learning. Tools for finding digital resources are
equipped with Web 2.0 technology which increases search
results relevance by tagging and mashups, examples of
web 2.0 tools for finding digital resources are Google
Directory, Flickr Storm, Rank Speed, Tinker, Lumifi, Whonu and Topix.
RESEARCH PAPERS
i-manager’s Journal of Educational Technology Vol.
October - December