Detecting Intrusions Using System Calls:
Alternative Data Models
Christina Warrender
Stephanie Forrest
Barak Pearlmutter
Dept. of Computer Science
University of New Mexico
Albuquerque, NM 87131-1386
fchristy,forrest, 
Intrusion detection systems rely on a wide variety of observable data to distinguish between legitimate and illegitimate
activities. In this paper we study one such observable—
sequences of system calls into the kernel of an operating system. Using system-call data sets generated by several different programs, we compare the ability of different
data modeling methods to represent normal behavior accurately and to recognize intrusions. We compare the following methods: Simple enumeration of observed sequences,
comparison of relative frequencies of different sequences,
a rule induction technique, and Hidden Markov Models
(HMMs). We discuss the factors affecting the performance
of each method, and conclude that for this particular problem, weaker methods than HMMs are likely sufﬁcient.
1. Introduction
In 1996, Forrest and others introduced a simple intrusion
detection method based on monitoring the system calls used
by active, privileged processes . Each process is represented by its trace—the ordered list of system calls used by
that process from the beginning of its execution to the end.
This work showed that a program’s normal behavior could
be characterized by local patterns in its traces, and deviations from these patterns could be used to identify security
violations of an executing process.
There are two important characteristics of the approach
introduced in . First, it identiﬁes a simple observable
(short sequences of system calls) that distinguishes between
normal and intrusive behavior. This observable is much
simpler than earlier proposals, especially those based on
standard audit packages, such as SunOS’s BSM. Second,
the method used to analyze, or model, the sequences is
also much simpler than other proposals. It records only the
presence or absence of sequences; it does not compute frequencies or distributions, or identify which sequences are
most important. The advantage of such a simple approach
is computational efﬁciency, but the question naturally arises
of whether more accurate models of the data might be possible.
Over the past several years, many statistically-based
learning techniques have been developed.
Several such
methods have the potential for generating more accurate
and/or more compact models of the system-call data, and at
least two groups have published results of their own experiments on alternative models applied to system calls .
Most of the available methods, however, were designed for
speciﬁc applications, and each has its own idiosyncrasies.
The goal of our paper is to compare these various methods
as systematically as possible across a larger and more realistic suite of data sets than has been used in the past.
2. Choosing Applicable Methods
There are many ways in which system call data could
be used to characterize normal behavior of programs, each
of which involves building or training a model using traces
of normal processes.1 In this section, we discuss several
alternative approaches to this task, and select four for more
careful investigation. The list of methods discussed here is
by no means exhaustive, but it does cover those we believe
to be most appropriate for our problem.
1The empirical approach taken here ignores the family of methods
based on formal speciﬁcation of a program’s legal activities, such as .
Authorized licensed use limited to: The Library NUI Maynooth. Downloaded on June 2, 2009 at 07:01 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
2.1. Enumerating Sequences
The methods described in depend only on enumerating sequences that occur empirically in traces of normal
behavior and subsequently monitoring for unknown patterns. Two different methods of enumeration were tried,
each of which deﬁnes a different model, or generalization,
of the data. There was no statistical analysis of these patterns in the earlier work.
The original paper used lookahead pairs .
database of normal patterns consisted of a list for each system call of the system calls that follow it at a separation of
0, 1, 2, up to
k system calls. This method can be implemented efﬁciently, and it gave good results on the original
(synthetic) data sets.
The later paper reported that contiguous sequences of
some ﬁxed length gave better discrimination than lookahead pairs . The database of normal behavior remained
compact, and computational efﬁciency was still reasonable.
As the earlier method was known as time-delay embedding
(tide), this method was called sequence time-delay embedding (stide). In the comparisons reported below, we use
contiguous sequences.
2.2. Frequency-based methods
Frequency-based methods model the frequency distributions of various events. For the system-call application, the
events are occurrences of each pattern of system calls in a
One example of a frequency-based method is the n-gram
vector used to classify text documents . Each document
is represented by a vector that is a histogram of sequence
frequencies. Each element corresponds to one sequence of
n (called an n-gram), and the value of the element is
the normalized frequency with which the
n-gram occurs in
the document. Each histogram vector then identiﬁes a point
in a multidimensional space, and similar documents are expected to have points close to each other. In , Damashek
used the dot product between two histogram vectors as a
measure of their similarity, but he pointed out that other
measures are possible. A set of documents can be represented by one or more centroids of the set’s individual histograms, and dot products can be taken with the resulting
centroid rather than an individual histogram vector to test
for membership in the set.
Adapting this method to traces of the system calls used
by computer programs is straightforward. One or more centroid vectors could be used as the model for normal, and
individual traces whose vectors were too distant from this
centroid would be considered anomalous. However, this
approach is not suitable for on-line testing because trace
vectors cannot be evaluated until the program has terminated. It is also difﬁcult to determine what size vector to
use; the space of all possible sequences is much too large,
and we cannot guarantee that the subset of sequences observed in traces of normal behavior is complete. Finally,
the coarse clustering of documents in does not suggest
sufﬁcient precision to discriminate between normal and intrusive traces of the same program.
Other frequency-based methods examine sequences individually, making them suitable for on-line use. Determination of whether a sequence is likely to be anomalous
is based on empirically determined frequencies for that sequence, but the approaches taken can be quite different, as
the next two examples illustrate.
Helman and Bhangoo propose ranking each sequence by
comparing how often the sequence is known to occur in
normal traces with how often it is expected to occur in intrusions . Sequences occurring frequently in intrusions
and/or infrequently in normal traces are considered to be
more suspicious.
Unfortunately, frequencies of each sequence in all possible intrusions are not known a priori.
We must, therefore, choose a frequency distribution for abnormal sequences by assumption. Several possibilities for
choosing this distribution are mentioned in , the simplest
of which is to assume that the abnormal distribution is uniform.
The Helman and Bhangoo method makes several assumptions that are problematic for the system-call application. First, it assumes that the data are independent and stationary. Although a series of complete program traces might
well be stationary (no ordered correlations among separate
traces) , the sequences within the trace are not. Programs
often have different distributions of sequences at the beginning of their execution than they do at the end, and there
might be many such distinct regions within the trace .
Also, sequences of system calls are clearly not independent,
especially when the sequences overlap as ours do. A second
problem is that of characterizing the frequencies of abnormal sequences accurately.
SRI takes a different approach in its Emerald system
 . Rather than using static distributions to deﬁne normal
and abnormal behavior, Emerald compares short-term frequency distributions from new, unknown traces with the
longer-term historical distribution.
Prior knowledge (or
estimation) of the abnormal frequencies is not required.
The long-term distribution can be continually updated, with
more weight being given to recent data, so that stationarity
is not required. This does, however, allow the possibility of
an intruder maliciously training the system to shift its deﬁnition of normal closer to the pattern produced by intrusive
Central to both methods is the idea that rare sequences
are suspicious. We chose to implement a minimal version of
a frequency-based method that would allow us to evaluate
Authorized licensed use limited to: The Library NUI Maynooth. Downloaded on June 2, 2009 at 07:01 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
this central idea.
2.3. Data mining approaches
Data mining approaches are designed to determine what
features are most important out of a large collection of data.
In the current problem, the idea is to discover a more compact deﬁnition of normal than that obtained by simply listing all patterns occurring in normal. Also, by identifying
just the main features of such patterns, the method should
be able to generalize to include normal patterns that were
missed in the training data.
Lee and others used this approach to study a sample of
system call data . They used a program called “RIP-
PER” to characterize sequences occurring in normal data
by a smaller set of rules that capture the common elements
in those sequences. During monitoring, sequences violating those rules are treated as anomalies. Because the results published in on synthetic data were promising,
we chose this method for further testing.
2.4. Finite State Machines
A machine learning approach to this problem would construct a ﬁnite state machine to recognize the “language” of
the program traces. There are many techniques for building
either deterministic or probabilistic automata for this sort
of task, for example, . These methods generally
determine the frequencies with which individual symbols
(system calls in our case) occur, conditioned on some number of previous symbols. Individual states in the automaton represent the recent history of observed symbols, while
transitions out of the states indicate both which symbols are
likely to be produced next and what the resulting state of the
automaton will be. Many, but not all, of the algorithms for
building these automata are based on the assumption that
the data are stationary.
A particularly powerful ﬁnite state machine is the hidden Markov model, used widely in speech recognition and
also in DNA sequence modeling . A hidden Markov
model (HMM) describes a doubly stochastic process. An
HMM’s states represent some unobservable condition of the
system being modeled. In each state, there is a certain probability of producing any of the observable system outputs
and a separate probability indicating the likely next states.
By having different output probability distributions in each
of the states, and allowing the system to change states over
time, the model is capable of representing nonstationary sequences.
HMMs are computationally expensive, but very powerful. There is a great deal of information available on them,
and their usefulness has been demonstrated in many areas.
For these reasons, we decided to use HMMs as the ﬁnite
state machine representative for our experiments.
3. Data Sets
The original studies of the system-call approach were
conducted primarily on synthetic data sets2 .
Although the earlier studies on synthetic data sets were suggestive, they are not necessarily good predictors of how the
methods will perform in ﬁelded systems. Consequently, we
have used a wider variety of data sets for our current study.
These include “live” normal data (traces of programs collected during normal usage of a production computer system), different kinds of programs (e.g., programs that run as
daemons and those that do not), programs that vary widely
in their size and complexity, and different kinds of intrusions (buffer overﬂows, symbolic link attacks, Trojan programs, and denial-of-service). We use programs that run
with privilege (with one exception, described below), because misuse of these programs has the greatest potential
for harm to the system. Table 1 summarizes the different
data sets and the programs from which they were collected.
All of these data sets are publicly available and carefully described at 
Intrusions were taken from public advisories posted on the
Each trace is the list of system calls issued by a single
process from the beginning of its execution to the end. This
is a simple deﬁnition, but the meaning of a process, or trace,
varies from program to program. For some programs, a
process corresponds to a single task; for example, in lpr
each print job generates a separate trace. In other programs,
multiple processes are required to complete a task. In some,
such as named, a single daemon process runs continuously,
monitoring events or awaiting requests, and occasionally
spawning subprocesses to handle certain tasks. Even in processes that are not daemons, the number of system calls per
trace varies widely, as can be seen by comparing the data
for lpr and that for xlock.
Data for lpr were collected at two universities under
identical conditions (OS, version of lpr, etc.), but with different users and network conﬁgurations. The UNM normal
data set includes ﬁfteen months of activity, while the MIT
data set includes two weeks. Each set includes a large number of normal print jobs and a single lprcp symbolic link
intrusion that consists of 1001 print jobs. Detection of an
anomaly in any of these 1001 traces is considered successful detection of the intrusion.
The named normal data consist of a single daemon trace
and traces of its subprocesses, collected for one month. The
2Synthetic traces are collected in production environments by running
a prepared script; the program options are chosen solely for the purpose of
exercising the program, and not to meet any real user’s requests.
Authorized licensed use limited to: The Library NUI Maynooth. Downloaded on June 2, 2009 at 07:01 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
Intrusions
Normal data
Normal data
used for training
Normal data
used for testing
system calls
system calls
system calls
16,937,816
16,000,000
15,618,237
15,185,927
44,500,219
35,578,249
Table 1. Amount of data available for each program. “Normal data used for training” refers to models
built with sequence length six; sequence length ten models used more training data. The same test
data were used for both sequence lengths; this includes all normal data not used for training either
set of models.
intrusion against named is a buffer overﬂow; we used two
sample traces of this intrusion.
Data for xlock include 71 synthetic traces, and a single
live trace. The live trace, however, is very long; xlock
generates a huge number of system calls as it continually
updates the user’s screen and it was left running for two
days to collect these data. The intrusion used here is also
a buffer overﬂow. As with named, we used two sample
traces of the same intrusion.
The login and ps normal data sets are relatively small.
These are simpler programs, and little variation in normal
behavior is expected from additional traces. The small data
set, however, means that there is insufﬁcient data for thorough analysis of false positives.
For both login and ps, we used Trojan intrusions,
which allow unauthorized access to the system through a
built in “back-door.” A number of traces have been collected from each Trojan program. Some of the Trojan program traces were collected from actual Trojan programs
installed during a live intrusion. These traces are easy to
detect because the Trojan program was a different version
from the program it replaced. Other traces are for Trojan
programs we created directly from the installed (normal)
version of the program. Some of the traces correspond to
use of the back door to break into the system, while others
are from ordinary users logging in to the Trojaned program
normally (without using the back door). Ideally, we would
like to detect the presence of Trojan code whether or not
it is currently being used for unauthorized access, so each
trace is treated as a separate example of an intrusion. However, this is a stringent test, as the foreign code is not being
The inetd program is typically started as a foreground
process, which initiates a daemon process to run in background and then exits. The daemon process in turn, initiates child processes which perform a ﬁxed set of initialization steps and then execute some other program. Child processes are, therefore, very nearly identical. The normal data
for inetd include a trace of the startup process, a daemon
process, and a representative child process. The intrusion
used against inetd is a denial-of-service attack that ties
up network connection resources. As the attack progresses,
more of the system calls requesting resources return abnormally and are re-issued. The intrusion data collected include a startup process, a daemon process, and several child
processes, but only the daemon process is expected to show
any deviation from normal behavior.
A second denial-of-service attack we tested ties up all
the memory available on a system. This affects any running program that requests memory during the denial-ofservice attack. In this one case, we departed from our policy of monitoring only privileged processes, and instead
traced the analysis program stide (which was processing
the sendmail data). The normal and intrusion data were
collected while stide was processing the same data, but
the latter was interrupted by the denial-of-service attack.
The ﬁnal data set, sendmail, consists only of normal data because this version of sendmail running on
a production mail server was not vulnerable to any known
sendmail intrusions. However, we were able to collect a
very large set of live normal data, and use this for false positive analysis. Note that these data were collected from a
different version of sendmail than that used in our earlier
Authorized licensed use limited to: The Library NUI Maynooth. Downloaded on June 2, 2009 at 07:01 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
4. Experimental Design
Our objective is to compare several different datamodeling methods using data from several different programs, thereby getting a better overall picture of their relative merits. For accurate intrusion detection, we must correctly classify both intrusions and normal data. Errors in the
ﬁrst category, where intrusions are not identiﬁed, are called
false negatives. Errors in the second category, where normal data are identiﬁed as anomalous, are called false positives. We wish to minimize both kinds of errors, or equivalently, maximize true positives and minimize false positives.
We do not attempt to measure performance in terms of system usage, although we do make some general observations
about computational effort.
For most of our data sets, we have only a single intrusion
script, and each method has a single threshold above which
that intrusion is detected and below which it is missed. To
get a better picture of the gradual trade-off between false
positives and false negatives that often occurs with multiple intrusions, we combine results across all available programs. By using the composite results, we also can see
which methods can be used on multiple data sets with a
single set of parameters and which require hand-tuning.
However, using several programs also complicates the
design of the experiments. First, we would like to use comparable amounts of data for each program in building our
models of normal. Since the programs vary in complexity
and a trace does not have a similar meaning in each program, simply choosing a ﬁxed number of traces or system
calls to include would not be a good approach. Second,
we need to deﬁne a consistent measure for comparing false
positives.
Figure 1 shows the number of unique sequences as a
function of the total number of sequences seen for one of
our data sets. The x-axis represents the sequences seen in
chronological order, from traces added in the order in which
they were collected. At ﬁrst, almost every sequence is new,
but gradually the number of new sequences drops off. One
way of establishing a consistent measure of how much training data to use across several programs is to set a target for
the slope of this growth curve. Once the rate of encountering new sequences drops below some preset value, we
say we have enough data with which to build our model of
Unfortunately, the growth curves for our data sets are
not very smooth. Several traces might pass with no new sequences, and then several new sequences are encountered
close together. This is not surprising, as a change in system call order affecting one sequence generally affects the
nearby sequences as well.
We considered several methods for smoothing this curve so as to get a better estimate
of the slope, and eventually settled on the following ap-
Total number of sequences
Number of unique sequences
Figure 1. Typical database growth curve. The
graph shows how the size of the normal
database grows as traces are added chronologically.
proach. Figure 2 shows several different versions of the
growth curve for the same data. The pool of normal data
traces is treated as a loop, where the ﬁrst trace follows the
last trace. For each curve shown in ﬁgure 2, a different starting point on this loop was chosen randomly, and then the
traces were read in order from that point. This allows us
to examine variations in the growth curve without reducing the amount of data used or disrupting the chronological
ordering of traces.
Total number of sequences
Number of unique sequences
Figure 2. Alternate database growth curves
for the same data used in Figure 1.
lines show standard growth curves for different starting points in the training data; the
dark line shows the mean.
The average of these individual growth curves, shown
as the darker line in ﬁgure 2, gives a smoother estimate of
the rate at which the database grows. This is not a precise
measure, but a rough way to estimate how much training
Authorized licensed use limited to: The Library NUI Maynooth. Downloaded on June 2, 2009 at 07:01 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
data should be used. For our experiments, we selected the
ﬁrst point on the average curve at which the local slope was
less than one new sequence per 10 traces, and remained that
way for at least 10 traces. We used each program’s average
trace length for this estimate, except in those cases where
a single long trace skewed the average. For xlock, we
averaged the lengths of only the synthetic traces, and for
named, we used the median trace length. We chose two
groups of training traces in this fashion, one for sequences
of length six, and another for sequences of length ten. All
data not included in the second, larger training set were used
for testing. Table 1 shows how much training data we used
for each program for sequence length six.
On the testing side, false positives were measured differently from true positives. To detect an intrusion, we require only that the anomaly signal (described below) exceed
a preset threshold at some point during the intrusion. However, making a single determination as to whether a normal
trace appears anomalous or not is insufﬁcient, especially for
very long traces. If a program is running for several days
or more, each time that it is ﬂagged as anomalous must be
counted separately. The simplest way to measure this is
to count individual decisions. The false-positive rate then
is the percentage of decisions in which normal data were
ﬂagged as anomalous. Note that the same approach cannot be used for measuring true positives. Intrusion traces
generally resemble normal traces in large part, and each individual sequence within an intrusive trace is more likely to
be normal than not.
5. Building models of normal behavior
We modeled the normal behavior of each of the data sets
described in Section 3 using each of the four methods chosen earlier. This process took much longer for HMMs than
for the other methods. On our largest data set, HMM training took approximately two months, while the other methods took a few hours each. For all but the smallest data sets,
HMM training times were measured in days, as compared
to minutes for the other methods. The subsections below
explain the details behind each method.
5.1. sequence time-delay embedding (stide)
In sequence time-delay embedding (stide), a proﬁle of
normal behavior is built by enumerating all unique, contiguous sequences of a predetermined, ﬁxed length
k that occur in the training data. We ran experiments with sequence
lengths of six and ten. For a sequence length of six, we
slide a window of length six across each trace, one system
call at a time, adding each unique sequence to the normal
database. The sequences are stored as trees to save space
and to speed up comparisons. Building such a database requires only a single pass through the data, unlike some of
the methods described below.
At testing time, sequences from the test trace are compared to those in the normal database. Any sequence not
found in the database is called a mismatch. Any individual
mismatch could indicate anomalous behavior, or it could be
a sequence that was not included in the normal training data.
To date, all of the real intrusions we have studied produce
anomalous sequences in temporally local clusters. This is
convenient for deﬁning an on-line measure of anomalous
activity. We derive our on-line measure, or anomaly signal,
from the number of mismatches occurring in a temporally
local region, called a locality frame. The data reported below used a locality frame of 20 system calls. At each point
in our test trace, we check whether the current sequence
is a mismatch, and keep track of how many of the last 20
sequences were mismatches. This Locality Frame Count
(LFC) gives us our anomaly signal. (A somewhat different
approach was taken in , where the measure of anomalous behavior was based on Hamming distances between
unknown sequences and their closest match in the normal
database.)
We then set a threshold on the LFC, below which traces
are still considered to be normal. Any time the LFC reaches
or exceeds the threshold, an anomaly is recorded. This LFC
threshold is the primary sensitivity parameter used in the
experiments described below; it ranges from 1 to 20. Lower
LFCs tend to catch more intrusions and also give more false
positives, higher LFCs tend to produce fewer true and false
positives.
5.2. stide with frequency threshold (t-stide)
A simple addition to stide allows us to test the premise
that rare sequences are suspicious. For each sequence in
the database, we keep track of how often it has been seen
in the training data. Once all the training data have been
processed, we then determine each sequence’s overall frequency. For our experiments, “rare” was deﬁned as any sequence accounting for less than 0.001% of the normal training data. The “t” in “t-stide” represents the addition of this
threshold on sequence frequencies.
Sequences from test traces are compared to those in the
database, as for stide. Rare sequences, as well as those
not included in the database, are counted as mismatches.
These mismatches are aggregated into locality frame counts
as described earlier. Again, the threshold on locality frame
counts is the primary sensitivity parameter.
Authorized licensed use limited to: The Library NUI Maynooth. Downloaded on June 2, 2009 at 07:01 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
5.3. RIPPER
RIPPER—Repeated Incremental Pruning to Produce Error Reduction—is a rule learning system developed by
William Cohen . It, like other rule learning systems, is
typically used for classiﬁcation problems. Training samples
consist of a set of attributes describing the object to be classiﬁed, and a target class to which the object belongs. Given
enough such examples, RIPPER extracts rules of the form:
classA:- attrib1 = x, attrib5 = y.
classB:- attrib2 = z.
classC:- true.
In this example, class A is chosen if attributes 1 and 5 are
x and y, respectively; class B is chosen if attribute 2 is z;
and class C is the default class. Conditions can also specify
that an attribute not equal a certain value. (For other types
of data, more conditions are possible.) Multiple conditions
are always taken to mean that all conditions must hold.
For the intrusion detection problem, such classiﬁcation
is useful only if one has a complete set of examples of the
abnormal class(es) with which to train the system. We are
primarily interested in the application to anomaly detection,
where we do not have both positive and negative instances.
Lee and others adapted RIPPER to anomaly detection by using it to learn rules to predict system calls within
short sequences of program traces.
For each program, we used a list of all unique sequences
occurring in that program to create the RIPPER training
samples. Each sequence was turned into a RIPPER sample by treating all system calls except the last in a sequence
as attributes, and the last as the target class. (This requires
renaming the last system call, as RIPPER will not accept
classes that look like attributes.)
Similar attribute/target
pairs were created for test traces, but in that case all sequences were used, not just a sample of each unique sequence.
RIPPER has a difﬁcult time learning rules for classes
about which there is not enough information, such as a system call that only occurs at the end of a sequence once
 . Because the frequencies of each sequence are not being recorded, simple duplication of each sequence
y times is
effective. We replicated each training sample twelve times
to create the training ﬁle, as did Lee and Stolfo in .
RIPPER takes these training samples and forms a
hypothesis—a list of rules to describe normal sequences.
For each rule, a violation score is established from the percentage of times that the rule was correctly applied in the
training data. For a rule whose conditions were met
times in the training data and whose prediction was correct for
T of those times, the penalty for violating that rule
=T. Lee and others used the average of these violation scores to rank a trace , but such a measure is
inappropriate for on-line testing. We ﬁrst used a moving average of these violation scores over the locality frame, but
found that gave excessive false positives. Instead, we call
each sequence that violates a high-conﬁdence rule a mismatch, equivalent to the stide mismatches described earlier. These mismatches then can be aggregated into locality frame counts, also described earlier. We chose highconﬁdence to mean those rules with violation scores greater
5.4. Hidden Markov Model
Standard HMMs have a ﬁxed number of states, so one
must decide on the size of the model before training. Preliminary experiments showed us that a good choice for our
application was to choose a number of states roughly corresponding to the number of unique system calls used by
the program.
Most of our test programs use an alphabet of about 40 system calls, hence 40-state HMMs were
used in most cases. We used a 20-state HMM for ps and
stide, a 35-state HMM for inetd, and a 60-state HMM
for sendmail. The states are fully connected; transitions
are allowed from any state to any other state. For each state
then, we need to store the probabilities associated with transitions to each other state, and the probabilities associated
with producing each system call. For a program using
system calls, and hence a model of
S states, this means
In most cases, transition and symbol probabilities were
initialized randomly, and then trained using the Baum-
Welch algorithm as described in . Occasionally, however, prior knowledge is useful in performing the initialization. This was the case with the lpr data sets. A primary
difference between lpr traces is in the length of the document being printed. This is reﬂected in the traces as the
number of read-write pairs. We found that randomly
initialized HMMs devoted most of the states and a great deal
of training time to modeling the different frequency distributions of this particular subsequence. As a result, these
HMMs were less likely to recognize the intrusion. However, when the model was initialized with a predetermined
read state and write state arranged in a loop, the rest of
the model states were available to represent other parts of
the traces and accuracy improved. We assigned large probabilities to the desired transitions and output system calls
for the read and write states, and low probabilities for
the alternatives. Transition and output probabilities for the
other states were randomized.
During training, the probabilities were iteratively adjusted to increase the likelihood that the automaton would
produce the traces in the training set. Several passes through
Authorized licensed use limited to: The Library NUI Maynooth. Downloaded on June 2, 2009 at 07:01 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
the training data were required. To avoid over-ﬁtting the
training data, the likelihood of the model producing a second set of normal traces (not used in training) was periodically measured. When this second likelihood stopped improving, training was terminated.
As mentioned earlier, training an HMM is expensive.
Calculations for each trace in each pass through the training data take
T is the length of the trace in
system calls (see Table 1), and
S is the number of states (and
symbols). Also, storage requirements are high. The “trellis”
of intermediate values that must be kept while performing
the calculations for a particular trace requires
ﬂoating point values. For our longer traces, these values
were written to a memory mapped binary ﬁle.
Fortunately, testing is more efﬁcient. A standard way to
test an HMM is to compute the likelihood that it will produce data not in the original training set. We, however, used
a simpler measure that (unlike the standard method) is not
sensitive to trace length and is better suited to on-line use.
We use the graph underlying the HMM as a nondeterministic ﬁnite automaton. We “read” a trace one system call
at a time, tracking what state transitions and outputs would
be required of the HMM to produce that system call. If the
HMM is a good model of the program, then normal traces
should require only likely transitions and outputs, while intrusive traces should have one or more system calls that require unusual state transitions and/or symbol outputs.
At a given time
t, there is a list of current possible states.
Choosing only the most likely state for any single system
call might not be consistent with the best path through the
HMM for a sequence of system calls, so we keep track of all
possible paths. Thresholds are set for “normal” state transition and output probabilities. Then, if we encounter a system call in the trace which could only have been produced
using below-threshold transitions or outputs, it is ﬂagged
as a mismatch. Note that we could have used the LFC to
aggregate these mismatches, but HMM anomalies are usually not temporally clumped, so we thought it more fair
to count individual mismatches. For our experiments, the
same threshold was used for both state transitions and outputs. This parameter was the primary sensitivity parameter,
with thresholds varying from 0.01 to 0.0000001. Note that
HMMs are making anomaly decisions at each system call,
rather than on sequences as in the other three methods.
The time to check each system call depends on the model
size and the size
s of the current list of valid states. The
latter tends to stay very small with normal traces, but can
include up to all
S states after an anomaly has been identi-
ﬁed. For each current valid state, our implementation of the
program takes O( S) to decide whether there is an anomaly
or not. If
S, this means O( S
) to process one system call. These times could be improved by converting the
model to a better representation of the automaton once the
testing probability thresholds are known.
6. Results
We tested each of the four data modeling methods on
each of the data sets (traces of Unix programs) at several different sensitivity thresholds. False positives are reported for
normal data not used during training, and true positives are
reported for traces of anomalous behavior. We ﬁrst present
the overall results, and then discuss accuracy on individual
data sets.
To get a picture of how well the detection methods perform on a variety of data, we ﬁrst averaged the results across
all the data sets. Figure 3 shows these average results for
each combination of data modeling method and sensitivity threshold. A different symbol is used to denote each
method, and each point shows performance at a particular
threshold. For HMMs, we distinguish between results with
randomly-initialized HMMs and those using HMMs initialized to include human knowledge of the modeled program.
In Figure 3, the y-axis represents overall ability to detect anomalies. As mentioned earlier, any above-threshold
signal anywhere in the intrusive trace(s) counts as correct
detection of the intrusion. The x-axis represents false positives, measured on an individual decision basis rather than
by traces. False positives are shown as a fraction of the total
number of sequences (or system calls) in a trace of normal
behavior, and therefore can range from 0 to 1. The ﬁgure,
however, shows only the region from 0 to 0.001 which is
of primary interest. As a very rough estimate, traces are
often on the order of a thousand system calls long. Identifying one in a thousand sequences (or system calls, for
HMMs) as anomalous is roughly equivalent to identifying
each trace as anomalous.
Of course, this does not hold
everywhere, because of the vast differences in traces mentioned earlier. However, it does suggest that for practicality,
false-positive rates should be well below 0.001. Perfect performance would be correct detection of all intrusions and no
false positives, represented by points in the upper left corner
of the ﬁgure.
For many of the data sets, the individual true-positive
rate was either one, if the intrusion(s) was successfully detected, or zero, because there are only two data sets for
which some intrusion traces are harder to recognize than
others. This makes the true-positive average a simple representation of how many intrusions are detected. The normal
data, however, are more varied. With differences between
false positives that span several orders of magnitude, the average is heavily inﬂuenced by the worst results. Thus, we
also show the median scores in the inset of ﬁgure 3. Note
that the scale for false positives is much smaller on this ﬁgure, as the median is signiﬁcantly lower than the average for
all methods and thresholds. . Many of plotted points on the y-axis
of the inset (median true positives) are 1.0, because stide
and both HMM methods correctly detect a majority of the
intrusion traces at all thresholds. RIPPER’s true positive
rates, however, drop off gradually with increasing threshold, while its false positives drop rapidly; this accounts for
the points running down the y-axis.
The composite picture shown in ﬁgure 3 gives only a
rough outline of the data.
Figure 4 shows the relationship between thresholds and true or false positives in more
As the sensitivity threshold is relaxed, fewer sequences (or system calls) are identiﬁed as anomalous in all
traces, affecting both true and false positives. “Relaxed” for
the sequence-based methods means an increase in the LFC
needed to ﬂag an anomaly, while it means a decrease in the
minimum probability for an HMM to generate a normal system call. The RIPPER curves are steeper because RIPPER
rarely generates high LFCs. Because RIPPER’s rules depend only on a few of the system calls in a sequence, not all
sequences in an anomalous part of the trace are classiﬁed as
anomalous.
We can use the results shown in ﬁgure 4 to choose good
thresholds for each method. The deﬁnition of “good,” however, is not ﬁxed. On one system it may be more important
to maximize true positives, while on another, minimizing
false positives may be key. For the moment, we choose
“good” to mean an average true-positive rate above 95%.
HMMs, stide and t-stide all have at least one threshold at
which the average true-positive rate is 96.9%, missing only
two of the login intrusion traces. RIPPER’s closest match
is a true-positive rate of 95.3%, missing three of the login
intrusion traces. Using these thresholds, we now turn to a
comparison of the corresponding false-positive rates.
Figure 5 shows the false-positive rate for each method
on each of the six normal test sets, using thresholds chosen as described above. Values for one data set vary over
Authorized licensed use limited to: The Library NUI Maynooth. Downloaded on June 2, 2009 at 07:01 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
average true positives
average false positives
Figure 4. Average true and false positives versus threshold for each method, sequence length 6.
HMM results are for randomly-initialized HMMs only.
orders of magnitude (note the logarithmic scale on the yaxis). There is some correlation between long traces and
low false-positive rates (ignoring the named daemon for
the moment), but the number of misclassiﬁed normal traces
still varies widely between programs. More important than
trace length are the complexity of a program and the variability in its usage. The sendmail program is larger and
more complicated than the other programs, producing traces
with a larger variety of system calls and sequence patterns,
so it is not surprising that it is more difﬁcult to model. By
contrast, xlock and stide are much simpler programs,
which do not interact with a network. They also gave our
least realistic data sets—xlock because the test data come
from just one abnormally long trace, and stide because
it is an application program. The two lpr data sets were
produced by the same program, but the UNM false positives are higher for all methods. We speculate that because
the UNM data were collected over a much longer period of
time, they reﬂect more changes in network conﬁgurations
and user behavior than the MIT data.
It is possible that we simply did not use enough training data to characterize the more complex data sets adequately, even though our training set sizes were determined
by the variability of system call patterns (see Section 4).
The sendmail training set was larger than any other program’s training set, and the lpr training sets used a larger
percentage of the available data. Yet sendmail and UNM
lpr had the worst false-positive rates.
Results across modeling methods for a particular data
set are more similar than results for the same method across
different data sets. Although it is clear that t-stide consistently performs below the other methods, none of the other
methods is a clear winner. We would need to better understand why false-positive rates vary so much between data
sets before we could conclusively identify one method as
best. That is, our data suggest that there is no single best
choice for all the data sets. However, none of the methods
(other than t-stide) would be a bad choice.
All of the results presented in ﬁgures 3, 4, and 5 were
computed using a sequence length (window size) of six, and
the corresponding choice of training data. Results for sequence length ten are qualitatively similar, but there are a
few points worth noting. We expected the results for the
sequence-based methods to be similar for the two sequence
lengths because we chose the size of the training set based
on the sequence length.
The training set chosen for sequence length ten was much larger than that for sequence
length six, reﬂecting the fact that there are many more possible sequences of length ten than of length six. RIPPER
and stide average results appear to be slightly better for sequence length six, despite training on less data, possibly
because the smaller sequences allow better generalization.
However, HMMs do not depend on the sequence length;
HMM accuracy was better for most data sets on the larger
training set.
However, these trends in the average behavior do not
hold for all programs. Each method has some programs for
which sequence length six false positive rates are lower and
Authorized licensed use limited to: The Library NUI Maynooth. Downloaded on June 2, 2009 at 07:01 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
False positives
Figure 5. False-positive rates for each of six data sets, sequence length six. stide threshold: 6, t-stide
threshold: 4, RIPPER threshold 2, HMM threshold = 0.001. Note that the RIPPER true-positive rate
at this threshold is is slightly lower than those of the other methods. False-positive rates are shown
on a logarithmic scale.
others for which they are higher. This is likely due to the
fact that our results depend somewhat on which traces or sequences are included in the training set. A different choice
of training data, even if the amount of data were the same,
would yield different test results in some cases. We have
not attempted to measure this variation or obtain an error
estimate for the false positives. The comparisons made here
are suggestive, rather than tests of statistical signiﬁcance.
7. Discussion
Intrusion detection is an important and active area of research. Various research groups have suggested methods
that look promising on at least one set of data. But in order to choose from among these different methods, we need
good comparisons between them on a variety of data. Such
comparisons are not easy. Differences in how the methods
work and large variations in the amount and types of data
both complicated our study.
One such difference is in the way anomaly signals are
generated. The sequence-based methods tend to produce
multiple mismatches even for a single misplaced system
call, because that system call affects multiple sequences.
Because HMMs, as used here, check only a single system call at a time, they automatically produce fewer mismatches. This biases the results in favor of HMMs. An
alternative that seems more fair at ﬁrst is to compare peaks.
A trace region where locality frame counts are all above 0
shows up as a peak in a graph of the anomaly signal over
time. Such a peak might be equivalent to a single HMM
anomaly. But the size of the locality frame might cause
multiple anomalies to be lumped together in one such peak.
Perhaps contiguous mismatches would be a better deﬁnition of peak. However, in either case, it is impossible to
calculate a percentage for false positives, because there is
no notion of how many such peaks are possible in a given
Regardless of how the false positives are calculated,
more test data would improve our conﬁdence in the results.
Although we have collected data for a spectrum of different
kinds of programs and intrusions, we still have a relatively
small number of data sets. Each individual data set carries
too much weight in the ﬁnal outcome, and adding results
for one more data set might change the composite results
enough to favor other methods.
Studies such as ours can always be conducted more thoroughly. As with collecting data, there are no predetermined
stopping criteria. Each modeling method has a number of
parameters that affect anomaly signals, but only a few representative variations were investigated here. Also, there is
a random element to both RIPPER and HMMs, so results
for these methods should ideally be averaged over multiple
For these reasons, we cannot deﬁnitively determine
which method is best. However, we can make some general
statements about which properties of the data were helpful
or harmful for each of the methods.
We purposely chose methods that could handle discrete
data, but the large number of distinct system calls used is
a problem for some methods. In training an HMM, the
time for each pass is roughly proportional to the square of
the alphabet size (number of different system calls). More
Authorized licensed use limited to: The Library NUI Maynooth. Downloaded on June 2, 2009 at 07:01 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
complex programs using more system calls require signiﬁcantly longer training times. On the testing side, each decision in the current implementation requires a number of
tests directly proportional to the number of distinct system
calls. By contrast, in stide and t-stide, the number of system calls is only an indirect factor in training and test times,
because of the way the data are stored. The search time
for a sequence in the database depends on the number of
branches in the sequence trees. Although the number of
possible branches at each level is equal to the number of
system calls, the number encountered in practice is signiﬁcantly fewer. These methods scale dramatically better with
the number of system calls used.
Scaling with the length of the traces is another factor. All
of the methods have training and test times that are linear in
the length of the trace. However, the training algorithms
for HMMs and RIPPER make multiple passes through the
training data, whereas stide and t-stide require only a single
pass to build their normal databases. Also, as mentioned
earlier, HMMs must store intermediate data while training,
with the number of ﬂoating point values proportional to the
trace length multiplied by the number of states. For long
traces, this is very expensive.
The number of unique sequences in a data set is not directly related to the trace length. In fact, longer traces often
repeat a small number of sequences many times. As mentioned earlier, the primary difference between lpr traces
is the number of read-write pairs. Also, in the long
xlock live trace, the bulk of the data consists of the same
ﬁve system calls repeated over and over. This is one reason
why RIPPER is trained on only the unique sequences, and
not on the raw data. Otherwise, those few very common
sequences would dominate, and few or no rules would be
extracted for the other sequences. It also suggests a problem for the frequency-basedmethods. With a few sequences
accounting for a large percentage of the data, frequencies
of other normal sequences tend to look insigniﬁcant, and
can be ﬂagged as anomalous.
However, these common
sequences do not dominate every trace; in the shorter sequences frequencies are more evenly distributed. Because
of this, simple methods for comparing rare and common
sequences are insufﬁcient, although more sophisticated approaches could perhaps make better use of the frequency
information.
Each method we used was designed to take advantage
of the locality of intrusions. The sequence based methods,
using locality frame aggregates of the mismatch counts, all
focus on the local history of system calls. Although HMMs
have the potential to capture some long-term history as well,
the way we used them also concentrated on local events.
This is partly because of our choice of model size; more
states would be required to give the HMMs a longer memory.
In these relatively small HMMs, each state might be
used to characterize multiple parts of the traces. A single
state producing primarily read system calls, for example,
might represent several different program states in which
reading data is required. Transitions out of that state might
reﬂect the different possibilities for going on to write or
to close or to another read. There is a potential here
for missing anomalies, because such state transitions might
make it possible to mix preﬁxes and sufﬁxes that do not go
together. However, there is also a potential for better generalization than that offered by the sequence-based methods.
As an example, if the training data include examples of a
system call being used one, three, or four times in a row, an
HMM will likely accept a trace using that system call twice
in a row. The sequence based methods (with the possible
exception of RIPPER) would identify at least some mismatches. In the data we have studied, such sequences are
always false positives, and do not contribute to identifying
anomalies.
An additional factor in evaluating methods is the degree
to which training can be automated. The ability to add human knowledge to the model might be helpful, but such
knowledge should not be required.
8. Conclusions
We compared four methods for characterizing normal
behavior and detecting intrusions based on system calls in
privileged processes. Each method was tested on the same
suite of data sets, consisting of different types of programs
and different intrusion techniques. On this test suite, three
of the four methods performed adequately. Hidden Markov
models, generally recognized as one of the most powerful
data modeling methods in existence, gave the best accuracy
on average, although at high computational costs. Surprisingly, the much simpler sequence time-delay embedding
method compared favorably with HMMs. We conclude that
for this problem, the system call data are regular enough
for even simple modeling methods to work well. The average results indicate that it might be possible to achieve
increased accuracy with HMMs, provided signiﬁcant computational resources are available to train and run them.
However, no one method consistently gave the best results on all programs, and results between programs varied more than results between methods. Variations in false
positives were due more to the complexity of the traced
programs and their environments than to differences in the
analysis methods. Although there are multitudes of alternative methods that were not tested, our results demonstrate
that for this problem, several methods perform well. We
believe that the choice of data stream (short sequences of
system calls) is a more important decision than the particular method of analysis.
Authorized licensed use limited to: The Library NUI Maynooth. Downloaded on June 2, 2009 at 07:01 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
Historically, many computationally sophisticated methods have been applied to the intrusion-detection problem,
yet there are few well-accepted solutions in widespread use.
One lesson from this paper is that perhaps a disproportionate amount of attention has been directed to the data modeling problem, and that equal attention should be paid to considering what are the most effective data streams to monitor.
9. Acknowledgments
The authors thank Mark Crosbie, Patrik D’haeseleer,
Paul Helman, Geoff Hunsicker, Anil Somayaji, Derek
Smith, Al Valdes, Wenke Lee, Carla Marceau and Matt
Stillerman for helpful discussions and suggestions. We also
thank the MIT AI Lab and the UNM CSSupport group for
allowing us to collect data on their production systems. This
work was supported by grants from the National Science
Foundation (IRI-9711199), DARPA (N00014-96-1-0680),
Intel Corporation, and IBM.