Top-down facilitation of visual recognition
M. Bar*†, K. S. Kassam*‡§, A. S. Ghuman*§¶, J. Boshyan*, A. M. Schmid*, A. M. Dale*, M. S. Ha¨ma¨la¨inen*,
K. Marinkovic*, D. L. Schacter‡, B. R. Rosen*, and E. Halgren*
*Martinos Center at Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129; and ¶Program in Biophysics and ‡Department of
Psychology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138
Edited by Riitta Hari, Helsinki University of Technology, Espoo, Finland, and approved November 23, 2005 
Cortical analysis related to visual object recognition is traditionally
thought to propagate serially along a bottom-up hierarchy of
ventral areas. Recent proposals gradually promote the role of
top-down processing in recognition, but how such facilitation is
triggered remains a puzzle. We tested a speciﬁc model, proposing
that low spatial frequencies facilitate visual object recognition by
initiating top-down processes projected from orbitofrontal to
visual cortex. The present study combined magnetoencephalography, which has superior temporal resolution, functional magnetic
resonance imaging, and a behavioral task that yields successful
recognition with stimulus repetitions. Object recognition elicited
differential activity that developed in the left orbitofrontal cortex
50 ms earlier than it did in recognition-related areas in the temporal
cortex. This early orbitofrontal activity was directly modulated by
the presence of low spatial frequencies in the image. Taken
together, the dynamics we revealed provide strong support for the
proposal of how top-down facilitation of object recognition is
initiated, and our observations are used to derive predictions for
future research.
feedback  object recognition  orbitofrontal cortex  visual cortex 
low spatial frequency
he functional architecture of the visual cortex has helped
shape the traditional view that visual input is processed
serially, in a bottom-up cascade of cortical regions that analyze
increasingly complex information. This view has been challenged
by models proposing a simultaneous bottom-up and top-down
flow of information in the cortex (1–6). Recent findings support
those proposals by showing that top-down mechanisms might
play an important role in visual processing (7–10), but it remains
puzzling how such processing would be initiated. Indeed, the
existence of top-down processes that facilitate perception implies that high-level information is activated earlier than some
lower-level information. We examine here a specific proposal for
the triggering of such top-down facilitation in visual object
recognition (11). The gist of this proposal is that a partially
analyzed version of the input image (i.e., a blurred image),
comprised of the low spatial frequency (LSF) components is
projected rapidly from early visual areas directly to the prefrontal cortex, possibly by using the dorsal magnocellular pathway.
This coarse representation is subsequently used to activate
predictions about the most likely interpretations of the input
image in recognition-related regions within the temporal cortex.
Combining this top-down ‘‘initial guess’’ with the bottom-up
systematic analysis facilitates recognition by substantially limiting the number of object representations that need to be
considered (Fig. 1).
The cortical regions most often associated with visual object
recognition are situated in the temporal cortex (12, 13) and in
humans include in particular the fusiform gyrus and the lateral
occipital cortex (14–17). However, recent studies indicate that the
prefrontal cortex might also play an active role in the cortical
network that mediates visual object recognition. In particular, Bar
et al. (14) compared the functional (fMRI) activity elicited by trials
in which objects were successfully recognized with the activity
elicited by the same pictures when they were not recognized under
identical conditions (Fig. 2A). In addition to the temporal regions
typically associated with object recognition, a prefrontal site, in the
orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), was also differentially active in this
comparison (Fig. 2B).
How should this OFC activity be interpreted with respect to
object recognition? Given that various prefrontal regions have been
implicated in semantic analysis (18–20) (although not the orbital
section in particular), it would be reasonable to interpret prefrontal
activity observed during recognition of everyday objects as reflecting postrecognition semantic processing. According to this view, the
OFC activity is not related to the processes required for object
recognition per se, but rather is a manifestation of related semantic
processes taking place after the object has been recognized. An
alternative account, however, is that the network that mediates
object recognition includes regions beyond the traditionally defined
visual cortex and, specifically, that this OFC activation represents
the cortical source of top-down facilitation in visual object recognition (11). This alternative is our focus here.
To facilitate recognition, top-down processing would have to
start before recognition has been accomplished. Consequently, for
the OFC site to be critical for early top-down facilitation, recognition-related activity must develop at that site earlier than it does
in temporal regions associated with recognition. Given the brief
amount of time that is sufficient for typical recognition to be
accomplished, it was critical to use a neuroimaging method with
superior temporal resolution to test this alternative account. We
therefore combined milliseconds-resolution magnetoencephalog-
Conﬂict of interest statement: No conﬂicts declared.
This paper was submitted directly (Track II) to the PNAS ofﬁce.
Abbreviations: HSF, high spatial frequency; LSF, low spatial frequency; OFC orbitofrontal
cortex; MEG, magnetoencephalography; fMRI, functional MRI; ROI, region of interest; RT,
reaction time.
†To whom correspondence should be addressed at: Martinos Center at Massachusetts
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 149 Thirteenth Street, Charlestown, MA 02129.
E-mail: .
§K.S.K. and A.S.G. contributed equally to this work.
© 2006 by The National Academy of Sciences of the USA
An illustration of the proposed model. A LSF representation of the
input image is projected rapidly, possibly via the dorsal magnocellular pathway, from early visual cortex to the OFC, in parallel to the systematic and
relatively slower propagation of information along the ventral visual pathway. This coarse representation is sufﬁcient for activating a minimal set of the
most probable interpretations of the input, which are then integrated with
the bottom-up stream of analysis to facilitate recognition.
www.pnas.orgcgidoi10.1073pnas.0507062103
January 10, 2006 
vol. 103 
NEUROSCIENCE
raphy (MEG) recordings with a behavioral task where the recognition of initially unrecognizable objects became possible with
stimulus repetitions (Fig. 2A). The similar paradigm that was
previously run with fMRI (14) provided not only the theoretical
motivation for the present study, but also qualitatively improved
spatial information for interpreting the present MEG findings. In
addition, we used phase-synchrony analysis to determine trial-bytrial covariance between visual and orbitofrontal regions and,
subsequently, to draw inferences about how these regions interact.
The other key prediction that stems from the tested model is that
because the projection of LSF to OFC is essential for initiating the
top-down facilitation, LSF and high spatial frequency (HSF) in an
image are processed differently in the specific OFC site. Consequently, in a second experiment, conducted both in fMRI (experiment 2A) and MEG (experiment 2B), we compared between the
activation patterns elicited by images of objects filtered to contain
predominantly LSF and by images filtered to contain primarily
HSF. This experiment is additionally interesting because, despite
previous findings (21), the prefrontal cortex is not typically perceived as selective to specific physical properties of input stimuli.
These three experiments resulted in rich data sets, and we had to
constrain our scope here only to those aspects of the data that
directly pertain to the tested model and its specific predictions.
Recognition-Related Activity in the OFC Precedes the Corresponding
Activity in the Temporal Cortex (Experiment 1). Participants were
required to recognize pictures of familiar objects that were presented briefly and interposed between two masks (Fig. 2A). The
same pictures were presented repeatedly up to five times in random
order, intermixed with the presentations of other objects. It has
been shown that objects that are not recognized on a given brief
presentation can nonetheless be recognized in a later, identical
presentation (22). Therefore, by presenting the same objects repeatedly, participants had several opportunities for successful recognition of those objects. To evaluate the cortical dynamics associated with relatively easy object recognition, some of the stimuli
appeared again for a sixth presentation, without a mask and for
considerably longer exposure duration (198 ms).
To answer the critical question of whether differential activity
would develop in the OFC earlier than in recognition-related
regions within the temporal cortex, we compared the MEG signal
elicited by trials in which the objects were successfully recognized
with the signal elicited by similar trials in which the same objects
were not recognized. Differential activation in the OFC was found
50 ms earlier than in regions of the temporal cortex previously
implicated as being directly involved in object recognition (Fig. 3).
In other words, OFC activity was diagnostic of successful recognition earlier than activity in the visual cortex, supporting the critical
prediction that stems from the proposed model. This early activity
peaked in the left posterior orbital gyrus at 130 ms from stimulus
(object) onset and remained statistically significant for about 40 ms.
This result of earlier differential OFC activity (recognized vs. not
recognized) was significant for each individual subject (P  0.01).
As seen in Fig. 3, the sequence of recognition-related differential
activity developed first in the left OFC (Talairach coordinates: 36,
23, 14), followed by the right fusiform gyrus (at 180 ms; 34, 53,
14), followed by the left fusiform gyrus (at 215 ms; 38, 52,
12). The OFC activity developed significantly earlier than the
right fusiform activity (t8  2.95; P  0.01) and the left fusiform
activity (t8  3.26; P  0.01); and the right fusiform activity
developed significantly earlier than the left fusiform activity (t8 
1.92; P  0.05).
Recognized vs. not-recognized trials in fMRI. (A) The experimental
design. (B) A statistical activation map, illustrating the comparison between
successful and unsuccessful recognition of the same objects under identical
conditions (adapted from ref. 14). Activity in the anterior fusiform gyrus and
collateral sulcus increased linearly with increasing recognition success. In
addition, the left posterior OFC was more active for successful than for
unsuccessful recognition attempts. Here, we test the hypothesis that this focus
is the origin of top-down facilitation in visual object recognition
The cortical chain of events leading to object recognition reveals OFC
activity that precedes the temporal cortex activity. (A) Anatomically (MRI)
constrained statistical parametric maps calculated from MEG, representing
the contrast between trials in which the masked objects were recognized
successfully and trials in which the same masked objects could not be recognized. The estimated cortical activation is illustrated here at different latencies
from stimulus onset and is averaged across all nine subjects. Differential
activation (recognized vs. not recognized) peaked in the left OFC 130 ms from
stimulus onset, 50 ms before it peaked in recognition-related regions in the
temporal cortex. See Fig. 9, which is published as supporting information on
the PNAS web site, for lateral views. These lateral views show early dorsal
differential activity, supporting the proposal that early projection relies on
magnocellular, dorsal projection and also suggests early frontal-eye-ﬁeld
differential activity. Taken together, these lateral activations provide a reasonable starting point for future studies aimed at characterizing the exact
neural pathway mediating the rapid projection of LSF from early visual cortex
to the OFC. (B) Corresponding time courses of the development of the differential activation in the OFC and temporal cortex regions of interest (ROIs),
depicting p values of the difference between recognized and not-recognized
trials as a function of time from stimulus onset. The p values are averaged
within the ROI and, thus, do not perfectly correspond to the higher levels of
signiﬁcance depicted in the statistical maps above. (C) Corresponding time
courses for normalized current values. Current and statistical values are presented in absolute, unsigned units.
www.pnas.orgcgidoi10.1073pnas.0507062103
Bar et al.
Objects in the nonmasked, 198-ms-exposure condition were very
easy to recognize (average reaction time (RT)  673  81 ms)
compared with the recognized objects that were briefly presented
and masked (average RT  897  79 ms), and they elicited early
OFC activity that was significantly lower than that elicited by
masked, recognized trials (t8  1.92; P  0.05). This finding is
similar to the fMRI results from ref. 14, which also show little
activation difference from fixation in the OFC for the unmasked
condition, when recognition is exceptionally easy.
In addition to the OFC focus of interest, occipital visual regions
also showed early activity in the masked recognized vs. masked
not-recognized contrast, which started as early as 67 ms from
stimulus onset. Note that masks were selected randomly and, thus,
did not differ systematically between any of the conditions. Unlike
the recognizednot-recognized pattern we found in the OFC, this
activity in the occipital visual cortex was stronger for notrecognized trials compared with recognized trials (t8  2.89; P 
0.01). Furthermore, the early occipital activity showed two peaks,
separated by 90 ms, perfectly aligned with the temporal onset of the
forward and backward masks (Fig. 4). This pattern was absent in the
recognized, nonmasked trials. These early visual areas are known
to analyze basic visual properties, such as lines at different orientations. Given that the masks consisted of such features and thus
were ideal for activating early visual regions, we suggest that this
early occipital activity reflects response to the masks. Consequently,
we hypothesize that at least one reason why not-recognized items
were not recognized is that the cortical analysis in the occipital
regions in those trials concentrated on the masks rather than on the
To test whether the occipital cortex, the OFC, and the temporal
cortex sites directly interact with each other as the tested model
implies, we subsequently conducted a time-frequency, trial-by-trial
covariance analysis of these data. The results demonstrate strong
synchrony between occipital visual regions and the OFC at a
relatively early stage (beginning at 80 ms after stimulus onset) and
a strong synchrony between the OFC and the fusiform gyrus activity
at a relatively later stage (130 ms after stimulus onset) (Fig. 5).
Although such phase-lock analysis lacks directionality, given the
temporal pattern observed in the MEG time courses, these results
support an early occipital–OFC feed-forward projection and a later
OFC–fusiform feedback projection. In addition, the OFC–fusiform
synchrony lasted 40 ms longer for recognized trials compared
with not-recognized trials. Furthermore, the timing of this additional locking for recognized trials coincided perfectly with differential fusiform activity, as demonstrated by the corresponding time
course. Phase-synchrony was seen primarily in the  frequency band
(8–12.5 Hz), which is known to play a role in successful object
recognition (23). Overall, the results of this analysis provide support
for the information flow suggested by the model tested here.
Finally, can these data inform us about a specific ‘‘aha’’ moment
of recognition? Peak activity associated with the conscious completion of object recognition has been observed during the interval
250–300 ms from stimulus onset (24, 25). Although the present
study was not designed to detect cortical activity specifically associated with a possible recognition moment, our data indicate
maximal fusiform activity during the same time interval (Fig. 3), in
agreement with those previous studies. It is important to emphasize, however, that successful recognition is associated more with a
gradual increase of temporal cortex activity than with a distinguishable step function of activity reminiscent of an aha moment (14).
In summary, this experiment demonstrated that recognitionrelated activity developed significantly earlier in the OFC than in
object areas in the visual cortex. In the subsequent study, we tested
the second critical hypothesis: that this early OFC activity is driven
by LSF in the image.
The Early Recognition-Related Activity in the OFC Depends on Spatial
Frequencies in the Image (Experiment 2). In the model tested here,
it was proposed that a LSF representation of the input image is
projected directly to the OFC (11), possibly through the dorsal
magnocellular pathway. This early and rudimentary projection then
activates information in the OFC that subsequently sensitizes the
representation of the most likely candidate objects in the temporal
cortex as a predictive ‘‘initial guess.’’ Indeed, physiological findings
indicate that the magnocellular pathway conveys LSF information
early and rapidly (26–28). Anatomical studies regarding direct
connections between early visual areas and the prefrontal cortex
that will support such a bypass projection are lacking in humans (29)
Normalized time courses for the occipital cortex. These are main
effects (i.e., each condition minus the prestimulus baseline) in the earlier
occipital visual areas. The two peaks of the masked conditions are separated
by 90 ms and correspond to the onset of the forward and backward masks.
Phase-locking analysis, showing signiﬁcant trial-by-trial phase covariance between occipital visual areas and the OFC and, later, between the
OFC and the fusiform gyrus. (A) Standard deviations above baseline of the
phase-locking between the occipital visual areas and the OFC. Representative
ROIs are shown in the right column. (B) OFC–fusiform phase-locking statistics
for trials in which the masked objects were successfully recognized. (C) OFC–
fusiform phase-locking statistics for trials in which the masked object was not
recognized. (D) Recognized vs. not-recognized activity in the fusiform repeated here to emphasize that OFC–fusiform phase-locking lasted 40 ms
longer in recognized trials than in not-recognized trials, coinciding with the
peak of differential activity in the fusiform.
Bar et al.
January 10, 2006 
vol. 103 
NEUROSCIENCE
and so far have been shown between temporal cortex and prefrontal
cortex only in monkeys (30). Nevertheless, psychophysical and
physiological experiments indicate that LSFs are processed first and
fast (31–33), as would be required to produce a top-down initial
guess. Taken together, these findings imply the existence and use of
the infrastructure required for the theoretically proposed mechanism for triggering top-down facilitation, although future anatomical studies of the exact neural pathways will be highly informative.
Because this model relies on the proposal that a projection of
LSF to the OFC initiates the top-down facilitation of object
recognition, we predicted that LSF and HSF filtered images would
have different effects on activity in the specific OFC site. General
differences in spatial-frequency processing have been reported,
primarily in the context of early visual processing, size tuning
mechanisms, and hemispheric lateralization (34, 35). Here, however, differential sensitivity to LSF and HSF images was used as a
test of the proposed mechanism for triggering fast top-down
facilitation in object recognition. Consequently, we used both fMRI
and MEG to compare the OFC activation pattern elicited by
filtered images of objects containing predominantly LSF with the
activation elicited by filtered images containing predominantly
Across all subjects, HSF images were correctly recognized as real
or nonreal objects in 90% of the trails, on average, and the LSF on
71% of all trials. The mean reaction times for correct trials were 668
ms  50 ms for HSF images, 723 ms  88 ms for LSF images, and
607 ms  52 ms for the intact images (t tests: LSF vs. HSF, t8  2.34,
P  0.05; intact vs. LSF, t8  6.67, P  0.001; intact vs. HSF,
t8  4.22, P  0.005). To ensure that there was no significant RT
difference between the two main conditions, we selected, post hoc,
a subset of trials with the same mean reaction time (LSF  700 ms;
HSF  700 ms; LSF vs. HSF, t8  0.05). This matched-RT subset
of trials consisted of 90% of the correct LSF and 78% of the correct
HSF trials and was used in the analyses presented here.
Most importantly in the present context, LSF object images
elicited a significantly higher fMRI signal than the HSF images in
the OFC, in the same region where we found early recognitionrelated activity in experiment 1 (t7  2.65, P  0.033) (21, 21,
19). Correspondingly, there was a significant difference between
the MEG current amplitudes estimated from the LSF and HSF
conditions within the same OFC region (24, 25, 12) (t8  3.56,
P  0.008). The polarity of the MEG source signal is associated with
the direction of the current with respect to the cortex (inwards or
outwards), and it is not straightforward to relate this direction
unambiguously to activation or inactivation, both because of the
complex structure of the cortical neurons and the spatial smoothness of our minimum-norm solution. However, from the fMRI
study, it seems that the OFC signals are all negative compared with
fixation (i.e., ‘‘deactivations’’). We therefore also used negative
polarity for the MEG signal (Fig. 6). Although there is currently no
clear understanding of the ubiquitous deactivations that are often
obtained in neuroimaging studies (36), the critical aspect here is that
the OFC region clearly responds differentially to LSF and HSF
images. The MEG data indicate that this LSF–HSF differential
activity peaked 115 ms from stimulus onset.
The OFC activity was highly similar for the LSF and intact
conditions and significantly different from that elicited by the HSF
images, which is particularly relevant. The model tested here
predicts that a lack of LSF information will diminish the contribution of top-down processes and will therefore result in relatively
slower recognition performance. By selecting HSF and LSF images
with equal RT (i.e., equalized recognition level), we used HSF
images that were recognized as quickly but, presumably, without
top-down contribution. That recognition in both LSF and HSF
conditions was significantly slower than performance with intact
images (93-ms difference in average performance level) emphasizes
the idea that optimal recognition relies on both types of information: Whereas LSF information promotes the generation of initial
predictions in OFC, HSF information is required for converging to
a single identity in the visual cortex. In other words, neither LSF nor
HSF images were recognized in the same manner as intact images
are in reality, but the similarity between the response to intact and
LSF images in the OFC shows that the OFC part of recognition is
identical as long as LSF information is present, and it is independent
of HSF information.
We conducted a trial-by-trial covariance analysis to test whether
the presumably feed-forward and feedback projections (Fig. 5) are
more synchronized (and thus better functionally connected) for
LSF images compared with HSF images. Indeed, there was a clear
interaction between the occipital visual regions and the OFC and
between the OFC and the fusiform gyrus for both LSF and intact
images, as suggested by this synchrony analysis (Fig. 7) but significantly less synchrony between these regions for the HSF stimuli.
Furthermore, as would be predicted from the tested model, the
synchrony in MEG signal between early visual areas and the OFC,
which presumably mediates the early feed-forward projection of
LSF, precedes the synchronized activity between the OFC and the
fusiform, which presumably subserves the feedback activation of
candidate interpretations based on the LSF content. Finally, the
phase-lock pattern indicates that here, too, LSF images, but not
HSF images, result in similar dynamics as intact images.
Discussion
This study was designed to test a proposed mechanism for the
activation of top-down facilitation during object recognition (11).
Our results demonstrate that (i) differential activity unique to
successful recognition developed in the OFC 50 ms before it
developed in fusiform regions previously implicated in object
recognition; (ii) this early OFC activity is differentially sensitive to
spatial frequencies, and it is similar for intact images and images
that contain only LSF; (iii) phase synchrony among the OFC,
fusiform, and early visual areas suggest that these regions interact
Comparison of the cortical signal elicited by LSF and HSF during
recognition. ROI analysis of the left medial OFC for both MEG and fMRI. (A)
MEG data. Normalized currents illustrate the main effects of spatial frequency
content on OFC activity during the ﬁrst 200-ms interval from stimulus onset.
Note that OFC activity peaked here 115 ms and started to develop even
earlier, whereas, in experiment 1, it peaked 130 ms from stimulus onset.
Here, this peak signiﬁes the arrival of information to the OFC, which presumably initiates the top-down facilitation, whereas the 130-ms peak in the
previous study distinguishes recognized from not-recognized trials. Therefore, it might be possible that this onset difference indicates the time interval
that it takes to generate successful predictions about the input, after the LSF
information has reached the OFC. A peak of activity in the occipital cortex was
seen at 100 ms, which did not differ between LSF and HSF responses. In fact,
differential activity in the occipital cortex did not appear until 160 ms after
stimulus onset. (B) fMRI data. Comparison of percent signal change within the
OFC ROI elicited by intact, LSF, and HSF images (see Methods).
www.pnas.orgcgidoi10.1073pnas.0507062103
Bar et al.
during object recognition in a manner predicted by the tested
model; and (iv) this functional connectivity is significantly stronger
for images that contain LSF compared with images that contain
primarily HSF. Naturally, a direct test of causal relations between
these regions in the future, using lesion studies, for example, will be
helpful. Finally, the OFC is not a region that is traditionally
considered a visual area, in that it is not generally expected to
respond differentially based on the physical properties of the input.
Here, we show that the OFC does respond differentially and in a
manner that supports the tested model.
Recent models have promoted the role of top-down analysis in
cortical processing (1–3, 5, 6, 37, 38). Until now, however, it was not
clear whether top-down facilitation is part of the dynamics that lead
to visual object recognition and, if it is, when and where a top-down
cortical signal would be initiated. Our results suggest that this
stream propagates from the OFC, 130 ms from stimulus onset,
and it is directly related to recognition success.
The role of the OFC has generally been discussed in the context
of emotional processing, reward, and decision-making (39, 40)
(though generally in various subregions posterior to the OFC region
observed here). However, the OFC has also been shown to be
involved in the analysis of visual information and in visual memory
(21, 41–45). Furthermore, the OFC is the prefrontal region with the
strongest connections to the inferior temporal cortex (46); and
there is evidence for LSF (i.e., magnocellular) projection from
visual cortex to various regions within the prefrontal cortex (39).
Finally, activity in the OFC has been associated with guessing and
hypothesis-testing, as well as with the generation of expectations
(44, 47, 48), all of which are in agreement with the role attributed
here to this region as a source of top-down predictions. It is possible
that the OFC serves as a rapid detector and predictor of potential
content based on coarse aspects of the input (i.e., gist). This
information would naturally be highly valuable in dangerous situations (49), when shared with the amygdala, for example. But the
same information can, in parallel, facilitate object recognition also
in nondangerous situations (11). Indeed, the OFC is located
optimally for subserving such a role, being part of an orbitofrontal–
amygdala–inferior temporal reciprocal triad (50). More generally,
the capability to derive a great deal about the most likely identity
of the input image based on its LSF appearance might have
developed through survival-related considerations; it is obviously
advantageous for an organism to recognize items in the periphery,
(where visual acuity is low, and the image is thus analogous to a LSF
representation) as soon as possible. Once these mechanisms have
evolved, they could be used also to facilitate foveal visual recognition based on the rapidly available LSF information.
When the objects were presented for considerably longer durations and not masked, recognition was trivial. In those trials, the
early OFC activity was lower than that elicited by the masked
recognized trials. This pattern of results indicates that when objects
are easily recognizable, the recognition process is so rapid and
efficient that it does not benefit as much from early top-down
facilitation. These situations are ecologically uncommon, however,
because objects around us rarely appear in isolation and as clearly
as on a computer screen in the laboratory. Instead, objects’ visibility
is typically affected by illumination conditions, clutter, occlusion,
and so on, and thus object recognition can benefit from top-down
facilitation and from other sources (51) not only in brief and masked
presentations. In the same context of lack of top-down facilitation
during exceptionally easy recognition attempts, it is important to
keep in mind that the proposed model does not imply that top-down
facilitation from OFC is essential for recognition to be accomplished. If this pathway is eliminated, as in prefrontal patients for
example, recognition is predicted to be slower but not impossible.
The phase-locking analysis demonstrated high trial-by-trial synchrony between the occipital region and the OFC (presumably
feed-forward) and between the OFC and the fusiform gyrus
(presumably feedback). The strength and delay of this phaselocking varied as a function of recognition success. In addition,
experiment 2 demonstrated that the same OFC site responds
differently to LSF images compared with HSF images, even when
recognition difficulty was equated. Therefore, the early OFC
activation observed in experiment 1 cannot be explained as a
manifestation of increased attentional load due to larger effort. But
this early and stimulus-specific OFC response might nevertheless be
seen as related to attentional allocation. It has been suggested (52)
that top-down attention signals enhance perceptual processing in
the sensory cortex. This proposal can be fine-tuned by the model
tested here, in conjunction with the data we report, by demonstrating that (i) the top-down signal depends on the particular physical
properties of the target image, and (ii) the feedback signal to the
visual cortex is specific in that it sensitizes only the representation
of the most likely interpretations of the input rather than generally
elevating visual sensitivity. This idea is supported by recent studies
reporting the involvement of the magnocellular pathway in attention (53, 54).
The other key prediction, that the cortical site where such
top-down facilitation originates would be sensitive to spatial frequencies in the input image, was supported by the second study we
report here. In a related electrophysiological study in monkeys (55),
it was shown that prefrontal representations carry information
about properties of object categories, without emphasizing information about the appearance of individual objects. IT activity, on
Phase-locking analysis, implying that cortical interactions between the occipital visual areas and the OFC and, relatively later, between the OFC and the
fusiform gyrus require LSF. (A) Phase-locking between the occipital visual areas and the OFC. No signiﬁcant occipital–OFC phase-locking was found for HSF
images. (B) OFC–fusiform phase-locking peaked from 80 to 190 ms from stimulus onset for intact and LSF images, 50 ms later than occipital–OFC phase-locking.
No signiﬁcant OFC–fusiform phase-locking was found for HSF images.
Bar et al.
January 10, 2006 
vol. 103 
NEUROSCIENCE
the other hand, emphasized features of individual objects with less
information about categorical membership. These findings are in
agreement with our proposal that prefrontal representations are
coarser because they rely on LSF and do not include fine detail. In
other words, a low-level visual property, such as LSF, might provide
the foundation for a high-level cognitive faculty, such as categorization. Indeed, event-related potentials studies (56, 57) have repeatedly shown that humans can distinguish between the category
of objects in scenes extremely rapidly, which we argue can be
mediated by coarse LSF representations, and that this distinction is
first apparent in prefrontal cortex time courses 150 ms from
stimulus onset. That such prefrontal representations subsequently
guide the activation of IT representations is supported by fMRI
studies in human patients (9, 58) and electrophysiology recordings
in monkeys (10).
In conclusion, we were able to demonstrate that differential
activation unique to successful recognition attempts develops and
peaks in the OFC significantly earlier than it does in regions in the
temporal cortex previously implicated in mediating object recognition and that this early activity is driven by LSF in the image.
These results provide critical support for the proposed model and
demonstrate that the prefrontal cortex plays a more active role in
object recognition than previously considered.
A detailed description of the methods is provided in Supporting
Methods, which is published as supporting information on the
PNAS web site.
Experiment 1. Subjects. Nine healthy volunteers participated in the
experiment.
Stimuli. The stimuli were line drawings depicting objects such as
tools, furniture, clothes, means of transportation, and animals (see
Fig. 8, which is published as supporting information on the PNAS
web site).
Experimental design. Stimuli were presented between one and six
times. The experimental trials consisted of 420 masked presentations of 154 different objects, and 84 nonmasked presentations of
84 of these objects. Subjects were required to recognize each of the
objects and indicate their level of knowledge about the identity of
the object. Each stimulus was presented for 63 ms. The first mask,
preceding the object presentation, was presented for 27 ms, and the
second mask was presented for 108 ms.
All times are reported with respect to the onset of the stimulus
not the onset of the first mask. A sixth, nonmasked presentation was
displayed for 198 ms (the total sum duration of a picture and two
masks in the other conditions).
Experiment 2A (MEG). Subjects. Nine subjects participated in the
experiment.
Stimuli. The images were grayscale photographs of common, everyday objects without background. See Supporting Methods for exact
details about the spatial filtering used.
Experimental design. This experiment was designed to reveal possibly different functional processing routes for the LSF and HSF
contents of visual objects. Each subject saw each object only
once, in one of its three possible conditions (i.e., LSF, HSF, or
intact), and the sequence of presentation was pseudorandomized
across subjects. All images were presented for 750 ms. Subjects
were asked to indicate by key press, irrespective of the spatial
frequency content, whether the image they saw represented a
normal everyday object or an abstract sculpture.
Experiment 2B (fMRI). Subjects. Twelve subjects participated in the
experiment. Four of the 12 participants were excluded from the
analysis because of an exceptionally low number of ‘‘recognized’’
responses.
Stimuli and design. Stimuli and design were the same as in
experiment 2A.
Data acquisition. All MRI scans were acquired on a 3T Siemens Trio
whole-body scanner, using gradient-echo echo-planar pulse sequences for the functional and a standard magnetization-prepared
rapid-gradient echo for the high-resolution anatomical scans.
We thank S. Ullman, S. Thorpe, M. Tarr, and A. Shmuel for invaluable
discussions; R. Hari, T. Tanskanen, M. Fenske, N. Gronau, and K.
Kveraga for helpful comments on the manuscript; and V. Carr, M.
Glessner, F. H. Lin, S. Stufflebeam, D. Post, and C. Rebel for technical
assistance. This work was supported by McDonnell Foundation Grant
99-6 CNS-QUA.05 (to M.B.), National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke Grants NS50615 and NS44319 (to M.B.), the Mental
Illness and Neuroscience Discovery (M.I.N.D.) Institute, National Institutes of Health (NIH) Grant NS18741 (to E.H.), and NIH National
Center for Research Resources Grant 5P41RR014075.
1. Kosslyn, S. M. Image and Brain (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA).
2. Ullman, S. Cereb. Cortex 1, 1–11.
3. Grossberg, S. Psychol. Rev. 87, 1–51.
4. Bullier, J. Brain Res. Rev. 36, 96–107.
5. Engel, A. K., Fries, P. & Singer, W. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2, 704–716.
6. Lamme, V. A. & Roelfsema, P. R. Trends Neurosci. 23, 571–579.
7. Miyashita, Y. & Hayashi, T. Cur. Opin. Neurobiol. 10, 187–194.
8. Ranganath, C., Cohen, M. X., Dam, C. & D’Esposito, M. J. Neurosci. 24, 3917–3925.
9. Barcelo´, F., Suwazono, S. & Knight, R. T. Nat. Neurosci. 3, 399–403.
10. Tomita, H., Ohbayashi, M., Nakahara, K., Hasegawa, I. & Miyashita, Y. Nature
401, 699–703.
11. Bar, M. J. Cognit. Neurosci. 15, 600–609.
12. Tanaka, K. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 19, 109–139.
13. Logothetis, N. K. & Sheinberg, D. L. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 19, 577–621.
14. Bar, M., Tootell, R., Schacter, D., Greve, D., Fischl, B., Mendola, J., Rosen, B. & Dale,
A. Neuron 29, 529–535.
15. Grill-Spector, K., Kourtzi, Z. & Kanwisher, N. Vision Res. 41, 1409–1422.
16. Martin, A., Wiggs, C. L., Ungerleider, L. G. & Haxby, J. V. Nature 379, 649–652.
17. Malach, R., Levy, I. & Hasson, U. Trends Cognit. Sci. 6, 176–184.
18. Gabrieli, J. D., Poldrack, R. A. & Desmond, J. E. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95,
19. Petersen, S. E., Fox, P. T., Posner, M. I., Mintun, M. A. & Raichle, M. E. J. Cognit.
Neurosci. 1, 153–170.
20. Smith, E. E., Jonides, J., Koeppe, R. A., Awh, E., Schumacher, E. H. & Minoshima, S.
 J. Cognit. Neurosci. 7, 337–356.
21. Thorpe, S. J., Rolls, E. T. & Maddison, S. Exp. Brain Res. 49, 93–115.
22. Bar, M., Biederman, I. Psychol. Sci. 9, 464–469.
23. Mima, T., Oluwatimilehin, T., Hiraoka, T. & Hallett, M. J. Neurosci. 21, 3942–3948.
24. Vanni, S., Revonsuo, A., Saarinen, J. & Hari, R. NeuroReport 8, 183–186.
25. Wilenius-Emet, M., Revonsuo, A. & Ojanen, V. Neurosci. Lett. 354, 38–41.
26. Merigan, W. H. & Maunsell, J. H. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 16, 369–402.
27. Bullier, J. & Nowak, L. G. Cur. Opin. Neurobiol. 5, 497–503.
28. Shapley, R. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 41, 635–658.
29. Oenguer, D. & Price, J. L. Cerebr. Cortex 10, 206–219.
30. Rempel-Clower, N. L. & Barbas, H. Cerebr. Cortex 10, 851–865.
31. DeValois, R. L. & DeValois, K. K. Spatial Vision (Oxford Science Publications,
New York).
32. Hughes, H. C., Nozawa, G. & Kitterle, F. J. Cognit. Neurosci. 8, 197–230.
33. Navon, D. Cognit. Psychol. 9, 1–32.
34. Fiser, J., Subramaniam, S. & Biederman, I. Vision Res. 41, 1931–1950.
35. Iidaka, T., Yamashita, K., Kashikura, K. and Yonekura, Y. Brain Res. Cognit. Brain
Res. 18, 196–204.
36. Gusnard, D. A. & Raichle, M. E. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2, 685–694.
37. Rao, R. P. & Ballard, D. H. Nat. Neurosci. 2, 79–87.
38. Ahissar, M. & Hochstein, S. Trends Cognit. Sci. 8, 457–464.
39. Barbas, H. Brain Res. Bull. 52, 319–330.
40. Bechara, A., Tranel, D. & Damasio, H. Brain 123, 2189–2202.
41. Voytko, M. L. Physiol. Psychol. 13, 219–229.
42. Xiang, J. Z. & Brown, M. W. Neuron 42, 817–829.
43. Meunier, M., Bachevalier, J. & Mishkin, M. Neuropsychologia 35, 999–1015.
44. Petrides, M., Alivisatos, B. & Frey, S. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99, 5649–5654.
45. Rolls, E. T., Browning, A. S., Inoue, K. & Hernadi, I. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 84,
46. Cavada, C., Company, T., Tejedor, J., Cruz-Rizzolo, R. J. & Reinoso-Suarez, F. 
Cerebr. Cortex 10, 220–242.
47. Frith, C. & Dolan, R. J. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London B 352, 1221–1230.
48. Elliott, R., Dolan, R. J. & Frith, C. D. Cerebr. Cortex 10, 308–317.
49. Carretie, L., Hinojosa, J. A., Mercado, F. & Tapia, M. NeuroImage 24, 615–623.
50. Ghashghaei, H. & Barbas, H. Neuroscience 115, 1261–1279.
51. Bar, M. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 5, 617–629.
52. Desimone, R. & Duncan, J. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 18, 193–222.
53. Cheng, A., Eysel, U. T. & Vidyasagar, T. R. Eur. J. Neurosci. 20, 2188–2192.
54. Omtzigt, D. & Hendriks, A. W. Vision Res. 44, 1927–1940.
55. Freedman, D. J., Riesenhuber, M., Poggio, T. & Miller, E. K. J. Neurosci. 23, 5235–5246.
56. Thorpe, S., Fize, D. & Marlot, C. Nature 381, 520–522.
57. VanRullen, R. & Thorpe, S. J. J. Cognit. Neurosci. 13, 454–461.
58. Yago, E., Duarte, A., Wong, T., Barcelo, F. & Knight, R. T. Cognit. Affect Behav.
Neurosci. 4, 609–617.
www.pnas.orgcgidoi10.1073pnas.0507062103
Bar et al.