HAL Id: hal-03553009
 
Submitted on 2 Feb 2022
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of scientific research documents, whether they are published or not.
The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
CORAL: Using Natural Language Generation for
Navigational Assistance
Robert Dale, Sabine Geldof, Jean-Philippe Prost
To cite this version:
Robert Dale, Sabine Geldof, Jean-Philippe Prost. CORAL: Using Natural Language Generation for
Navigational Assistance. Twenty-Sixth Australasian Computer Science Conference (ACSC2003), 2003,
Melbourne, Australia. pp.35–44. ￿hal-03553009￿
CORAL: Using Natural Language Generation for Navigational
Assistance
Robert Dale
Sabine Geldof
Jean-Philippe Prost
Center for Language Technology
Macquarie University
Sydney, Australia
Email: {rdale|sabine|jpprost}@ics.mq.edu.au
In this paper we tackle the problem of generating natural route
descriptions on the basis of input obtained from a commercially
available way-ﬁnding system.
Our framework and architecture incorporates the use of generic natural language generation techniques. Through examples we demonstrate that it is
possible to bridge the gap between underlying representation
and natural sounding descriptions. The work presented contributes both to the area of natural language generation and
to the improvement of way-ﬁnding system interfaces.
Keywords: Natural language generation, way-ﬁnding
systems, micro-planning
Introduction
Natural language generation (NLG) is concerned
with the production of natural language output,
whether written or spoken, from some underlying
non-linguistic data source. The technology has been
used in a wide variety of systems and contexts; see
 for an overview. In this paper,
we describe our current work in using NLG to provide ﬂuent and natural navigational assistance in the
context of driving directions.
There are now many web-based services which offer the automatic generation of driving directions.
MapBlast, MapPoint and MapQuest are three major US providers of this functionality; in Australia,
WhereIs provides the same kind of information.1 Although there are interesting diﬀerences of detail in
the user interfaces provided by each, all these systems
are similar in concept and content: the user speciﬁes
a start address and a target address, and the system
plans a route between these two points, possibly taking into account speciﬁc constraints such as a desire
to use freeways or to avoid toll bridges. The output of
each of these systems is in the form of ‘turn by turn’
instructions; an example from WhereIs is shown in
There may be some advantage to displaying this
kind of information in a tabulated form like this: for
example, the consistent row-by-row format may make
it easier to quickly determine what is involved in the
Nonetheless, when compared to a humanauthored description for the same route, as in Figure 2, several diﬀerences become apparent:2
Copyright c⃝2003, Australian Computer Society, Inc. This paper appeared at the Twenty-sixth Australasian Computer Science Conference (ACSC2003), Adelaide, South Australia. Conferences in Research and Practice in Information Technology,
Vol. 16 Michael Oudshoorn, Ed. Reproduction for academic,
not-for proﬁt purposes permitted provided this text is included.
1See www.mapblast.com, www.mappoint.com, www.mapquest.com and
www.whereis.com.au respectively.
2All our human-authored examples are drawn from a corpus of real route descriptions, described later.
Our examples
• Humans often omit steps that the automated systems include, typically because they are deemed
unimportant or obvious; the automated system
is not capable of making these assessments.
• Humans typically use landmarks and visible features of the environment to identify turning
points, whereas the automated systems generally describe these points by distances or times
of travel from previous decision points.
• Humans typically produce complex clause structures, gathering together related information into
single sentences, whereas the automated systems
produce what are in eﬀect one-sentence-per-step
In this paper, we explore how natural language generation techniques can be exploited to imbue automatically generated route descriptions with some of these
properties.
Of course, there is no prima facie reason why we
should want an automated system to emulate what
people do.
There is no guarantee that a humanproduced description is necessarily a good one, and
it is clearly possible that the tabulated form of instructions that is common to existing applications is
actually an improvement on what people do. There is
some evidence, however, that route descriptions closer
to those produced by humans are preferable: work
on the graphical display of routes, for example by
Agrawala and Stolte , has suggested that users
prefer modes of delivery which do not give equal status to all parts of the route description, and experiments have demonstrated that describing points by
means of salient features of the environment results in
route descriptions that are much easier to follow than
those couched in terms of distances and travel times,
which humans ﬁnd diﬃcult to estimate and keep track
of .
Our current work is concerned with the development of a route description system that uses the same
underlying Geographical Information Systems (GIS)
datasets as the commercially available web-based systems, but which incorporates techniques from natural
language generation (NLG) research to produce more
natural-sounding descriptions. In this paper, we focus
on three aspects of our generation process:
• the use of discourse structure to facilitate understanding of the structure of a route;
• the use of aggregation techniques to combine information into ﬂuent and coherent multiclausal
sentences; and
of publicly available, web-delivered directions are obtained from
www.whereis.com.au.
&OLFN RQ LQVWUXFWLRQ LFRQ IRU GHWDLOHG PDS
Figure 1: An automatically generated route description
Leave the house and drive towards the Midway
shops, at the end of the street turn right and then
left at the roundabout. Drive along North road and
take the third right turn, just after the ﬁrst hump
in the road. Go to the end of that road and then go
straight ahead at the roundabout, there’s a church
on your left.
Now go straight along Herring road
for quite a way until you hit the main road (Epping
Rd), go straight across at the lights and continue on
until you get to the next set of lights. Turn right
here into the university.
Figure 2: A human generated route description for
the route in Figure 1
• the use of referring expression generation techniques to produce user-oriented descriptions of
key elements in routes.
The techniques we use are an attempt to balance generalisability and domain dependence, in order to provide a practical solution.
The remainder of this paper is as follows. Section 2
sketches some background to the work described here.
Section 3 describes the architecture of our system and
outlines the approach we take to the problem in general; and Section 4 explores our use of discourse structuring and NLG techniques for referring expression
generation and aggregation, along with example outputs that demonstrate the current capabilities of our
system. Section 5 provides some brief comments on
evaluation, and Section 6 draws some conclusions and
points to ways forward.
Background
There already exists a considerable body of work in
the generation of route descriptions. Pattabhiraman
and Cercone pointed to the importance of
salience and relevance in content selection, the ﬁrst
sub-process in NLG. The domain of route descriptions illustrates their point clearly because of the inherent coupling of domain and linguistic knowledge.
The notion of salience is further speciﬁed as a gradual value by Lapalme et al ; their system produces variants of subway route directions by mapping the relative importance of information entities
onto syntactico-semantic features.
While these approaches are all concerned with establishing a link
between GIS knowledge on the one hand and linguistic realization principles on the other, Moulin and
Kettani take a radically diﬀerent approach.
They advocate the encoding of geographical information centred around those elements that are believed
to be crucial in the description of routes, thus conceiving the generation task as a straightforward mapping from the underlying data. Like Lapalme and his
colleagues, H¨o¨ok also aimed at generating different route descriptions for one particular route, but
from a human-computer interaction (HCI) perspective; her focus was the matching of observed diﬀerences in navigation style. Finally, the route descriptions generated by Maaß and colleagues are based on the integration of cognitive
and perceptual information processing.
From our perspective, this earlier work suﬀers from
two drawbacks.
• For the most part, earlier systems have not made
use of real GIS data, but have relied on handcrafted knowledge sources to support the generation process. While this strategy allows exploration of desirable outputs in a way that might
inform subsequent GIS data development exercises, it does not provide a solution to the limitations of existing GIS-based systems.
• The techniques used in these systems have
tended to be somewhat ad hoc, in that they have
not attempted to capitalise on more general techniques and approaches developed in the ﬁeld of
Our own system, Coral, has evolved over the last few
years through a range of quite diﬀerent instantiations.
Our earlier work addressed the provision of route descriptions within a University department , providing multi-modal (text, graphics and speech) descriptions via the web; more recently, we have explored how higher-level segmentation of a route description may contribute to its ease
of use, especially when delivered via a mobile device
 .
Our current work represents an attempt to address both of the problems identiﬁed above. We use
as input precisely the same GIS data that is available to existing commercial web-based systems; and
at the same time, we attempt to apply more general principles of natural language generation ) to the production of the resulting output texts. To support this
work, we have carried out an analysis of several specially collected corpora of human-produced route descriptions. Our corpora diﬀer with respect to mode
of navigation, means of communication, and type of
environment: our ﬁrst corpus consists of 49 spoken
route descriptions (7 subjects × 7 routes) within our
university department; another corpus consists of 30
written route descriptions (10 subjects × 3 routes)
within the university campus. Of particular relevance
to the work described here, we also collected a corpus of 20 written directions within the urban road
network: 9 subjects were asked to describe the route
from their homes to the university to a visitor and to
a neighbour, as well as a route from the university to
a ﬁxed, known destination. Whereas the architecture
of our system is applicable to the domains explored
in each of these corpora, the strategies described in
this paper are based on the last corpus; given the
variety of parameters that inﬂuence the formulation
of route descriptions, it was important to reduce our
scope to a single mode of transportation and environment type. The familiarity with the environment
and the ﬁxed destinations in this corpus allowed us
to constrain and control the variations in expression
used by our subjects. Our approach to corpus analysis and its application to other corpora are the subject
of another publication (in preparation).
The Coral Architecture
The Input Representation
The GIS datasets used in existing systems represent
the world in terms of nodes (points in space), arcs
(directed links that connect two nodes), and polygons (sequences of arcs that form bounded spaces).
Nodes typically represent junctions or decision points
in a road network; arcs are the travelable paths between points in that network; and polygons are used
to represent areas such as parks or railway stations.
A GIS system typically also provides, in additional
data sources, information about these entities: street
name, length of the path, category of point of interest,
and so on. It will be the task of the natural language
generation system to include the information deemed
useful in a description of a particular route.
The construction of a route plan thus consists in
determining a path between two speciﬁed nodes; the
result of route planning is a sequence of arcs that form
a path between these nodes. A number of constraints
may be taken into account in planning this path:
for example, some systems oﬀer the user a choice of
the fastest or the shortest route (not necessarily the
same), or of routes that avoid toll bridges. Local constraints such as whether a segment of road is one-way
must also, of course, be taken into account.
Before such a plan can be used to produce an output description, it typically undergoes a process of
arc aggregation. This is our term for the process
of merging together those contiguous arcs that are
all part of the same road: since an arc joins two junctions, the path between each two intersections along a
road constitutes a separate arc, and so an instruction
like Follow Epping Road for 10km may in fact correspond to several arcs in the underlying representation.
Arc aggregation thus turns a raw arc-based plan into
what we call a path-based plan. From here, it is a
fairly simple process to map the route into a sequence
of turn-by-turn instructions as in Figure 1. Our interest, however, is in further manipulating the data
to produce more ﬂuent and natural output.
Levels of Representation
In line with current thinking in NLG research, we
view the generation process as consisting of three distinct stages: text planning, micro-planning, and
linguistic realisation.
For our current purposes,
text planning consists in taking a path-based route
plan, and deriving from this a set of messages that
are to be conveyed to the user. These can be thought
of as the separate chunks of meaning that have to
be conveyed.
The micro-planning stage then uses
these messages to build a sequence of sentence plans
that determine the content to be realised in each sentence; this may involve combining clauses to build
complex sentences, and also working out what information should be used to describe locations that are
mentioned. Finally, the realisation stage maps these
sentence plans, which are still in the form of semantic
speciﬁcations, into the appropriate lexico-syntactic
material of the target natural language. This architecture is shown in Figure 3.
A message is, eﬀectively, a piece of semantic content that can be realised linguistically. As argued in
Reiter and Dale ,
the appropriate inventory of message types and their
optimal granularity depends on speciﬁc characteristics of the application: the general idea is to view
messages as data objects corresponding to the largest
distinct linguistic fragments we need in order to generate the variety of texts we are interested in. Our
analysis of human-produced route descriptions leads
Path-based Route Plan
Message Sequence
Sentence Plans
Surface Realiser
Microplanner
Text Planner
Figure 3: Coral’s architecture
us to favour a message level that distinguishes three
message types that may be combined in a variety of
Points: Although descriptions of points rarely appear in the route descriptions produced by commercial systems, they are common in humanproduced descriptions, where they often serve as
a means of checking the user’s position. These
can either appear as parts of instructions, or in
separate sentences whose sole function is to state
Follow the road until the traﬃc lights
next to ‘The Ranch’ restaurant.
Take a right turn, just after the Macquarie Center.
Turn right at the ﬁrst roundabout.
There’s a church on your left.
You’ll go over two bridges.
Directions: These correspond to turns that are
made at decision points in a route plan.
Paths: These correspond to continuous movements
along parts of the road network.
In these terms, the instructions in commercial systems typically consist of a combination of a path
message and a direction message; as noted, point
messages typically do not occur at all.
Given a path-based route plan as introduced in
the previous section, we build from this a text plan
that consists of an alternating sequence of point, direction and path messages, terminating in a point
message that corresponds to the target location. Each
message contains information that can be used in describing that message; Figure 4 shows the content of
typical point and path messages. A point message
includes a list of the identiﬁers of points of interest
(POIs) that are associated with that point and which
can therefore be used in describing the point; a path
type: point
nodeID: n21330
pointtype: start
address: ‘Herring Road’
poi-list: [n18921]
type: path
hunit: meter
count: 800
hname: ‘George Street’
elements: [a30,n18978,a26,n19002,a21]
Figure 4: Example point and path messages
message contains its level in the road status hierarchy
(here, 3 means that this is a main road), the distance
to be travelled along this path, and the constituent
arcs and nodes that make up the path (these are the
elements combined in arc aggregation).
This text plan then serves as the input to our
micro-planning process, which is faced with two tasks:
• It must decide how to cluster together the
points, directions and paths into clause-sized
units; and
• it must decide how to refer to each of these elements.
The ﬁrst of these is a linguistic aggregation task
 , while the second is an application
of referring expression generation . We describe our approach to each of
these tasks in Sections 4.4 and 4.5 below, but ﬁrst
turn to the higher-level generation task concerned
with determining the structure of the route description and its correlation to ease of task execution.
Applying NLG Techniques
Discourse Structure
H¨oppner formulated requirements for route descriptions in general: a route description needs to
be both recognizable and rememberable. Our view is
that these cognitive requirements can be addressed to
some extent by introducing segmentation and structuring into the ﬂat sequences of instructions provided
by existing systems. Given a ﬂat sequence of instructions of the kind delivered by a typical navigational
assistance system, our approach is to segment this
sequence of instructions in a meaningful way, and
to generate a summary for each resulting segment.
This hierarchical approach reduces the cognitive load
on the user and enhances the rememberability of the
route description.
Our solution is based on two elements. First, the
route to be described needs to be segmented and summarized in a meaningful way. In an ideal world this
might correspond to the top-down structure developed in a hierarchical planner; however, existing systems do not make use of or provide such structures,
and so we have explored the use of bottom-up heuristics for the identiﬁcation of appropriate segmentations.
Then, we need techniques that support ﬂexible
interaction with the segmented route in conjunction
with task execution. For example, we exploit the hierarchical structure resulting from segmentation to
present route descriptions on a small device (in particular, a Palm hand-held computer). This presentation mode allows step-by-step exploration of the description as the user performs the navigation task (see
Figure 6).
Subsections 4.2 and 4.3 further explain each of
these elements.
Segmentation
As noted above, existing route planning systems provide ﬂat sequences of instructions, consisting of alternating paths and turns, rather than hierarchical
structures.
The process of segmentation therefore
consists in grouping these path and turn instructions into higher level entities that we call segments.
The notion of segmentation we are working with here
bears some relation to the notion of a discourse segment as discussed by Grosz and Sidner : elements that are more related are seen as aggregating
together to form segments within a larger structure,
and in theory this analysis applies recursively to produce a hierarchy.3
The concept of hierarchy in way-ﬁnding is not, of
course, new. The process of human spatial knowledge
acquisition is often assumed to result in a hierarchical
structure, referred to as the cognitive map by Kuipers
 ; and Pailhous’s observation of way-ﬁnding behaviour by experts (i.e.
taxi drivers in Paris) con-
ﬁrmed the hypothesis of the existence of a hierarchical strategy, where ﬁrst a route between regions is
constructed at a higher level before being reﬁned into
concrete path components .
As so far described, segmentation can be viewed
as a way of coherently organising and structuring information. However, it can also be seen as addressing
a key question in the provision of information in dialogic contexts: how do we convey information in installments so that the course of information exchange
approximates the way humans interact? The segmentation of information in human dialogue responds to
the need to decrease the cognitive eﬀort required from
the interlocutor .
Of course, only a subset of all (mathematically)
possible segmentations of a stream of information is
meaningful. Thus a key task is to determine which
segmentations are valuable.
We have explored two
alternative strategies: one determines optimal break
points in the sequence of paths that make up the
route, and the other aggregates several paths into a
higher level structure on the basis of properties of
the constituent elements. These strategies have been
applied to the output of existing route description
Landmark-based segmentation
Our ﬁrst strategy relies on the experimentally veriﬁed idea that landmarks at decision points constitute useful cognitive entities that improve the eﬀectiveness of route descriptions . Although what constitutes a landmark remains vague
and ill-deﬁned, attempts have been made to distinguish diﬀerent categories of landmarks. Sorrows and
Hirtle , for example, identify visual landmarks
(objects such as churches and towers which are clearly
distinguishable from their environment by virtue of
salient visual features), cognitive landmarks (for example, the desk of a receptionist, which may be significant because it has a particular function for a user),
and structural landmarks (entities such as Trafalgar
3In practice, we have so far only found need for one level of
hierarchy in our structures.
Figure 5: Example of a segmented route presentation via the Web
Figure 6: Example of a segmented route presentation via the Palm
Square in London, which assists in structuring a spatial environment). Raubal and Winter developed measures to formally specify the saliency of various features in view of landmark selection. However,
these require the availability of rich datasets.
explored the
hypothesis
saliency of landmarks can be exploited to structure
route descriptions. A landmark at a decision point
delimits a part of the route to be followed, so the
navigator will be aware whether she has reached that
point in the route and will thus know how far she has
progressed in the navigation task at hand.
We have applied this idea to an earlier version of
Coral which provided indoor route descriptions for
our department . The knowledge representation used in that system includes landmarks as
domain objects, and these are included in the intermediate representation from which the textual route
description is generated. The route plan representation consists of a sequence of alternating path and
turn speciﬁcations as shown in the following example, which underlies part of the route presented in
⟨start(r333), via(⟨⟩), end(p333)⟩,
turn(lhs),
⟨start(p2), via(⟨c1, pass(lhs:[4,room]),
pass(rhs:[1,room]), ﬁnal(rhs:lift1)⟩),
end(lift1)⟩
turn(lhs),
⟨start(p362), via(⟨⟩), end(r362)⟩
Our segmentation strategy makes use of a separate
knowledge source that indicates which domain objects
are plausible landmarks; in the present case, the lift is
one such object. Since this appears at a decision point
(just before the ﬁnal left-hand turn in the fragment
above), it is selected as a segment border and included
in the summary for this segment. Consequently, the
route is decomposed into one segment leading to the
lift and a second segment from this landmark to the
destination.
The intuition behind this approach to segmentation is quite straightforward: if the user is familiar
with the environment, she will recognize the landmark
that terminates the segment and realise that she does
not need the detailed instructions for that segment.
It is also easy for the user to keep this landmark in
mind as an intermediary target and to remember that,
once she has reached it, she should revert back to the
instructions.
There are, however, limitations to this strategy, since it depends on the presence of landmarks
at appropriate locations along the route.
blindly, it can lead to segments of signiﬁcantly varying lengths, which can be confusing. Overall, then,
whereas a landmark-based segmentation might be
feasible for route descriptions on a small dataset (such
as an indoor area), where it is relatively easy to determine which objects of the domain constitute landmarks, it becomes more diﬃcult to apply on a larger
scale, and this is particularly the case with currently
available GIS data.
Path-based segmentation
Another approach to segmentation is to investigate
characteristics of the constituent paths of the route
to determine whether they belong to a meaningful
higher-level entity.
Other work (see, for example,
H¨o¨ok (91) has explored the hypothesis that recurring
higher-level patterns can be found in route descriptions. A frequently occurring pattern consists of three
segments corresponding to the beginning, middle and
end of a route; typically these involve, respectively,
getting onto a main thoroughfare or higher-level road,
travelling along that road, and then leaving that road
to reach the destination via a number of lower-level
roads. We refer to this route pattern as ‘BME’. For
• How do I get from Macquarie University to the
Queen Victoria Building, in the City?
• [Well, ﬁrst you get onto Epping Road B], [then
you continue ahead via the freeway, following
signs to the City M]. [Exit at Druit Street, then
the QVB is not far from there E].
Given a ﬂat sequence of paths and turns, we need
to determine how these constituents are allocated to
segments within such a structure.
Our analysis of
a small corpus of human-generated routes led us to
formulate the hypothesis that three features of paths
and turns play a role in this segmentation:
Road status hierarchy: Routes often involve travelling on roads of diﬀerent status within the road
network, from freeways down through main roads
to side roads. Our analysis demonstrated that a
series of consecutive paths of the same or similar
road status is likely to be perceived as constituting a higher-level entity.
Path length: For some routes, segmentation on the
basis of road status alone can result in a large
number of segments.
In such cases, the total
length of a segment can help to decide which one
of the segments is the stable middle segment.
Turn typology: A turn that is very salient (for example, a T-junction) or that requires careful navigation (for example, a right turn in a drive-onthe-left road context) is a likely segment border
candidate.
These principles are very prominent in the prototypical BME route, as demonstrated in the example
above: the middle segment consists of a long stretch
of one or more steps on higher level roads, and the
absence of explicit or diﬃcult turns along this middle
segment reinforces the perception of a stable section
in the route. However, when examining a larger number of routes, it becomes clear that many variants on
this pattern exist, and that these three features interact in a complex manner.
To allow for a systematic exploration of the space,
we implemented a segmentation module that takes as
input a route obtained from a route planning system
available on the web, augmented with road status information derived from a widely used street directory.
We used 23 routes of diﬀerent length and in various
suburbs of Sydney in our initial exploration.4
main criterion for segmentation quality was approximation to the prototypical BME pattern.
We experimented with various combinations of road statusbased and length-based heuristics for segmentation;
our conclusions from this study were that road status is a good indicator for segmentation (in 43% of
the cases); in most other cases (another 34%), segmentation can be improved by augmenting this with
heuristics that combine segments on the basis of path
length. Our intuition is that turn type information
could be used as an additional factor in determining
segmentation borders but further experiments would
be needed to conﬁrm this.
 
for an example.
<route-plan context="Sydney">
<from>BAY RD ARCADIA</from>
<to>UNIVERSITY AV MACQUARIE PARK</to>
<distance>35.0 km</distance>
</summary>
<map url=" 
Routes/Sydney/map302.gif"/>
<segment sid="1">
<string>First go from BAY RD to PACIFIC HWY.
</summary>
<utterance uid="1">
<string>Start at BAY RD.</string>
</utterance>
Figure 7: A fragment of rpml
A Route Planning Markup Language
Our goal is to produce one route description that can
be rendered via a variety of devices; in the ﬁrst instance we have been exploring rendering via both
standard desktop web browsers and via hand-held
computers (speciﬁcally, the Palm), and we are also
extending this to voice delivery via VoiceXML.
To support this variety of outputs,
deﬁned an intermediate, device-independent representation called rpml (for Route Planning Markup
Language).
Two principle features of this representation are that (a) it allows for the annotation
of a route description with segmentation information that can be used for presentation by the
rendering device; and (b) it allows for multi-modal
content, such as links to graphical representations
of the described route and to voice output.
Using this representation, we use XSLT to produce
web pages for pre-trip planning like those found at
 
and the same input is used by a specially written
renderer on the Palm that formats the output for interactive display to support incremental exploration
of the route description while travelling.
shows a fragment of rpml; this demonstrates how
individual instructions can be provided both as
canned output (First go from BAY RD to PACIFIC
HWY) and as more abstracted speciﬁcations (as in
the contents of the top level <summary> element)
which the renderer can decide how to realise.
Aggregation
Aggregation is the process of building sentences which
communicate several pieces of information at once.
Although the messages in our text plan could be realised one-per-sentence, the result would be less than
ﬂuent, as exempliﬁed in Figure 8.
Of course, there are many situations where one
sentence will indeed be used to convey a single message. However, our examination of human-produced
route descriptions has identiﬁed two speciﬁc aggregation strategies that people frequently pursue:
Path+Point: A common strategy is to fold a description of a point into the description of a path, in
order to provide a more eﬀective way of identifying
the end of that path:
Now go straight ahead along Herring Road
for quite a way until you hit the main road
(Epping Road).
Start at Liverpool Street.
Follow Liverpool Street for 86 meters.
You are at George Street.
Turn right.
Follow George Street for 230 meters.
You are at Bathurst Street.
Turn left.
Follow Bathurst Street for 8 meters.
You have arrived at your destination.
Figure 8: One message per sentence
Start at Liverpool Street.
Follow Liverpool Street for 86 meters.
Turn to the right at George Street.
Follow George Street for 230 meters until you reach
Bathurst Street.
Turn left.
Follow Bathurst Street for 8 meters.
You have arrived at your destination.
Start at Liverpool Street.
Follow Liverpool Street for 86 meters until you
reach George Street.
Turn right.
Follow George Street for 230 meters.
Turn to the left at Bathurst Street.
Follow Bathurst Street for 8 meters until you reach
your destination.
Figure 9: Diﬀerent aggregations
Continue on until you get to the next set of
Point+Direction: Very often, a turn direction
is combined with a speciﬁcation of the location where
this instruction is to be executed:
. . . and take the third right turn, just after
the ﬁrst hump in the road.
. . . and then go straight ahead at the roundabout.
. . . at the end of the street turn right.
Note here that the point description can be realized
either before or after the turn or follow instruction; we
view this variation as a choice made in the realisation
stage, so both variants involve the same aggregation
We also ﬁnd sentences that combine all three of
path, point and direction, as in Go to the end of that
street and then go straight ahead at the roundabout.
However, from our perspective this is the result of a
clause combining process that takes eﬀect once aggregation at the message level has been applied: in
eﬀect, aggregation determines the content of major
clauses, which may then be realised as single-clause
sentences, or combined to form conjoined sentences.
Clearly, applying diﬀerent combinations of strategies to the same route plan will result in diﬀerent ways
of describing that plan. Currently, our Prolog implementation uses backtracking to produce all possible
combinations of the applications of these strategies to
a given text plan; Figure 9 shows some of the various
realisations possible for the route shown in Figure 8.
In future work, we aim to explore a scoring regime
that ranks the various renderings.
Referring Expression Generation
Referring expression generation is the process of determining what semantic content should be used in
Start at Liverpool Street.
Follow Liverpool Street for 86 meters until you
reach George Street.
Turn right.
Follow George Street for 230 meters.
After you pass Wilmot Street turn to the left at
Bathurst Street.
Follow Bathurst Street until you reach St. Andrew’s
Cathedral.
Figure 10: Applying referring expressions generation
describing an intended referent; the goal is to distinguish the intended referent from other entities with
which it might be confused. So, for example, describing the location of a turn by referring to an object at
the relevant intersection is only eﬀective if that description does not also apply to other intermediate
intersections on the way: an instruction like Turn left
at the traﬃc lights may be a true description of the
location of a turn, but it is not helpful if there are intermediate intersections that also have traﬃc lights.
In Dale , the task of referring expression
generation is characterised as being driven by three
principles: sensitivity (the speaker must pay heed
to what the hearer can be presumed to know), adequacy (the referring expression should identify the
intended referent unambiguously), and eﬃciency
(the referring expression should not contain more information than is required for the task at hand). Following Dale and Reiter , we take the view that
the best way to meet these requirements is to use a
general purpose algorithm that is fed by a ‘preference
ranking’ of domain properties and relations that can
be used in building referring expressions; properties
and relations from a predetermined list of types are
added to the content of a description until enough information to identify the referent has been collected.
In the context of our current work, a number of
distinct reference strategies are applied by the algorithm in turn. Again, on the basis of a ﬁrst corpus
analysis and the readily available GIS information, we
have identiﬁed the following strategies for referring
to junction points:
1. Use a landmark that is at, or close to, the junction.
2. Use the type of intersection (for example, roundabout, T-junction, or fork).
3. Use the name of the immediately preceding intersection.
4. Use the name of the intersecting street.
Thus, we use whatever information the underlying
dataset makes available, and only fall back on the
‘intersecting street name’ strategy as a last resort.
Examples of the third and the ﬁrst strategy respectively are shown in Figure 10.
A similar range of reference strategies is used to
provide appropriate descriptions of paths:
1. Mention street name and any landmarks that are
passed on the path.
2. Mention street name and the distance to be travelled along the path.
The eﬀectiveness of these strategies is determined by
the richness of the underlying data set. For example,
in the data we are currently using, there are no details
of whether junctions have traﬃc lights, so a type of
landmark that is commonly used by humans is not
&OLFN RQ LQVWUXFWLRQ LFRQ IRU GHWDLOHG PDS
Start at Parbury Lane.
Follow Parbury Lane until you reach the end.
Take a right.
Follow Lower Fort Street for 30 meters.
Turn to the left at George Street.
Follow George Street until you reach your destination.
Figure 11: Route descriptions generated by Whereis
and Coral compared
available to us. However there are a suﬃcient number
of other kinds of landmarks encoded in the data to be
able to provide useful descriptions.
An Example
Combined with the aggregation strategies described
in the previous section, the application of these techniques allows us to generate route descriptions which
are considerably more ﬂuent than those in commercial systems. Figure 11 shows a route description provided by WhereIs, and the same route described by
our system, making use of the aggregation and referring expression strategies described above.
Evaluation
Performing a rigorous and comprehensive evaluation
of technology of this kind is an extrememly costly enterprise. Following the recommendations of Ross and
Burnett for the evaluation of navigational systems, we have performed a small-scale expert evaluation in a task-based context, described in more detail
in Geldof and Dale . The aim of the experiment was to obtain feedback on the use of segmented
route descriptions and their incremental presentation
on a mobile device. The experiment was well-deﬁned
and carefully designed to minimize the many factors
which inﬂuence the performance of a navigation task.
Three teams, each consisting of a navigator and a
driver, were asked to drive 2 routes each, one using a
segmented and one using a non-segmented route description delivered via a Palm hand-held computer.
An observer accompanied each team and feedback
was collected via a form to be ﬁlled out during and
just after the navigation task. A striking diﬀerence
in navigation style was observed, between a navigator who relied heavily on distance information provided in the descriptions, and the two others used
more general orientation and higher level information
such as that provided through the summary of segments. While no noticeable problems occurred with
respect to task performance, the ﬁrst navigator expressed a preference for the non segmented presentation mode, whereas the other navigators indicated
that they found the segmented presentation on the
mobile devices more useful. Thus, although a larger
scale experiment would need to be set up to further
conﬁrm this result, this pilot evaluation is indicative
of the utility of this aspect of our approach.
The observed diﬀerences in navigation style point
to one important aspect which has an impact on any
evaluation task in this domain, while at the same time
highlighting the potential beneﬁt of natural language
generation technology for tuning route descriptions
to personal preferences. On the one hand, individual judgements of the quality of route descriptions
will to a high extent depend on personal preferences.
This increases the complexity of an evaluation set-up
(as one needs to ensure that the results are not biased towards a particular subject—note that there is
no clearly speciﬁed gold standard), but also creates
a situation in which no objective measure is available. On the other hand, once elicited, the principles
underlying these preferences may be embedded in a
generation system that outputs route directions better adapted to individual needs.
Conclusions
In this paper, we have presented a framework and architecture for generating route descriptions that approximate the naturalness of human generated route
descriptions. Unlike other attempts towards this goal,
our approach allows us to take as input GIS data
like that currently used by commercial systems, and
uses generic natural language generation techniques
in constructing the resulting textual output.
Our ﬁndings so far consist in a better understanding of the multiple aspects giving rise to variation in
human route descriptions.
We have unravelled the
basic description components of route directions and
identiﬁed the mechanisms that impact on their combination and reﬁnement towards full-ﬂedged semantic input structures. Further experimentation within
this framework will allow us to focus on the interaction between the techniques we use for aggregation
and referring expression generation: some route descriptions we produce can contain redundant information because these two processes work in a pipeline.
Insights about this interaction should lead towards
more general heuristics at the level of micro-planning
in natural language generation.
A principled approach to route directions generation may also be valuable to two important issues in
the domain of route guidance: customization to different navigation styles and inclusion of landmarks.
The former consists in applying diﬀerent strategies
for generating referring expressions. The latter also
relates to this topic, since the very notion of a landmark and the conditions that govern the choice of one
over another can be viewed in terms of generating a
referring expression for a decision point or path.