Converging Intracranial Markers
of Conscious Access
Raphae¨l Gaillard1,2,3, Stanislas Dehaene1,4,5, Claude Adam6, Ste´phane Cle´menceau6, Dominique Hasboun6,7,
Michel Baulac6,7, Laurent Cohen1,6,7, Lionel Naccache1,6,7*
1 INSERM, Cognitive Neuro-imaging Unit, Institut Fe´de´ratif de Recherche (IFR) 49, Gif sur Yvette, France, 2 Centre Hospitalier Sainte Anne, Service Hospitalo-Universitaire de
Sante´ Mentale et de The´rapeutique, Paris, France, 3 Universite´ Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 4 CEA, I2BM, NeuroSpin center, Gif sur Yvette, France, 5 Colle`ge de France, Paris,
France, 6 Assistance Publique Hoˆpitaux de Paris, Hoˆpital de la Pitie´-Salpeˆtrie`re, Poˆle des Maladies du Syste`me Nerveux, Paris, France, 7 Universite´ Pierre et Marie Curie Paris 6,
De´partement de Physiologie, Paris, France
We compared conscious and nonconscious processing of briefly flashed words using a visual masking procedure while
recording intracranial electroencephalogram (iEEG) in ten patients. Nonconscious processing of masked words was
observed in multiple cortical areas, mostly within an early time window (,300 ms), accompanied by induced gammaband activity, but without coherent long-distance neural activity, suggesting a quickly dissipating feedforward wave.
In contrast, conscious processing of unmasked words was characterized by the convergence of four distinct
neurophysiological markers: sustained voltage changes, particularly in prefrontal cortex, large increases in spectral
power in the gamma band, increases in long-distance phase synchrony in the beta range, and increases in long-range
Granger causality. We argue that all of those measures provide distinct windows into the same distributed state of
conscious processing. These results have a direct impact on current theoretical discussions concerning the neural
correlates of conscious access.
Citation: Gaillard R, Dehaene S, Adam C, Cle´menceau S, Hasboun D, et al. Converging intracranial markers of conscious access. PLoS Biol 7(3): e1000061. doi:10.1371/
journal.pbio.1000061
Introduction
The neural correlates of consciousness (NCC) still remain
highly controversial. Indeed, the precise timing, location, and
dynamics of neural events causing conscious access are not
clearly and unequivocally determined. Do the NCC correspond to late or early brain events ? Are they
systematically associated with reentrant ‘‘top down’’ processing ? If so, do they necessarily involve long-range
coherent activity , including prefrontal cortex as an
essential node , or can they be restricted to local
patterns of reverberating activity ? Is the
concept of ‘‘integrated information’’ relevant, rather than the
speciﬁc localization of the underlying cerebral network ?
In addition to such fundamental questions, an important
methodological issue also remains open. Neural data relevant
to conscious access originate from a diversity of techniques
including hemodynamic blood oxygen level dependent
(BOLD) functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) or
positron emission tomography (PET) responses and electrophysiological measures using scalp and intracranial eventrelated potentials (iERPs), event-related spectral perturbations (ERSPs), and phase synchrony parameters. How are
these distinct measures of conscious access related to each
other? Do they reﬂect common facets of the same underlying
phenomenon?
In this work, we address some of these issues using
intracerebral electrophysiological recordings of neural activity in a group of implanted epileptic patients presented with
visually masked and unmasked printed words. This method
offers a unique opportunity to measure neural correlates of
conscious access with both millisecond time resolution and
centimetric spatial resolution. Its high signal-to-noise ratio
allowed us to compute several neurophysiological measures
from the intracerebral signal in order to unravel the relations
prevailing between iERPs, ERSPs, interelectrode phase synchrony, and a recently proposed estimate of causality
(Granger causality).
The Global Workspace Model of Consciousness
We adopted a theory-driven approach, trying to test
experimentally a set of explicit predictions derived from
the global workspace model of conscious access. This model,
in part inspired from Bernard Baars’ theory , proposes
that at any given time, many modular cerebral networks are
active in parallel and process information in an unconscious
manner . Incoming visual information becomes
conscious, however, if and only if the three following
conditions are met : Condition 1: information must be
explicitly represented by the neuronal ﬁring of perceptual
networks located in visual cortical areas coding for the
speciﬁc features of the conscious percept. Condition 2: this
neuronal representation must reach a minimal threshold of
duration and intensity necessary for access to a second stage
of processing, associated with a distributed cortical network
involved in particular parietal and prefrontal cortices.
Academic Editor: Leslie Ungerleider, National Institutes of Health, United States of
Received August 4, 2008; Accepted February 2, 2009; Published March 17, 2009
Copyright:  2009 Gaillard et al. This is an open-access article distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted
use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author
and source are credited.
Abbreviations: EEG, electroencephalogram; ERP, event-related potential; ERSP,
event-related spectral perturbation; iERP, intracranial event-related potential; ITC,
intertrial phase coherence; MEG, magnetoencephalography; RT, response time
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: lionel.naccache@
wanadoo.fr
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
March 2009 | Volume 7 | Issue 3 | e1000061
PLoS BIOLOGY
Condition 3: through joint bottom-up propagation and topdown attentional ampliﬁcation, the ensuing brain-scale
neural assembly must ‘‘ignite’’ into a self-sustained reverberant state of coherent activity that involves many neurons
distributed throughout the brain.
Why would this ignited state correspond to a conscious
state? The key idea behind the workspace model is that
because of its massive interconnectivity, the active coherent
assembly of workspace neurons can distribute its contents to
a great variety of other brain processors, thus making this
information globally available. The global workspace model
postulates that this global availability of information is what
we subjectively experience as a conscious state. Neurophysiological, anatomical, and brain-imaging data strongly
argue for a major role of prefrontal cortex, anterior
cingulate, and the associative areas that connect to them, in
creating the postulated brain-scale workspace.
Scope and Limits of Our Experimental Paradigm
In the present work, we measured the neural correlates of
visually masked words and contrasted them with those of
consciously visible unmasked words. On each trial, patients
were randomly presented with a masked word, a visible word,
or with corresponding control stimuli in which the words
were replaced by blank screens. In the masked condition,
words or blank screens were presented for 29 ms, preceded by
a forward mask and followed by a backward mask. In the
unmasked conditions, words or blank screens were made
visible by simply removing the backward mask (see Materials
and Methods and Figure 1 for details). In order to discard
activations induced by the masks, we always subtracted from
word-present conditions the corresponding blank condition.
This subtraction allowed us to isolate the entire processing
path evoked by the masked or unmasked word.
Advantages of the visual masking paradigm. Variants of the
masking paradigm have been extensively used in behavioral
and brain-imaging studies over the last 30 years. In humans, a
cumulative set of data demonstrated that a masked visual
stimulus (e.g., word, number, or image) that cannot be
reported can nevertheless be processed from low-level visual
stages up to abstract cognitive processes, including semantic
content, and eventually up to motor response preparation
 . From a neural point of view, masked stimuli activate a
large set of cortical structures, from occipital to anterior
frontal regions . The interpretation of these observations is informed by recent studies of the mechanisms of
visual masking. Recordings of single neurons in nonhuman
primates revealed that masking acts by reducing or interrupting the late activity evoked by stimuli while leaving the
initial feedforward activation largely unaffected . Recent scalp–event-related potential (ERP) studies
suggest that the same mechanism may prevail in humans
 . Finally, among the various methods that can be used to
compare conscious and nonconscious processes, the masking
paradigm allows for a comparison between two very stable
and clear-cut states of perception: (1) a strong masking
condition in which subjective report and objective discrimination are impossible, and (2) an unmasked condition in
which undisputed subjective and objective measures of
conscious access can be gathered.
Limits of the visual masking paradigm. When comparing
the processing of a clearly visible unmasked stimulus and of a
visually degraded masked stimulus, one should be aware of
two potential shortcomings. First, the masking procedure
induces an inescapable degradation of stimulus processing at
a visual stage. Therefore, comparing masked and unmasked
stimuli does not amount to a pure comparison between
conscious and nonconscious perception, but rather to the
comparison between nondegraded conscious information
and degraded nonconscious visual information. In other
words, one has to keep in mind that any observed difference
between the two conditions may include low-level processing
differences due to visual degradation itself, upstream from
conscious access. Note, however, that in our experimental
design, we systematically subtracted activity evoked by the
visual masks, in order to isolate the correlates of masked and
unmasked words processing.
A second shortcoming of the masking method is that
subjects can perform the instructed task only when consciously perceiving the stimuli. Therefore, activation differences between conscious and nonconscious stimuli may relate
to the execution of the task downstream from conscious
access, rather than to conscious access per se. However, this
concern is moderated by evidence that the processing of
masked stimuli is sensitive to task instructions and more
generally to top-down strategical effects . Note also
that this issue is not restricted to visual masking, but that it
equally applies to most paradigms used for the study of
conscious access, including paradigms without visual degradation such as the attentional blink, attentional blindness, or
masking at threshold. It is generally not feasible to equate
performance with conscious and nonconscious stimuli,
probably because improved performance is an integral
consequence of the greater availability of information made
possible by conscious access. The few paradigms that have
attempted to compare conscious and nonconscious processing with equated performance levels have used various means
of degrading conscious performance down to nonconscious
levels .
Neurophysiological Predictions Derived from the Global
Workspace Model
In the light of our model, the masked–unmasked contrast
corresponds to a comparison between a visual representation
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
March 2009 | Volume 7 | Issue 3 | e1000061
Electrophysiology of Conscious Access
Author Summary
What is the neural signature of the conscious perception of a visual
stimulus? To address this question, we recorded neural activity
directly from the brains of human subjects (who were undergoing
neural surgery for medical reasons). This rare opportunity afforded
greater spatial and temporal resolution than noninvasive methods
used previously to probe the neural basis of consciousness. We
compared neural activity concomitant with conscious and nonconscious processing of words by using a visual masking procedure that
allowed us to manipulate the conscious visibility of briefly masked
words. Nonconscious processing of words elicited short-lasting
activity across multiple cortical areas, including parietal and visual
areas. In sharp contrast, only consciously perceived words were
accompanied by long-lasting effects (.200 ms) across a great
variety of cortical sites, with a special involvement of the prefrontal
lobes. This sustained pattern of neural activity was characterized by
a specific increase of coherence between distant areas, suggesting
conscious perception is broadcasted widely across the cortex.
satisfying only condition 1 and a representation satisfying all
three conditions for conscious access listed above. The global
workspace model therefore leads to the following four
predictions.
Prediction 1: a common early stage of processing. Both
masked and unmasked words should evoke similar neural
activity within an early time window, reﬂecting a fast
feedforward sweep propagating from posterior to anterior
cortices. In particular, invisible masked words should induce
transient event-related responses along the ventral visual
pathway, as assessed by iERPs and ERSP.
Prediction 2: a temporal divergence. Following this initial
common stage, only unmasked words should be associated
with sustained effects. We thus predict a divergence in cortical
activation for unmasked and masked words. Given that we
contrasted heavily masked stimuli with unmasked stimuli, we
expect a progressive buildup of the divergence between these
two conditions. In the light of recent high-resolution scalp
electroencephalogram (EEG) studies in visual masking and
attentional blink paradigms, this temporal divergence is
expected to occur within a 200–500-ms window .
Prediction 3: an anatomical divergence. The activation of
frontal and parietal areas, which are allegedly dense in global
workspace neurons, should be particularly sensitive to
consciously perceived words (see and Figure 1 of 
for explicit simulations of this property). Although masked
words may cause a small, transient and local activation within
these regions, we predict that unmasked words should elicit a
global and long-lasting activation of these regions, corresponding to a broadcasting process.
Prediction 4: phase synchrony and causality. During this
late time window, the long-lasting and long-distance neuronal
assembly speciﬁc to conscious processing should be associated with an intense increase in bidirectional interelectrode
communication. Measures of phase synchrony and Granger
causality should be particularly apt at capturing this
phenomenon. The global workspace theory is not yet fully
explicit about the exact pattern of neuronal oscillations
involved in conscious access. In our initial modeling and
theoretical articles, no prediction was stated about which
frequencies would be affected by conscious access .
Increased high-frequency power and long-distance neural
Figure 1. Electrode Locations and Experimental Design
(A) Sagittal (left), coronal (middle), and axial (right) normalized glass brain showing all 176 electrodes after normalization in Talairach’s anatomical space.
(B) Experimental paradigm used to present masked and unmasked words, with d9 measures in the forced-choice semantic task.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1000061.g001
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
March 2009 | Volume 7 | Issue 3 | e1000061
Electrophysiology of Conscious Access
synchrony were merely thought to be necessary, but not
sufﬁcient, conditions for conscious access, contrasting with
the local synchrony induced within modular processors
during nonconscious processing . In a recent theoretical
review, we further pinpointed an important distinction to be
drawn between preconscious and conscious processing, as
deﬁned by occipitotemporal loops with local synchrony in the
former, and long-distance synchronous loops in the latter
 —but again without specifying the actual frequency bands
involved. Explicit neuronal network simulations of global
workspace activity during the attentional blink paradigm
demonstrated a link between increased gamma-range oscillations (20–100 Hz) and conscious access . In simulations
of inattentional blindness, this rather broad gamma band
narrowed down to a predominant band at 40–45 Hz .
Those frequency ranges, however, were only determined by
the particular choice of simulation parameters for corticocortical and thalamocortical propagation latencies, whose
values in humans are not known in detail.
In the light of these considerations, the present study of
neuronal oscillations should be considered as an exploration
of a broad theoretical proposal, rather than an assessment of
a precisely articulated prediction. Actually, theoretical considerations by other groups , as well as recent
experimental measurements , suggest that for distant
cortical areas, synchrony cannot be easily achieved in the
high-frequency range, where the oscillation period is short
relative to corticocortical transmission delays. Thus, these
articles would predict that long-distance synchrony associated with conscious access should preferentially occur in the
beta frequency range (13–30 Hz), whereas local recurrence
would mostly concern the gamma range (.30 Hz), even for
masked stimuli .
Behavioral Measures of Word Visibility
Unmasked words were consciously reportable, and were
categorized better than chance level in a forced-choice
categorization task on the emotional valence of words (mean
discriminability index d9 ¼ 2.24 (þ1.14 to þ3.04), all individual
v2 p-values and group analysis Student t-test p-value ,
0.0001). In sharp contrast, masked words were not consciously
visible, and forced-choice performance was at chance level
for each of the implanted patients (mean d9 ¼ 0.02 (0.18 to
þ0.27), all p-values .0.2). Response times (RTs) were similar
across the two masking conditions (p . 0.38 in Student t-test
performed on mean RTs; masked mean RT ¼ 1,640 ms,
unmasked mean RT ¼ 1,300 ms).
Intracranial ERPs
We deﬁned masked effects by subtracting the voltages
measured on masked blank trials from those associated with
masked word trials. This subtraction allowed us to isolate, on
a sample-by-sample basis, activations associated with masked
word processing (see Figure 1 and Materials and Methods for
our detailed three-step statistical procedure). Unmasked
effects were deﬁned similarly by subtraction of the unmasked
word and unmasked blank conditions.
Figure 1 shows the anatomical distribution of the 176
reconstructed bipolar montages (‘‘electrodes’’) from which we
obtained valid data across the ten patients. The bipolar
subtraction of nearby recording sites reduced distant
inﬂuences, including those from the reference electrode,
and resulted in a signal tightly localized to the implanted
structure. Although measures were obtained for all four
lobes, it should be kept in mind that major sectors of
dorsolateral and polar prefrontal cortex as well as parietal
cortex were not sampled.
Among the 176 electrodes, 24.4% (43 electrodes) showed a
signiﬁcant effect for masked words. These effects were
observed across all implanted structures but with a predominance of effects on occipital electrodes: 22/55 (40%) within
the occipital lobe, 11/78 (14.1%) within the temporal lobe, 4/
24 (16.7%) within the parietal lobe and 6/19 (31.6%) within
the frontal lobe (v2 p-value ¼ 0.004).
Concerning unmasked words, 68.8% of all electrodes (121
electrodes) showed a signiﬁcant effect of word presence—a
remarkably high percentage, given that electrodes had been
placed at clinically relevant sites without consideration of
their relevance to our visual stimuli. Unmasked effects were
observed across all implanted structures but with a particular
emphasis on the frontal lobe: 42/55 (76.4%) within the
occipital lobe, 49/78 (62.8%) within the temporal lobe, 12/24
(50%) with the parietal lobe, and 18/19 (94.7%) within the
frontal lobe (v2 p-value ¼ 0.005). The frontal lobe showed a
major difference between trials containing masked and
unmasked words: almost all contacts were systematically
activated during conscious processing of unmasked words
(;95%), whereas this was not the case during unconscious
processing of masked words (;32%).
In order to better assess the speciﬁcity of this last result, we
ran an ANOVA to directly compare the impact of masking on
the proportion of activated electrodes between occipital and
frontal lobes. A main effect of masking was observed (86%
versus 36%; p , 104), conﬁrming the larger spatial extension
of unmasked activations as compared to masked activations.
No main effect was observed between frontal and occipital
electrodes (58% versus 63%, p . 0.5). Crucially, we observed a
signiﬁcant interaction between frontal and occipital cortices
and masking condition (p ¼ 0.05), assessing the larger
differential activation of frontal lobe between masked and
unmasked conditions, as compared to the pattern observed in
posterior visual cortex.
Note that this spatial analysis is affected by the nonhomogenous sampling of brain regions, minimizing the
contribution of cortical structures that were less frequently
implanted. Nevertheless, masked effects were more frequent
on posterior than on anterior electrodes, whereas unmasked
effects were homogeneously distributed. To demonstrate this
point, we examined the distribution of the anterior-posterior
(y) coordinate, in Talairach space, of the electrodes showing a
signiﬁcant effect, and compared it to the spatial distribution
of all 176 recorded electrodes (see Figure S1). For masked
words, the spatial distribution of signiﬁcant electrodes was
strongly shifted towards posterior sites (p , 106, Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, relative to the distribution of either the whole
set of 176 electrodes or to those showing an unmasked effect).
The same analysis conducted on the cumulative distribution of
unmasked effects showed a spatial distribution statistically
indistinguishable from that of the whole set of electrodes.
Masked and unmasked words were also distinguished by the
temporal extension of their activation. A crude analysis,
averaging across all electrodes, revealed that masked effects
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
March 2009 | Volume 7 | Issue 3 | e1000061
Electrophysiology of Conscious Access
had a mean duration of 60 ms, much shorter than the mean of
378 ms for unmasked effects (p , 106). Masked effects also
showed an earlier onset (mean¼366 ms; median¼301 ms) than
unmasked effects (mean¼522 ms; median¼497 ms; t-test, p ,
105). A more relevant analysis focusing on the ﬁrst signiﬁcant
effect within the subset of electrodes with both masked and
unmasked effects showed similar latencies between these two
conditions (299 ms and 348 ms, respectively, for masked and
unmasked conditions; t-test, p ¼ 0.30). Indeed, up to
approximately 200 ms after word onset, glass brain visualization of the spatiotemporal dynamics of masked and
unmasked effects showed a strikingly similar pattern of
activations within posterior occipitotemporal cortical regions
(see Figure 2). This dynamic pattern is very comparable to the
‘‘feedforward sweep’’ described by Lamme in the nonhuman
primate visual cortex using multiunit recordings for latencies
up to 100 ms after visual stimulus onset . Clear differences
between masked and unmasked effects appeared after 150 ms,
with a progressive increase in the intensity and spatial
extension of unmasked effects, while masked effects decayed
and did not show a similar spatial extension (see Videos S1 and
This general pattern was observed on individual electrodes
(see Figure 3). The initial response was often indistinguishable between masked and unmasked effects. This initial
common response was usually followed by later effects
speciﬁcally for the unmasked condition. Out of 14 electrodes
showing this pattern with our statistical criteria, 11 of them
also showed a polarity inversion of the late sustained effects
relative to the polarity of the initial effect.
A cortical lobe analysis focusing on the proportion of
electrodes showing a signiﬁcant effect over time (Figure 4)
showed a similar proportion of electrodes activated by
masked and unmasked words at short latencies, whereas at
later latencies, the effects were increasingly speciﬁc to the
unmasked condition. An analysis of the mean voltage power,
averaged across electrodes within one lobe, showed a similar
temporal dynamics, and additionally allowed us to detect a
progressive time delay in the peak of the initial activation
common to masked and unmasked words. The time point at
which the ﬁrst signiﬁcant divergence between masked and
unmasked effects occurred, as estimated by a t-test (p , 0.05),
progressively increased from 215 ms to 275 ms and 347 ms,
respectively, for the occipital, temporal, and frontal lobes (see
Figure 4). The divergence did not reach signiﬁcance for the
small set of 14 parietal lobe electrodes tested (those showing
at least one signiﬁcant effect, masked or unmasked).
Event-Related Spectral Perturbations
We then turned to frequency-domain analyses of the
intracranial signals. Figure 5A shows a typical singleelectrode example of the time-frequency transform applied
to our data. The masks alone evoked a very strong sequence
of event-related increase in the beta and gamma bands
accompanied by alpha decrease, followed by a reversal of this
pattern. Subtraction of each mask-only condition from the
corresponding word-present condition, however, isolated the
Figure 2. Spatiotemporal Dynamics of iERP Effects
Absolute values of iERPs difference (microVolts) between word-present
and word-absent in masked (left) and unmasked (right) conditions. Only
electrodes showing a significant effect are displayed as red squares.
Square size and color intensity are proportional to the absolute voltage
difference between the word and blank conditions. Six different time
slices are displayed, ranging from 130 to 600 ms (see Videos S1 and S2
for complete videos provided as supplementary on-line material).
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1000061.g002
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
March 2009 | Volume 7 | Issue 3 | e1000061
Electrophysiology of Conscious Access
ERSP induced by the word alone, as a function of whether it
was masked or unmasked. As can be seen in this example,
masked words induced a slight increase in gamma power 100–
200 ms after the stimulus, whereas unmasked words induced a
much bigger effect that lasted throughout the epoch and was
accompanied by alpha suppression.
To evaluate the generality and signiﬁcance of such effects,
we averaged the time-frequency diagrams across all electrodes (Figure 5B). Statistical comparisons over time-frequency regions of interest, with Bonferroni correction (see
Methods and Materials), identiﬁed several signiﬁcant effects.
In the 100–200-ms time window, masked words evoked highly
signiﬁcant power changes (beta suppression: p ¼ 0.0004; highgamma increase: p ¼ 0.0005). In this time period, there was no
signiﬁcant difference with unmasked words, conﬁrming that
a volley of activation, reﬂected primarily in a gamma
increase, can propagate nonconsciously while being largely
unaffected by masking .
In the next time window (200–300 ms), whereas unmasked
words created an even larger power increase in the highgamma band (p , 1011) and decreases in alpha (p , 108) and
beta bands (p ¼ 105), masked words induced only small
effects of alpha suppression (p ¼ 0.0014) and high-gamma
increase (p ¼ 0.038). Beta and high-gamma bands showed
signiﬁcantly stronger changes for unmasked compared to
masked words (all p , 0.0007). In the subsequent time window
Figure 3. iERP Effects on Three Representative Electrodes
(A) Maximum size of significant masked and unmasked effects across the 0–800-ms time window are displayed as red squares, whose size and color
intensity are proportional to peak absolute voltage amplitude.
(B) Mean iERPs of three representative electrodes in occipital, fusiform, and frontal cortex (location shown in [A]). Shadowed areas indicate significant
effects (difference between word and blank conditions). The bottom graphs (blue traces) show the time course of the ‘‘word minus blank’’ subtraction
separately from the masked and unmasked conditions. All three sites exhibit an initial common peak, followed by a polarity reversal and delayed activity
specific to the unmasked condition.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1000061.g003
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
March 2009 | Volume 7 | Issue 3 | e1000061
Electrophysiology of Conscious Access
(300–500), alpha suppression, beta suppression, and highgamma increase were very strong in the unmasked condition
(all p , 0.0003), but altogether absent in the masked
condition, creating a signiﬁcant difference (all p , 0.0002).
In summary, masked words induced signiﬁcant changes in
the power spectrum, particularly increases in the highgamma band, but these induced oscillations quickly dissipated with time, whereas the ERSPs evoked by unmasked
words exhibited a greater power and lasted signiﬁcantly
longer. Note that the above analysis was based on the pooling
of ERSP results from all electrodes, regardless of their
location. We also replicated this ERSP analysis while separating the electrodes as a function of their lobe of origin. Both
the high-gamma increase and late alpha and beta suppression
speciﬁc to the unmasked condition were replicated within
each of the four lobes (see Figure S2). Interestingly, the highgamma increase peaked earlier in occipital cortex than in
temporal, parietal, or frontal, following an approximate
posterior to anterior progression (see Videos S3 and S4).
Furthermore, the lobar analysis showed that the early
nonconscious effects were conﬁned to the occipital and
temporal lobes: the only signiﬁcant effects were a highgamma power increase in occipital cortex in the 100–200-ms
and 200–300-ms windows (respectively, p ¼ 0.013 and p ¼
0.016), and decreases in alpha (200–300 ms, p ¼ 0.007) and
beta (100–200 ms, p , 103) in temporal cortex. In brief, the
early ERPS evoked by nonconscious stimuli originated only
from occipitotemporal regions, whereas conscious perception was associated with stronger and longer-lasting power
changes spreading towards anterior cortical regions.
In this respect, analyses of induced high-gamma power
yielded conclusions very similar to those derived from iERP
analyses. To better evaluate the relation between induced
gamma activity and iERPs, we calculated for each segment for
Figure 4. Lobar Analysis of iERPs
(A) For each lobe, proportions of electrodes showing a significant effect over time for masked (cyan) and unmasked (blue) conditions, respectively.
(B) Voltage power, averaged across electrodes showing at least one significant effect, for masked (cyan) and unmasked (blue) conditions, respectively.
Black dashed lines indicate latencies of the first significant differences (p , 0.05) between conditions.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1000061.g004
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
March 2009 | Volume 7 | Issue 3 | e1000061
Electrophysiology of Conscious Access
which a signiﬁcant ERP difference was seen, the absolute
value of the iERP effect as well as the mean power evoked in
the high-gamma range, averaged over the same time period.
A signiﬁcant positive correlation between these two measures
was found, for unmasked words (r2 ¼ 14.9%, 241 time
segments, p , 108) and, crucially, for masked words (r2 ¼
9.3%, 59 time segments, p¼0.028). This means that periods in
which a high-gamma–band activity is seen are also periods in
which a high-voltage difference between word-present and
word-absent conditions exists. In brief, high-gamma activity
and iERP are correlated measures that both jointly reﬂect
conscious as well as nonconscious processing stages. Indeed,
videos of ERP and of high-gamma activity, provided as
Figure 5. ERSP Effects
(A) Time-frequency diagrams showing the ERSPs of a representative electrode (Talairach 19,5, 90, 20). Color indicates the log power increase or
decrease in power relative to baseline (same scale in all graphics). Top row, masked words, masked blanks, and their subtraction. Bottom row, same
analysis for the unmasked conditions.
(B) Time-frequency diagrams of mean ERSPs averaged across 147 electrodes for masked (left) and unmasked (right) effects. Dashed lines delimit the
time-frequency windows used for the statistical analyses that appear in Figure 7.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1000061.g005
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
March 2009 | Volume 7 | Issue 3 | e1000061
Electrophysiology of Conscious Access
supplementary online material, present high similar proﬁles
(see Videos S1, S2, S3, and S4).
Phase Coherence
Spectral changes are complex phenomena that can be
sensitive to local as well as global neuronal synchronization of
thalamocortical networks . To evaluate the global workspace model’s prediction that access to consciousness is
associated with long-distance synchronization, we measured
the phase synchrony between all electrode pairs. Phase
synchrony can occur independently of changes in induced
power: it solely evaluates whether oscillations are reprodu-
Figure 6. Phase Synchrony Effects
(A) Phase synchrony analyses of a representative pair of electrodes (Talairach 12, 97, 12 and 28.5, 77.5, 6). Top row, masked condition; bottom
row, unmasked condition. Each picture shows a time-frequency diagram of intertrial phase coherence across the two electrodes (ranging from 0 to 1)
for the word condition, the blank condition, and their subtraction (different scale, including negative values).
(B) Time-frequency diagrams of ITC averaged across all 1,283 electrode pairs, separately for masked (left) and unmasked (right) effects. Dashed lines
delimit the time-frequency windows used for the analyses that appear in Figure 7.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1000061.g006
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
March 2009 | Volume 7 | Issue 3 | e1000061
Electrophysiology of Conscious Access
cibly synchronized across two distant sites in the sense that
across trials, they exhibit a systematic phase relationship.
Figure 6 shows a time-frequency diagram of the intertrial
phase coherence (ITC) changes induced by the masked and
unmasked words, both in an example electrode and in the
mean overall electrodes. All statistics were Bonferroni
corrected. Statistical analyses revealed no signiﬁcant coherence changes induced by the masked words. For unmasked
words, an increase in beta synchrony in the 300–500-ms time
window was highly signiﬁcant (t(1,282 df) ¼ 7.12, p , 1010;
difference with masked condition, t(1,282 df) ¼ 5.43, p ,
106). It is particularly interesting to note that (1) this phase
synchrony increase was concomitant with a decrease in
induced spectral power (ERSP) within the same frequency
band (see Figure 7A and 7B); (2) no phase synchrony
increase was detected in the high-gamma band, although in
this band, a highly signiﬁcant increase in induced power had
been detected by ERSP analysis. Thus, ERSP and phase
synchrony appear to double dissociate, and beta synchrony
appears as a highly selective marker of the late phase of
conscious access.
Figure 8 shows in graphic form the value of the beta
coherence increase due to word presence in the critical time
window 300–500 ms, separately for unmasked and masked
words. Clearly, unmasked words create a more globally
synchronous brain state than masked words. The ﬁgure
makes apparent that this phase coherence analysis is
importantly limited by the available electrodes: we can only
analyze coherences between electrodes within a given patient,
and these tend to be regrouped within a cortical area, thus
preventing a thorough analysis of how coherence evolves
across distant anatomical sites. For instance, it was not
possible to evaluate the prediction that frontal electrodes
should cohere more with posterior sites during conscious
processing, because in our sample, these two regions were
very rarely recorded simultaneously. Still, to probe longdistance connections, we could analyze a subset consisting of
electrode pairs in which the two electrodes lie in different
hemispheres, thus imposing a long-distance transfer across
the corpus callosum. As predicted by global workspace
theory, we observed an increase in long-distance interhemispheric beta coherence selective to unmasked words (t(71) ¼
2.50, uncorrected p ¼ 0.015). In fact, interhemispheric beta
coherence actually decreased when masked words were
presented (t(71) ¼ 3.14, uncorrected p ¼ 0.003), thus creating
a strong difference between visible and invisible conditions
(t(71) ¼ 3.83, p ¼ 0.0003).
Conversely, Figure 8 suggests that in the masked condition,
there might have been a small local increase in beta
coherence within posterior occipitotemporal cortices, which
might have been missed in our analysis pooling across all
electrode pairs. Indeed, when we restricted only to intrahemispheric electrodes lying within occipital cortex or within
temporal cortex posterior to y¼20, we detected a signiﬁcant
increase in beta coherence for masked words during the 200–
300-ms time window (t(734) ¼ 2.34, uncorrected p ¼ 0.02),
which ceased to be signiﬁcant in the 300–500-ms time window
(t ¼ 0.41, not signiﬁcant [n.s.]). No such increase was seen in
other frequency bands, or in other regions (e.g., within
frontal electrodes). Thus, nonconscious word processing
resulted in only small and barely detectable transient
increases in phase coherence within visual cortex, whereas
conscious words yielded a massive increase in long-distance
beta coherence
Granger Causality
A ﬁnal measure of conscious processing that we evaluated
is Granger causality , a mathematical tool that can
estimate the causal inﬂuence that one electrode site exerts on
another. Global neuronal workspace theory predicted that
access to consciousness for unmasked words would be
accompanied by a massive web of causal relations among
distant cortical sites, not seen in the masked condition.
Granger causality and phase coherence are similar in that
both estimate the correlations among pairs of electrodes, but
Granger causality looks for temporal contingencies inaccessible to coherence analyses. In a nutshell, the method
estimates whether past samples of electrode j account for a
signiﬁcant amount of variance in electrode i, over and above
a simpler ‘‘autoregressive’’ model using only past samples of
electrode i (see for details). It is possible for two time
series to be strongly phase coherent, yet not causally related
(for instance, two sine waves with constant phase lag and
independent noise). Thus, Granger causality analysis is not
redundant with phase coherence analysis: ﬁnding that
Granger causality increases during conscious perception,
perhaps simultaneously with the beta coherence increase,
would provide additional evidence in favor of a large-scale
reverberating neuronal assembly linking distant sites. Furthermore, unlike phase coherence, Granger causality is a
directional measure: it is possible for electrode j to causally
inﬂuence i without i causally inﬂuencing j (although it is also
possible for two signals to exert mutual causal inﬂuences on
each other). This analysis therefore provided an opportunity
to examine the top-down versus bottom-up propagation of
activation during conscious and nonconscious processing.
As a concrete example, Figure 9 illustrates the causality
analysis of a sample electrode pair consisting of one frontal
and one occipital electrode. At the time of stimulus
presentation, a massive increase in Granger causality is seen
in the feedforward, occipitofrontal direction (Figure 9A, left
panel) and, to a smaller extent in the top-down, frontooccipital direction (Figure 9A, right panel). Importantly, the
curves showing the evolution of the F-test for causality as a
function of time exhibit two successive peaks: one early peak
is evoked by the masks alone (146 ms after mask onset),
whereas a second peak (325 ms after word onset) is seen only
when a word is present and unmasked. As illustrated in Figure
9B, a strong ‘‘causal gain’’ is therefore observed, approximately 200–450 ms after word onset, when the word-present
condition is contrasted to the word-absent condition. This
effect is seen mostly in the feedforward direction, thus
engendering a ‘‘causal imbalance’’ (higher causal gain in one
direction than in the other).
Similar increases in causal gain and causal imbalance in the
unmasked condition were seen in a large set of electrode
pairs. To evaluate their statistical signiﬁcance, we ﬁrst
averaged the causal gains across all electrode pairs and both
causal directions, separately for masked and unmasked
conditions, and used t-tests to evaluate the signiﬁcance of
changes within three temporal windows (100–200, 200–300,
and 300–500 ms, similar to the ERSP and phase coherence
analyses, with Bonferroni correction over the number of
windows tested) (see Figure 9C). A massive increase in mean
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
March 2009 | Volume 7 | Issue 3 | e1000061
Electrophysiology of Conscious Access
causal gain was observed during the 300–500-ms window in
the unmasked condition (t(1805) ¼ 7.60, p , 1013), but not in
the masked condition (t ¼ 1.47, n.s.), resulting in a
signiﬁcantly larger causal gain during conscious than during
nonconscious processing (t(1805) ¼ 5.46, p , 108). The effect
was already perceptible in the 200–300-ms window, though it
was much smaller (unmasked: t(1805) ¼ 3.03, p ¼ 0.0075;
masked, t¼0.86, n.s.; difference: t(1805)¼2.89, p¼0.012). No
effect reached signiﬁcance in the 100–200-ms window.
Figure 8B illustrates the anatomical distribution of the
mean causal gains during the 300–500-ms window. In the
unmasked condition, causal relations increased massively
among many distant sites, both within the occipitotemporal
cortex, between occipitotemporal cortex and distant frontal
and insular sites, and across the corpus callosum. By contrast,
increases were very scarce in the masked condition and never
reached signiﬁcance even when restricted to posterior
electrodes only.
Figure 7. ERSP and Phase Synchrony across Three Time Windows
Twelve time-frequency regions of interest were defined on ERSP and phase synchrony–averaged analyses (see Figures 5B and 6B). For each region,
mean ERSPs (A) and mean ITC (B) are plotted for three different time windows (abscissa axis: 100–200, 200–300, and 300–500 ms) and for four frequency
bands (ordinate axis: alpha ¼ 8–13 Hz; beta ¼ 13–30 Hz; low gamma ¼ 30–50 Hz; and high gamma ¼ 50–100 Hz), separately for the masked (M) and for
the unmasked (UM) conditions. Bars represent one standard error of the mean.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1000061.g007
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
March 2009 | Volume 7 | Issue 3 | e1000061
Electrophysiology of Conscious Access
With similar methods, we evaluated the statistical signiﬁcance of changes in the variable of ‘‘causal imbalance,’’ which
is the subtraction of forward causal gain minus backward
causal gain in the same electrode pair. This variable evaluated
the dominant directionality of causality (posterior to anterior
¼ feedforward, or anterior to posterior ¼ feedback). During
the 300–500-ms time window, in the unmasked condition,
there was a small imbalance with a higher causality gain in the
feedforward compared to the feedback direction (t(1,850) ¼
2.07, p ¼ 0.039 before Bonferroni correction). Although
marginally signiﬁcant, this ﬁnding occurred in the predicted
late time window and ﬁts with our prior hypothesis that
during this time period, and only in the unmasked condition,
perceptual information gains access to consciousness and is
therefore able to invade anterior areas in a feedforward
manner. Indeed, in this time window, the imbalance was not
signiﬁcant for masked targets (t ¼ 0.90, n.s.), creating a
difference for unmasked as opposed to masked targets
(t(1,805) ¼ 2.09, p ¼ 0.037 before Bonferroni correction).
Quite surprisingly, however, in the preceding time window
(200–300 ms, see Figures 9D and S3), there was a signiﬁcant
imbalance in the converse direction (higher causality in the
top-down or feedback). This was true only for the masked
condition (t(1,805) ¼2.66, p ¼ 0.024, Bonferroni corrected),
Figure 8. Phase Synchrony and Granger Causal Gain between 300 and 500 ms after Word Onset
Each figure depicts three orthogonal views of a transparent ‘‘glass brain,’’ with segments linking, for each patient, all pairs of electrodes. Segments are
colored and sized according to the intensity of the increase or decrease in phase coherence in the beta frequency band (A), and in Granger causal gain
(B) during the 300–500-ms time window. Superimposed lines are plotted in increasing order of the absolute value of the depicted parameter, so that
larger values override smaller ones. Left two columns, masked effects; right two columns, unmasked effects.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1000061.g008
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
March 2009 | Volume 7 | Issue 3 | e1000061
Electrophysiology of Conscious Access
Figure 9. Granger Causality Analysis
(A and B) Illustration of Granger causality analysis for a representative pair of electrodes located respectively in the frontal and occipital lobes.
For each of the four experimental conditions, an F-test evaluates, over a sliding timing window, the causal influence of occipital activity on
frontal electrode activity and vice versa (A). Note that this F-test is not directly comparable across conditions (because of smaller number of trials
in the blank control conditions), nor can it be taken directly as a test of significance (because of inflation due to auto-correlation ).
Furthermore, masks alone obviously induce increases in causality. To evaluate how words and their conscious perception affect Granger
causality, causal gain was then computed as the difference in the percentage of word-absent (blank) condition (B). Here, an obvious imbalance is
seen, with a massive increase in causality only in the occipital-to-frontal direction and in the unmasked condition. For statistical analysis, we
distinguished the mean causal gain (averaged across the two directions of causality) and the causal imbalance (difference in causal gain over the
two directions of causality).
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
March 2009 | Volume 7 | Issue 3 | e1000061
Electrophysiology of Conscious Access
not the unmasked condition (t ¼ 1.11, n.s.), a signiﬁcant
difference (t(1,805) ¼ 2.70, p ¼ 0.021 Bonferroni corrected).
This unexpected ﬁnding, further discussed below, may
indicate that in the masked condition, there is a top-down
component of attentional ampliﬁcation, perhaps relating to
an unsuccessful effort to identify the masked word.
Discussion
We ﬁrst summarize and discuss our results in the light of
the four theoretical predictions listed in the introduction. We
then focus on the nonpredicted results and discuss two
important limitations of this study. Finally, we propose a
description of the neural signature of conscious access
combining the four neural measures that we could gather
here within the same subjects.
Discussion of the Four Predictions
An early stage of processing, common to masked and
unmasked stimuli. Masked iERP effects shared common
temporal properties: most of them (75%) exhibited a short
latency and a transient nature. As indicated in Figures 2, 3,
and 4, masked and unmasked iERPs were strikingly similar at
short latencies (see glass brain at 130 ms on Figure 2, and
initial parts of the curves in Figure 4). Masked words also
induced early (100–200 ms) spectral power effects corresponding to signiﬁcant beta suppression and high-gamma
band increases. Again, in this early time period, no signiﬁcant
difference was found between masked and unmasked ERSPs.
iERP correlates of the processing of masked words were
observed in almost 25% of the 176 electrodes, across all
cortical lobes. These effects were not exclusively conﬁned to
posterior areas, but reached the most-anterior implanted
structures, including prefrontal cortex.
Taken together, these results are highly suggestive of a
feedforward mode of processing that propagates nonconsciously and is initially largely unaffected by masking. This
experimental validation of our prediction 1 also corresponds
to an extension to the human brain of the concept of
‘‘feedforward sweep’’ proposed by Lamme and Roelfsema for
the macaque brain .
A temporal divergence. We observed a major divergence, as
predicted, between the processing of masked and unmasked
words. This divergence occurred around 200 ms for the mostposterior implanted electrodes. Although both masked and
unmasked words evoked similar initial cortical activity, only
consciously visible words evoked long-lasting effects. iERPs
evoked by masked words decayed rapidly around 200 ms for
occipital electrodes and around 300 ms for frontal electrodes.
Accordingly, clear differences in spectral power were also
observed. Initially (100–200 ms), increases in spectral power
in the high-gamma band were jointly elicited by masked and
unmasked words, but in the 200–300-ms window, a clear
difference occurred and only unmasked words still induced
signiﬁcant effects within the late temporal window (300–500
Recordings of single-unit activity in other epileptic
patients indicate that single neurons within the human
temporal lobe encode an invariant representation of stimulus
identity . A recent study using a backward-masking
paradigm has shown that these neurons are strongly activated
during conscious perception . The onset latencies of these
neurons are mostly around 400 ms , supporting our
present observation that neural representations of conscious
percepts are activated during the late phase (300–500 ms) of
stimulus processing.
The observation of a common level of activation followed
by a clear divergence between masked and unmasked
conditions bears upon the debated issue of qualitative versus
quantitative models of conscious perception (for discussions
of the quantitative activation strength theory, see ).
Indeed, a ﬁne temporal description of the brain activity
associated with masked and unmasked stimuli is essential to
resolve this theoretical issue. If we just compared the net
activation summed across time, as might be reﬂected in the
fMRI BOLD signal, we would ﬁnd a difference of intensity
between the two conditions, compatible with both qualitative
and quantitative models (e.g., see occipital electrodes in
Figure 4B). However, the ﬁne temporal description reported
here refutes purely quantitative models of conscious perception, by showing an initial common intensity followed by a
clear divergence, in line with the predictions of nonlinear
models of conscious access .
Although we noted above that our observations ﬁt with
global workspace theory, they are also largely in line with the
feedforward/feedback model advocated by Lamme and
Roelfsema . According to this model, an initial feedforward sweep does not differentiate nonconscious and conscious processing, but recurrent feedback loops uniquely
characterize conscious processing. Yet a major difference
between our results and those of Lamme and Roelfsema
concerns the timing of feedback processing. Lamme and
Roelfsema observed an early divergence in V1, around 100 ms
in nonhuman primates and 120 ms in humans , and
they suggested that virtually any recurrent loop, even locally
within visual cortex, might sufﬁce to cause conscious-level
processing . Zeki and Pins and Ffytche also
emphasize early visual events as the main determinants of
conscious visual experience. On the other hand, we essentially
observed late differences between masked and unmasked
effects, and our theory proposes that it is only the late and
global patterns of recurrent activity, particularly those
involving prefrontal cortex, that correspond to consciouslevel processing. None of our four analyses (iERP, ERSP,
synchrony, and causality) ever detected any event speciﬁcally
associated with conscious reportability before 150 ms, and in
most of them, the main differences were found after 300 ms.
One possible explanation for our observation of a late
divergence may originate in the complexity of the stimuli and
in the areas being recorded. Visual word comprehension
necessitates at least 250 ms in humans, and occurs in areas
well beyond V1 in the hierarchy of cortical visual pathways.
With simpler stimuli (e.g., line gratings or Gabor patches), the
divergence may occur earlier. Yet, we consider this possibility
unlikely given that our main contrast simply asked about the
(C and D) show the mean results, averaged over all electrode pairs (bars indicate one standard error of the mean). Mean causal gain and mean causal
imbalance were calculated separately across three time windows (100–200 ms, 200–300 ms, and 300–500 ms) are plotted separately for the masked (M)
and for the unmasked (UM) conditions.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1000061.g009
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
March 2009 | Volume 7 | Issue 3 | e1000061
Electrophysiology of Conscious Access
conscious or nonconscious coding of word presence (by
contrasting word versus blank trials), a distinction that could
have been seen as early as in V1.
It could also be argued that we did observe a difference in
masked versus unmasked iERPs at some occipital sites around
150 ms (Figure 4), and that only this early divergence is
critical for conscious perception, whereas all the other later
measures only reﬂect differences in subsequent word
processing. Yet this possibility is made unlikely by the results
of other paradigms such as the attentional blink or
inattentional blindness . During attentional blink, when
the very same stimuli are classiﬁed subjectively as being
consciously or nonconsciously perceived, only a late divergence is observed by EEG or by magnetoencephalography
(MEG) . Early visual events such as the P1 and N1 are
strictly undiagnostic of conscious reports .
Anatomical divergence and involvement of prefrontal
cortex. In close accordance with our broadcasting prediction,
frontal lobe electrodes were characterized by a different
pattern for consciously and nonconsciously perceived words.
During conscious processing of unmasked words, iERPs
showed a signiﬁcant deviation on almost all electrodes (18/
19), whereas the voltage differences of these same electrodes
remained remarkably low for masked words (see Figure 4).
Electrodes on other lobes did not show such a dichotomy
(from 50% to 76% of active sites with unmasked words). A
similar anatomical divergence was seen with ERSPs: in the
masked condition, high-gamma increases were only seen in
posterior occipital and temporal electrodes, whereas they
occurred in all four lobes in the unmasked condition.
Those observations ﬁt with the global workspace model,
which postulates that once a representation is consciously
accessed, a broad distributed network, involving in particular
prefrontal cortex, ignites and broadcasts its content. Computer simulations of this ignition process within thalamocortical networks have shown strong recurrent interactions
occurring exclusively during conscious access, implying that
the relevant neurons are suddenly coactivated in a cooperative manner and emit increased and synchronized highfrequency oscillations in the gamma range .
An important qualiﬁcation, however, is that the 19 frontal
electrodes were recorded in only two patients, and that the
present study did not sample homogeneously from frontal
and parietal structures. Indeed, frontal electrodes were
almost conﬁned to mesiofrontal and peri-insular regions,
whereas dorsolateral prefrontal cortex was simply not
implanted in our sample. In the future, obtaining a better
sampling will be important in order to determine whether the
ignition property is presented in speciﬁc subareas of
prefrontal cortex and in which order they activate.
Beyond the sudden and massive involvement of prefrontal
cortex in conscious access, the hypothesis that conscious
information is ‘‘broadcasted’’ widely in the cortex is also
supported by the incidental observation that although
electrode location was only determined by clinical considerations, up to 68% of electrodes showed an unmasked effect.
This proportion is remarkably high and indicates that a piece
of visual information (here, the presence or absence of a
written word), although initially coded only locally within
occipital cortex, can eventually inﬂuence a great variety of
distant cortical areas. This distributed inﬂuence was exerted
only in the conscious case, since only 24% of electrodes were
affected by masked words.
Naturally, the observation of a voltage deviation to a visible
word does not imply the existence, within each of the
sampled sites, of neurons speciﬁcally tuned to processing of
that word. Rather, the global workspace model postulates that
activation coding for conscious-level information is distributed broadly by pyramidal neurons with long and branching
axons arising from layer II/III neurons, which are particularly
dense in prefrontal and cingulate cortex . Diffusion of
workspace activation along those axons would lead to a
measurable depolarization in the dendritic trees of many
target neurons, as observed here, even if many of those target
neurons need not ﬁre in response to this ‘‘broadcast.’’
According to Shanahan and Baars , the broadcasting
property of the workspace architecture, by allowing many
areas to simultaneously receive the same signal and, in
parallel, determine its relevance to them, may provide the
ﬁrst elements of a solution to the ‘‘frame problem,’’ i.e., the
fast shifting of information relevant to the organism’s goals.
Whatever its ultimate functional interpretation, the present
observation shows clearly that conscious information is
indeed made available simultaneously to many cortical sites.
In the future, replications studies in epileptic patients
implanted with both iEEG electrodes and with microelectrodes appropriate for single-unit recording could, in
principle, dissociate action potentials from postsynaptic
dendritic integration, as was observed in macaques .
Recent single-unit recordings in epileptic patients support
the feasibility of such developments .
Phase synchrony and causality. In our data, only the
unmasked stimuli were associated with a signiﬁcant increase
of phase synchrony between distant pairs of electrodes in the
beta range of stereoelectroencephalographic (SEEG) frequencies (13–30 Hz, peaking around 20 Hz). This effect occurred
in the late 300–500-ms time window and was simply absent
for masked words. This result supports our prediction that
conscious access involves an improved long-distance exchange of information across a very broad cortical network.
Interestingly, this increase of coherence between distant
brain regions occurred during the same temporal window
where long-lasting iERP effects and late ERSP effects were
seen (alpha and beta suppression and high-gamma increase).
This ﬁnding suggests that all three electrophysiological
measures may reﬂect different aspects of a single phenomenon. Long-distance coherence between distant regions
appears to co-occur with the active maintenance of locally
coded representations.
The last measure that we used to assess long-distance
communication between distant cortical sites examined the
causal relations between pairs of electrodes. We observed an
increased causal gain exclusively for the conscious processing
of unmasked stimuli during the 200–500-ms time window.
Again, late causal changes (.300 ms) were simply absent for
masked words. The conscious increase in causal gain was
bidirectional, but with a small and marginally signiﬁcant
causal imbalance suggesting that the dominant direction of
causality was from posterior to anterior electrodes. This
observation is consistent with the global workspace theory’s
prediction that conscious access occurs during a late time
period and is dominated by an inﬂow of perceptual
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
March 2009 | Volume 7 | Issue 3 | e1000061
Electrophysiology of Conscious Access
information from posterior visual areas into hierarchy higher
frontal and parietal cortices .
Given that all recordings were obtained from patients with
focal epilepsy, it could be argued that Granger causality
results were affected by the epileptic focus driving surrounding brain regions. However, several considerations minimize
the impact of this potential physiological artifact. First,
electrodes providing abnormally ample voltage in more than
5% of trials, corresponding mostly to epileptic events, were
systematically excluded from our analyses. Second, all trials
were submitted to stringent rejection criterion, based both
on voltage amplitude and on spectral time-frequency plots.
Third, observing a strong occipital to frontal causal imbalance across all electrodes gathered from all patients suggests
that this pattern is independent from the speciﬁc localization
of their various epileptic foci. Fourth, this hypothesis would
require a replicable time-locking of epileptic activity with
respect to the onset of visual stimulation across patients, an
infrequent and unlikely possibility. Still, it will be important
to replicate the causality analysis in normal controls, using
either MEG or high-density EEG measures.
Nonpredicted Results
Beta-band rather than gamma-band phase synchrony. As
noted in the introduction, neuronal simulations of the global
workspace architecture predicted that conscious access would
correlate with increases in phase synchrony at frequencies
within a large gamma band ranging from 20–100 Hz, centered
around 40 Hz . Actually, such increases in synchrony
appeared in the beta frequency range (13–30 Hz), where
spectral power decreased, rather than in the gamma range
where the largest increases in induced power (ERSP) were
The present ﬁnding, however, is not an isolated one. In the
macaque monkey, Buschman and Miller, in their study of topdown versus bottom-up shifts in attention , found a
greater increase in a low-frequency band (22–34 Hz) for topdown shifts of attention and a greater increase of synchrony
in a higher band (35–55 Hz) for bottom-up shifts. Most
directly relevant to conscious access, Gross et al. , using
MEG in humans, observed that the main correlate of target
visibility during the attentional blink paradigm was a massive
change in beta-band synchrony across distant frontal and
parietal sites. Intracranial recordings in macaques and
epileptic humans showed a similar pattern, with local
gamma-range synchrony and long-distance beta-range synchrony . Note also that several studies dedicated to the
binding problem in perception seem compatible with
this explanatory framework. The ﬁrst experimental contribution to the hypothesis of assembly coding signaled by
gamma oscillatory synchrony came from recordings in area
17 of the anesthetized cat . Recordings in distant areas in
the cat, and scalp EEG studies in humans showed long-range
coherence in low-frequency bands (theta and alpha, 4–12 Hz),
whereas local coherence effects were predominantly observed
within the gamma band . Likewise, von Stein and
colleagues suggested, on the basis of local ﬁeld potential (LFP)
data in cats, that long-distance top-down effects could be
mediated by middle band activities (4–30 Hz), whereas local
bottom-up effects would affect gamma-band frequencies .
At the theoretical level, a systematic relation may indeed
exist between the size of a neuronal assembly and the
frequency at which it can sustain synchronized oscillations.
As suggested by Pascal Fries, gamma oscillations in cortical
areas, with periods of 10 to 30 ms, may synchronize only in
the face of short conduction delays (1–3 ms) and may
therefore contribute to locally coded thalamocortical representations . When the recorded neuronal groups are more
distant, phase-coherent oscillations are often found in the
lower-frequency beta range , probably because their
slower period (30–80 ms) allows them to resist the longer
conduction delays (5–15 ms) needed to bridge large cortical
distances. Thus, beta-coherent oscillations may preferentially
subserve long-distance synchronization and broadcasting. In
the future, it will be important to incorporate this effect in
the global workspace simulations, as well as to account for the
observed decrease in power that accompanies the increase in
beta synchrony in our data.
Late effects during nonconscious processing. Most (75%) of
the iERP effects elicited by masked words were conﬁned to an
early time window (,500 ms), in accordance with the usual
ﬂeeting lifetime of unconscious processes. However, a rather
high proportion (25%) of these unconscious iERP effects
were still observable and signiﬁcant at latencies around 600–
700 ms after word onset. This result replicates and extends
our previous observation of late unconscious modulations of
amygdala activity by the emotional valence of masked words
in a close but distinct paradigm . These late unconscious
effects call for theoretical reﬁnements, as the global workspace model and many other proposals predicted a fast decay
of subliminal activity . We may conceive of at least
two nonexclusive explanations. First, these late effects may
reﬂect a reverberation of activation within local cortical or
thalamic loops, enabling their maintenance over an unusually
long time window. Note, however, that neither phase
synchrony nor Granger causality measures could detect any
local reverberations for masked stimuli beyond 300 ms (see
Results), raising the issue of their level of sensitivity. Second,
subjects were actively engaged in the forced-choice discrimination task and tried to overcome visual masking by focusing
their attention on the stimuli, as reﬂected in their long RTs
(see Results). Such top-down attentional ampliﬁcation of
perceptual processors may improve their ability to maintain
the ﬂeeting stimulus information and thus cause a late iERP
effect for masked words. Indeed, the existence of such topdown effects on subliminal processing was inferred from
behavioral measures in other masking paradigms .
Reverse pattern of causality during nonconscious processing. Interestingly, a reversed pattern of causality was observed
for masked words during the intermediate-latency time
window (200–300 ms), with causal relations now ﬂowing from
anterior towards posterior electrodes. This observation was
unpredicted. However, it may again be explained by an
effortful top-down attentional ampliﬁcation of the masked
stimuli, thus creating a temporary ﬂow of activity between
anterior regions and posterior visual processors. Several
studies have previously noted how attention and consciousness differ, in that attention can be oriented towards
nonconscious stimuli and inﬂuence them without yet allowing them to cross the threshold for conscious access
 . In this respect, our results bear similar
with those of Buschman and Miller , who used single-cell
recordings in the awake monkey to demonstrate a top-down
frontoparietal sequence of activity accompanied by beta
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
March 2009 | Volume 7 | Issue 3 | e1000061
Electrophysiology of Conscious Access
frequency increases during a difﬁcult visual search task
(although their study did not evaluate consciousness or
Granger causality).
Note that the calculation of causality requires computing a
temporally shifted regression over a relatively large time
window (here, 320 ms). Thus, it is likely that only temporally
sustained causal effects can be detected with this index. This
feature may explain why the initial nonconscious feedforward
sweep that we inferred from iERPs did not lead to a
measurable causal gain with a posterior to anterior causal
imbalance. Our causal gain measure seems sensitive only to
long-lasting causal effects, and largely blind to fast and
transient propagations of neural activity.
Limits of the Present Paradigm
It is important to keep in mind the limits of the present
paradigm. First, when comparing the neural activity elicited
respectively by a masked word and by an unmasked word, as
was done here, one is actually comparing the correlates of a
conscious representation with those of a degraded nonconscious representation. Early differences are therefore not
guaranteed to isolate a neural signature of conscious
processing per se . Indeed, Del Cul et al. demonstrated
that early visual components such as the P1b, N1, or N2 are
affected by masking, yet do not meet the criteria for a strong
one-to-one correlation with subjective reports of conscious
experience. It therefore seems likely that the early iERP
differences that we observed at occipital sites only reﬂected
the early and not-yet conscious effects of masking (see, for
instance, the peak of activity observed on occipital lobe
electrodes on Figure 4, bottom right panel). The three
additional markers of conscious processing that occurred
later on, around 300 ms, synchronous to the activation of
frontal regions, appear to be more consistent with the
existing literature on electrophysiological correlates of
conscious access . Indeed, they concur nicely with
ERP results obtained in the attentional blink , a
paradigm that may be more appropriate for answering the
early versus late debate because it involves an undegraded
stimulus that is only made invisible by central competition.
A second limitation relates to task confounds. In the
present work, some of the observed differences might
correspond to differences between a task being performed
(in the conscious condition) and a task not being performed
(in the nonconscious condition). Once a word was consciously
perceived, subjects were able to complete the requested
semantic emotional categorization task, a complex decision
that presumably requires high-level coordination of multiple
brain areas. In the masked condition, on the other hand,
although subjects still responded to the task, objective
performance was by chance. Some of the neurophysiological
differences that we reported between masked and unmasked
words might therefore be related to task performance rather
than to conscious access itself.
Mitigating this criticism, however, is the fact that our task
appeared to be more difﬁcult for masked words than for
unmasked ones, as indicated by longer RTs and by informal
subject reports. Indeed, the observed imbalance in the topdown direction for masked words not observed for unmasked
words in the 200–300-ms window suggests that nonconscious
processing was not free of attentional effects.
Nevertheless, an important direction for future research
will be to minimize task differences while still comparing
neural activity associated with conscious and nonconscious
perception. Passive viewing of stimuli could be a valuable
instruction, but does not guarantee an absence of task
differences (indeed, it seems obvious that subjects would
continue to read and to memorize the conscious words, but
not the nonconscious words). The task problem is notoriously
difﬁcult because performance levels are very rarely identical
under nonconscious and conscious conditions. Nevertheless,
using ‘‘blindsight’’ conditions with unseen but better than
chance performance, matched with seen but degraded
performance, Lau and Passingham used fMRI to identify
an activation of dorsolateral prefrontal cortex that was
speciﬁcally associated with conscious experience. This type
of paradigm may be usefully complemented with intracranial
recordings.
We close this issue with a general consideration, initially
put forward by phenomenological philosophers : whenever a subject is conscious, he is necessarily conscious of a
given mental content. Consciousness is an transitive or
‘‘intentional’’ process (it is ‘‘about’’ a certain content), and
therefore it may be illusory to look for a ‘‘pure’’ form of
consciousness independent of its particular contents and of
the tasks that it affords. Applied to neuroscientiﬁc experiments, this property of consciousness implies that when
imaging a brain having some conscious experience, we will
necessarily observe activations corresponding to a speciﬁc
conscious content. Nevertheless, satisfactory solutions to
overcome this major limitation may exist. For instance, it
could be particularly relevant to replicate the present results
while manipulating the subjects’ task. This track of research
may look for the common and invariant correlates of
conscious access, irrespective of the task being performed
and of the speciﬁc mental content being probed. Plausible
candidates include late brain-scale activation and beta
synchrony, since they were observed in the present results
as well as other EEG and MEG studies of conscious perception
 , with various tasks of letter perception, word reading,
or digit comparison.
Toward a Neural Signature of Conscious Access
The main motivation of our study was to probe the
convergence of multiple neurophysiological measures of
brain activity in order to deﬁne candidate neural signatures
of conscious access. Conscious word processing was associated with the following four markers: (1) sustained iERPs
within a late time window (.300 ms after stimulus presentation); (2) sustained and late spectral power changes, combining a high-gamma increase, beta suppression, and alpha
blockage; (3) sustained and late increases in long-range phase
coherence in the beta range; and (4) sustained and late
increases in long-range causal relations.
Our results suggest that in the search for neural correlates
of consciousness, time-domain, frequency-domain, and causality-based electrophysiological measures should not be seen
as competing possibilities. Rather, all of these measures may
provide distinct glimpses into the same distributed state of
long-distance reverberation. Indeed, it seems to be the
convergence of these measures in a late time window, rather
than the mere presence of any single one of them, that best
characterizes conscious trials. For instance, masked words
also elicited signiﬁcant iERPs and signiﬁcant increases in
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
March 2009 | Volume 7 | Issue 3 | e1000061
Electrophysiology of Conscious Access
spectral power in the gamma band, contemporary with shortrange synchronies in the beta range during the 200–300-ms
window. Yet, those words were not consciously accessed,
which implies that neither iERPs (even those recorded from
frontal cortex), nor gamma-band activity or beta synchrony
per se are unique markers of conscious experience. Our
results suggest that only late sustained long-distance synchrony and late ampliﬁcation (.300 ms) may be causally
related to conscious-level processing.
There are yet other mathematical measures derived from
nonlinear dynamics that could have been applied to our
dataset, such as dimensional activation or neural
complexity , although some of them remain to be
made operational in a computationally tractable manner. We
consider it likely that these measures would also show a
pattern unique to conscious perception. The present work
suggests that, rather than hoping for a putative unique
marker (the neural correlate of consciousness), a more mature
view of conscious processing should consider that it relates to
a distributed pattern of brain activation that occurs at a
speciﬁc level within a complex anatomical and functional
architecture, and that it can therefore be reﬂected by many
partially overlapping physiological measures.
Materials and Methods
Ethics statement. Experiments were approved by the Ethical
Committee for Biomedical Research of Pitie´-Salpeˆtrie`re Hospital in
Paris , participants
gave informed consent, and all clinical investigation have been
conducted according to the principles expressed in the Declaration
of Helsinki.
Patients. Ten patients (ﬁve men) suffering from drug-refractory
epilepsy were stereotactically implanted with depth electrodes as part
of a presurgical evaluation. One patient was implanted twice. Patient
ages ranged from 18 to 47 y. Eight patients were right-handed; one
man was left-handed; one woman was ambidextrous. Neuropsychological assessment revealed normal or mild impairment in general
cognitive functioning: verbal IQ ranged from 65 to 97 and performance IQ from 64 to 120.
Experimental protocol. On each trial, patients were randomly
presented either with a masked word (33%), a masked blank (17%), a
visible word (33%), or a visible blank (17%). A total number of 548
trials were presented for each patient. Words or blanks were
presented for 29 ms and were preceded by a visual forward mask
(string of hash signs [#]) presented for 71 ms, and were followed by a
backward mask (string of ampersands [&]) presented for 400 ms (see
Figure 1). Words or blanks were made visible by simply removing the
backward mask. Although mask removal in itself affected brain
activity, in order to discard the activation induced by the masks, we
systematically subtracted each word-present condition with its
corresponding blank condition, thus isolating the processing path
of the masked or unmasked word.
In order to maximize attentional engagement and word processing, participants were engaged in a forced-choice task of categorizing
each word as threatening or nonthreatening, even on the masked
trials. Subjects responded by manually pressing one of two response
buttons with the left and right index ﬁngers, and hand response
instructions were inverted halfway through the experiment. To
prevent automatic stimulus–response learning, we used two distinct
sets of 92 French words each for the masked trials and the visible
trials, so that the masked words were never seen consciously. In each
list, half of the words were threatening (e.g., danger, kill), with variable
frequencies, lengths (three to eight letters) and lexical categories
(verbs and nouns). The other half included nonthreatening, emotionally neutral words (e.g., cousin, see), matched for frequency, length,
and category.
Behavioral measures. RTs of less than 250 ms or more than 5,000
ms were discarded. Median RTs were calculated for each patient and
for each condition. RTs were compared across conditions using
analysis of variance (ANOVA) F-tests. For each patient, we also
computed objective discriminability (d9) separately for each of the
two masking conditions. We then assessed better-than-chance
performance on d9 using both individual and group statistical
criteria. First, individual v2 statistics were calculated for each
condition: proportions of correct and incorrect responses to
emotional and neutral words were compared with those in the
expected random distribution. Second, group analysis was performed using a Z-test testing distributions of d9 against a zerocentered Gaussian.
Intracranial recordings. Patients were implanted intracerebrally
with depth electrodes, each bearing four to eight recording sites (Ad-
Tech Medical Instruments). Recording sites were 2.3-mm long, 1-mm
diameter cylinders, separated by a distance of 10 mm. The structures
to be explored were deﬁned on the basis of ictal manifestations,
electroencephalography (EEG), and neuroimaging studies. For each
recording site, the Cartesian coordinates (x, y, z) were calculated after
normalization of the anatomical three-dimensional spoiled gradient
recalled (SPGR) anatomical cerebral MRI into Talairach space using
SPM2 (Matlab).
iERPs processing. iERPs were digitized at 400 Hz, referenced to the
vertex (Nicolet-BMSI). Epochs were then extracted (500 ms plus
1,000 ms from word onset), submitted to automatic artifact rejection
(6300-mV threshold), visually inspected, and notch ﬁltered (50 Hz)
using EEGLAB software (Matlab) . Recording sites with more than
5% of rejected trials were discarded from analysis. To maximally
prevent the measurement of the same electrical signals by multiple
sites, for instance, through the common vertex reference, bipolar
montages were calculated by subtracting the signals recorded from
adjacent sites belonging to the same-depth electrode. This calculation
resulted in a total of 176 bipolar recordings (here called ‘‘electrodes’’
for simplicity) across ten patients (corresponding to 11 distinct
implantations). For each bipolar montage, the Cartesian coordinates
(x, y, z) were calculated as the medium location of the two adjacent
recording sites, resulting in the following anatomical repartition: 55
electrodes in the occipital lobe, 78 in the temporal lobe, 24 in the
parietal lobe, and 19 within frontal lobes. For simplicity, in the
remnant of this paper, we refer to these recomputed bipolar
montages as ‘‘electrodes.’’ Eighty-two electrodes were recorded
within the left hemisphere and 94 in the right hemisphere. Baseline
correction (from 500 to 0 ms before word onset) was applied, and
potentials were averaged from500 up to 800 ms in order to keep the
same temporal windows for ERPs and time-frequency measures.
We used a three-step strategy to assess the statistical signiﬁcance of
our results. First, the ERPs of masked words or of unmasked words
were compared with those of masked or unmasked blanks by using
sample-by-sample t-tests, with a criterion of signiﬁcance being set at p
, 0.001 for a minimum of ﬁve consecutive samples. Second, we
further checked the statistical signiﬁcance of the observed effects
(number of consecutive samples with p , 0.001 on t-test) through
Monte Carlo permutations. This method provides an estimation of
type I error rate (false positives) by using resampling procedures.
Precisely, for each patient and for each electrode showing a
signiﬁcant effect, we computed 20,000 random permutations of the
observed trials in two surrogate conditions: trials were randomly
assigned to one of the two groups, and then for each permutation, we
counted the number of surrogate effects satisfying the observed effect
anywhere within a time window of 0–1,000 ms after stimulus onset.
Third, statistical values obtained in the Monte Carlo procedure were
corrected for multiple comparisons across electrodes using the false
discovery rate procedure . The false discovery rate of a test is
deﬁned as the expected proportion of false positives among the
declared signiﬁcant results.
Spectral analyses. Spectral analysis is exquisitely sensitive to small
subcritical epileptic events of small amplitude, which are often hard
to detect on conventional voltage time series yet can severely impact
on time-frequency diagrams. For spectral analysis, our ﬁrst stage was
therefore a visual inspection of the individual time-frequency
diagrams of all electrodes. Artifacts, in the form of large broad-band
excursions on occasional trials, were detected in 19 additional
electrodes that were therefore eliminated from further analysis. For
the remaining 147 electrodes, we used the ‘newtimef’ and ‘newcrossf’
functions of EEGLAB software to estimate and plot, respectively,
the mean event-related (log) spectral perturbation (ERSP) and ITC
around word onset. As illustrated in Figures 5 and 6, ERSP and ITC
were ﬁrst calculated separately within each of the four conditions,
then the word-present and word-absent conditions within each
masking condition were subtracted from each other to yield a timefrequency plot of masked and unmasked effects. We used a
prestimulus baseline correction over 400 to 0 ms, and all results
are expressed as increases or decreases relative to this baseline . Calculation was based on successive windows of 128
samples (¼ 320 ms) centered on time points 500 to 1,000 ms around
stimulus onset. In order to avoid windowing artifacts, we only report
results over a window of 400 to 800 ms. We used EEGLAB’s default
algorithm (fast Fourier transform with Hanning window tapering), a
frequency range of 0–100 Hz, and a padding ratio of 1. Prior to
computation, individual trials were linearly detrended, and the mean
ERP in each condition was removed. Thus, our analysis was aimed at
detecting ‘‘induced’’ oscillatory activity, temporally associated with
the stimuli but not phase-synchronized with them, while discarding
any phase-synchronous ‘‘evoked’’ activity .
Because of the larger number of available electrodes, times, and
frequencies, calculating a corrected-level statistic that evaluates the
level of signiﬁcance of a given time-frequency change in a given
electrode poses a severe statistical problem. For simplicity, we
therefore only tested signiﬁcance of effects across groups of electrodes and time-frequency regions of interest. For statistical purposes,
we distinguished three time periods (100–200, 200–300, and 300–500
ms relative to word onset) and four frequency bands (alpha ¼ 8–13
Hz; beta ¼ 13–30 Hz; low gamma ¼ 30–50 Hz; and high gamma ¼ 50–
100 Hz), thus deﬁning 12 time-frequency regions of interest. For each
region, we then computed the mean ERSP for each of the 147
electrodes, and then performed t-tests across electrodes to evaluate
the signiﬁcance of the activity induced by masked and unmasked
words relative to zero (i.e., relative to prestimulus baseline) and
relative to each other. Unless otherwise stated, p-values are
Bonferroni corrected for the 12 regions tested, and we only report
Bonferroni-corrected effects at p , 0.05. Identical analyses were
performed on mean phase synchrony, except that there were now
measures from 1,283 electrode pairs.
Granger causality. We adapted a Matlab software package
developed by Anil K. Seth . Because our goal was to establish
whether relations of causality between electrodes change in the
course of the trial, we performed our analyses on successive time
windows of 320-ms width, spaced every 25 ms, with Hanning window
tapering. For each such window, for each of the four experimental
conditions, and for each pair of distinct electrodes (i, j), the software
computed two linear regressions. The ﬁrst is an autoregressive model
that predicts the signal observed on electrode i at time t based on the
signal of the same electrode i at previous times tdt, t2dt,. . . tndt.
The second model is a causal model that adds as regressors to the
above regression the signals of the other electrode j measured at
previous times t  dt, t  2dt,. . . t ndt. Here the value of n was ﬁxed at
eight retrospective samples (¼20-ms retrospective time window) after
piloting showed essentially similar results with n ¼ 4 or n ¼ 16. An
associated F-value then probes whether the second causal regression
accounted for signiﬁcantly more variance than the ﬁrst autoregressive model, indicating a putative causal inﬂuence of electrode j on
electrode i (see Figure 9 for an example). Seth suggests using
the logarithm of the F-test as an index of causality strength, but a
problem with this index is that it varies with the number of trials,
which differed in the word-present and word-absent conditions .
We therefore used a causal index independent of run length: the
amount of residual variance that was gained by the second model
compared to the ﬁrst, expressed as a percentage of the residual
variance in the second model.
A general ﬁnding (see, e.g., Figure 9) was that the presentation of
the masks alone already created a considerable increase in Granger
causality relative to the baseline. Because we were interested in the
further increases due to the presence of the words, over and above
the effect of the masks, we calculated a ‘‘causal gain’’ by subtracting
the causal index in the word-absent condition from the causal index
in the word-present condition.
Finally, note that the causal gain is still a directional measure: there
are distinct causal gains for the effects of electrode j onto electrode i
and vice-versa. In the results section, we therefore perform the
analysis in two steps: (1) analysis of the mean causal gain, averaged
across the two directions of causality, thus probing the existence of
causal relations independently of their direction; (2) analysis of the
‘‘causal imbalance,’’ obtained by subtracting the causal gains in the
feedforward and feedback directions, thus probing the existence of a
preferred direction of causality. For the latter analysis, we deﬁned the
feedforward direction as a causal inﬂuence of the more posterior
electrode onto the more anterior electrode (in case their y
coordinates were identical, we used the z coordinate to deﬁne as
feedforward an effect of the lowest onto the highest electrode). A
positive causal imbalance, therefore, indicated stronger causality in
the feedforward or bottom-up direction, and a negative causal
imbalance indicated a stronger feedback or top-down causality.
Statistical signiﬁcance was evaluated by t-tests over the 1,806
electrode pairs, on causal gains averaged over time windows of
100–200, 200–300, and 300–500 ms. Unless otherwise state, p-values
are Bonferroni corrected for the three windows tested.
Supporting Information
Figure S1. Spatial Distribution of Masked and Unmasked Effects
Cumulative distributions of ERP effects are plotted against the
anterior–posterior axis of Talairach’s referential system (y coordinate) for the masked (red) and for the unmasked (green) conditions,
respectively. The blue curve represents the electrode distribution.
Unmasked effects are distributed homogeneously across the electrodes, whereas the distribution of the masked effects is skewed
towards posterior electrodes.
Found at doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1000061.sg001 (74 KB PPT).
Figure S2. ERSP Effects Separated by Lobes
Time-frequency diagrams of mean ERSPs averaged by lobes for
masked (left) and unmasked (right) effects. Color indicates log of
power variation relative to baseline.
Found at doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1000061.sg002 (650 KB PPT).
Figure S3. Granger Causal Imbalance in Two Time Windows
Glass brains are superimposed with segments linking, for each
patient, all pairs of implanted electrodes. Segments are colored and
sized according to the intensity of the feedforward (red) or feedback
(blue) causal imbalance, calculated respectively in the 200–300 ms (A)
and in the 300–500 ms (B) time windows after word onset. The same
scale was used for masked (left column) and unmasked effects (right
Found at doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1000061.sg003 (714 KB PPT).
Video S1. Absolute Values of iERPs Difference (microVolts) between
Word-Present and Word-Absent in the Masked Condition
Only electrodes showing a signiﬁcant effect are displayed as red
squares. Square size and color intensity are proportional to the
absolute voltage difference between the word and blank conditions.
Time ranges from 4 ms after word onset to 799 ms, with 5-ms
increments.
Found at doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1000061.sv001 (9.38 MB AVI).
Video S2. Absolute Values of iERPs Difference (microVolts) between
Word-Present and Word-Absent in the Unmasked Condition
Only electrodes showing a signiﬁcant effect are displayed as red
squares. Square size and color intensity are proportional to the
absolute voltage difference between the word and blank conditions.
Time ranges from 4 ms after word onset to 799 ms, with 5-ms
increments.
Found at doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1000061.sv002 (9.77 MB AVI).
Video S3. ERSP Difference (dB) in the High-Gamma Band (50–100
Hz) in the Masked Condition
Only electrodes showing a signiﬁcant ERSP increase are displayed as
red squares. Square size and color intensity are proportional to the
absolute ERSP difference between the word and blank conditions.
Time ranges from 2 ms after word onset to 800 ms, with 8-ms
increments.
Found at doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1000061.sv003 (5.70 MB AVI).
Video S4. ERSP Difference (dB) in the High-Gamma Band (50–100
Hz) in the Unmasked Condition
Only electrodes showing a signiﬁcant ERSP increase are displayed as
red squares. Square size and color intensity are proportional to the
absolute ERSP difference between the word and blank conditions.
Time ranges from 2 ms after word onset to 800 ms, with 8-ms
increments.
Found at doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1000061.sv004 (5.97 MB AVI).
Acknowledgments
We thank the patients for participating in this study.
Author contributions. RG, SD, and LN conceived and designed the
experiments. RG and LN performed the experiments. RG, SD, LC,
and LN analyzed the data. CA, SC, DH, and MB contributed reagents/
materials/analysis tools. RG, SD, LC, and LN wrote the paper.
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
March 2009 | Volume 7 | Issue 3 | e1000061
Electrophysiology of Conscious Access
Funding. This work was supported by the Institut pour le Cerveau
et la Moe¨lle e´pinie`re (ICM Institute, Paris, France), by INSERM, and
by the Fe´de´ration Franc¸aise pour la Recherche sur l’Epilepsie and the
Acade´mie Nationale de Me´decine (RG). The funders had no role in
study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or
preparation of the manuscript.
Competing interests. The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.