UvA-DARE is a service provided by the library of the University of Amsterdam ( 
UvA-DARE (Digital Academic Repository)
Findings of the 2016 Conference on Machine Translation (WMT16)
Bojar, O.; Chatterjee, R.; Federmann, C.; Graham, Y.; Haddow, B.; Huck, M.; Jimeno Yepes,
A.; Koehn, P.; Logacheva, V.; Monz, C.; Negri, M.; Névéol, A.; Neves, M.; Popel, M.; Post, M.;
Rubino, R.; Scarton, C.; Specia, L.; Turchi, M.; Verspoor, K.; Zampieri, M.
10.18653/v1/W16-2301
Publication date
Document Version
Final published version
 
Proceedings of the First Conference on Machine Translation
Link to publication
Citation for published version (APA):
Bojar, O., Chatterjee, R., Federmann, C., Graham, Y., Haddow, B., Huck, M., Jimeno Yepes,
A., Koehn, P., Logacheva, V., Monz, C., Negri, M., Névéol, A., Neves, M., Popel, M., Post, M.,
Rubino, R., Scarton, C., Specia, L., Turchi, M., ... Zampieri, M. . Findings of the 2016
Conference on Machine Translation (WMT16). In Proceedings of the First Conference on
Machine Translation: Berlin, Germany, August 11-12, 2016 (Vol. 2, pp. 131-198). Association
for Computational Linguistics. 
General rights
It is not permitted to download or to forward/distribute the text or part of it without the consent of the author(s)
and/or copyright holder(s), other than for strictly personal, individual use, unless the work is under an open
content license (like Creative Commons).
Disclaimer/Complaints regulations
If you believe that digital publication of certain material infringes any of your rights or (privacy) interests, please
let the Library know, stating your reasons. In case of a legitimate complaint, the Library will make the material
inaccessible and/or remove it from the website. Please Ask the Library: or a letter
to: Library of the University of Amsterdam, Secretariat, Singel 425, 1012 WP Amsterdam, The Netherlands. You
will be contacted as soon as possible.
Download date:26 Mar 2025
Proceedings of the First Conference on Machine Translation, Volume 2: Shared Task Papers, pages 131–198,
Berlin, Germany, August 11-12, 2016. c⃝2016 Association for Computational Linguistics
Findings of the 2016 Conference on Machine Translation (WMT16)
Ondˇrej Bojar
Charles University
Rajen Chatterjee
Christian Federmann
Microsoft Research
Yvette Graham
Dublin City University
Barry Haddow
Univ. of Edinburgh
Matthias Huck
LMU Munich
Antonio Jimeno Yepes
IBM Research Australia
Philipp Koehn
JHU / Edinburgh
Varvara Logacheva
Univ. of Shefﬁeld
Christof Monz
Univ. of Amsterdam
Matteo Negri
Aur´elie N´ev´eol
LIMSI-CNRS
Mariana Neves
HPI/Potsdam
Martin Popel
Charles University
Johns Hopkins Univ.
Raphael Rubino
Saarland University
Carolina Scarton
Univ. of Shefﬁeld
Lucia Specia
Univ. of Shefﬁeld
Marco Turchi
Karin Verspoor
Univ. of Melbourne
Marcos Zampieri
Saarland University
This paper presents the results of the
WMT16 shared tasks, which included ﬁve
machine translation (MT) tasks (standard
news, IT-domain, biomedical, multimodal,
pronoun), three evaluation tasks (metrics,
tuning, run-time estimation of MT quality), and an automatic post-editing task
and bilingual document alignment task.
This year, 102 MT systems from 24 institutions (plus 36 anonymized online systems) were submitted to the 12 translation
directions in the news translation task. The
IT-domain task received 31 submissions
from 12 institutions in 7 directions and the
Biomedical task received 15 submissions
systems from 5 institutions.
Evaluation
was both automatic and manual (relative
ranking and 100-point scale assessments).
The quality estimation task had three subtasks, with a total of 14 teams, submitting
39 entries. The automatic post-editing task
had a total of 6 teams, submitting 11 entries.
Introduction
We present the results of the shared tasks of the
First Conference on Statistical Machine Translation (WMT) held at ACL 2016.
This conference builds on nine previous WMT workshops
 .
This year we conducted several ofﬁcial tasks.
We report in this paper on ﬁve tasks:
• news translation (§2, §3)
• IT-domain translation (§4)
• biomedical translation (§5)
• quality estimation (§6)
• automatic post-editing (§7)
The conference featured additional shared tasks
that are described in separate papers in these proceedings:
• tuning 
• metrics 
• cross-lingual pronoun prediction 
• multimodal machine translation and crosslingual image description 
• bilingual document alignment 
In the news translation task (§2), participants
were asked to translate a shared test set, optionally restricting themselves to the provided training data. We held 12 translation tasks this year,
between English and each of Czech, German,
Finnish, Russian, Romanian, and Turkish.
Romanian and Turkish translation tasks were new
this year, providing a lesser resourced data condition on challenging language pairs. The system
outputs for each task were evaluated both automatically and manually.
The human evaluation (§3) involves asking
human judges to rank sentences output by
anonymized systems.
We obtained large numbers of rankings from researchers who contributed
evaluations proportional to the number of tasks
they entered. We made data collection more efﬁcient and used TrueSkill as ranking method. We
also explored a novel way of ranking machine
translation systems by judgments of adequacy and
ﬂuency on a 100-point scale.
The IT translation task (§4) was introduced this
year and focused on domain adaptation of MT to
the IT (information technology) domain and translation of answers in a cross-lingual help-desk service, where hardware&software troubleshooting
answers are translated from English to the users’
languages: Bulgarian, Czech, German, Spanish,
Basque, Dutch and Portuguese. Similarly as in the
News translation task, training and test data were
provided and the system outputs were evaluated
both automatically and manually.
Another task newly introduced this year was
the biomedical translation task (§5). Participants
were asked to translate the titles and abstracts of
scientiﬁc articles indexed in the Scielo database.
Training and test data were provided for two subdomains, biological sciences and health sciences,
and three language pairs, Portuguese/English,
Spanish/English and French/English.
therefore provided data for a language not previously covered in WMT, Portuguese. The system
outputs for each language pair were evaluated both
automatically and manually.
The quality estimation task (§6) this year included three subtasks: sentence-level prediction of
post-editing effort scores, word and phrase-level
prediction of good/bad labels, and document-level
prediction of human post-editing scores. Datasets
were released with English→German IT translations for sentence and word/phrase level, and
English↔Spanish news translations for document
The automatic post-editing task (§7) examined
automatic methods for correcting errors produced
by an unknown machine translation system. Participants were provided with training triples containing source, target and human post-edits, and
were asked to return automatic post-edits for unseen (source, target) pairs. In this second round,
the task focused on correcting English→German
translations in the IT domain.
The primary objectives of WMT are to evaluate the state of the art in machine translation, to
disseminate common test sets and public training data with published performance numbers, and
to reﬁne evaluation and estimation methodologies
for machine translation.
As before, all of the
data, translations, and collected human judgments
are publicly available.1
We hope these datasets
serve as a valuable resource for research into statistical machine translation and automatic evaluation or prediction of translation quality. News
and IT translations are also available for interactive visualization and comparison of differences
between systems at using
MT-ComparEval .
News Translation Task
The recurring WMT task examines translation between English and other languages in the news domain. As in the previous years, we include German, Czech, Russian, and Finnish. New languages
this years are Romanian and Turkish.
We created a test set for each language pair by
translating newspaper articles and provided training data.
The test data for this year’s task was selected from
online sources, as before. We took about 1500 English sentences and translated them into the other
5 languages, and then additional 1500 sentences
from each of the other languages and translated
them into English. This gave us test sets of about
3000 sentences for our English-X language pairs,
which have been either originally written in English and translated into X, or vice versa.
composition of the test documents is shown in Table 1.
The stories were translated by professional
translators, funded by the EU Horizon 2020
projects CRACKER and QT21 (German, Czech,
Romanian), by Yandex2, a Russian search engine
company (Turkish, Russian), and by BAULT, a research community on building and using language
technology funded by the University of Helsinki
(Finnish). For Finnish, a second translation was
provided as well, but not used in the evaluation.
All of the translations were done directly, and not
via an intermediate language.
For Turkish we also released an additional 500
sentence development set, and for Romanian a
third of the test set were released as a development
1 
2 
set instead. For the other languages, test sets from
previous years are available as development sets.
Training data
As in past years we provided parallel corpora to
train translation models, monolingual corpora to
train language models, and development sets to
tune system parameters. Some training corpora
were identical from last year (Europarl3, United
Nations, French-English 109 corpus, Common
Crawl, Russian-English parallel data provided by
Yandex, Wikipedia Headlines provided by CMU)
and some were updated , News Commentary v11, monolingual news data).
We added a few new corpora:
• Romanian Europarl 
• SETIMES2 from OPUS for Romanian–
English and Turkish–English 
Some statistics about the training materials are
given in Figure 1.
Submitted systems
We received 102 submissions from 24 institutions. The participating institutions and their entry
names are listed in Table 2; each system did not
necessarily appear in all translation tasks. We also
included 36 online statistical MT systems (originating from 4 services), which we anonymized as
ONLINE-A,B,F,G.
For presentation of the results, systems are
treated as either constrained or unconstrained, depending on whether their models were trained only
on the provided data. Since we do not know how
they were built, these online and commercial systems are treated as unconstrained during the automatic and human evaluations.
Human Evaluation
Each year,
we conduct a human evaluation
campaign to assess translation quality and determine the ﬁnal ranking of candidate systems. This
section describes how we prepared the evaluation
data, collected human assessments, and computed
the ofﬁcial results.
3As of Fall 2011, the proceedings of the European Parliament are no longer translated into all ofﬁcial languages.
Over the past few years, our method of collecting and evaluating the manual translations has
settled into the following pattern.
We ask human annotators to rank the outputs of ﬁve systems.
From these rankings, we produce pairwise translation comparisons, and then evaluate them with a
version of the TrueSkill algorithm adapted to our
task. We refer to this approach (described in Section 3.4) as the relative ranking approach (RR),
so named because the pairwise comparisons denote only relative ability between a pair of systems, and cannot be used to infer their absolute
quality. These results are used to produce the of-
ﬁcial ranking for the WMT 2016 tasks. However,
work in evaluation over the past few years has provided fresh insight into ways to collect direct assessments (DA) of machine translation quality. In
this setting, annotators are asked to provide an assessment of the direct quality of the output of a
system relative to a reference translation. In order to evaluate the potential of this approach for
future WMT evaluations, we conducted a direct
assessment evaluation in parallel. This evaluation,
together with a comparison of the ofﬁcial results,
is described in Section 3.5.
Evaluation campaign overview
Following the trend from previous years, WMT16
ended up being the largest evaluation campaign to
date. Similar to last year, we collected researcherbased judgments only (as opposed to crowdsourcing annotations from a tool like Mechanical
Turk). For the News translation task, a total of
150 individual annotator accounts were involved.
Users came from 33 different research groups and
contributed judgments on 10,833 HITs.
Each HIT comprises three 5-way ranking tasks
for a total of 32,499 such tasks. Under ordinary
circumstances, each of the tasks would correspond
to ten individual pairwise system comparisons denoting whether a system A was judged better than,
worse than, or equivalent to another system B.
However, since many systems have produced the
same outputs for a particular sentence, we are often able to produce more than ten comparisons
(Section 3.2), ending up with a total of 569,287
pairwise annotations—a 75.2% increase over the
expected baseline of 324,990 pairs. This is smaller
than last year’s gain of 87.1% as we have decided
to preserve punctuation differences. Section 3.2
provides more details on our pre-processing.
Europarl Parallel Corpus
German ↔English
Czech ↔English
Finnish ↔English
Romanian ↔English
50,486,398 53,008,851 14,946,399 17,376,433 37,814,266 52,723,296 10,943,404 10,891,847
Distinct words
News Commentary Parallel Corpus
German ↔English
Czech ↔English
Russian ↔English
Distinct words
Common Crawl Parallel Corpus
French ↔English
German ↔English
Czech ↔English
Russian ↔English
91,328,790 81,096,306 54,575,405 58,870,638 3,529,783 3,927,378 21,018,793 21,535,122
Distinct words
United Nations Parallel Corpus
French ↔English
12,886,831
411,916,781
360,341,450
Distinct words
109 Word Parallel Corpus
French ↔English
22,520,400
811,203,407
668,412,817
Distinct words
Yandex 1M Parallel Corpus
Russian ↔English
24,121,459
26,107,293
Distinct words
CzEng Parallel Corpus
Czech ↔English
51,424,584
592,890,104
699,087,647
Distinct words
Wiki Headlines Parallel Corpus
Russian ↔English
Finnish ↔English
Distinct words
Europarl Language Model Data
59,848,044
53,534,167
14,946,399
39,511,068
Distinct words
News Language Model Data
145,573,876
187,008,695
53,383,346
56,371,276
3,355,935,396
3,331,396,767
879,993,532
1,016,368,612
83,112,454
54,793,949
Distinct words
16,166,174
Common Crawl Language Model Data
3,074,921,453
2,872,785,485
333,498,145
1,168,529,851
157,264,161
288,806,234
511,196,951
Words 65,128,419,540 65,154,042,103 6,694,811,063 23,313,060,950 2,935,402,545 8,140,378,873 11,882,126,872
342,760,462
339,983,035
50,162,437
101,436,673
47,083,545
37,846,546
88,463,295
German ↔EN
Russian ↔EN
Finnish ↔EN
Romanian ↔EN
Turkish ↔EN
Figure 1: Statistics for the training and test sets used in the translation task. The number of words and the number of distinct
words (case-insensitive) is based on the provided tokenizer.
Sources (Number of Documents)
ABC News (5), BBC (5), Brisbane Times (2), CBS News (2), CNN (1), Christian Science Monitor (2),
Daily Mail (4), Euronews (1), Fox News (2), Guardian (9), Independent (1), Los Angeles Times (3),
Medical Daily (1), News.com Australia (4), New York Times (1), Reuters (3), Russia Today (2), Scotsman (2), Sky (1), Sydney Morning Herald (5), stv.tv (1), Telegraph (4), The Local (2), Time Magazine (1), UPI (3), Xinhua Net (1).
aktu´alnˇe.cz (2), blesk.cz (3), den´ık.cz (8), e15.cz (2), iDNES.cz (12), ihned.cz (4), lidovky.cz (7),
Novinky.cz (1), tyden.cz (6), ZDN (1).
Wirtschaftsblatt (1), Abendzeitung M¨unchen (1), Abendzeitung N¨urnberg (1), ¨Arztezeitung (1), Aachener Nachrichten (4), Berliner Kurier (1), Borkener Zeitung (1), Come On (1), Die Presse (2),
D¨ulmener Zeitung (2), Euronews (1), Frankfurter Rundschau (1), G¨ottinger Tageblatt (1), Hessische/Nieders¨achsische Allgemeine (1), In Franken (4), Kleine Zeitung (3), Kreisanzeiger (1),
Kreiszeitung (1), Krone (2), Lampertheimer Zeitung (1), Lausitzer Rundschau (1), Merkur (2),
Morgenweb (1), Mitteldeutsche Zeitung (1), NTV (2), Nachrichten.at (6), Neues Deutschland (2),
Neue Presse Coburg (1), Neue Westf¨alische (1), Ostfriesenzeitung (2), Passauer Neue Presse (1),
Rheinzeitung (1), Schwarzw¨alder Bote (1), Segeberger Zeitung (1), Stuttgarter Nachrichten (1),
S¨udkurier (3), Tagesspiegel (1), Teckbote (1), Thueringer Allgemeine (1), Th¨uringische Landeszeitung (1), tz M¨unchen (1), Usinger Anzeiger (6), Volksblatt (3), Westf¨alischer Anzeiger (1),
Weser Kurier (1), Wiesbadener Kurier (2), Westf¨alische Nachrichten (4), Westdeutsche Zeitung (3),
Willhelmshavener Zeitung (1), Yahoo (1).
Aamulehti (4), Etel¨a-Saimaa (2), Etel¨a-Suomen Sanomat (1), Helsingin Sanomat (12), Ilkka (5), Iltalehti (10), Ilta-Sanomat (31), Kaleva (3), Karjalainen (7), Kouvolan Sanomat (2).
168.ru (1), aif (2), altapress.ru (2), argumenti.ru (1), BBC Russian (1), Euronews (2), Fakty (3), Russia
Today (1), Izvestiya (3), Kommersant (13), Lenta (7), lgng (2), MK RU (1), New Look Media (1),
Novaya Gazeta (3), Novinite (1), ogirk.ru (1), pnp.ru (2), rg.ru (1), Rosbalt (2), rusplit.ru (1), Sport
Express (10), trud.ru (2), tumentoday.ru (1), Vedomosti (1), Versia (2), Vesti (11), VM News (1).
National (1), HotNews (1), Info Press (1), Puterea (1), ziare.ro (29), Ziarul de Ias¸i (17)
hurriyet (37), Sabah (26), Zaman (23)
Table 1: Composition of the test set. For more details see the XML test ﬁles. The docid tag gives the source and the date for
each document in the test set, and the origlang tag indicates the original source language.
In total, our human annotators spent nearly 39
days and 3 hours working in Appraise. This gives
an average annotation time of 6.4 hours per user.
The average annotation time per HIT amounts to
5 minutes and 12 seconds. This is a little slower
than last year’s average time of 4 minutes and 53
seconds. Similar to the previous campaign, several of the annotators passed the mark of more
than 100 HITs annotated (the maximum number
being 684) and, again, some worked for more than
24 hours (the most patient annotator contributing
a little over 99 hours of annotation work).
The effort that goes into the manual evaluation campaign each year is impressive, and we
are grateful to all participating individuals and
teams. We believe that human annotation provides
the best decision basis for evaluation of machine
translation output and it is great to see continued
contributions on this large scale.
Data collection
The system ranking is produced from a large set
of pairwise judgments, each of which indicates
the relative quality of the outputs of two systems’
translations of the same input sentence. Annotations are collected in an evaluation campaign that
enlists participants in the shared task to help. Each
team is asked to contribute one hundred so-called
“Human Intelligence Tasks” (HITs) per primary
system submitted.
We continue to use the open-source Appraise4
 tool for our data collection.
Last year, we had provided the following instructions at the top of each HIT page:
You are shown a source sentence followed by several candidate translations.
Your task is to rank the translations from
best to worst (ties are allowed).
This year, in order to optimize screen space we
have streamlined the user interface, removing the
instruction text (which instead was communicated
to annotators outside of the HIT annotation interface) and trimming vertical spacing. A screenshot
of the Appraise relative ranking interface is shown
in Figure 2.
Annotators are asked to rank the outputs from 1
(best) to 5 (worst), with ties permitted. Note that a
lower rank is better, and that this is clear from the
interface design. Annotators can decide to skip a
ranking task but are instructed to do this only as a
last resort, e.g., if the translation candidates shown
on screen are clearly misformatted or contain data
4 
Institution
Aalto University 
ABUMATRAN-*
Abu-MaTran 
AFRL-MITLL
Air Force Research Laboratory / MIT Lincoln Lab 
Adam Mickiewicz Uni. / Uni. Edinburgh 
University of Cambridge 
Carnegie Mellon University
CU-MERGEDTREES
Charles University 
CU-CHIMERA
Charles University 
CU-TAMCHYNA
CU-TECTOMT
Charles University 
Johns Hopkins University 
KIT, KIT-LIMSI
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology 
University of Paris 
University of Munich / Charles University 
Salesforce Metamind 
National Research Council Canada 
NYU-MONTERAL
New York University / University of Montr´eal 
Ergun Bicici 
Polish-Japanese Academy of Inf. Technology 
PROMT Automated Translation Solutions 
QT21 System Combination 
RWTH Aachen 
T ¨UBITAK 
University of Edinburgh 
UEDIN-PBMT
University of Edinburgh 
UEDIN-SYNTAX
University of Edinburgh / University of Munich 
University of Helsinki 
USFD-RESCORING
University of Shefﬁeld 
Uppsala University 
Yandex School of Data Analysis 
ONLINE-[A,B,F,G]
Four online statistical machine translation systems
Table 2: Participants in the shared translation task. Not all teams participated in all language pairs. The translations from the
commercial and online systems were not submitted by their respective companies but were obtained by us, and are therefore
anonymized in a fashion consistent with previous years of the workshop.
Figure 2: Screenshot of the Appraise interface used in the human evaluation campaign. The annotator is presented with a
source segment, a reference translation, and up to ﬁve outputs from competing systems (anonymized and displayed in random
order), and is asked to rank these according to their translation quality, with ties allowed.
issues (wrong language, encoding errors or other,
obvious problems). Similar to last year, only a few
ranking tasks have been skipped in WMT16.
Each HIT consists of three so-called ranking
tasks. In a ranking task, an annotator is presented
with a source segment, a human reference translation, and the outputs of up to ﬁve anonymized
candidate systems, randomly selected from the set
of participating systems, and displayed in random
order. This year, as with last year, we perform a redundancy cleanup as an initial preprocessing step
and create multi-system outputs to avoid confusing annotators with identical content: instead of
selecting ﬁve systems and displaying their (identical) outputs, we select ﬁve distinct outputs, and
then propagate the collected rankings to all the
individual systems within each of the respective
multi-system outputs. Last year, however, nearlyidentical outputs were collapsed if they differed
only on punctuation. Because punctuation is an
important component of producing quality MT
output, this year, we only collapse outputs that
are exactly the same, apart from differences in
nonzero whitespace.
To demonstrate how this works, we provide the
following example. First, consider the case where
we select system outputs directly, instead of the
multi-system outputs described above. Here, we
consider an annotation provided by a judge among
the outputs of systems A, B, F, H, and J:
The joint rankings provided by a ranking task are
then expanded to a set of pairwise rankings produced by considering all
≤10 combinations
of all n ≤5 outputs in the respective ranking task.
Language Pair
Comparisons
Comparisons/Sys
Czech→English
English→Czech
Finnish→English
English→Finnish
German→English
English→German
Romanian→English
English→Romanian
Russian→English
English→Russian
Turkish→English
English→Turkish
Totals WMT16
Table 3: Amount of data (pairwise comparisons after “de-collapsing” multi-system outputs) collected in the WMT16 manual
evaluation campaign. The ﬁnal ﬁve rows report summary information from previous years of the workshop. Note how many
rankings we get for Czech language pairs; these include systems from the tuning shared task.
As the number of outputs n depends on the
number of identical (and, hence, redundant) multisystem outputs in the original data, we end up
getting varying numbers of corresponding binary
judgments. Now, consider the case of multi-system
outputs. If the outputs of system A and F from
above are actually identical, the annotator this year
would see an easier ranking task:5
Both examples would be reduced to the following
set of pairwise judgments:
A > B, A = F, A > H, A < J
B < F, B < H, B < J
F > H, F < J
Here, A > B should be read is “A is ranked
higher than (worse than) B”. Note that by this procedure, the absolute value of ranks and the magnitude of their differences are discarded. In the
5Technically, another distinct output would have been inserted, if possible, so as to present the annotator with ﬁve, but
we ignore that for illustration purposes.
case of multi-system outputs, this set of pairwise
rankings would have been produced with less annotator effort. This productivity gain grows in the
number of systems that produce identical output,
and this situation is quite common, due in part to
the fact that many systems are built on the same
underlying technology. Table 3 has more details.
Annotator agreement
Each year we calculate annotator agreement
scores for the human evaluation as a measure of
the reliability of the rankings. We measured pairwise agreement among annotators using Cohen’s
kappa coefﬁcient (κ) . If P(A) be
the proportion of times that the annotators agree,
and P(E) is the proportion of time that they would
agree by chance, then Cohen’s kappa is:
κ = P(A) −P(E)
Note that κ is basically a normalized version of
P(A), one which takes into account how meaningful it is for annotators to agree with each other
by incorporating P(E). The values for κ range
from 0 to 1, with zero indicating no agreement and
1 perfect agreement.
We calculate P(A) by examining all pairs of
Language Pair
Czech→English
English→Czech
German→English
English→German
French→English
English→French
Russian→English
English→Russian
Finnish→English
English→Finnish
Romanian→English
English→Romanian
Turkish→English
English→Turkish
Table 4: κ scores measuring inter-annotator agreement for WMT16. See Table 5 for corresponding intra-annotator agreement
scores. WMT14–WMT16 results are based on researchers’ judgments only, whereas prior years mixed judgments of researchers
and crowdsourcers.
outputs6 which had been judged by two or more
judges, and calculating the proportion of time that
they agreed that A < B, A = B, or A > B. In
other words, P(A) is the empirical, observed rate
at which annotators agree, in the context of pairwise comparisons.
As for P(E), it captures the probability that two
annotators would agree randomly. Therefore:
P(E) = P(A<B)2 + P(A=B)2 + P(A>B)2
Note that each of the three probabilities in P(E)’s
deﬁnition are squared to reﬂect the fact that we are
considering the chance that two annotators would
agree by chance. Each of these probabilities is
computed empirically, by observing how often annotators actually rank two systems as being tied.
Table 4 shows ﬁnal κ values for inter-annotator
agreement for WMT11–WMT16 while Table 5
details intra-annotator agreement scores. The exact interpretation of the kappa coefﬁcient is dif-
ﬁcult, but according to Landis and Koch ,
0–0.2 is slight, 0.2–0.4 is fair, 0.4–0.6 is moderate, 0.6–0.8 is substantial, and 0.8–1.0 is almost
Compared to last year’s results, inter-annotator
agreement rates have decreased.
Notably, for
6Regardless if they correspond to an individual system
or to a set of systems (“multi-system”) producing identical
translations.
Thus, when computing annotator agreement
scores, we effectively treat both individual and multi-systems
in the same way, as “individual comparison units”. By doing
so, we avoid artiﬁcially inﬂating our agreement scores based
on the automatically inferred A = B ties from multi-systems.
Czech→English, we see a drop from 0.458 to
0.244. English→Czech decreases from 0.438 to
0.381. Considering that the total number of data
points collected as well as the number of annotators for these language pairs have increased substantially, the lower agreement score seems plausible.7
We observe a small increase in agreement for German→English (from 0.423 to 0.475)
and a drop for English→German (from 0.434 to
0.369). Scores for both Russian language pairs
are similar to what had been measured in WMT15.
For Finnish, we again see a decrease (from 0.388
to 0.293 for Finnish→English and from 0.549
to 0.484 for English→Finnish) and our new languages, Romanian and Turkish, end up with fair
annotator agreement. The average inter-annotator
agreement across all languages is 0.357, which is
also fair and comparable to researchers’ agreement over the last years. Intra-annotator agreement scores have mostly decreased compared to
WMT15, except for both Russian language pairs.
The new languages show moderate agreement except for English→Turkish which achieves a fair
score. On average we observe an intra-annotator
agreement which is comparable to researcherbased scores from WMT13–WMT15.
7Both Czech→English and English→Czech contain
tuning-task systems with very similar quality (according to
both human evaluation and BLEU), which makes the annotation task more difﬁcult.
Language Pair
Czech→English
English→Czech
German→English
English→German
French→English
English→French
Russian→English
English→Russian
Finnish→English
English→Finnish
Romanian→English
English→Romanian
Turkish→English
English→Turkish
Table 5: κ scores measuring intra-annotator agreement, i.e., self-consistency of judges, across for the past few years of the
human evaluation campaign. Scores are in line with results from WMT14 and WMT15.
Producing the human ranking
The collected pairwise rankings are used to produce the ofﬁcial human ranking of the systems. Since WMT14, we have used the TrueSkill
method for producing the ofﬁcial ranking, in the
following fashion. We produce 1,000 bootstrapresampled datasets over all of the available data
(i.e., datasets sampled uniformly with replacement
from the complete dataset). We run TrueSkill over
each dataset. We then compute a rank range for
each system by collecting the absolute rank of
each system in each fold, throwing out the top
and bottom 2.5%, and then clustering systems into
equivalence classes containing systems with overlapping ranges, yielding a partial ordering over
systems at the 95% conﬁdence level.
The full list of the ofﬁcial human rankings for
each task can be found in Table 6, which also reports all system scores, rank ranges, and clusters
for all language pairs and all systems. The ofﬁcial
interpretation of these results is that systems in the
same cluster are considered tied. Given the large
number of judgments that we collected, it was possible to group on average about two systems in a
cluster, even though the systems in the middle are
typically in larger clusters.
In Figure 3–5, we plotted the human evaluation result against everybody’s favorite metric
BLEU. Although these two metrics correlate generally well, the plots clearly suggest that a fair
comparison of systems of different kinds cannot
rely on automatic scores. Rule-based systems receive a much lower BLEU score than statistical
systems (see for instance English–German, e.g.,
PROMT-RULE). The same is true to a lesser degree
for statistical syntax-based systems (see English–
German, UEDIN-SYNTAX vs. UEDIN-PBMT).
Direct Assessment Manual Evaluation
In addition to the standard relative ranking (RR)
manual evaluation, this year a new method of human evaluation was also trialed in the main translation task: monolingual direct assessment (DA)
of translation ﬂuency and
adequacy .
Agreement between human assessors of translation quality is a known problem in evaluation of
MT and DA therefore aims to simplify translation
assessment, which conventionally takes the form
of a bilingual evaluation, by restructuring the task
into a monolingual assessment. Figure 6 provides
a screen shot of DA adequacy assessment, where
the task is structured as a monolingual similarity
of meaning task.
Human assessors are asked to rate a given translation by how adequately it expresses the meaning
of the corresponding reference translation on an
analogue scale, which corresponds to an underlying absolute 0–100 rating. DA ﬂuency assessment
is similar with two exceptions, ﬁrstly no reference
translation is displayed and secondly, assessors are
asked to rate how much they agree that a given
translation is ﬂuent target language text. DA ﬂu-
Czech–English
TT-BLEU-MIRA
TT-NRC-NNBLEU
TT-NRC-MEANT
TT-BEER-PRO
TT-BLEU-MERT
CU-MRGTREES
English–Czech
NYU-MONTREAL
CU-CHIMERA
CU-TAMCHYNA
UEDIN-CU-SYTX
TT-BLEU-MIRA
TT-BEER-PRO
TT-BLEU-MERT
CU-TECTOMT
TT-USAAR-HMM-MERT
CU-MRGTREES
TT-USAAR-HMM-MIRA
TT-USAAR-HARM
Romanian–English
UEDIN-PBMT
UEDIN-SYNTAX
English–Romanian
QT21-HIML-COMB
UEDIN-PBMT
UEDIN-LMU-HIERO
USFD-RESCORING
German–English
UEDIN-SYNTAX
UEDIN-PBMT
JHU-SYNTAX
Russian–English
AFRL-MITLL-PHR
AFRL-MITLL-CNTR
PROMT-RULE
English–Russian
PROMT-RULE
NYU-MONTREAL
AFRL-MITLL-PHR
AFRL-MITLL-VERB
Turkish–English
TBTK-SYSCOMB
JHU-SYNTAX
English–German
UEDIN-SYNTAX
NYU-MONTREAL
PROMT-RULE
JHU-SYNTAX
UEDIN-PBMT
Finnish–English
UEDIN-PBMT
UH-FACTORED
UEDIN-SYNTAX
English–Finnish
ABUMATRAN-NMT
ABUMATRAN-CMB
ABUMATRAN-PB
NYU-MONTREAL
UH-FACTORED
JHU-HLTCOE
English–Turkish
JHU-HLTCOE
TBTK-MORPH
Table 6: Ofﬁcial results for the WMT16 translation task. Systems are ordered by their inferred system means, though systems
within a cluster are considered tied. Lines between systems indicate clusters according to bootstrap resampling at p-level
p ≤.05. Systems with gray background indicate use of resources that fall outside the constraints provided for the shared task.
Romanian–English
UEDIN-SYNTAX
UEDIN-PBMT
English–Romanian
USFD-RESCORING
UEDIN-LMU-HIERO
QT21-HIML-SYSCOMB
UEDIN-PBMT
RWTH-SYSCOMB
German–English
UEDIN-PBMT
UEDIN-SYNTAX
JHU-SYNTAX
English–German
NYU-UMONTREAL
UEDIN-PBMT
UEDIN-SYNTAX
PROMT-RULE-BASED
JHU-SYNTAX
Figure 3: Human evaluation scores versus BLEU scores for the German–English and Romanian–English language pairs illustrate the need for human evaluation when comparing systems of different kind. Conﬁdence intervals are indicated by the
shaded ellipses. Rule-based systems and to a lesser degree syntax-based statistical systems receive a lower BLEU score than
their human score would indicate. The big cluster in the Czech-English plot are tuning task submissions.
Russian–English
PROMT-RULE-BASED
AFRL-MITLL-CONTRAST
AFRL-MITLL-PHRASE
English–Russian
PROMT-RULE-BASED
AFRL-MITLL-VERB-ANNOT
NYU-UMONTREAL
AFRL-MITLL-PHRASE-BASED
Turkish–English
JHU-SYNTAX
TBTK-SYSCOMB
English–Turkish
TBTK-MORPH-HPB
JHU-HLTCOE
Figure 4: Human evaluation scores versus BLEU scores for the Russian–English and Turkish–English language pairs
Czech–English
TT-NRC-NNBLEU
TT-NRC-MEANT
TT-BLEU-MIRA
TT-BLEU-MERT
TT-BEER-PRO
Finnish–English
UH-FACTORED
UEDIN-SYNTAX
UEDIN-PBMT
English–Finnish
ABUMATRAN-COMBO
ABUMATRAN-NMT
ABUMATRAN-PBSMT
NYU-UMONTREAL
UH-FACTORED
JHU-HLTCOE
English–Czech
TT-USAAR-HMM-MERT
TT-BLEU-MIRA
CU-MERGEDTREES
NYU-UMONTREAL
TT-BLEU-MERT
TT-USAAR-HMM-MIRA
UEDIN-CU-SYNTAX
TT-BEER-PRO
TT-USAAR-HARMONIC-MERT-MIRA
CU-TECTOMT
CU-TAMCHYNA
CU-CHIMERA
Figure 5: Human evaluation scores versus BLEU scores for the Czech–English and Finnish–English language pairs
Figure 6: Direct Assessment of translation adequacy as carried out by workers on Mechanical Turk.
ency therefore provides a dimension of the assessment that cannot be biased by the presence of a reference translation. For both ﬂuency and adequacy,
the simpler monolingual assessment DA employs
also allows the sentence length restriction to be removed.8
DA also aims to avoid the possible source of
bias identiﬁed in Bojar et al. , introduced by
simultaneous assessment of several translations at
once, where systems for which translations were
more frequently compared to other low or high
quality outputs resulted in either an unfair advantage or disadvantage for that system. We therefore elicit assessments of individual translations in
isolation from the output of other systems, an important criteria when aiming for absolute quality
judgments.
Large numbers of human assessments of translations for seven language pairs (cs-en, de-en, ﬁen, ro-en, ru-en, tr-en and en-ru) were collected on
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk.9 Table 7 shows overall numbers of translation assessments carried out.
Translations are arranged in sets of 100translations per HIT to ensure sufﬁcient repeat
items per worker, before application of strict quality control measures to ﬁlter out assessments from
poorly performing workers. When an analogue (or
100-points, in practice) scale is employed, agree-
8The maximum sentence length with RR was 30 in
9www.mturk.com
ment cannot be measured using the conventional
Kappa coefﬁcient, ordinarily applied to evaluation
of human assessment where judgments are discrete categories or preferences. Instead, we ﬁlter human assessors by how consistently they rate
translations of known distinct quality.
A degraded version of a given original system
output translation is automatically generated by
substituting a sequence of words with a random
phrase, itself selected from elsewhere in the reference document. Together with the original output, the degraded translation is known as a bad
reference translation pair.
Bad reference pairs
are subsequently hidden within HITs, and provide
a mechanism for ﬁltering out workers who are
simply not up to the task or those attempting to
game the system. Assessments of workers who do
not reliably score bad reference translations signiﬁcantly lower than corresponding genuine system output translations are ﬁltered out by comparison of scores they attribute to bad reference
pairs within HITs. More speciﬁcally, we apply a
paired Wilcoxon signed-rank test to score distributions of bad reference pairs, yielding a p-value
for each worker we subsequently employ as a reliability estimate. Assessments of workers whose
p-value lies above the conventional 0.05 threshold
are omitted from the evaluation of systems.
Table 8 shows the number of unique workers
who evaluated MT output on Mechanical Turk via
DA for WMT16 for both ﬂuency and adequacy,
those who met our ﬁltering requirement by show-
Pre Quality
Post Quality
Pre Quality
Post Quality
16,800 (56.0%)
6,880 (40.8%)
33,760 (49.1%)
10,400 (50.8%)
30,080 (47.7%)
9,680 (44.5%)
16,000 (57.3%)
8,000 (42.2%)
37,040 (57.0%)
11,520 (46.8%)
18,400 (37.8%)
10,640 (38.0%)
15,920 (41.7%)
168,000 (49.2%)
57,120 (43.7%)
DA Manual Evaluation Assessments
Table 7: Numbers of system output translations evaluated on Mechanical Turk for direct assessment (DA) in WMT16, numbers
exclude quality control items.
(A) & No Sig.
Exact Rep.
DA Workers
Table 8: Number of unique human assessors for DA adequacy and ﬂuency on Mechanical Turk in WMT16, (A) those
whose scores for bad reference pairs were signiﬁcantly different and numbers of unique human assessors in (A) whose
scores for exact repeat items also showed no signiﬁcant difference, paired Wilcoxon signed-rank signiﬁcance test was
applied in both cases.
ing a signiﬁcantly lower score for bad reference
items, and the proportion of those workers who simultaneously showed no signiﬁcant difference between scores they attributed in repeat assessment
of an identical previous translation.
In order to iron out differences in scoring strategies of distinct workers, human assessment scores
for translations are standardized according to each
individual worker’s overall mean and standard deviation score. Subsequently, the overall score of a
given MT system participating in the shared task
simply comprises the mean (standardized) score of
its translations.
Table 9 includes mean DA ﬂuency and adequacy scores for all to-English systems participating in WMT16 translation task, while Table 10
includes results for the single out-of-English language pair for which DA was run this year, English
to Russian. Mean standardized scores for systems
not signiﬁcantly lower than that of any other participating system, according to Wilcoxon signedrank test, for a given language pair, are highlighted
in bold. Although we also evaluated the ﬂuency of
translations, mean standardized adequacy scores
should provide the primary mechanism for ranking competing systems, since it is entirely possible
to achieve a high ﬂuency score without conveying
the meaning of the source input. Fluency can be
employed as a secondary mechanism to break systems tied for adequacy or for diagnostic purposes.
Figures 7, 8 and 9 show results of combining signiﬁcance test conclusions for DA adequacy and
ﬂuency, where any ties between systems tied for
adequacy are broken if that system outperformed
the other with respect to ﬂuency.
It should be
noted that RR provide ofﬁcial task results, while
DA results are investigatory and do not indicate
ofﬁcial translation task winners.
Finally, we compare scores of the ofﬁcial ranking to mean standardized adequacy scores for systems evaluated with DA. Table 11 shows the Pearson correlation between Trueskill scores for systems evaluated by researchers with relative preference judgments (ofﬁcial results) and DA mean
scores collected via crowd-sourcing, showing high
levels of agreement reached overall for all language pairs as correlations range from 0.92 to
DA Adequacy
DA Fluency
mean raw (%)
mean raw (%)
CU-MERGEDTREES
UEDIN-SYNTAX
UEDIN-PBMT
JHU-SYNTAX
UEDIN-PBMT
UEDIN-SYNTAX
UH-FACTORED
UEDIN-PBMT
UEDIN-SYNTAX
PROMT-RULE-BASED
AFRL-MITLL-PHRASE
AFRL-MITLL-CONTRAST
TBTK-SYSCOMB
JHU-SYNTAX
DA to-English Translation Task
Table 9: DA mean scores for WMT16 translation task participating systems for translation into English.
cu.mergedtrees
cu−mergedtrees
cu.mergedtrees
cu−mergedtrees
cu.mergedtrees
cu−mergedtrees
uedin.syntax
uedin.pbmt
jhu.syntax
jhu−syntax
uedin−pbmt
uedin−syntax
uedin.syntax
uedin.pbmt
jhu.syntax
jhu−syntax
uedin−pbmt
uedin−syntax
uedin.syntax
uedin.pbmt
jhu.syntax
jhu−syntax
uedin−pbmt
uedin−syntax
uedin.pbmt
uedin.syntax
UH.factored
UH−factored
uedin−syntax
uedin−pbmt
uedin.pbmt
uedin.syntax
UH.factored
UH−factored
uedin−syntax
uedin−pbmt
uedin.pbmt
uedin.syntax
UH.factored
UH−factored
uedin−syntax
uedin−pbmt
Figure 7: Signiﬁcance test results for pairs of systems competing in the news domain translation task (cs-en, de-en, ﬁ-en),
where a green cell denotes a signiﬁcantly higher DA adequacy or ﬂuency score for the system in a given row over the system in
a given column, “Combined” results show overall conclusions when adequacy is primarily used to rank systems with ﬂuency
used to break ties between systems tied with respect to adequacy.
uedin.pbmt
uedin.syntax
uedin−syntax
uedin−pbmt
uedin.pbmt
uedin.syntax
uedin−syntax
uedin−pbmt
uedin.pbmt
uedin.syntax
uedin−syntax
uedin−pbmt
PROMT.Rule.based
AFRL.MITLL.Phrase
AFRL.MITLL.contrast
AFRL−MITLL−contrast
AFRL−MITLL−Phrase
PROMT−Rule−based
PROMT.Rule.based
AFRL.MITLL.Phrase
AFRL.MITLL.contrast
AFRL−MITLL−contrast
AFRL−MITLL−Phrase
PROMT−Rule−based
PROMT.Rule.based
AFRL.MITLL.Phrase
AFRL.MITLL.contrast
AFRL−MITLL−contrast
AFRL−MITLL−Phrase
PROMT−Rule−based
tbtk.syscomb
jhu.syntax
jhu−syntax
tbtk−syscomb
tbtk.syscomb
jhu.syntax
jhu−syntax
tbtk−syscomb
tbtk.syscomb
jhu.syntax
jhu−syntax
tbtk−syscomb
Figure 8: Signiﬁcance test results for pairs of systems competing in the news domain translation task (ro-en, ru-en, tr-en),
where a green cell denotes a signiﬁcantly higher DA adequacy or ﬂuency score for the system in a given row over the system in
a given column, “Combined” results show overall conclusions when adequacy is primarily used to rank systems with ﬂuency
used to break ties between systems tied with respect to adequacy.
PROMT-RULE-BASED
NYU-UMONTREAL
AFRL-MITLL-PHRASE
AFRL-MITLL-VERB-ANN
DA English to Russian
Table 10: DA mean scores for WMT16 translation task participating systems for translation from English into Russian.
PROMT.Rule.based
NYU.UMontreal
AFRL.MITLL.phrase.based
AFRL.MITLL.verb.annot
AFRL−MITLL−verb−annot
AFRL−MITLL−phrase−base
NYU−UMontreal
PROMT−Rule−based
Figure 9: Signiﬁcance test results for pairs of systems competing in the news domain translation task (en-ru), where a
green cell denotes a signiﬁcantly higher DA adequacy score
for the system in a given row over the system in a given column.
DA Correlation with RR
Correlation between overall DA standardized
mean adequacy scores and RR Trueskill scores.
IT Translation Task
The IT-domain translation task introduced this
year brought several novelties to WMT:
• 4 out of the 7 languages of the IT task are
new in WMT (Bulgarian, Basque, Dutch and
Portuguese),
• adaptation to the IT domain with its speciﬁcs
such as frequent named entities (mostly menu
items, names of products and companies) and
technical jargon,
• adaptation to translation of answers in helpdesk service setting and bilingual dictionaries of ITrelated terms extracted from Wikipedia. The outof-domain training data contained all the corpora
from the News Task (see Figure 1), plus PaCo2-
EuEn Basque-English corpus and SETimes with
Bulgarian-English parallel sentences.
“Constrained” systems were restricted to use
only these training data provided by the organizers. Linguistic tools such as morphological analyzers, taggers, parsers, word-sense disambiguation or named entity recognizer were allowed in
the constrained condition. The split of Batches 1
and 2 into the training set and development test set
was left to the participants.
Submitted systems
31 systems were submitted in total for the 7 language pairs.
English→German
QTL-CHIMERA
(Charles University).
Gaudio et al. describe the remaining QTL-* systems (partners
10 
qtleapcorpus
from the QTLeap project: HF&FCUL for Portuguese, UPV/EHU for Spanish and Basque,
IICT-BAS for Bulgarian, CUNI for Czech and
UG for Dutch).
Duma and Menzel 
UHDS-DOC2VEC
(University of Hamburg).
Pahari et al. 
University
& Saarland University).
Cuong et al. 
describe ILLC-UVA-SCORPIO (University of
Amsterdam). IILC-UVA-DS is based on Hoang
and Sima’an . PROMT-RULE-BASED and
PROMT-HYBRID systems were submitted by the
PROMT LLC company and they are not described
in any paper.
QTL-MOSES is the standard Moses setup
(MERT-tuned on the in-domain training data, but
otherwise without any domain-adaptation) and
serves as a baseline.
Human evaluation
The main results are presented in Table 12. The
PROMT-* systems won all three language pairs,
for which they were submitted, but they were
trained using additional training data not available to other participants, so they are considered
unconstrained and not comparable to the constrained systems. In all language pairs except for
English→Bulgarian, the baseline (QTL-MOSES)
was outperformed by all other systems.
Table 13 reports the amount of pairwise comparisons collected and inter- and intra-annotator
agreement of the human evaluation, which is in a
similar range as in the News task (cf. Tables 4 and
Biomedical Translation Task
This is the ﬁrst time that we have run the Biomedical Translation task at WMT. This task aims to
evaluate systems for the translation of biomedical
titles and abstracts from scientiﬁc publications. In
this ﬁrst edition of the challenge, we have focused
on three language pairs (considering both translation directions),
English/Portuguese
English/Spanish
English/French (EN/FR), and documents in the two
sub-domains of biological sciences and health sciences.
Task description
The participants were provided with training data
and were required to submit automatic translations
English→Bulgarian
QTL-DEEPFMOSES
English→Czech
QTL-CHIMERA-PURE
ILLC-UVA-DS
QTL-TECTOMT
QTL-CHIMERA-PLUS
English→German
PROMT-RULE-BASED
UHDS-DOC2VEC
QTL-RBMT-SMTMENUS
QTL-RBMT-MENUS
DFKI-SYNTAX
QTL-SELECTION
English→Spanish
PROMT-HYBRID
QTL-CHIMERA
QTL-TECTOMT
English→Basque
QTL-TECTOMT
English→Dutch
ILLC-UVA-SCORPIO
QTL-CHIMERA
QTL-TECTOMT
English→Portuguese
PROMT-HYBRID
QTL-TECTOMT
QTL-CHIMERA
Table 12: Ofﬁcial results for the WMT16 IT translation task. Systems are ordered by their inferred system means, though
systems within a cluster are considered tied. Lines between systems indicate clusters according to bootstrap resampling at plevel p ≤.05. Systems with gray background indicate use of resources that fall outside the constraints provided for the shared
Language pair
Comparisons
Comparisons/sys
English→Bulgarian
English→Czech
English→German
English→Spanish
English→Basque
English→Dutch
English→Portuguese
Table 13: Amount of manual-evaluation pairwise comparisons (after “de-collapsing” multi-system outputs) collected and κ
scores measuring inter- and intra-annotator agreement in the IT task. Cf. Tables 3, 4 and 5 for the respective News task
statistics.
for each document in the test set. Details on the
data, baseline system, automatic evaluation and
manual validation are described below.
We provided the participants with training data of
parallel documents for the three language pairs as
well as monolingual documents for each of the
four languages, as summarized in Table 14. We
did not provide any development data and the participants were free to split the training data into a
training and a development datasets.
The training data consisted mainly of the Scielo corpus , a parallel collection of scientiﬁc publications composed of either
titles, abstracts or title and abstracts which were
retrieved from the Scielo database. For the Scielo corpus, we compiled parallel documents for
all language pairs in the two sub-domains, except
for the EN/FR, where only health was considered,
as there were inadequate parallel documents available for biology in that pair.
In previous work
 , the training data was aligned
using the GMA alignment tool.
The quality of
the alignment was found to be satisfactory so that
aligned training data could be made available to
the participants.
The test set consisted of 500 documents (title
and abstract) for each of the two directions of each
language pair, i.e., English to Portuguese (en-pt),
Portuguese to English (pt-en), English to Spanish (en-es), Spanish to English (es-en), English to
French (en-fr) and French to English (fr-en). None
of the test documents was included in the training
data and there is no overlap of documents between
the test sets for any language pair, translation direction and sub-domain.
Additionally, we prepared a corpus of parallel titles from MEDLINE R⃝for all three language
Finally, we also provided monolingual
documents for the four languages, i.e., English,
French, Spanish and Portuguese, retrieved from
the Scielo database. These consist of documents
in the Scielo database which have no corresponding document in another language.
Evaluation metric
We computed the BLEU score for each of the runs
in comparison to the reference translation, i.e., the
original text made available in the Scielo database,
as provided by the authors of the publications.
Our baseline system was described in previous
work . It consists of the statistical MT system Moses 11 trained on both the Scielo
corpus and on the parallel collection of Medline
titles. We did not make use of the monolingual
collection as we did not train a language model.
Manual validation
We carried out a manual evaluation for 100 random sentences for some selected pairs in the test
data. We used the 3-way ranking task in the Appraise tool 12 which typically shows the source and
the reference translation, and allows the pairwise
comparison of two translations (A and B).
However, to distance the manual evaluation
from the automatic BLEU evaluation which compares automatic runs to the reference translation,
we treated the reference translation as one of the
systems and therefore suppressed the reference
translation in the interface. Evaluators were only
presented with the source sentence, and two translations to rank. Evaluators were blind to the nature
of the sentences they were evaluating: automatic
system A vs. system B, reference translation vs.
system, or system vs. reference translation.
When comparing two translations in the 3-way
ranking task in Appraise, evaluators were presented with four options: (1) A>B, translation A
is better than translation B; (2) A=B, the quality of
the two candidate translations is similar; (3) A<B,
translation B is better than translation A; and (4)
Flag Error, to indicate that one of the translations
did not seem to refer to the same source sentence
or there is some other misalignment.
The latter situation could happen when the original sentence pairs were not perfectly aligned. This may
be due to the fact that the reference translations
are created by the article authors independently of
the WMT challenge goals. These authors are not
professional writers or professional translators, so
that some of the content may only be present in
one of the languages, i.e., not every sentence in
one language has a directly corresponding sentence in the other language. Thus, when selecting
the corresponding sentences in the reference translation, we do it based on the automatic alignment
provided by the GMA tool, which performs with
at least 80% accuracy for our training data .
Regarding assigning the second option, i.e.,
A=B, we considered situations in which both
translations were equally bad or good. In some
cases, both candidate translations exhibited either
lexical or grammatical issues, but the evaluator
could not rank one candidate as deﬁnitely better or
worse than the other. Sometimes, both candidates
were correct and were acceptable translations of
the source sentence, even if not identical. Currently, this distinction is not captured in the statistics computed by Appraise.
Participants
Five teams participated in the Biomedical Translation task, submitting a total of 40 runs. Participants are listed in Table 15; a short description of
their systems is provided below.
Istrionbox
The Istrionbox team utilized a nonlog-linear model based on a weighted average of
the translation and language models. They aligned
the training documents on the phrase level using
an aligner based on a lexicon which contains more
than 930,000 terms derived from many parallel
corpora for English/Portuguese.
The language
model was based on phrases, instead of words, as
well as the translation model. For the various runs
that the team submitted, they experimented with
assigning equal or different weights for the distinct
models trained on the biological or the health corpora, and they also considered a bilingual lexicon
and named entities.
The IXA team adapted a general-domain
statistical machine translation system to the
biomedical domain. Three approaches were developed for English-Spanish and Spanish-English
language pairs, using Moses and three corpora
(News corpora, Scielo Health and Scielo Biological, both the bilingual and monolingual documents). In the system used for the ﬁrst submission,
the medical vocabulary SNOMED-CT is used to
extend the vocabulary to address the problem of
out-of-vocabulary (OOV) words.
In the system
used for the second submission, OOV words are
Participating team
Istrionbox
Istrionbox, Portugal 
University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU, Spain 
LIMSI, France 
Universitat Polit`ecnica de Catalunya, Spain 
University of Edinburgh, UK 
Table 15: Participants in the WMT16 Biomedical Translation task.
addressed by expanding generated phase tables
with morphological variants and transliterations of
the remaining words. In the system used for the
third submission, the IXA team used the test set
provided by the organizers to optimize the method
used in the second submission.
The TALP team’s system is a standard
phrase-based system based on Moses and MERT
and enhanced with vocabulary expansion using
bilingual word embeddings and a character-based
neural language model with rescoring. The former
focuses on resolving out-of-vocabulary words,
while the latter enhances the ﬂuency of the system.
MOSES-based statistical machine translation system, rescored with Structured Output Layer neural network models.
It relied on additional indomain data, including data from the WMT’14
medical translation task (English-French) and a set
of English-French Cochrane systematic review abstracts.
They also experiment with a confusion
network system combination which combines the
outputs of Phrase Based SMT systems trained either to translate entire source sentences or speciﬁc syntactic constructs extracted from those sentences. The approach is implemented using Confusion Network decoding.
The University of Edinburgh team used
the phrase-based statistical model from Moses including hierarchical lexicalized reordering model
with four orientations in both directions.
translation model was trained on data from the
WMT13, the Scielo training data as well as the
EMEA corpus. The language model was based
on the interpolation of various language models
trained separately on monoligual English corpora,
such as the WMT14 medical, Scielo, EMEA and
English LDC GigaWord corpus.
The ﬁve participating teams submitted a total of
40 runs. However, only the Spanish–English and
English–Spanish language pairs attracted submissions from more than one team. In addition, one
language pair (fr-en) did not receive any submission. Table 16 presents the BLEU score for each
run as well as for our baseline system.
All runs obtained a much higher BLEU score
than the baseline system, except for the en-pt and
pt-en submissions, with BLEU scores just slightly
superior to the baseline. The LIMSI run showed
the best improvement over the baseline (246% absolute improvement, from 9.24 to 22.75). Overall,
however, the BLEU scores for all language pairs
remain quite moderate. Regarding comparison of
the various runs and teams for each language pair,
we did not observe considerable differences between them, except for the the runs of the ”uedin”
system, which obtained around two BLEU points
more than other runs.
We rank the systems as follows according to
their BLEU scores, with B=biology and H=health,
and bl=baseline:
• en-pt(B): Istrionbox>bl;
• en-pt(H): Istrionbox>bl;
• pt-en(B): Istrionbox>bl;
• pt-en(H): Istrionbox>bl;
• en-es(B): TALP>IXA>bl;
• en-es(H): TALP>IXA>bl;
• es-en(B): uedin>IXA>TALP>bl;
• es-en(H): uedin>IXA>TALP>bl;
• en-fr(H): LIMSI>bl;
BLEU score
Biological
Istrionbox
Istrionbox
Table 16: Ofﬁcial BLEU scores for the WMT16 Biomedical Translation task.
For the pairwise manual validation of sentences,
and given the high number of runs for some language pairs, e.g., Spanish–English and English–
Spanish, we did not perform a pairwise evaluation
for every pair of two systems. Instead, we considered only one run from each participant for each
language pair and dataset: the one that achieved
the best BLEU score in the automatic evaluation.
An exception was made for the English–French
and English-Portuguese tasks for which we had
only one participating team: we considered all
combinations of runs and reference translations
for English–French and combinations of the reference translation and both the run with best BLEU
score and the one that the participant (Istrionbox)
reported as their best run. The results of the manual validation are presented in Table 17.
Only one run (IXA run 3, English–Spanish,
health dataset) was comparable to the reference
translation: 30 vs. 26 for A>B and A<B, respectively. For all other cases, the reference translation
was assigned to be better than the other translation
at least twice as many times.
Regarding comparison between teams and
runs, i.e., ES2PT (biological and health) and
English–French, we did not observe much difference when comparing distinct runs of the same
team. When comparing runs from distinct teams,
IXA clearly outperformed TALP in two comparisons: Spanish–English biological (57 vs. 24) and
Spanish–English health (48 vs. 22). On the other
hand, TALP slightly outperformed IXA in one
dataset: English–Spanish biological (16 vs. 7). Finally, the uedin system was clearly superior to
TALP in the Spanish–English biological dataset
(60 vs. 20) and to both TALP and IXA in the
Spanish–English health dataset (54 vs. 19 and 41
vs. 15, respectively).
We rank the systems as follows according to our
manual validation (ref=reference):
Biological
TALP run3 vs. reference
IXA run1 vs. TALP run3
reference vs. IXA run1
IXA run1 vs. reference
reference vs. uedin run1
TALP run3 vs. IXA run1
reference vs. TALP run3
IXA run1 vs. uedin run1
uedin run1 vs. TALP run3
reference vs. Istrionbox run1
Istrionbox run3 vs. Istrionbox run1
Istrionbox run3 vs. reference
reference vs. Istrionbox run3
reference vs. LIMSI-TLP run2
LIMSI-TLP run1 vs. LIMSI-TLP run2
LIMSI-TLP run1 vs. reference
reference vs. IXA run3
IXA run3 vs. TALP run3
TALP run3 vs. reference
reference vs. IXA run3
IXA run3 vs. TALP run1
TALP run1 vs. reference
IXA run3 vs. uedin run1
reference vs. uedin run1
TALP run1 vs. uedin run1
Istrionbox run3 vs. Istrionbox run1
Istrionbox run1 vs. reference
reference vs. Istrionbox run3
Istrionbox run1 vs. reference
Table 17: Results for the manual validation carried out in Appraise for the Biomedical Translation task.
• en-pt (B): ref>Istrionbox;
• en-pt (H): ref>Istrionbox;
• pt-en (B): ref>Istrionbox;
• pt-en (H): ref>Istrionbox;
• en-es (B): ref>TALP> IXA;
• en-es (H): {IXA,ref}>TALP;
• es-en (B): ref>uedin>IXA>TALP;
• es-en (H): ref>uedin> IXA>TALP;
• en-fr (H): ref>LIMSI;
Discussion
In this section we analyze the errors we observed
in the translations submitted by teams, the lessons
we learned in this ﬁrst edition of the task and our
plans for future work.
Error analysis.
During our manual analysis of a
sample of the translations that were submitted for
the test data, we noticed that their quality is still
poor in comparison to the reference translations.
We identiﬁed numerous problems, as summarized
• many missing words or words in the source
language mixed in with the target language,
probably due to words or concepts in the
source language that could not be translated
to the target language;
• incorrect ordering of adjectives and nouns,
given that, in contrast to English, nouns typically precede adjectives in Portuguese, Spanish and French;
• incorrect agreement of nouns, verbs and adjectives with respect to gender and number;
• incorrect punctuation, e.g., periods placed in
the middle of a sentence;
• incorrect casing for words, e.g., common
words which were capitalized or in upper
• missing translations for acronyms, i.e., the
acronym in the source language was used instead.
We note that some of these issues were ignored
during the manual evaluation, for instance, incorrect capitalization was not penalized if the translation was otherwise better or comparable to the
other translation.
Lessons learned.
We performed a comparison
of the systems based only on the overall results
on the complete test set and on the samples of sets
that we randomly selected for manual validation.
For this ﬁrst edition of the Biomedical Translation
task, we aimed at providing an evaluation platform
for the automatic translation of scientiﬁc publications, in particular for titles and abstracts in the
biomedical domain.
In this ﬁrst edition of the task, the training and
test data was obtained from the parallel publications available in Scielo.
We did not perform
manual translation of the documents for either the
training or the test data, but rather used the original text available in Scielo for all languages under
consideration here. In practice, this means that the
reference translations were produced by the article authors independently of the WMT challenge
goals. These authors are not professional writers
or professional translators, and some of them may
have limited proﬁciency in the languages they are
required to use for publication. This situation has
an impact on the quality of the reference translations, compared to other WMT tasks. It is re-
ﬂected in the manual evaluation which indicates
that for some language pairs (notably English–
Spanish health), participant runs were rated overall as better or equal to the reference translation.
Our experience with this ﬁrst edition of the task
indicates that the Scielo corpus is a valuable resource for biomedical WMT, however more work
is needed in terms of quality assurance to ensure
that meaningful evaluation results can be obtained.
Plan for future editions.
In next editions, we
plan to build on the established pipeline to collect
and pre-process Scielo data to prepare a new test
dataset. More importantly, we plan to work towards improved data and evaluation quality.
While we initially focused on characterizing
the quality of the alignment in the parallel Scielo
corpus, we are planning to craft a higher quality
dataset by removing any sentence pairs with alignment issues. Furthermore, the data set will also be
pruned for sentences exhibiting lexical, grammatical or ﬂuency issues. These steps will contribute to
improve the signiﬁcance of the evaluation results,
especially in terms of BLEU scores.
Furthermore, we believe that the nature of scientiﬁc texts and biomedical texts in particular calls
for speciﬁc evaluation metrics.
One of the intended uses of translation systems in the biomedical domain is to provide health professionals with
access to the latest research results that are published in a language other than their native language.
Consequently, health professionals may
use the translated information to make clinical
decisions impacting patients care.
It is vital
that translation systems do not contribute to the
dissemination of incorrect clinical information.
Therefore, the evaluation of biomedical translation
systems should include an assessment at the document level indicating whether a translation conveyed erroneous clinical information.
Quality Estimation
The ﬁfth edition of the WMT shared task on
quality estimation (QE) of machine translation
(MT) builds on the previous editions of the task
 , with “traditional” tasks at sentence
and word levels, a new task for entire documents
quality prediction, and a variant of the word-level
task: phrase-level estimation.
The goals of this year’s shared task were:
• To advance work on sentence and wordlevel quality estimation by providing domainspeciﬁc, larger and professionally annotated
• To analyse the effectiveness of different types
of quality labels provided by humans for
longer texts in document-level prediction.
• To investigate quality estimation at a new
level of granularity: phrases.
These goals are addressed through three groups
of tasks: Task 1 at sentence level (Section 6.3),
Task 2 at word and phrase levels (Section 6.4),
and Task 3 at document level (Section 6.6). Tasks
1 and 2 provide the same dataset with English-
German translations generated by a statistical machine translation (SMT) system, while Task 3 provides an English-Spanish dataset of translations
taken from all participating systems in WMT08-
These datasets were annotated with
different labels for quality: for Tasks 1 and 2,
the labels were automatically derived from the
post-editing of the machine translation output,
while for Task 3, scores were computed based
on a two-stage post-editing process. Any external resource, including additional quality estimation training data, could be used by participants
(no distinction between constrained and unconstrained tracks was made). As presented in Section 6.1, participants were also provided with a
baseline set of features for each task, and a software package to extract these and other quality
estimation features and perform model learning,
with suggested methods for all levels of prediction. Participants, described in Section 6.2, could
submit up to two systems for each task.
Data used to build MT systems or internal system information (such as model scores or n-best
lists) were made available on request for Tasks 1
Baseline systems
Sentence-level baseline system:
For Task 1,
QuEst++13 was used to extract 17 features from the SMT source/target language training corpus:
• Number of tokens in source & target sentences.
• Average source token length.
• Average number of occurrences of the target
word within the target sentence.
• Number of punctuation marks in source and
target sentences.
• Language model probability of source and
target sentences based on models built from
the SMT training corpus.
• Average number of translations per source
word in the sentence as given by IBM Model
1 extracted from the SMT training corpus.
• Percentage of unigrams, bigrams and trigrams in frequency quartiles 1 (lower frequency words) and 4 (higher frequency
words) in the source language extracted from
the source SMT training corpus.
• Percentage of unigrams in the source sentence seen in the source SMT training corpus.
These features were used to train a Support
Vector Regression (SVR) algorithm using a Radial Basis Function (RBF) kernel within the
scikit-learn toolkit .14
13 
questplusplus
14 
The γ, ϵ and C parameters were optimised via grid
search with 5-fold cross validation on the training
Word-level baseline system:
For Tasks 2 and
2p, the baseline features were extracted with the
Marmot tool .
For the baseline system we used a number of
features that have been found the most informative in previous research on word-level QE. Our
baseline set of features is loosely based on the one
described in . It contains the
following 22 features:
• Word count in the source and target sentences, source and target token count ratio.
Although these features are sentence-level
their values will be the same for all
words in a sentence), the length of a sentence
might inﬂuence the probability of a word being wrong.
• Target token, its left and right contexts of one
• Source word aligned to the target token, its
left and right contexts of one word.
alignments were taken from the SMT system
that produced the automatic translations.
• Binary dictionary features: whether target token is a stopword, a punctuation mark, a
proper noun, a number.
• Target language model features:
– The order of the highest order ngram
which starts and end with the target token.
(ti−2, ti−1, ti),
(ti−1, ti, ti+1),
(ti, ti+1, ti+2),
where ti is the target token ).
• The order of the highest order ngram which
starts and ends with the source token.
• The Part-of-speech tags of the target and
source tokens.
This set of baseline features is similar to the
one used at WMT15 QE shared task . We excluded three features used the last
year: pseudo-reference features and number of
WordNet senses for the source and target tokens.
We model the task as a sequence prediction
problem, and train our baseline system using the
Linear-Chain Conditional Random Fields (CRF)
algorithm with the CRFSuite tool . The model was trained using the passiveaggressive optimisation algorithm.
Phrase-level baseline system:
The phrase-level
features were also extracted with Marmot, but they
are different from the word-level features.
baseline set of phrase-level features is based on a
list of features which were used for sentence-level
QE in QuEst++ toolkit. These so-called “blackbox” features do not use the internal information
from the MT system. We use the following feature set consisting of 72 features, using the SMT
source/target language training corpus:
• Source phrase frequency features:
– average frequency of ngrams (unigrams,
bigrams, trigrams) from different quartiles of frequency (from the low frequency to high frequency ngrams);
– percentage of distinct source ngrams
(unigrams, bigrams, trigrams) seen in a
corpus of the source language.
• Translation probability features:
– average number of translations per
source word in the sentence (with different translation probability thresholds:
0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5);
– average number of translations per
source word in the sentence (with different translation probability thresholds:
0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5) weighted by
the frequency of each word in the source
• Punctuation features:
– difference between numbers of various
punctuation marks (periods, commas,
colons, semicolons, question and exclamation marks) in the source and the target phrases;
– difference between numbers of various
punctuation marks normalised by the
length of the target phrase;
– percentage of punctuation marks in the
target and the source.
• Language model features:
– log probability of the source and the target phrases;
– perplexity of the source and the target
• Phrase statistics:
– lengths of the source and target phrases;
– ratio of the source and the target phrase
– average length of tokens in source and
target phrases;
occurrence
within the phrase.
• Alignment features:
– Number of unaligned target words;
– Number of target words aligned to more
than one word;
– Average number of alignments per word
in the target phrase.
• Part-of-speech features:
– percentage of content words in the
source and target phrases;
– percentage of words of a particular partof-speech (verb, noun, pronoun) in the
source and the target phrases;
– ratio of numbers of words of a particular
part-of-speech (verb, noun, pronoun) in
the source and the target phrases;
– percentage of numbers and alphanumeric tokens in the source and the target
– ratio of the percentage of numbers and
alphanumeric tokens in the source and
the target phrases;
This feature set was originally designed for sentences. We expect that since phrases are sequences
of words of varied length, they can be treated
analogously for QE. However, unlike sentences,
which are translated independently, phrases are related to their neighbouring phrases in a sentence,
and in this respect they are similar to words in
the context of QE. Therefore, as in the baseline
word-level system, we treat phrase-level QE as a
sequence labelling task and model it using Conditional Random Fields. The phrase-level baseline system is trained with CRFSuite using the
passive-aggressive optimisation algorithm.
Document-level baseline system:
For Task 3,
17 baseline features equivalent to those for sentence level were extracted at document level using QuEst++. These features are aggregations of
sentence-level baseline features. Some sentencelevel features were summed (number of tokens
in the source and target sentences and number of
punctuation marks in source and target sentences),
while all remaining were averaged.
The model was trained with a SVR algorithm
with RBF kernel using the scikit-learn toolkit.
The γ, ϵ and C parameters were optimised via grid
search with 5-fold cross validation on the training
Participants
Table 18 lists all participating teams submitting
systems to any of the tasks. Each team was allowed up to two submissions for each task. In the
descriptions below, participation in speciﬁc tasks
is denoted by a task identiﬁer.
(Task 2): The CDACM team participated in Task 2 for the word and phrase-level QE.
They use a Recurrent Neural Network Language
Model (RNN-LM) architecture for word-level QE.
To estimate the phrase-level quality, they use the
output of the word-level QE system. For this task,
they use a modiﬁed RNN-LM with other RNN
variants like Long Short Term Memory (LSTM),
deep LSTM and Gated Recurring Units (GRU).
The modiﬁed system predicts a label (OK/BAD)
rather than predicting the word as in the case of
standard RNN-LM. The input to the system is a
word sequence, similar to the standard RNN-LM.
They also tried bilingual models with RNN-LM
and found that they perform better than monolingual models.
In the training data, the distribution of labels (OK/BAD) is skewed, with signiﬁcantly more OK labels. To handle this issue, they
use strategies to replace the OK label with sublabels to balance the distribution. The sub-labels
are OK B, OK I, OK E, depending on the location of the token in the sentence.
(Task 1, Task 2): POSTECH’s submissions (SENT/RNN for Task 1, WORD/RNN
for Task 2 and PHR/RNN for Task 2p) are RNNbased QE systems consisting of two component:
two bidirectional RNNs on the source and target sentences in the ﬁrst component and other
RNNs for predicting the ﬁnal quality in the second component. The ﬁrst component is an RNNbased modiﬁed neural MT model which generates quality vectors.
Quality vectors indicate a
sequence of vectors about target words’ translation quality. The second component using other
RNNs predicts the quality at sentence level (Task
1), word level (Task 2), and phrase level (Task 2p).
POSTECH’s RNN-based systems are entirely neural approaches for QE. Due to the small amount of
data to train the prediction models, each component of the systems is trained separately by using
different training data. To train the ﬁrst component
of the systems, the Europarl v7 English-German
parallel corpus was used. To train the second component of the systems, WMT16 QE task English-
German datasets were used.
(Task 1, Task 2, Task 3): Referential translation machines (RTMs) 
are a language-independent approach for predicting translation quality, as well as for addressing
other text similarity tasks. They eliminate the need
to access any task or domain speciﬁc information
or resource. SVR and regression trees are used
in combination with feature selection and partial
least squares for the document and sentence-level
prediction tasks and global linear models with dynamic learning were used for the word and phraselevel prediction tasks.
The SHEF systems exploit
RNNs and the principle of compositionality to offer a resource-light solution to sentence-level QE.
They use only one side of the translation, the
source (SRC) or the target (TGT). They split the
sentence in ngrams and train a model that predicts the quality of ngrams. To calculate the quality of an entire sentence translation, they split its
source/target side in ngrams, estimate their quality individually, then average their quality scores.
They use word embedding models trained over 7
billion words as external resource (English and
German) using word2vec.
The two joint submissions from the University of Shefﬁeld and
LIUM use (i) a Continuous Space Language
Model (CSLM) to extract sentence embeddings
and cross-entropy scores, (ii) a neural network
MT (NMT) model, (iii) a set of QuEst++ features (iv) a combination of features produced by
QuEst++ and the features produced with CSLM
and NMT. When added to QuEst++ standard feature sets for Task 1, the CSLM sentence embed-
Participating team
Centre for Development of Advanced Computing, India 
Referential Translation Machines, Turkey 
University of Shefﬁeld, UK 
University of Shefﬁeld,
UK and Laboratoire d’Informatique de
l’Universit´e du Maine, France 
University of Shefﬁeld, UK 
University of Alicante, Spain 
Nile University, Egypt & Charles University, Czech Republic 
Ghent University, Belgium 
Unbabel, Portugal 
University of Shefﬁeld, UK 
University of Shefﬁeld, UK 
Uppsala University, Sweden 
Yandex School of Data Analysis, Russia 
Table 18: Participants in the WMT16 Quality Estimation shared task.
ding features along with the cross entropy and
NMT likelihood led to large improvements in prediction, and achieved third place in the scoring and
second place in the ranking task variants according
to the ofﬁcial evaluation metrics. Neural network
features alone also performed very well. This is a
very encouraging ﬁnding since for many language
pairs it is sometime hard to ﬁnd appropriate resources to build hand-crafted features, while the
neural network features used only require (sufﬁcient) monolingual data to train models, which is
available in abundance for many languages.
The University of
Shefﬁeld’s submission to the word-level QE task
is based on imitation learning, an approach that
treats structured prediction as a sequence of actions taken by a binary classiﬁer. This approach
allows the use of arbitrary information from previous tag predictions and has the ability to train
the classiﬁer using non-decomposable loss functions over the predicted structure. The submitted
system uses the baseline features provided by the
shared task organisers plus additional features relying on the predicted structure, such as previous
tag ngrams and the total number of BAD predictions. It employs an online learning algorithm as
the underlying classiﬁer and uses a loss function
based on the ofﬁcial shared task evaluation metric.
No external data or resources were used for this
submission.
The submissions of the
Universitat d’Alacant team focus for Task 2 were
obtained by applying the approach by Espl`a-
Gomis et al. , which uses any source of
bilingual information available online in order to
spot sub-segment correspondences between the
source segment and the translation hypothesis.
These sub-segment correspondences are used to
extract a collection of features that are then used
by a multilayer perceptron to determine the ﬁnal word-level QE labels. The probabilities provided by this classiﬁer for every word in a phrase
are then used as new features for a second multilayer perceptron that is able to obtain quality estimates at the phrase level. Three sources of bilingual information available online were used by the
UAlacant submissions: two online MT systems,
Lucy LT KWIK15 and Google Translate,16 and
the bilingual concordancer Reverso Context.17
Two systems were submitted, both for word-level
and phrase-level QE tasks: one using only features
based on external sources of bilingual information,
and another combining them with the baseline features provided by the task organisers.
15 
traduccio-automatica/kwik-translator-/
16 
17 
(Task 1): The submission is based on
word alignments and bilingual distributed representations to introduce a new set of features for the
sentence-Level QE task. The features extracted include three alignment-based features, three bilingual embedding-based features, two embeddingbased features constrained on alignment links, as
well as a set of 74 bigrams used as boolean features. The set of bigrams represents the most frequent bigrams in translations that have changed
after the post-edition, and they are compiled by
aligning translations to their post-editions provided in the WMT QE datasets.
To produce
these features, GIZA++ was
used for word alignment and Multivec was used for the bilingual model,
which jointly learns distributed representations for
source and target languages using a parallel corpus. To build the bilingual model, domain-speciﬁc
data compiled from the resources made available
for the WMT 16 IT-Domain shared task was used.
As prediction model, a Linear Regression model
using scikit-learn was built using a combination of QuEst++ baseline features and the new features proposed.
(Task 1, Task 2): The submissions
for the word-level task use 41 features in combination with the baseline feature set to train binary classiﬁers.
The 41 additional features attempt to capture accuracy errors (concerned with
the meaning transfer from the source to target sentences) using word and phrase alignment probabilities, ﬂuency errors (concerned with the wellformedness of target sentence) using language
models trained on word surface forms and on
part-of-speech tags, and terminology errors (concerned with the domain-speciﬁc terminology) using a bilingual terminology list. Based on the combined feature set, SCATE-RF uses random forests
for binary classiﬁcation, which combines decision trees into an ensemble.
SCATE-ENS uses
the same feature set and combines different algorithms into an ensemble by applying the majority voting scheme.
For the sentence-level task,
SCATE-SVM1 adds 18 features to the baseline
feature set to train SVR models using an RBF kernel. SCATE-SVM2 additionally utilises an extra
feature, which is based on the percentage of words
that are labelled as BAD by the best word-level QE
system (SCATE RF). External language resources
from the IT domain are used to extract the additional features for both tasks.
submitted for the word-level task.
BEL 2 linear is a feature-based linear sequential model.
It uses the baseline features provided by the shared task organisers (with slight
changes) conjoined with individual labels and
pairs of consecutive labels.
It also uses various syntactic dependency-based features (dependency relations, heads, and second-order structures like siblings and grandparents). The syntactic dependencies are predicted with TurboParser
trained on the TIGER German treebank.
BABEL 2 ensemble uses a stacked architecture,
inspired by the last year’s QUETCH+ system
 , which combines three
neural systems:
one feedforward and two recurrent ones.
The predictions of these systems are added as additional features in the linear system above.
The following external resources were used: part-of-speech tags and extra
syntactic dependency information obtained with
TurboTagger and TurboParser , trained on the Penn Treebank (for English)
and on the version of the German TIGER corpus
used in the SPMRL shared task for German. For the neural models, pretrained word embeddings from Polyglot and those produced with a neural
MT system were used.
(Task 2): USFD’s submissions tested two
different approaches for phrase-level QE. The ﬁrst
one (CONTEXT submission) is an enhancement
of the baseline feature set provided with the context features. The additional features consist of the
source and target tokens which precede and follow the phrase under consideration, part-of-speech
tags of these tokens, and language model scores
for ngrams at the borders of the phrase.
second approach (W&SLP4PT submission) learns
phrase-level labels from predictions at other levels. The models are trained on a set of seven features that are based on (i) the phrase segmentation
itself (length and ratio to the sentence), (ii) wordlevel predictions (number of predicted OK/BAD
words in the current phrase and in the sentence),
and (iii) the predicted quality of the sentence.
CRFsuite is used to train the prediction models
in both cases.
(Task 3): Two different systems were
submitted for Task 3. The ﬁrst system (BASE-
EMB-GP) combines the 17 baseline features with
word embeddings from the source documents (English) using a Gaussian Process (GP) model. The
word embeddings were learned by using the Continuous Bag-of-Words (CBOW) model , trained on the Google’s billion-word
corpus,18 with a vocabulary size of 527K words.
Document embeddings are extracted by averaging
word embeddings in the document. The GP model
was trained with two Rational Quadratic kernels
 : one for the 17
baseline features and another for the 500 features
from the embeddings. Since each kernel has its
own set of hyperparameters, the full model can
leverage the contributions from the two different
sets. The second system (GRAPH-DISC) combines the baseline features with discourse-aware
The discourse aware features are the
same as the ones used by Scarton et al. 
plus Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) cohesion
features , number of
subtrees and height of the Rhetorical Structure
Theory (RST) tree and entity graph-based coherence scores . Discourseaware and RST tree features were extracted only
for English (tools are only available for this language), LSA features were extracted for both languages, and entity graph-based coherence scores
were extracted for the target language only (Spanish), as the source documents are expected to be
coherent. This QE model was trained with an SVR
algorithm.
(Task 1): The UU system uses SVR to predict HTER scores based on features extracted with
QuEst++ plus additional features.
The feature
vector consists of a combination of the 17 baseline features and top performing new features proposed by UU. These new features are related to reordering and noun translation, grammatical correspondence and structural integrity, based on parse
trees and part-of-speech tags. The system submitted uses Kendall Tau distances in alignments between source and target for measuring reordering,
noun group ratio, verb ratio and probabilistic context free grammars probabilities.
18 
1-billion-word-language-modeling-benchmark
(Task 1): The YSDA submission is based
on a simple idea that the more complex the sentence is the more difﬁcult it is to translate. For this
purpose, it uses information provided by syntactic parsing (information from parsing trees, some
speciﬁc language constructions, etc).
Additionally, it uses features based on pseudo-references,
back-translation, web-scale language model, word
alignments (as given by the data for Task 2),
and combinations of several features. A regression model was training to predict BLEU as target metric instead HTER. The machine learning
pipeline uses an SVR with RBF kernel to predict BLEU scores, followed by a linear SVR to
predict HTER scores from BLEU scores.
external resources, the system uses a syntactic parser, pseudo-references and back-translation
from web-scale MT system, and a web-scale language model.
Task 1: Predicting sentence-level quality
This task consists in scoring (and ranking) translation sentences according to the percentage of their
words that need to be ﬁxed. HTER is used as quality score, i.e. the minimum
edit distance between the machine translation and
its manually post-edited version in .
As in previous years, two variants of the results
could be submitted:
• Scoring: An absolute HTER score for each
sentence translation, to be interpreted as an
error metric: lower scores mean better translations.
• Ranking: A ranking of sentence translations
for all source sentences from best to worst.
For this variant, it does not matter how the
ranking is produced (from HTER predictions
or by other means). The reference ranking is
deﬁned based on the true HTER scores.
The data is the same as that used for the
WMT16 Automatic Post-editing task, collected
By the QT21 Project19 in the Information Technology (IT) domain.20 Source segments are English
sentences and target segments are German translations produced by a strong SMT system built
within the QT21 Project. The human post-editions
19 
20The source sentences and reference translations were
provided by TAUS ( and come
from a unique IT vendor.
are a manual revision of the target, done by professional translators using the PET post-editing tool
 . HTER labels were computed
using the TERCOM tool21 with default settings (tokenised, case insensitive, exact matching only),
and scores capped to 1.
As training and development data, we provided
English-German datasets with 12,000 and 1,000
source sentences, their machine translations, posteditions and HTER scores. As test data, we provided an additional set of 2,000 English-German
source-translations pairs produced by the same
SMT system used for the training data.
Evaluation
Evaluation was performed against
the true HTER label and/or ranking, using the following metrics:
• Scoring: Pearson’s r correlation score (primary metric, ofﬁcial score for ranking submissions), Mean Average Error (MAE) and
Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE).
• Ranking: Spearman’s ρ rank correlation and
Statistical signiﬁcance on Pearson r and Spearman rho was computed using the William’s test,
following the approach suggested in (Graham,
Table 19 summarises the results for
Task 1, ranking participating systems best to worst
using Pearson’s r correlation as primary key.
Spearman’s ρ correlation scores should be used to
rank systems according to the ranking variant. We
note that three systems have not submitted results
ranking evaluation variant.
Task 2: Predicting word-level quality
The goal of this task is to evaluate the extent to
which we can detect word-level errors in MT output.
Various classes of errors can be found in
translations, but for this task we consider all error
types together, aiming at making a binary distinction between OK and BAD tokens. The decision to
bucket all error types together was made because
of the lack of sufﬁcient training data that could allow consideration of more ﬁne-grained error tags.
This year’s word-level task uses the same
dataset as Task 1, for a single language pair:
English-German.
Each instance of the training,
21 
development and test sets consists of the following elements:
• Source sentence (English).
• Automatic translation (German).
• Manual post-edition of the automatic translation.
• Word-level binary (OK/BAD) labelling of the
automatic translation.
The binary labels for the datasets were acquired
automatically with the TERCOM tool. The tool identiﬁes four types of errors: substitution of a word
with another word, deletion of a word (word was
omitted by the translation system), insertion of a
word (a spurious word was added by the translation system), and word or sequence of words shift
(word order error). Every word in the machinetranslated sentence is tagged with one of these error types or not tagged if it matches a word from
the reference.
All the untagged (correct) words were tagged
with OK, while the words tagged with substitution
and insertion errors were assigned the tag BAD.
The deletion errors are not associated with any
word in the automatic translation, so we could not
consider them. We also disabled the shift errors by
running TERCOM with the option ‘-d 0’. The reason
for that is the fact that searching for shifts introduces signiﬁcant noise in the annotation. The tool
cannot discriminate between cases where a word
was really shifted and where a word (especially
common words such as prepositions, articles and
pronouns) was deleted in one part of the sentence
and then independently inserted in another part of
this sentence, i.e. to correct an unrelated error. The
statistics of the datasets are outlined in Table 20.
Evaluation
This year’s evaluation procedure is
different from the one used in previous QE tasks.
Previously, the submissions were evaluated in
terms of F1-score for the BAD class. However,
this metric was criticised for being biased towards
“pessimistic” labellings. It tends to rate higher the
outputs of systems which labelled most of words
as BAD, e.g.
a trivial “all-BAD” baseline outperforms many real systems in terms of F1-BAD
score .
Therefore, this year we used a different metric:
the multiplication of F1-scores of the BAD and
OK classes (herein referred to as F1-mult). As it
Pearson’s r ↑
Spearman’s ρ ↑
DeltaAvg ↑
English-German
• YSDA/SNTX+BLEU+SVM
POSTECH/SENT-RNN-QV2
SHEF-LIUM/SVM-NN-emb-QuEst
POSTECH/SENT-RNN-QV3
SHEF-LIUM/SVM-NN-both-emb
UGENT-LT3/SCATE-SVM2
UFAL/MULTIVEC
RTM/RTM-FS-SVR
UGENT-LT3/SCATE-SVM1
RTM/RTM-SVR
SHEF/SimpleNets-SRC
SHEF/SimpleNets-TGT
Ofﬁcial results for the scoring ad ranking variants of the WMT16 Quality Estimation Task 1. The systems are
ranked according to the Pearson r metric and signiﬁcance results are also computed for this metric. The winning submissions
are indicated by a •. These are the top-scoring submission and those that are not signiﬁcantly worse according to Williams
test with 95% conﬁdence intervals. The systems in the grey area are not different from the baseline system at a statistically
signiﬁcant level according to the same test.
Development
Table 20: Datasets for Task 2.
was shown in , this metric is not biased neither towards “pessimistic” nor
to “optimistic” labellings, and is good at discriminating between different systems.
We tested the signiﬁcance of the results using
randomisation tests with Bonferroni
correction .
The results for Task 2 are summarised in
Table 21. We show the performance of all participating systems as well as the baseline model. The
results are ordered by the F1-mult metric. The top
three submissions are statistically signiﬁcantly different from any other system. However, we cannot
unambiguously depict other signiﬁcance groups in
the table. Therefore, we only show the systems
which are not signiﬁcantly different from the baseline (grey area). The models above and below the
grey area are signiﬁcantly better and worse than
the baseline system, respectively.
In order to show and analyse the groups of
signiﬁcantly different systems we plot the results
of signiﬁcance test as a heatmap (see Table 22).
Here, a cell at the crossing of a row and a column corresponding to different submissions contains the information about the signiﬁcance of the
difference in their results: the darker the cell is,
the lower is the signiﬁcance in the difference for
the pair of systems. The coloured frames denote
groups of submissions which are not signiﬁcantly
different.
We should also note that in order to adequately
evaluate the signiﬁcance for multiple experiments
we used Bonferroni correction.
The essence of
this method is that in cases when multiple results
are compared (i.e. multiple comparisons are performed) the ﬁnal signiﬁcance level is computed
as the initial signiﬁcance level over the number of
comparisons. In our case we had 91 comparisons
which gave us αB =
91 = 0.0005 for the signiﬁcance level of 0.05. Bonferroni correction is
quite a conservative method, so the number of signiﬁcance groups may vary when using a different
correction technique.
Overall, there are 10 groups of signiﬁcantly
different results: three of them contain one submission (the three best-performing models), other
seven contain two to ﬁve models each (these are
the groups denoted by frames of different colours).
Task 2p: predicting phrase-level quality
As an extension of the word-level task, we introduced a new task: phrase-level prediction. For this
task, given a “phrase” (segmentation as given by
the SMT decoder), participants are asked to label it
as ‘OK’ or ‘BAD’. Errors made by MT engines are
interdependent and one incorrectly chosen word
can cause more errors, especially in its local context. Phrases as produced by SMT decoders can be
seen as a representation of this local context and
in this task we ask participants to consider them as
atomic units, using phrase-speciﬁc information to
English-German
• UNBABEL/ensemble
UNBABEL/linear
UGENT-LT3/SCATE-RF
UGENT-LT3/SCATE-ENS
POSTECH/WORD-RNN-QV3
POSTECH/WORD-RNN-QV2
UAlacant/SBI-Online-baseline
SHEF/SHEF-MIME-1
SHEF/SHEF-MIME-0.3
RTM/s5-RTM-GLMd
UAlacant/SBI-Online
RTM/s4-RTM-GLMd
Table 21: Ofﬁcial results for the WMT16 Quality Estimation Task 2. The winning submissions are indicated by a •. These
are the top-scoring submission and those that are not signiﬁcantly worse according to approximate randomisation tests with
95% conﬁdence intervals. The grey area indicates the submissions whose results are not statistically different from the baseline
according to the same test.
improve upon the results of the word-level task.
The data to be used is exactly the same as
for Task 1 and the word-level task. The labelling
of this data was adapted from word-level labelling
by assigning the ‘BAD’ tag to any phrase that contains at least one ‘BAD’ word. The phrase segmentation used in this dataset is the original segmentation of sentences produced by the SMT decoder during translation.
The dataset statistics are outlined in Table 23
(this is similar to Table 20, but shows the percentage of incorrect phrases instead of words).
Evaluation
Although the QE was produced at
the level of phrases, we used word-level metrics
to evaluate the performance of participating systems. This choice was motivated by the fact that
the length of phrases can vary signiﬁcantly, and
an incorrectly labelled phrase can actually mean 1
to 5 incorrectly labelled words, while phrase-level
metrics do not weigh incorrect labels by the length
of the phrases. We decided to use word-level evaluation to make the results of this task more intuitive. We used the same metric as the one used
in task 2: multiplication of word-level F1-OK and
word-level F1-BAD (F1-mult). However, the test
set was re-labelled in order to agree with phrase
boundaries: if a phrase had at least one BAD word,
all its labels were replaced with BAD.
Thus, the sequence
OK ∥BAD OK OK ∥OK ∥BAD OK ∥OK OK
was converted to:
OK ∥BAD BAD BAD ∥OK ∥BAD BAD ∥OK OK
As in Task 2, statistical signiﬁcance was computed using randomisation tests with Bonferroni
correction.
The results of the phrase-level task are
represented in Table 24. Here, unlike the wordlevel task, we cannot ﬁnd a single winner: although the F1-mult scores of the top ﬁve systems
vary from 0.379 to 0.364, this difference is not
signiﬁcant. However, all the winning submissions
outperform the baseline.
Analogously to the previous task, we provide
the F1-BAD and F1-OK scores in order to better understand the differences between the models.
We can see that some models have very close F1mult scores, although their per class components
scores can differ. For example, the F1-mult scores
of two submissions by the USFD team are very
close (0.367 and 0.364). However, if we decompose these scores, we will see that both F1-BAD
and F1-OK scores of the two models have around
2% of absolute difference: the W&SLP4PT model
is more “pessimistic” (i.e. it is better at labelling
BAD words), while the CONTEXT model identi-
ﬁes the correct words more accurately. However,
the combinations of these scores lead to very similar F1-mult. The situation is the same with all
top ﬁve submissions: the differences in F1-BAD
are levelled off by the F1-OK component, and the
values of the F1-mult are closer than those of F1-
This suggests that the F1-mult score might not
be an best metric for the phrase-level task. While
in the phrase-level models phrases of different
length are treated in the same way, the word-level
metric unfolds each phrase-level label to a set of
UNBABEL/ensemble
UNBABEL/linear
UGENT/LT3-RF
UGENT/LT3-ENS
POSTECH/WORD-RNN-QV3
POSTECH/WORD-RNN-QV2
UAlacant/SBI-Online-baseline
SHEF/SHEF-MIME-1
SHEF/SHEF-MIME-0.3
RTM/s5-RTM-GLMd
UAlacant/SBI-Online
RTM/s4-RTM-GLMd
UNBABEL/ensemble
UNBABEL/linear
UGENT/LT3-RF
UGENT/LT3-ENS
POSTECH/WORD-RNN-QV3
POSTECH/WORD-RNN-QV2
UAlacant/SBI-Online-baseline
SHEF/SHEF-MIME-1
SHEF/SHEF-MIME-0.3
RTM/s5-RTM-GLMd
UAlacant/SBI-Online
RTM/s4-RTM-GLMd
Table 22: Randomised signiﬁcance test for the word-level task with Bonfferroni correction. The darker the cell, the lower the
signiﬁcance level of the difference between the scores of the corresponding systems. The coloured frames denote groups of
submissions which are not signiﬁcantly different. The blue row shows the baseline system.
Development
Table 23: Datasets for Task 2p.
word-level labels, thus giving different importance
to phrases of different lengths. In order to ﬁnd a
more suitable metric we tested another evaluation
strategy. We evaluated the submissions in terms
of phrase-level F1-scores: here all phrases were
considered as uniform atomic units regardless of
their lengths, and F1-BAD and F1-OK were computed as harmonic means of precision and recall
for phrase-level of OK and BAD labels.
Table 25 shows the performance of phrase-level
QE models measured in terms of multiplication of
phrase-level F1-scores. Except for some changes
in the order of models, this ranking is very similar
to the ofﬁcial one represented in Table 24. Here,
the order of submissions by the POSTECH and
CDACM teams is different from the ranking produced with the primary metric, but they are still
not signiﬁcantly different. On the other hand, the
USFD team models are no longer best-performing
under the phrase-level F1-score. This evaluation
shows that phrase-level F1-mult is slightly better
at discriminating between models, although they
are still considered too close and no single bestperforming approach can be identiﬁed.
Task 3: Predicting document-level quality
The document-level QE task consists in scoring
and ranking documents according to their predicted quality. Knowing the quality of entire documents is useful for scenarios where fully automated approaches are used. An example is gisting,
mainly if the user of the system does not know the
source language. Another example are scenarios
where post-editing is not an option or cannot be
performed for the entire data.
Different from last year’s task, in this second
edition we use entire documents and a documentoriented quality score.
The quality scores are
achieved by a two-stage post-editing method
 , with post-editing done by
professional translators.
In the ﬁrst stage, sentences are shufﬂed and post-edited without context
(PE1). In the second stage, the post-edited sentences (from the ﬁrst stage) are put together in the
document context and post-edited again (PE2) by
the same translator. This approach aims to isolate
problems that can only be solved with documentlevel information.
Although the annotation task is considerably
simple to perform, generating reliable quality labels from the data is not a trivial task.
Average (AVG) and Standard Deviation (STDEV) of
HTER between PE1 and MT (PE1 × MT), PE2
and MT (PE2 × MT) and PE2 and PE1 (PE2 ×
PE1) are presented in Table 26.22
As shown in Table 26, PE1 × MT and PE2 ×
MT show low variation. As discussed last year
 , we hypothesise that the low
variation in the scores means that quality labels
are not not able to distinguish documents reliably.
PE2×PE1 values, on the other hand, show a high
variation, indicating that the documents vary more
when only document-wide errors are considered.
However, taking only PE2 × PE1 as quality label is not ideal as it disregards problems at word
and sentence levels, which certainly also inﬂuence
the quality of the document as whole. Our solution is to combine the scores such as to maintain
a high enough variation in the data, while considering all issue levels. More speciﬁcally, we use a
linear combination of PE1×MT and PE2×PE1
(Equation 1).
f = w1 · PE1 × MT + w2 · PE2 × PE1,
where w1 and w2 are empirically deﬁned weights.
w1 was ﬁxed to 1, while w2 was optimised aiming at ﬁnding how much relevance we should give
to each component in order to meet two criteria. First, the ﬁnal label (f) should lead to signiﬁcant data variation (in terms of standard deviation on the mean). Second, the difference between the MAE of the mean baseline23 and the
MAE of the ofﬁcial baseline QE system should be
large enough.24 The quality labels were deﬁned
by Equation 1 with w1 = 1 and w2 = 13.
22HTER was calculated by using the Asiya toolkit implementation of TER (non-tokenised and case insensitive)
 .
23This baseline is calculated by assuming the mean of the
training set as the predicted value of all instances in the test
24In our experiments, for variance we deﬁned that the ratio
between the standard deviation and mean should be at least
0.5 and for MAE difference, we deﬁned it to be at least 0.1.
w2 was increased by 1 at each iteration and the optimisation
process stopped when any of the requirements was met.
English-German
• CDACM/RNN
• POSTECH/PHR-RNN-QV3
• POSTECH/PHR-RNN-QV2
• USFD2/W&SLP4PT
• USFD2/CONTEXT
RTM/s5 RTM-GLMd
RTM/s4 RTM-GLMd
Ualacant/SBI-Online-baseline
UAlacant/SBI-Online
Table 24: Ofﬁcial results for the WMT16 Quality Estimation Task 2p. The winning submissions are indicated by a •. These are
the top-scoring submission and those that are not signiﬁcantly worse according to approximate randomisation tests with 95%
conﬁdence intervals. The grey area indicates the submissions whose results are not statistically different from the baseline.
English-German
• POSTECH/PHR-RNN-QV3
• POSTECH/PHR-RNN-QV2
• CDACM/RNN
USFD/CONTEXT
USFD/W&SLP4PT
RTM/s5-RTM-GLMd
RTM/s4-RTM-GLMd
UAlacant/SBI-Online-baseline
UAlacant/SBI-Online
Table 25: Results for the WMT16 Quality Estimation Task 2p computed in terms of phrase-level F1-scores. The winning
submissions are indicated by a •. These are the top-scoring submission and those that are not signiﬁcantly worse according to
approximate randomisation tests with 95% conﬁdence intervals. The grey area indicates the submissions whose results are not
statistically different from the baseline.
Table 26: AVG and STDEV of the post-edited data.
The documents were extracted from the
WMT translation task test data from 2008 to 2013,
using submissions from all participating MT systems. Source documents were randomly chosen.
For each source document, a translation was taken
from a different MT system. We considered EN-
ES as language pair, extracting 208 documents.
All documents were post-edited as previously explained. 146 documents were used for training and
62 for test.
Evaluation
The evaluation of the documentlevel task was the same as that for the sentencelevel task. Pearson’s r, MAE and RMSE are reported as evaluation metrics for the scoring task,
with Pearson’s r as ofﬁcial metric for the ranking
of systems. For the ranking task, Spearman’s ρ
correlation and DeltaAvg are reported, with Spearman’s rho as main metric. The signiﬁcance of the
results is evaluated by applying the Williams test
on Pearson’s r scores.
The results of both the scoring and ranking variants of the task are given in Table 27,
sorted from best to worst by using the Pearson’s
r scores as primary key.
USHEF/BASE-EMB-
GP and RTM/RTM-FS+PLS-TREE showed the
best scores, with no signiﬁcant difference between
them. The other two systems are not statistically
signiﬁcantly different from the baseline.
The two winning submissions are very different. The BASE-EMB-GP system combines word
embeddings with the ofﬁcial baseline features in a
GP model with two-kernels, while RTM-FS+PLS-
TREE is an RTM implementation that explores
more sophisticated features from the source and
target texts. For ranking variant, however, RTM-
FS+PLS-TREE showed better results. Moreover,
this is the only system with higher scores than the
baseline that is also signiﬁcantly better than the
Discussion
In what follows, we discuss the main ﬁndings of
this year’s shared task based on the goals we had
Pearson’s r ↑
Spearman’s ρ ↑
DeltaAvg ↑
English-Spanish
• USHEF/BASE-EMB-GP
• RTM/RTM-FS+PLS-TREE
RTM/RTM-FS-SVR
USHEF/GRAPH-DISC
Ofﬁcial results for the scoring ad ranking variants of the WMT16 Quality Estimation Task 3. The systems are
ranked according to the Pearson r metric and signiﬁcance results are also computed for this metric. The winning submissions
are indicated by a •. These are the top-scoring submission and those that are not signiﬁcantly worse according to Williams
test with 95% conﬁdence intervals. The systems in the grey area are not different from the baseline system at a statistically
signiﬁcant level according to the same test.
previously identiﬁed for it.
Domain speciﬁc, professionally done
post-editions
Last year we used the largest dataset of all editions
of the shared task to date (for sentence and phraselevel QE): ∼14K segment pairs altogether. However, the ﬁndings were somewhat inconclusive as
the quality of the dataset was dubious (crowdsourced post-editions).
This year we were able
to collect a dataset of comparable size (15K) but
in a completely controlled way, and with professional (paid) translators to ensure the quality of
the data. Another critical difference in this year’s
main dataset is its domain: IT, as opposed to the
rather general, “news” domain that had been used
so far. Finally, we had access to the SMT system that produced the translations, which was very
important for the new task introduced this year –
phrase-level QE. For phrase-level QE, the segmentation of the sentences in phrases was necessary.
Having a more repetitive text domain was deemed
particularly relevant for the word and phrase-level
tasks, where data sparsity is a major issue.
In practice, we found that this year’s main
dataset is similar to last year’s in terms of error
distribution at the word-level: about 20% of the
words are labelled as BAD. One thing to notice,
however, is that with the new data systems did not
seem to beneﬁt from ﬁltering data out. Last year,
various systems reported improvements from ﬁltering out signiﬁcant portions of the “all/mostly
GOOD” sentences, which could have meant that
these sentences may not have been correct, but did
not get post-edited by the crowdworkers.
In terms of progress with respect to last year for
comparable tasks, although direct comparisons are
not possible, we observed that:
• For sentence-level, the Pearson correlation of
the winning submission last year was 0.39
(against 0.14 of the baseline system). This
year, the winning submission reached 0.52
Pearson correlation, with many other systems
above 0.4 (against 0.35 of the same baseline
system as last year). One can speculate that
the task was made somewhat “easier” by using high quality data, but the delta in Pearson
correlation between the baseline and winning
submission is still very substantial.
• For word-level, the main metric used this
year (F1-mult) is different from the one used
last year (F1-BAD), and this may have been
the metric most systems optimised against, so
looking at the F1-BAD results for both years
is not entirely fair to this year’s systems, but
nevertheless this year’s systems performed
much better: 0.56 against 0.43 last year. The
baseline system used last year was much simpler, and therefore comparisons against the
baseline cannot be made.
Effectiveness of new quality label provided by
humans for document-level prediction
Participation in the document-level task was again
disappointingly low, with only four systems.
Document-level QE is still a relative new area and
engaging the community is therefore still a challenge.
The main changes in this year’s task were the
fact that entire documents are used (potentially resulting in the need for more discourse/documentwide features), and the the fact that the quality labels are computed based on human post-editing.
We start by analysing the new quality label against
automatic metrics (such as BLEU) used in previous work. Our hypothesis is that automatic metrics are not reliable labels for document-level evaluation ).
Therefore, we expect that our new label would perform differently from these metrics. We use cor-
relation to measure whether or not the new label
shows different behaviour. Table 28 shows Pearson r correlation scores for automatic metrics versus the new label, as well as between HTER and
all labels. The HTER score was calculated considering the last version of the two-stage post-editing
method (PE2 × MT).
Table 28: Pearson r correlation between automatic metrics,
our new label (NEW) and HTER. All correlation scores are
signiﬁcant with 95% of conﬁdence.
Although the new label showed some correlation to BLEU, TER and METEOR, the best
correlation is showed with HTER. On the other
hand, the automatic metrics showed higher correlation among themselves than against HTER
scores, which is expected since such metrics are
similar in many ways.
An important observation is that the automatic
metrics are calculated against a human translation
and HTER is calculated against a post-edited version. The effect of this is that BLEU, TER and
METEOR compare the MT output to a human
translation that can be completely different from
the MT output, without necessarily meaning that
the machine translation is bad. HTER, conversely,
compares the MT output to its post-edited version.
It is also worth noticing that although HTER did
not show a high variation (0.091 for mean 0.381 third column of Table 26), similar to the automatic
metrics, it still did not show very high correlation with BLEU, TER and METEOR. Conversely,
the new label showed high correlation with HTER,
but much lower correlation with BLEU, TER and
METEOR than HTER itself. This seems to indicate that the new label captures different information than BLEU, TER and METEOR. Therefore,
we believe that the new label and standard evaluation metrics provide complementary information
on translation quality.
In terms of features,
most are similar to
those used by the systems submitted last year,
which are aggregations of sentence-level feature values.
Therefore, our hypothesis that
discourse/document-aware features would show
better results on evaluating full document was not
proved. Systems using discourse-aware features
(USHEF/GRAPH-DISC) did not show improvements relative to the baseline system. This could
be an indication of the limitations of the features
or of the labels themselves.
QE at the phrase level
One of the main motivations for switching from
the word level to phrase level is the fact that MT
errors are often context-dependent, and the wrong
choice of a word might be explained by an error
in its context. A good example of such errors are
adjectives that take the gender of the noun they
depend on, and become erroneous if this noun is
replaced with another noun of a different gender.
This motivation suggests that the phrases to be
used as atomic units in a phrase-level QE system should be syntactically motivated. However,
there can be other approaches. For example, the
very popular SMT systems manipulate sequences
of words as opposed to single words. These sequences – referred to as “phrases” – are not linguistically motivated phrases.
During decoding
these phrases are selected or rejected as atomic
units (regardless of the quality of the individual
words they consist of), and thus it may be useful
to estimate the quality of the entire phrase.
Overall, there is no single answer to what
should be considered as a “phrase” in a phraselevel QE system. A fully-ﬂedged phrase-level QE
system should be able to handle both the segmentation of a sentence into phrases and the labelling
of each phrase for quality. However, each of these
two steps is a complex problem on itself. Therefore, for the ﬁrst edition of the task we decided to
simplify it and provide the phrase segmentation.
Following Logacheva et al. , we considered
a “phrase” the ﬁnal segmentation produced by the
SMT decoder by an MT decoder that generated
the automatic translations in the dataset. This segmentation is useful for decoding-time QE.
The baseline phrase-level QE system uses a
set of features which were originally designed
for sentences and later adapted for smaller sequences. These features were used to train a CRF
Participants chose many different techniques to model the task.
The best performing
ones are deep neural networks: the Recurrent Neural Network from the POSTECH team which predicts the phrase-level label and the CDACM Recurrent Neural Network whose word-level predictions were successfully applied to the phrase-level
task. Two of the submitted models make use of
the baseline feature set: the USFD team enhanced
it with context information, while the UAlacante
team combined it with features based on pseudoreference translations coming from a number of
Several teams attempted to take into account
the predictions for other the task at other levels.
The phrase-level submission from CDACM simply labels the phrase-level test set using wordlevel predictions; while the UAlacant submission
uses the probability of each word in a phrase being labelled as BAD along with other external features. Similarly, USFD uses information on word
labels within a phrase as well as the information
on sentence-level quality.
Comparison of word-level and phrase-level
The word-level and phrase-level systems that participated in Tasks 2 and 2p are not directly comparable. Although they are evaluated on
the same test sentences, and the labels for the test
set come from the same post-editions, they are not
identical. The labels for the phrase-level test set
were modiﬁed in order to comply with the phraselevel training data. We established a pessimistic
approache where a phrase is considered BAD if
any of its words is BAD. We changed the wordlevel labels so that all labels within a BAD phrase
are also BAD. This is analogous to replacing some
OK labels with BAD labels for words.
Nevertheless, we can still try to compare the
word-level and phrase-level submissions if we
change the word-level submissions appropriately.
Let us consider that a word-level QE model was
used to label phrases for quality. Following the
rules mentioned above we will label a phrase as
BAD if our QE model labelled any of words of
this phrase as BAD. After performing this transformation we can use the Task 2p test set to evaluate both phrase-level and (modiﬁed) word-level
submissions.
While this comparison is an approximation as
the submitted word-level models were not trained
to predict the quality of phrases, it still allows a rough comparison between word-level and
phrase-level QE models.
One of the purposes
of the phrase-level task was to understand if the
subsentence-level QE can beneﬁt from joint labelling of groups of words, and this cross-task
comparison is a means to try to answer that question.
Table 29 contains the joint results of Tasks 2 and
2p. The best-performing system is the winning
word-level submission. Moreover, the word-level
systems tend to perform better in this task in general: the top seven positions in this joint table are
occupied by the word-level systems. Some of the
phrase-level systems which performed well turn
out not to be better than the word-level baseline
system. Presumably, this result means that deﬁning the quality for individual words yields better
results in general.
Another observation we can make from this table is the change in the signiﬁcance level of the results: some of the word-level submissions which
were signiﬁcantly different from the word-level
baseline model in the original (word-level) task
are no longer different in the phrase-level version.
This can shed some light on the difﬁculties we had
with deﬁning the single best phrase-level system:
perhaps the lack of signiﬁcance in the differences
between the labellings is derived from the phraselevel task itself. Alternatively, as it was discussed
in Section 6.5, it could be explained by the fact that
F1-mult score is not a suitable metric for phraselevel QE.
In order to examine how the phrase-level task
relates to the word-level one more closely we performed a different comparison. Some of the teams
presented their results for both variants of Task 2,
and the majority of them have similar models for
both levels: they tried to adapt their original wordlevel system for the phrase-level task.
compare these pairs of systems to see if the adaptation was successful. This is not a direct comparison, because the models, although similar, cannot be identical due to differences between words
and phrases. This comparison was only done for
analysis, as it can give us more insights on the future perspectives for the phrase-level task. Table
30 outlines the results of this comparison.25
Here, in order to enable the direct comparison,
we adapted the word-level systems to phrase-level
test set the same way as we did for Table 29. It can
be clearly seen that the performance of word-level
systems is better than that of the analogous phraselevel systems. There are multiple possible reasons
for that, for example, wrong choice of phrase-level
features, limitations of models originally designed
for word-level QE in dealing effectively with word
25The submission by the CDACM team was not included
in the table because their phrase-level submission is an adaptation of word-level predictions to phrase level. It was performed analogously to our word-level submissions adaptation, therefore it should be no different.
English-German
UNBABEL/ensemble
UNBABEL/linear
UGENT-LT3/SCATE-RF
POSTECH/WORD-RNN-QV3
UGENT-LT3/SCATE-ENS
POSTECH/WORD-RNN-QV2
POSTECH/PHR-RNN-QV3
POSTECH/PHR-RNN-QV2
UAlacant/SBI-Online-baseline
USFD/W&SLP4PT
SHEF/SHEF-MIME-0.3
SHEF/SHEF-MIME-1
USFD/CONTEXT
RTM/s5-RTM-GLMd
RTM/s5-RTM-GLMd
RTM/s4-RTM-GLMd
RTM/s4-RTM-GLMd
UAlacant/SBI-Online
UAlacant/SBI-Online-baseline
UAlacant/SBI-Online
Table 29: Comparison of submissions for Tasks 2 and 2p in terms of word-level F1-mult scores computed on the test set used
for the Task 2p. Word-level systems (Task 2) are indicated by “word”, while phrase-level systems (Task 2p), by “phrase”.
The winning submission is indicated with •. The grey area indicates the models which are not signiﬁcantly different from
the word-level baseline system, the cyan area indicates the models which are not signiﬁcantly different from the phrase-level
Word-level
Phrase-level
English-German
POSTECH/RNN-QV3
POSTECH/RNN-QV2
RTM/s5-RTM-GLMd
RTM/s4-RTM-GLMd
Ualacant/SBI-Online-baseline
Ualacant/SBI-Online
Table 30: Comparison of systems’ performance in Task 2 (word-level) and 2p (phrase-level). Performance is evaluated in
terms of word-level F1-mult scores computed on the test set used for the Task 2p. The submissions to the word-level task are
modiﬁed in order to comply with the phrase-level task.
sequences.
Nevertheless, it is worth noticing the phraselevel QE systems introduced a number of interesting strategies that allowed them to outperform
a strong baseline phrase-level model. Finally, we
recall that the evaluation metric – word-level F1mult – has difﬁculties to distinguish phrase-level
systems. This suggests that we may need to ﬁnd a
different metric for evaluation of the phrase-level
task, with phrase-level F1-mult one of the candidates.
Automatic Post-editing Task
This year WMT hosted the second round of the
shared task on MT automatic post-editing (APE),
which consists in automatically correcting the errors present in a machine translated text.
pointed out by Chatterjee et al. , from the
application point of view the task is motivated by
its possible uses to:
• Improve MT output by exploiting information unavailable to the decoder, or by performing deeper text analysis that is too expensive at the decoding stage;
• Cope with systematic errors of an MT system
whose decoding process is not accessible;
• Provide professional translators with improved MT output quality to reduce (human)
post-editing effort;
• Adapt the output of a general-purpose MT
system to the lexicon/style requested in a speciﬁc application domain.
Also this year, the general framework consisted
in a “black box” scenario in which the MT system that produced the translations is unknown to
the participants and cannot be modiﬁed.
However, building on the lessons learned in the ﬁrst pilot round , some changes have
been made.
The major differences concern the domain and
the origin of the data.
First, we moved from
the general news domain to the more speciﬁc
information technology (IT) domain.
novelty is motivated by the difﬁculties observed in
the pilot round, in which the baseline (the simple
do-nothing APE system that leaves all the test sentences unmodiﬁed) remained unbeaten.
the scarce repetitiveness of the news domain prevented participants to learn from the training data
effective correction patterns that are also applicable to the test set. Second, concerning the origin of the data, we moved from post-edits obtained from non-professional crowdsourced workforce to material collected from professional translators. Data collected from trained professionals
represents ﬁrst of all a more standard scenario for
the translation industry. Besides this, they are considered to guarantee higher translation coherence,
feature higher repetitiveness and, eventually, make
the APE task more feasible by automatic systems.
Other changes concern the language combination and the evaluation mode.
As regards the
languages, we moved from English-Spanish to
English-German, which is one of the language
pairs covered by the QT21 Project26 that supported data collection and post-editing.
Concerning the evaluation, we changed from TER
scores computed both in case-sensitive and caseinsensitive mode to a single ranking based on case
sensitive measurements.
Besides these changes the new round of the
APE task included some extensions in the evaluation. BLEU has been introduced as a secondary evaluation metric to measure the improvements over the rough MT output.
In addition, to gain further insights on ﬁnal output
quality, a subset of the outputs of the submitted
systems has also been manually evaluated.
Based on these changes and extensions, the
goals of this year’s shared task were to: i) improve and stabilize the evaluation framework in
view of future rounds, ii) analyze the effect on task
26 
feasibility of data coming from a narrow domain,
iii) analyze the effect of post-edits collected from
professional translators, iv) analyze how humans
perceive TER/BLEU performance differences between different systems, v) measure the progress
made during one year of research on the APE task.
Although the changes made with respect to the
ﬁrst pilot round prevent from fair and informative result comparisons, we believe that these objectives were successfully achieved. Most noticeably, the higher feasibility of the task brought by
domain-speciﬁc data and professional post-edits
resulted in signiﬁcant baseline improvements (up
to 3.2 TER and 5.5 BLEU points), which are also
evident to human evaluation. These positive results, together with the increase in the number of
participants with respect to the pilot round (from
four to six), represent a good starting point for future rounds of the APE task.
Task description
Similar to last year, participants were provided
with training and development data consisting of
(source, target, human post-edit) triplets, and were
asked to return automatic post-edits for a test set of
unseen (source, target) pairs.
One of the ﬁndings of the ﬁrst pilot task was that
the origin and the domain of the data pose speciﬁc
challenges to the participating systems. In particular, our analysis highlighted the strong dependence
of system results on data repetitiveness, which
tends to be higher within restricted domains and
with coherent post-edits. On one side, restricted
domains are more likely to feature smaller vocabularies and to be more repetitive (or, in other terms,
less sparse). This situation, in turn, will likely determine a higher applicability of the learned error
correction patterns. On the other side, coherent
post-edits (like those produced within controlled
professional environments) will result in a lower
variability in the correction of speciﬁc errors and,
in turn, in favorable conditions to learn and gather
reliable statistics. These considerations motivate
some of the major changes of this year’s round
of the APE task, namely those concerning the domain (a speciﬁc one as opposed to news) and the
origin of the post-edits (from professional translators instead of crowdsourced).
The data used this year was released by the
QT21 Project.
This material was obtained by
randomly sampling from a collection of English-
German (source, target, human post-edit) triplets
drawn from the Information Technology (IT)
domain.27 Also this year, the main reason for random sampling was to induce a higher data homogeneity and, in turn, to increase the chances that
correction patterns learned from the training set
can be applied also to the test set.
The downside of losing information yielded by text coherence (an aspect that some APE systems might take
into consideration) has hence been accepted in exchange for a higher error repetitiveness across the
three data sets.
The training and development sets respectively
consist of 12, 000 and 1, 000 instances. In each
• The source (SRC) is a tokenized English sentence whose length ranges between 3 and 30
• The target (TGT) is a tokenized German
translation of the source. Translations were
obtained with a statistical MT system.28 This
information, however, was unknown to participants, for which the MT system was a
black-box.
• The human post-edit (PE) is a manuallyrevised version of the target, done by professional translators.29
Test data (2, 000 instances) consists of (source,
target) pairs having similar characteristics of those
in the training set. Human post-edits of the test
target instances were left apart to measure system
performance.
Table 31 provides some basic statistics about
the data. As discussed in Section 7.3, the differences in the domain and the origin of this year’s
data can contribute to explain the large improvements over the baseline, which in the ﬁrst pilot
round unfortunately remained unbeaten.
differences are highlighted by the Repetition Rate
27The source sentences (together with their reference
translations which were not used for the task) were provided
by TAUS ( and originally come
from a unique IT vendor.
28It consists of a phrase-based machine translation system
leveraging generic and in-domain parallel training data and
using a pre-reordering technique . It
takes also advantages of POS and word class-based language
29German native speakers working at Text&Form https:
//www.textform.com/.
(RR30) scores reported in Table 32. Values are indeed very close to those observed in the IT-related
corpus (the Autodesk Post-Editing Data corpus31)
that was used last year as a term of comparison to
motivate the high difﬁculty of dealing with news
Evaluation metric
System performance was evaluated by computing
the distance between automatic and human postedits of the machine-translated sentences present
in the test set (i.e. for each of the 2, 000 target
test sentences). Differently from the ﬁrst edition of
the task, in which this distance was only measured
in terms of Translation Error Rate (TER) , this year the BLEU score was also used.
TER is an evaluation metric commonly used in MT-related tasks
(e.g. in quality estimation) to measure the minimum edit distance between an automatic translation and a reference translation.32 BLEU is the
reference metric for MT evaluation and is based
on modiﬁed n-gram precision to ﬁnd how many of
the n-grams in the candidate translation are present
in the reference translation over the entire test set.
The main difference between the two metrics is
that TER works at word level, while BLEU takes
advantage of words and n-grams with n from 2 to
4. Systems were ranked based on the average TER
calculated on the test set by using the TERcom33
software: lower average TER scores correspond
to higher ranks. BLEU was computed using the
multi-bleu.perl package34 available in MOSES.
Differently from the pilot round, in which TER
was computed both in case-sensitive and caseinsensitive mode, this year we opted for only one
mode. Working with German, for which case errors are of crucial importance, participants’ submissions were evaluated with the more strict casesensitive mode.
30Repetition rate measures the repetitiveness inside a text
by looking at the rate of non-singleton n-gram types (n=1...4)
and combining them using the geometric mean. Larger value
means more repetitions in the text.
31 
Autodesk-PostEditing
32Edit distance is calculated as the number of edits (word
insertions, deletions, substitutions, and shifts) divided by the
number of words in the reference. Lower TER values indicate
lower distance from the reference as a proxy for higher MT
33 
34 
blob/master/scripts/generic/multi-bleu.perl
Train (12,000)
Dev (1,000)
Test (2,000)
Table 31: Data statistics.
(EN-ES, news, crowd)
(EN-DE, IT, prof.)
Repetition Rate (RR) of the WMT15 (English-
crowdsourced
post-edits)
WMT16 (English-German, IT domain, professional posteditors) APE Task data.
The ofﬁcial baseline results are the TER and
BLEU scores calculated by comparing the raw MT
output with the human post-edits. In practice, the
baseline APE system is a system that leaves all the
test targets unmodiﬁed.35 Baseline results are reported in Table 34.
Monolingual translation as another term of
comparison.
To get some insights about the
progress with respect to the ﬁrst pilot task, participating systems were also evaluated against a reimplementation of the approach ﬁrstly proposed
by Simard et al. .36 Last year, in fact, this
statistical post-editing approach represented the
common backbone of all submissions (this is also
reﬂected by the close results achieved by participants in the pilot task). For this purpose, a phrasebased SMT system based on Moses was used. Translation and reordering models were estimated following the Moses protocol
with default setup using MGIZA++ for word alignment. For language modeling we used the KenLM toolkit 
for standard n-gram modeling with an n-gram
length of 5. Finally, the APE system was tuned on
35In the case of TER, the baseline is computed by averaging the distances between each machine-translated sentence
and its human-revised version. The actual evaluation metric
is the human-targeted TER (HTER). For the sake of clarity,
since TER and HTER compute edit distance in the same way
(the only difference is in the origin of the correct sentence
used for comparison), henceforth we will use TER to refer to
both metrics.
description
in . Our re-implementation, however,
is not meant to ofﬁcially represent such approach. Discrepancies with the actual method are indeed possible due to our
misinterpretation or to wrong guesses about details that are
missing in the paper.
the development set, optimizing TER/BLEU with
Minimum Error Rate Training . The
results of this additional term of comparison are
also reported in Table 34.
For each submitted run, the statistical signiﬁcance of performance differences with respect to
the baselines and the re-implementation of Simard
et al. was calculated with the bootstrap
test .
Participants
This year, six teams (two more than in the pilot
round) participated in the APE task by submitting
a total of eleven runs. Participants are listed in
Table 33; a short description of their systems is
provided in the following.
Adam Mickiewicz University.
This system is
among the very ﬁrst ones exploring the application of neural translation models to the APE
In particular, it investigates the following
i) the use of artiﬁcially-created postedited data to train the neural models, ii) the loglinear combination of monolingual and bilingual
models in an ensemble-like manner, iii) the addition of task-speciﬁc features in the log-linear
model to control the ﬁnal output quality.
Concerning the data, in addition to the ofﬁcial training and development material, the system exploits
the English-German bilingual training material released for the IT-domain and news translation
shared tasks. The German monolingual common
crawl corpus admissible for these two tasks is also
exploited. This data is used by a “round-trip translation” approach aimed to artiﬁcially create the
huge amount of triples needed to train the neural models. Such models are attentional encoderdecoder models trained
with subword units in order to deal with the limited ability of neural translation models to handle out-of-vocabulary words.
They include both monolingual models trained to
translate from TGT to PE, and cross-lingual models trained to translate from SRC to PE. An ensemble is obtained through their log-linear combination with empirically-set weights 
Univerzita Karlova v Praze, Czech Republic 
Dublin City University, Ireland
Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Italy 
JUSAAR Jadavpur University, India & Saarland University, Germany
Saarland University, Germany 
Table 33: Participants in the WMT16 Automatic Post-editing task.
TGT-to-PE model). Finally, a task-speciﬁc feature
based on string matching is added to the log-linear
combination to control the faithfulness of the APE
results with regard to the input. This is done by
penalizing words in the output that do not appear
in the input to be corrected.
Univerzita Karlova v Praze.
Also this system
is based on the neural translation model with attention proposed by Bahdanau et al. and extends it to include multiple encoders able to manage different input representations. Each encoder
is a bidirectional RNN that takes in input a onehot vector for each representation of a word. The
decoder is an RNN which receives an embedding
of the previously produced word as an input in every time step together with the hidden state from
the previous time step. The RNNs output is then
used to compute the attention and the next word
distribution. The attention is computed over each
of the encoders separately. The initial state of the
decoder is obtained by a weighted combination of
the encoders ﬁnal states. To improve the capability
of the network to focus on the edits made by the
post-editors, the target sentence is converted in the
minimum-length sequence of edit operations performed on the machine-translated sentence. For
this purpose, the network vocabulary is extended
adding two more tokens (keep and delete) and the
new representation is made of a sequence of keep,
delete and insert operations, where the insert operation is deﬁned by placing the word itself. The
different inputs used for the APE task submission
are the source sentence and its translation into the
target language and the sequence of edits. The
network is trained using only the task data. To
better handle the complexity of the German target
language, different language-dependent pre- and
post-processing are used, in particular, splitting
the contracted prepositions and articles and separating some pronouns from their case ending.
Dublin City University.
This system is designed as an automatic rule learning system. It
considers four types of editings, i.e.
replacement, deletion, insertion and reordering, as generalized replacement (GR) editings. GR editings are
learned from aligning words in source and target
sentences and records replacement pairs and their
corresponding contexts for each source and target
sentence pair. When the source word is empty,
it is of an insertion editing; similarly, when the
target word is empty, it is of a deletion editing.
When the source words and target words in a GR
editing both comprise the same set of words but
with different orderings, it is of a reordering editing. The word-based GR editings and their generalization which uses POSs to replace their context
words, comprise the whole rule set of GR editings.
There is no linguistic knowledge incorporated in
the system, which therefore can be applied to any
language for post-editing purposes. Three things
are learned from the training set, 1) the GR rules,
2) the precedence ordering of these rules, and 3)
the maximum number of rules to be applied to
a sentence. For each set of GR rules, the precedence ordering can be ranked based on the counts
of replacement words, the counts of their context
words, the lengths of GR editings, the number
of occurrences of GR editings observed in training set and/or their combinations. In the training
phase, given a set of GR rules, the system will apply the rules to the training set using different settings of precedence ordering and maximum number of rules to be applied for each sentence. The
system is trained when one setting is selected if
the system yields the best overall post-edited results by applying that setting. In the test phase,
the GR rules will be applied to each sentence in
the test set using the trained precedence ordering
and stop when the maximum number of rules to be
applied is met for that sentence.
Fondazione Bruno Kessler.
This system combines the monolingual statistical approaches previously exploited in Chatterjee et al. with
a factored machine translation model that is able to
leverage beneﬁts from both. One is the monolingual statistical translation approach proposed by
Simard et al. .
The other is the contextaware variant proposed by B´echara et al. .
The former is more robust and it better generalizes the learned post-editing rules. The latter is
prone to data sparsity, word alignment and tuning problems due to its richer representation of
the terms.
Nevertheless, by integrating knowledge about the source context in the learned rules,
its precision is a good complement to the higher
recall of .
By enabling a
straightforward integration of additional annotation (factors) at the word-level, factored translation models are used
to leverage such complementarity.
In the FBK
system they include part-of-speech-tag and classbased neural language models (LM) along with
statistical word-based LM to improve the ﬂuency
of the post-edits.
These models are built upon
a data augmentation technique (i.e.
the extension of the monolingual parallel corpus with the
post-edits available in the training data), which
helps to mitigate the problem of over-correction
in phrase-based APE systems. One of the submitted runs incorporates a quality estimation model
 , which aims to
select the best translation between the MT output
and the automatic post-edit.
Jadavpur University & Saarland University.
This system contains three basic components: statistical APE, word deletion model and word surface form correction model. The ﬁnal generated
translation is the product of a multi-engine reranking system. The statistical APE component
is based on the phrase-based APE approach of Pal
et al. . MT outputs generally contain four
types of errors: presence of unwarranted words,
wrong word surface form, absence of some relevant words, and wrong word order. The system
tries to address the ﬁrst two types of errors. The
word deletion model is based on source language
context modelling and target language word deletion frequency in the training data. The surface
form correction model tries to ﬁx the morphological errors by generating all possible surface forms
for each root word present in the MT output and
to select the most likely sequence of word surface forms by applying a language model. The
word deletion model and the word surface form
correction model are applied to all the APE outputs. Finally, the generated translation candidates
are ranked using a ranking algorithm based on
language model information and a length-based
heuristic. The top ranked output is chosen as the
ﬁnal APE output.
Saarland University.
This system combines the
Operation Sequence Model (OSM) with the classic phrase-based statistical MT
(PB-SMT) approach. The OSM-APE method represents the post-edited translation process as a linear sequence of operations such as lexical generation of post-edited translation and their orderings.
The translation and reordering decisions are conditioned on n previous translation and reordering
decisions. This technique is able to model both local and long-range reorderings that are quite useful
when dealing with the German language. To improve the capability of choosing the correct edit to
process, eight new features are added to the loglinear model. These features capture the cost of
deleting a phrase and different information on possible gaps in reordering operations. The monolingual alignments between the MT outputs and their
post-edits are computed using different methods
based on TER, METEOR and
Berkeley Aligner . Only the
task data is used for these submissions.
TER/BLEU results
The ofﬁcial TER and BLEU results achieved by
participants are reported in Table 34.
The submitted runs are sorted based on the average (casesensitive) TER measured on test data, which was
this year’s primary evaluation metric.
Looking at the performance of the two baselines, i.e. the raw MT output (Baseline) and the
basic statistical APE approach of Simard et al.
 , the latter outperforms the former with both
This indicates that, under this year’s
evaluation conditions, the MT outputs could be
improved by learning from human post-editors’
Differently from the pilot task , in which none of the runs was able to beat
the baselines, this year half of the participants
achieved this goal by producing automatic postedited sentences that result in lower TER 
DCU Contrastive
JUSAAR Primary
JUSAAR Contrastive
DCU Primary
Table 34: Ofﬁcial results for the WMT16 Automatic Postediting task – average TER (↓), BLEU score (↑).
maximum of -3.24 points) and higher BLEU score
(up to +5.54 points). All differences with respect
to such baselines are statistically signiﬁcant. This
suggests that the correction patterns learned from
the data were reliable enough to allow most systems to effectively correct the original MT output.
The obvious question is whether the improvements observed this year are due to the new data
domain-speciﬁc texts and professional
post-edits) or to a real technology jump (i.e. the
use of neural end-to-end APE systems, factored
or operational sequential models). A partial answer is given by the performance of the approach
of Simard et al. , which we run on the data
of both rounds of the APE task with the same implementation. Although its results on the two test
sets are difﬁcult to compare (also due to the different language setting), the overall TER scores and
the relative distances with respect to the other submitted runs can give us some indications.
First of all, on the pilot test set, the basic statistical APE method damaged the original MT output quality, with a TER reduction of about 1 point.
On this year’s data it achieves a small improvement (though statistically signiﬁcant only in terms
of BLEU). This suggests that, as hypothesized in
Section 7.1.1, the higher repetitiveness featured by
the selected data can facilitate the work of the APE
systems. The new scenario, with repetition rates
for SRC, TGT and PE that are more than twice the
values measured last year (see Table 32), makes
them able to learn from the training data a larger
number of reliable and re-applicable correction
However, the large improvements obtained this year by the top runs can only be reached
by moving from the basic statistical MT backbone
shared by all last year’s participants to new and
more reliable APE solutions. Indeed, its distance
from the top-ranked systems has increased from
0.6 up to 3.12 TER points. While on one side it
is true that the new data made the task easier, on
the other side the deployed solutions and the increased results’ distance over the basic statistical
APE approach indicate a signiﬁcant step forward.
In terms of TER and BLEU evaluations, there
are minor differences (only for the lower ranked
systems) between the two rankings. This conﬁrms
that both metrics capture similar linguistic phenomena and the use of n-grams does not show particular advantages.
System/performance analysis
Differently from the pilot round, in which TER results were more concentrated (the difference between the top and the lowest ranked system was
about 1.5 points), this year systems’ performance
is distributed within an interval of about 7.5 points.
Indeed, the two rankings of Table 34 can be seen
as composed of three blocks: the best system,
the systems scoring around the baselines and the
lower performing systems. Trying to go beyond
rough TER/BLEU measurements and to shed light
on such performance differences, in this section
we focus on a more ﬁne-grained analysis of systems’ behaviour and the corresponding errors.
System behaviour
A ﬁrst interesting aspect to analyse is systems’ behaviour which, compared to last year, reﬂects the
larger variety of approaches explored. Does this
variety result in major differences in the correction strategies/operations? To answer this question, we ﬁrst analysed the submitted runs taking
into consideration the changes made by each system to the test instances. Table 35 shows the number of modiﬁed, improved and deteriorated sentences.
It’s worth noting that, as observed last
year, for all the systems the number of modiﬁed
sentences is higher than the sum of the improved
and the deteriorated ones. This difference is represented by modiﬁed sentences for which the corrections do not yield TER variations. This grey
area, for which quality improvement/degradation
can not be automatically assessed, contributes to
motivate the human evaluation discussed in Section 7.5
Deteriorated
AMU Primary
AMU Contrastive
FBK Contrastive
FBK Primary
USAAR Primary
USAAR Contrastive
CUNI Primary
 
DCU Contrastive
JUSAAR Primary
JUSAAR Contrastive
DCU Primary
Table 35: Number of test sentences modiﬁed, improved and deteriorated by each submitted run.
Looking at the numbers in Table 35, it becomes evident that the overall number of modi-
ﬁed sentences is considerably larger than in the
pilot task.
On average, the best run submitted
by each team modiﬁed 42.5% sentences.
amount is much larger than last year, when the
percentage was 18.0%, probably due to the higher
repetitiveness of the data which makes possible
to learn more reliable and applicable correction
The same holds for the average number
of improved sentences, which this year is significantly larger (18.7% vs. 11% in the pilot). This
trend is conﬁrmed by the performance of our reimplementation of Simard et al. , which
modiﬁed 35% of the sentences (vs. 26% in the
pilot), improving 45% (vs. 11% last year) and deteriorating 36% of them (vs. 61%).
These ﬁgures,
vary considerably
across the submitted runs. Among the systems that
improve over the basic statistical APE approach,
the top-ranked one modiﬁed an impressive number of test sentences (80%), which is more than
twice the amount of items changed by the other
submissions. For the same system, the improved
and the deteriorated ones are respectively about
58% and 23% of the total, which is in line with the
other participants that improved the baseline. An
interesting general conclusion that we can draw is
that the neural approach adopted by the top-ranked
system allowed it to better cope with the data sparsity issues that affect the other methods (despite
the higher repetitiveness of this year’s data). More
thorough investigations that are beyond the scope
of this overview should verify the hypothesis that
learning and generalising rules from a relatively
small amount of human post-edits is easier with
Figure 10: System Behaviour – TER(MT, APE)
neural models than with pure statistical solutions.
Another aspect that should be checked is whether
the neural solution performs better per se or thanks
to the much larger amount of training data needed
for its deployment.
Further insights about systems’ behaviour can
be drawn from the analysis of Figure 10. It plots
the distribution of the edit operations done by each
system (insertions, deletions, substitutions, shifts)
obtained by computing the TER between the original MT output and the output of each system as
reference (only for the primary submissions).
The ﬁgure evidences some interesting trends,
starting from the much larger proportion of shifts
made by the top-ranked neural approach. More
than 450 shift operations (9.2% of the total),
in fact, represent the major difference between
the behaviour of the winning system and all the
Figure 11: System Error – TER(APE, human post-edits)
other submissions (the second-ranked one performs only 26 shifts, 2.5% of the total). It is likely,
but this should be veriﬁed, that the available training data featured correction patterns that the neural
method was able to model and re-apply better than
the other solutions. Overall, the behaviour of the
best system is the most balanced with respect the
three other operations. In total, insertions, deletions and substitutions (respectively 1,132, 1,465
and 1,807) are considerably more that those made
by the other systems and they are more evenly distributed (23%, 30% and 37% respectively). As a
term of comparison, the second-ranked primary
submission performed much less operations (83
insertions, 652 deletions and 248 substitutions),
with a clear predominance (65%) of deletions that
is common also to other submissions. As a general remark, best results seem to be associated with
a rather homogeneous distribution of the types of
correction patterns learned by the system.
System error
Another interesting aspect to analyse is the effect
of the different methods on the types of errors
made by each system. Does the variety in the approaches result in major differences in the types of
errors made? To answer this question, Figure 11
plots the distribution of the edit operations needed
to transform the output of each system into the
human post-edits available for each test sentence.
Such distribution of systems’ errors is obtained by
computing the TER between their output and the
human post-edits of the original translations as reference.
The ﬁgure does not show visible trends that can
provide us with useful hints. In terms of error distribution, the task baseline, our re-implementation
of Simard et al. , and the submitted primary runs show almost identical ratios.
Insertions range between 17% and 20% of the total,
deletions range between 23% and 28%, substitutions range between 44% and 49%.
The highest percentage of substitution errors suggests that
the major problem for all systems is the lexical
choice. Half of the errors in the APE output belong to this error category, indicating that learning the appropriate lexical replacements from human post-edits is still one of the main challenges.
Comparing the error distribution in the MT baseline (our ground truth in terms of what has to be
corrected) with the actions actually made by each
system as shown in Figure 10, it is interesting to
emphasise the higher similarity with the distributions of the operations made by the top-performing
system. “AMU Primary”, indeed, seems to perform a slightly larger amount of insertions compared to the total insertions actually needed, while
the other operations are substantially in line with
the expected amount. Based on TER information,
nothing can be said about which of them are actually correct/wrong. The only conclusions we can
draw at this stage are: i) a good amount of MT
errors is corrected (the global TER decreases), ii)
the actions of the top-performing system are quite
evenly distributed, iii) such distribution is the closest to the distribution of ground truth operations
but iv) errors (missing corrections and/or wrong
corrections) still remain in all classes.
In light of these considerations, we performed
further analysis by evaluating this years’ APE submissions also from another point of view. To this
aim, in the next section we try to understand the relation between the participants’ performance and
the human perception of translation quality.
Human Evaluation
To assess the quality of APE systems and produce
a ranking based on human judgement, as well as
analyze how humans perceive TER/BLEU performance differences between the submitted systems,
two runs of human evaluations were conducted.
The whole evaluation took approximately a month
and was performed mainly by student translators
who annotated the APE systems’ outputs. This
subsection describes the human evaluation pro-
cedure, gives details about the annotators’ backgrounds and proﬁles, and ﬁnally presents the results of the evaluation.
Evaluation Procedure
The two runs of human evaluation were conducted
using the Appraise37 opensource annotation platform through the ranking
task interface. A ranking task consists of a source
segment and the outputs of up to 5 anonymized
APE systems randomly selected from the set of
participants and displayed in random order to human evaluators. The main difference between the
two evaluation runs is the following: for the ﬁrst
run, the annotators were presented with a translation reference consisting of the manual post-edit of
the machine-translated source segment, while for
the second run no translation reference was presented to the human evaluator. For both evaluation
runs, the non-post-edited MT output was included
among the systems to evaluate. For the second
evaluation run, the human post-edited version of
the MT output was included among the systems to
A total of 200 randomly extracted source segments taken from the test set presented in Table 31
with their corresponding systems’ outputs were
considered for the ﬁrst evaluation run, while 100
source segments went through the second run. The
decision to consider a larger set of segments for
the ﬁrst evaluation run is based on the previous
editions of WMT, where human evaluations conducted for the translation tasks included a translation reference. The smaller scale evaluation for the
second run can be seen as a pilot study, where no
translation reference is given to the annotators and
where the human post-edit is presented as part of
the anonymized systems. The latter setup allows
us to see if APE systems can reach human postediting in terms of quality while avoiding evaluation bias towards a reference.
We carried out six annotation sessions in a controlled environment of approximately 45 to 60
minutes each, divided in two blocks of equal duration with a small break in between. Prior to the human evaluation task, we provided annotators with
a pilot study in order to be introduced to the ranking task and be familiarized with the annotation
interface. For each source sentence, ﬁve systems’
outputs were randomly selected among the partic-
37 
ipants and the non-post-edited MT output. For the
second evaluation run, the human post-edit was included in the random selection of target sentences
to annotate. The human annotators then ranked the
outputs from 1 to 5 (1 being the best) with ties allowed. All source segments were evaluated by at
least 3 annotators. The annotations were then used
with the TrueSkill38 adaptive ranking system to
produce a score for each system based on their inferred means . This score
was used to sort and cluster the systems submitted
by the participants, as well as the MT output and
the human post-edit, and produce the ﬁnal ranking
presented in Section 7.5.3
Annotators Background
A total of 37 annotators participated in the manual evaluation of APE systems, including 30
5th semester B.A. students in the Comparative
Linguistics, Literature, and Translation program
taught in Saarland University.39
The remaining
7 evaluators are expert translators and lecturers
at Saarland University in the Applied Linguistics, Translation and Interpreting department.40
Among the annotators, 34 are native German
speakers with strong English skills and have completed introductory courses such as translation theory and translation studies, machine translation,
CAT tools, and MT evaluation and post-editing.
The remaining 3 annotators have strong German
skills and have been living in Germany for several
The ﬁrst and second runs of human evaluation results are respectively presented in Table 36 and Table 37.
The ﬁrst run shows a preference for the AMU
Primary system compared to the other submissions (Table 36). These results conﬁrm those obtained with the automatic metrics as shown in Table 34 and we can see that two systems are above
the Baseline (the raw MT output).
Primary and USAAR Primary systems are in the
same cluster with the Baseline, which indicates a
non-signiﬁcant difference with p ≤0.05. Two
systems are in a single cluster below the baseline, namely JUSAAR Primary and DCU Primary,
being on par with the results obtained using au-
38 
39 
40 
AMU Primary
FBK Primary
CUNI Primary
USAAR Primary
JUSAAR Primary
DCU Primary
Table 36: Results of the ﬁrst run of human evaluation including human post-edited MT output as translation reference. Scores and ranges are obtained with TrueSkill . Lines between systems indicate clusters
according to bootstrap resampling at p-level p ≤0.05 based
on 1, 000 runs. Systems within a cluster are considered tied.
Human Post-edit
AMU Primary
CUNI Primary
FBK Primary
USAAR Primary
JUSAAR Primary
DCU Primary
Table 37: Results of the second run of human evaluation
without translation reference provided to annotators. Scores
and ranges are obtained with TrueSkill . Lines between systems indicate clusters according to
bootstrap resampling at p-level p ≤0.05 based on 1, 000
runs. Systems within a cluster are considered tied.
tomatic metrics.
The correlation between automatic metrics and the ﬁrst manual evaluation run
indicates the reliability of popular MT metrics for
the evaluation of APE systems. On average, annotators needed 53 seconds to perform one ranking task, while the fastest ranking was performed
in 18.3 seconds and the slowest one took more
than 4 minutes and 30 seconds (averaged over at
least 3 annotators for the same source segment).
The agreement between annotators on the ﬁrst run
of evaluation is k = 0.481 according to Fleiss’
Kappa .
The results of the second run of manual evaluation (Table 37) show that the human post-editing
of MT output is preferred by human annotators
when compared to the other systems’ outputs,
reaching the ﬁrst position. It indicates that, in spite
of the signiﬁcant improvements over the original
MT output, none of the submitted APE systems
managed to reach the translation quality achieved
by human post-editing.
The second position in
the ranking is reached by the AMU Primary system, while a single cluster is ranked third and contains all the remaining systems as well as the Baseline. This smaller amount of clusters can be due
to the limited scale of the second run of manual
evaluation involving 100 source segments only,
compared with the 200 segments for the ﬁrst run.
However, this second run shows that the AMU Primary system is again preferred by human evaluators compared to the other systems without necessarily being closer to the human post-edited MT
output, which is not included as a translation reference, and thus without biasing human judgements.
The agreement between annotators for the second
run of evaluation is slightly lower compared to
the ﬁrst run, with a Fleiss’ Kappa of k = 0.466.
For both runs, the inter-annotator agreement is
considered moderate.
On average, the annotators needed 60 seconds per ranking task, while the
fastest ranked outputs was completed in 21.7 seconds and the slowest one in 3 minutes.
Lessons learned and outlook
The objectives of this pilot APE task were to: i)
improve and stabilize the evaluation framework in
view of future rounds, ii) analyze the effect on task
feasibility of data coming from a narrow domain,
iii) analyze the effect of post-edits collected from
professional translators, iv) analyze how humans
perceive TER/BLEU performance differences between different systems, v) measure the progress
made during one year of research on the APE task.
Concerning the ﬁrst point, no speciﬁc issues
emerged this year calling for major changes. The
overall format, starting from the baselines and the
evaluation metrics adopted, will likely be kept also
for the next round.
As regards points ii) and iii) the positive effect
of domain-speciﬁc data and professional-quality
post-edits is evident. Most likely, these favorable
conditions for automatic post-editing will be kept
as well, also because they represent a more standard translation scenario compared to the generic
news domain.
Regarding point iv), an interesting ﬁnding of
the manual evaluation is a correlation between human judgements and the results obtained with automatic metrics. This conﬁrms the reliability of
popular MT metrics, namely BLEU and TER, for
APE systems evaluation. Despite the baseline improvements and the signiﬁcant overall TER/BLEU
gains, the feedback from human evaluators regard-
ing the quality of the APE MT segments is not
fully positive yet, showing that there is still room
for improvement. One explanation for this is probably related to the domain speciﬁcity of the data
set used for this year’s APE shared task. Many
segments contain sets of instructions and commands that are used in user manuals of the IT domain and were given to annotators without context. The annotators also pointed out that they considered difﬁcult to rank very similar segments, as
most APE systems do not make substantial modi-
ﬁcations of the MT output, which results in similar
outputs in terms of quality and leads to challenging comparisons for humans. This aspect is emphasized when no translation reference is given to
the annotators. In this case, only the top-ranked
system emerges as a source of corrections that are
signiﬁcantly better than the baseline (in spite of
the impressive TER and BLEU gains, respectively
up to -3.24 and +5.54 points).
In terms of progress over the last year, this was a
successful follow-up. More participants, some of
which new, resulted in a larger variety in the submitted systems. Those pursuing the phrase-based
approach that dominated the pilot round managed
to improve over this common backbone in different ways. Other teams introduced interesting
novelties, bringing also into the APE framework
the popularity of neural approaches. The tangible result is represented by the large improvements
over the (last year unbeaten) baseline achieved by
most of the systems. Such gains indicate the good
potential of APE systems to improve MT output
in black-box conditions and motivate further research and developments.
Acknowledgments
MosesCore,
CRACKER projects funded by the European
Commission (7th Framework Programme and
The APE task organizers would also like to
thank Jan Niehues for training the KIT system
used to produce the MT output, Text&Form for
producing the manual post-edits, and the annotators involved in the manual evaluation.