For a two-choice response time (RT) task, the observed
variables are response speed and response accuracy. In
experimental psychology, inference usually concerns the
mean response time for correct decisions (i.e., MRT) and
the proportion of correct decisions (i.e., Pc). The immediate problem is that MRT and Pc are in a trade-off relationship: Participants can respond faster, and hence decrease
MRT, at the expense of making more errors, thereby decreasing Pc . This so-called speed–accuracy
trade-off has for a long time bedeviled the field. Consider
2 participants in an experiment, Amy and Rich. Amy’s and
Rich’s performance is summarized by MRT  0.422 sec,
Pc  .881, and MRT  0.467 sec, Pc  .953, respectively.
Amy responds faster than Rich, but she also commits
more errors. Thus, it could be that Amy and Rich have
the same ability, but Amy risks making more mistakes. It
could also be that Amy’s ability is higher than that of Rich,
or vice versa. If we only consider MRT and Pc, there appears to be no way to tell which of these three possibilities
is in fact true.
Now consider George, whose performance is characterized by MRT  0.517 sec, Pc  .953. George responds
more slowly than Rich, whereas their error rates are identical. An explanation solely in terms of the speed–accuracy
trade-off cannot account for this pattern of results, and
therefore most researchers would confidently conclude
that Rich performs better than George. Unfortunately, if
we only consider MRT and Pc, it is impossible to go beyond
these conclusions in terms of ordinal relations and quantify how much better Rich does than George. Note that
the same arguments would hold if the example above had
been in terms of 1 participant who responds in three different experimental conditions presented in three separate
blocks of trials. In this case, comparison of performance
across the different conditions is complicated by the fact
that task performance may be simultaneously influenced
by task difficulty and response conservativeness.
In sum, both MRT and Pc provide valuable information
about task difficulty or subject ability, but neither of these
variables can be considered in isolation. When MRT and
Pc are considered simultaneously, however, it is not clear
how to weigh their relative contributions to arrive at a single index that quantifies subject ability or task difficulty.
A way out of this conundrum is to use cognitive process
models to estimate the unobserved variables assumed to
underlie performance in the task at hand. The field of research that uses cognitive models for measurement has
been termed cognitive psychometrics , and similar approaches in
other paradigms have included those of Busemeyer and
Stout ; Stout, Busemeyer, Lin, Grant, and Bonson
 ; and Zaki and Nosofsky . Here, the focus
is on the diffusion model for two-choice RT tasks . In the diffusion model, the three most
important unobserved variables are the quality of information, response conservativeness, and nondecision time. A
statistical analysis of these unobserved variables is not
only immune to speed–accuracy trade-offs, but also affords an unambiguous quantification of performance differences. This article introduces the EZ-diffusion model,
Copyright 2007 Psychonomic Society, Inc.
THEORETICAL AND REVIEW ARTICLES
An EZ-diffusion model for response time
and accuracy
ERIC-JAN WAGENMAKERS, HAN L. J. VAN DER MAAS, AND RAOUL P. P. P. GRASMAN
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
The EZ-diffusion model for two-choice response time tasks takes mean response time, the variance of response time, and response accuracy as inputs. The model transforms these data via three simple equations to
produce unique values for the quality of information, response conservativeness, and nondecision time. This
transformation of observed data in terms of unobserved variables addresses the speed–accuracy trade-off and
allows an unambiguous quantification of performance differences in two-choice response time tasks. The EZ-
diffusion model can be applied to data-sparse situations to facilitate individual subject analysis. We studied the
performance of the EZ-diffusion model in terms of parameter recovery and robustness against misspecification
by using Monte Carlo simulations. The EZ model was also applied to a real-world data set.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review
2007, 14 (1), 3-22
E.-J. Wagenmakers, 
4 WAGENMAKERS, VAN DER MAAS, AND GRASMAN
a simplified version of the diffusion model that is able to
uniquely determine these three important unobserved variables from just three observed quantities: MRT, Pc, and the
variance of response times for correct decisions (VRT).
Our mathematical analysis will show that VRT is much
more informative with respect to subject ability or task
difficulty than is MRT, echoing recent empirical insights
in the aging literature and elsewhere .
An important practical advantage of the EZ-diffusion
model is that it does not require a parameter fitting routine
(cf. signal detection theory). Also, the EZ-diffusion model
can be applied to common experimental setups in which
each participant contributes only a moderate amount of
data and error rate is low (i.e., 5%–10%).
The outline of this article is as follows. The next section briefly discusses the methods of analysis that are currently standard in the field. Then we briefly describe the
“full” Ratcliff diffusion model and introduce the simplified, “EZ” version. Subsequent sections detail the performance of the EZ method in terms of parameter recovery
and robustness against misspecification. Then we use a
real-world data set to compare parameter estimates for the
EZ model against those for the Ratcliff diffusion model.
We conclude by stressing the practicality of the present
approach and by acknowledging the potential dangers of
blindly applying the EZ model to situations in which its
assumptions do not hold.
The Standard Analysis of Two-Choice RT Tasks
and Its Limitation
For many decades, the analysis of data from two-choice
RT tasks has remained unchanged. The standard analysis separately considers MRT and Pc. Specifically, one
ANOVA is performed for MRT and a second for Pc. The
standard analysis is simple but crude, and it can be improved in various ways. For instance, Rouder, Lu, Speckman, Sun, and Jiang recently introduced a Bayesian hierarchical model of Weibull distributions that bases
inference not just on MRT, but on the entire RT distribution for correct decisions. Similar sophistications (e.g.,
hierarchical logistic regression) can be proposed for the
analysis of Pc.
Regardless of the statistical sophistication that the standard method may undergo, the general framework fails to
address the core problem of the two-alternative RT task.
This is the problem of how to combine response speed and
accuracy in a single index that reflects subject ability or
task difficulty.
To highlight the limitations of the standard method of
inference, consider the performance of our hypothetical participants in a two-alternative RT task, as shown in
Table 1. Assume that the imaginary experiment involves
very many trials, so that measurement error is negligible. The standard analysis method is perfectly able to
rank-order the participants according to either MRT (i.e.,
1. Mark, 2. Amy, 3. Rich, 4. George), Pc (i.e., 1&2. George
& Rich, 3&4. Mark & Amy), or VRT (i.e., 1&2. Mark &
Amy, 3&4. George & Rich). However, the standard method
cannot rank-order the 4 participants on “ability,” since this
requires response speed and response accuracy to be combined in some unspecified manner. This also means that
the standard method cannot inform us as to how much better or worse one participant performs than another.
The Ratcliff Diffusion Model
A solution to the problem of how to combine response
speed and response accuracy is to analyze the data in terms
of the parameters of a cognitive model such as a diffusion
model. In a diffusion model, illustrated in Figure 1, noisy
accumulation of information drives a decision process that
terminates when the accumulated evidence in favor of one
or the other response alternative exceeds threshold. Thus,
the diffusion model is a continuous-time, continuous-state
random-walk sequential sampling model . The reader is referred to Luce , Ratcliff , Ratcliff and Smith , and Townsend and
Ashby for detailed accounts of the diffusion model;
to Gardiner , Honerkamp , and Smith 
for mathematical foundations; and to Diederich and Busemeyer , Ratcliff and Tuerlinckx , Tuerlinckx
 , and Voss, Rothermund, and Voss for a discussion of several methods to fit the model to data.
For concreteness, our focus is on the diffusion model as
it applies to the lexical decision task . In lexical decision, the participant is presented with a letter string that needs to be classified either as
an English word (e.g., zebra) or as a nonword (e.g., drapa).
The diffusion model has also been successfully applied to
many other two-choice RT paradigms, including short- and
long-term recognition memory tasks, same/different letter
string matching, numerosity judgments, visual-scanning
tasks, brightness discrimination, and letter discrimination
 . In all
these applications, the diffusion model provided a close fit
to response accuracy and the observed RT distributions for
both correct and error responses.
In the application of the diffusion model to lexical decision, presentation of a word stimulus will generally lead
to the accumulation of evidence that supports the correct
“word” response, as in the two examples shown in Figure 1.
In the model, easy-to-classify letter strings have relatively
high absolute drift rate values; that is, these letter strings
are associated with relatively high signal-to-noise ratios in
the evidence accumulation process. Drift rate Ý is defined
Performance of 4 Hypothetical Participants in a
Two-Alternative Forced Choice Task
Participant
Note—Which participant did best? RT denotes response time, and Pc the
proportion of correct responses. See the text for details.
EZ DIFFUSION 5
on the real line; Ý  0 and Ý
0 lead to evidence accumulation consistent with a “word” or a “nonword” response,
respectively. The case of Ý  0 corresponds to a process
that, at each point in time, is equally likely to move upward
as it is to move downward. Drift rate is assumed to vary over
trials according to Ý ÂÅN(v, h). Because drift rate quantifies
the deterministic component of the noisy information accumulation process, it can be interpreted as an index for the
signal-to-noise ratio of the information processing system.
Therefore, drift rate is an excellent candidate for a measure that combines respond speed and response accuracy to
quantify subject ability or task difficulty.
The stochastic, nonsystematic component of the information accumulation process on each trial is quantified
by s. The factor s2 dt is the variance of the change in the
accumulated information for a small time interval dt . The s parameter is a scaling parameter, which means that if s doubles, other parameters
in the model can be doubled to obtain exactly the same
result. Thus, the choice of a specific value for s  0 is
arbitrary; in practice, s is usually set to 0.1, and we adhere to this convention throughout the article. Two further
important parameters are the boundary separation a and
the starting point z. The boundary separation parameter
a is especially important here, because large values of a
indicate the presence of a conservative response criterion:
When a is large, the system requires more discriminative
information before deciding on one or the other response
alternative. A conservative response criterion results in
long response times, but also in highly accurate performance, since with large a it is unlikely that the incorrect
boundary will be reached by chance fluctuations. Therefore, in the diffusion model, one of the main mechanisms
by which speed–accuracy trade-off phenomena arise is
through changes in a.
The a priori bias against one or the other response alternative is given by z. As with drift rate, the exact location of
z may fluctuate from trial to trial. This fluctuation is quantified by a uniform distribution with range sz. As shown later,
in most applications z is estimated to be about equidistant
from both response boundaries (i.e., z . a/2). Finally, the
diffusion model captures the nondecision component of
RT by a parameter Ter that varies over trials according to a
uniform distribution with range st. As is often assumed in
RT modeling, the total RT is a sum of the nondecision and
decision components of processing :
RT  DT  Ter,
where DT denotes decision time.
In sum, the Ratcliff diffusion model estimates the following seven parameters:1
1. Mean drift rate (v).
2. Across-trials variability in drift rate (h).
3. Boundary separation (a).
4. Mean starting point (z).
5. Across-trials range in starting point (sz).
6. Mean of the nondecision component of processing
7. Across-trials range in the nondecision component of
processing (st).
In theory, these seven parameters could be estimated separately for each experimental condition. In practice, however, only parameters that are believed to be affected by
the experimental manipulation are free to vary between
conditions.
In order to provide some perspective regarding the
ranges of parameter values that may be expected when
fitting the Ratcliff diffusion model to data, Figure 2 provides a visual overview of the best-fitting parameter valst
#!%
! #!%
!$# 
 
! " !!$!
#!%
!s
Figure 1. Diffusion model account of evidence accumulation in the lexical decision task
 .
6 WAGENMAKERS, VAN DER MAAS, AND GRASMAN
ues encountered in previous experiments . These experiments used tasks such as lexical decision, letter identification, asterisks discrimination, recognition memory, and color discrimination. Studies that manipulated starting point were excluded from
consideration. Whenever there was a choice, we selected
parameter values estimated from averaged data.2 Almost
all experiments vary task difficulty (i.e., drift rate in the
model), and this is the reason why the top left panel contains relatively many values—when a manipulation is
thought to affect drift rate, only this parameter is free to
vary across conditions. The bottom right panel plots the
best-fitting values for the st parameter. It represents relatively few experiments because this parameter has been
recently added to the diffusion model. Figure 3 shows the
relation between boundary separation and starting point as
obtained in earlier experiments. The solid line has a slope
of 2. Figure 3 confirms the earlier assertion that in many
applications, z . a/2.
The data needed to fit the Ratcliff diffusion model are
error rate and RT distributions for correct and error responses. As mentioned earlier, participants usually do not
commit very many errors: In most tasks, error rate is lower
than 10%. This means that it may take a substantial number of trials to accurately estimate the entire RT distribution for error responses. On the basis of prior experience
with the model, a rule of thumb is that about 10 error RTs
are needed in order to estimate the error RT distribution
Drift Rate
Boundary Separation
Mean of Nondecision Time
Trial-to-Trial Variability
in Drift Rate
Trial-to-Trial Variability
in Starting Point
Trial-to-Trial Variability
in Nondecision Time
Figure 2. Best-fitting diffusion model parameter values as encountered in previous research. The top left
panel plots the absolute values of drift rates (i.e., negative drift rates have been multiplied by 1). The scaling
parameter s is always fixed at 0.1.
EZ DIFFUSION 7
with an acceptable degree of reliability. This means that
with an error rate of, say, 5%, each experimental condition
should contain about 200 observations.
The model is then fit to the data using one of several
methods . Each
method uses the facts that in the diffusion model, the
probability of an error (Pe) is given by
and the probability of an error response before time t is
given by Equation 3 at the bottom of this page , where k indexes the infinite series and a,
z, Ý, and Ter are free parameters. As t%@, the part that
involves the infinite sum goes to zero, and what remains
is simply the probability of an error response. Thus, Equation 3 computes the defective distribution . To obtain the equation that gives
the probability of a correct response before time t, z and Ý
should be replaced by a  z and Ý, respectively.
Although Equation 3 may look daunting,3 the real problem in fitting the diffusion model is in the fact that parameters Ter, z, and Ý vary across trials. Finding the best-fitting
values for the across-trials variability parameters st, sz,
and h necessitates the use of time-consuming numerical
integration procedures. The reason that mathematical psychologists use such a complicated method is the substantial
payoff involved. The Ratcliff diffusion model provides a
description of response time that is extremely detailed. Perhaps more important, however, is the fact that the parameter values of the model can provide insights that standard,
more superficial methods of analysis cannot.
For instance, in an application of the diffusion model
to aging , it was found that in an asterisks discrimination task, older participants responded
more slowly but also a little more accurately than the
younger participants. The diffusion model was fitted to
the data, and the resulting parameter estimates indicated
that the parameter that varied between the different age
groups was boundary separation a (and Ter, the nondecision RT component, which was about 50 msec longer for
older adults), whereas mean drift rate v remained fairly
constant—if anything, drift rate was a little higher for
the group of older participants. This analysis supports
the notion that in this particular task, the observed differences in performance arose because the older adults
adopted more conservative response criteria than did the
younger participants. Such detailed and quantitative conclusions could not be based on a standard ANOVA on
the RTs and error rates .
THE EZ-DIFFUSION MODEL
For a wide range of two-alternative forced choice tasks,
the Ratcliff diffusion model provides a principled and seemingly satisfactory solution to the speed-versus-accuracy
dilemma that plagues standard methods of analysis. This
raises the question as to why the diffusion model is not
standardly applied as a psychometric analysis tool. One
of the answers is that the Ratcliff diffusion model requires
the entire RT distribution as input; critically, this includes
the RT distribution for incorrect decisions. In many experiments, participants commit few errors overall, and it
may take very many trials to obtain an accurate estimate
of the error RT distribution. Therefore, in most practical
settings it is unclear whether or not the Ratcliff diffusion
model can be applied. When a model with at least seven
free parameters is unleashed on a small data set, problems
such as high-variance parameter estimates and sensitivity
to starting values may become prominent.
Another important reason why the diffusion model is
not used more often in empirical studies is the complexity
of the parameter-fitting procedure . Many experimental psychologists, even those with
a firm background in mathematics and computer programming, will find the amount of effort required to fit
the Ratcliff diffusion model rather prohibitive.
The EZ-diffusion model constitutes an attempt to popularize a diffusion model analysis of two-alternative forced
choice tasks. In order to achieve this goal, we have considerably simplified the Ratcliff diffusion model. These simplifications are warranted by the fact that the aim of the
EZ model is much more modest than that of the Ratcliff
model. The EZ model tries to determine only the most
psychologically relevant parameters of the Ratcliff model:
drift rate v (i.e., quality of information), boundary separation a (i.e., response conservativeness), and nondecision
time Ter. The EZ model does not seek to address the issue
of RT distributions, especially not for error responses.
Thus, the price that has to be paid for the simplification
of the diffusion model is that it no longer provides a very
detailed account of the observed behavior, but instead operates at a more macroscopic level. Of course, with few
data, this may be the only available option. We will return
to this issue in the General Discussion section.
The first simplification is that the EZ-diffusion model
does not allow across-trials variability in parameters. This
means that st, sz, and h are effectively removed from the
model. The effect of st—that is, the across-trials variability in Ter—is usually not very pronounced . The effect of sz—that is, across-trials
variability in starting point—allows the model to handle
error responses that are on average faster than correct responses. The effect of h—that is, across-trials variability
in drift rate—is to produce error responses that are on
average slower than correct responses. From the bird’seye perspective taken by the EZ-diffusion model, these
aspects of the data are outside the focus of interest.
The second and final simplification is that the starting
point z is assumed to be equidistant from the response
boundaries, so that z  a/2. As mentioned earlier, in practical applications of the diffusion model this is often found
to be approximately true (see Figure 3). For instance, Ratcliff et al. had participants decide whether a screen
with asterisks came from a “high” or “low” distribution.
Since the design of the stimulus materials was symmetric,
one would not expect participants to be biased toward either the “high” or the “low” response category .
In other experiments, however, biases in starting point
are more plausible. Consider a hypothetical situation
in which participants have an a priori bias to respond
“word” to letter strings presented in a lexical decision
task. When such a bias exists, the “vanilla” version of the
EZ-diffusion model presented here is inappropriate. Fortunately, there exists an easy check for the presence of
bias in the starting point: When participants have a starting point bias that favors the “word” response in a lexical
decision task, this means that for word stimuli the correct
responses are faster than the error responses, whereas for
nonword stimuli the correct responses are slower than the
error responses. Such a pattern of results indicates a bias
in starting point, and this bias renders the results from an
EZ-diffusion model analysis suspect. In the General Discussion, we will discuss an extension of the EZ-diffusion
model that can be applied to situations in which the starting point is biased. For now, we will work under the assumption that the starting point is equidistant from the
response boundaries—that is, that z  a/2.
As will soon be apparent, the simplifications above
allow the EZ-diffusion model to determine v, a, and Ter
without a complicated parameter-fitting exercise. Figure 4 shows the EZ-diffusion model and its streamlined
set of parameters.
Before proceeding, we should issue a general disclaimer.
Any analysis that involves unobserved variables may lead to
misleading results when the hypothesized model radically
 # 
 $
 s
Figure 4. The EZ-diffusion model.
EZ DIFFUSION 9
deviates from reality. This holds for both the EZ-diffusion
model and the Ratcliff diffusion model. As an example,
classical signal detection theory assumes the distributions
for “signal plus noise” and “noise only” to have equal variances. When assumptions such as this one are violated,
care must be taken with the interpretation of unobserved
variables. Fortunately, almost all studies using the diffusion
model have shown that the model provides a good description of the RT distributions and that the specific experimental manipulations have selectively affected
the model’s parameters in the expected direction . Nevertheless, as with any statistical procedure, one is generally well advised to check whether the
data are consistent with the assumptions of the model. We
will revisit this issue several times throughout the article.
Mathematical Derivation
The EZ-diffusion model determines drift rate v, boundary
separation a, and nondecision time Ter from just MRT, VRT,
and Pc. This is possible because we have three unknowns
(v, a, and Ter) and also three diffusion model equations (for
MRT, VRT, and Pc). As will be apparent later, VRT and Pc
uniquely determine the values for v and a, so that MRT is
necessary only to determine Ter. This result contrasts sharply
with the popular analysis of RTs, which focuses on MRT and
ignores VRT .
The first equation refers to the probability of a correct
response—that is, the probability that the stochastic process
first arrives at the correct response boundary. Using the fact
that z  a/2 in the EZ model, Equation 2 simplifies to
which can be rewritten as
The second equation refers to the variance of a symmetrical diffusion process . The variance is given by
where y  va/s2 and v p 0. If v  0,
Palmer, Huk, and Shadlen independently derived
the same equation in terms of hyperbolic functions. Their
equation contains a typographical error, and the correct
equation is
where v*  v/s and z*  z/s.
Substituting Equation 5 for a in Equation 6 and solving
for v yields Equation 7, at the bottom of this page. The sign
function returns 1 for all negative numbers and 1 for all
positive numbers. Inclusion of the sign(Pc  1/2) term ensures that v will take on positive values when Pc  1/2 and
negative values when Pc
1/2. Using the variance equation derived by Palmer et al. , Equation 7 can also
be written as shown at the top of the next page, where L 
logit(Pc). Equation 7 shows that for fixed accuracy, drift
rate v in the EZ-diffusion model is inversely proportional to
VRT1/4, which is the square root of the standard deviation
of the RT distribution. When 2 participants respond at the
same level of accuracy, their difference in drift rate comes
about solely through their difference in VRT.
After v has been determined by Equation 7, this allows
a to be determined from Equation 5. At this point, the two
key parameters v and a have been determined without any
recourse to MRT. It turns out that MRT is useful only to
determine the final parameter of the EZ-diffusion model,
Ter. Recall that in the EZ-diffusion model, as in the Ratcliff
diffusion model, MRT contains not just the time to classify
the stimulus (i.e., decision time), but also the time to visually encode the stimulus and the time to produce a motor
response (i.e., nondecision time Ter). That is,
where MDT denotes mean decision time.
Given both v and a, MDT can be determined from a
third equation, which refers to the mean time until arrival
at a response threshold:4
where, again, y  va/s2. Given MDT, we can now use
Equation 8 to obtain Ter. Thus, the foregoing discussion
10 WAGENMAKERS, VAN DER MAAS, AND GRASMAN
shows how the EZ-diffusion model transforms MRT,
VRT, and Pc to v, a, and Ter without any parameter fitting; all that is needed to determine the parameters is
a straightforward computation. The Appendix contains
R code that implements the EZ-diffusion model.
Conceptual Similarity to Signal Detection
The EZ-diffusion model is very similar to classical signal
detection theory in its aim,
scope, and method. Figure 5 highlights these similarities. In
fact, the EZ-diffusion model can arguably be considered the
response time analogue of signal detection theory.5
As can be seen from Figure 5, signal detection theory
takes hit rate and false alarm rate as input. As output, it
produces unique values for discriminability (d) and bias
(;). The statistic d is a fixed property of the condition or
the participant, but ; is under the control of the participant.
Conclusions regarding participant ability or task difficulty
that are based solely on hit rates are suspect, since the participant may change the response threshold ; to increase
hit rates at the expense of increasing false alarm rates.
The EZ-diffusion model takes MRT, VRT, and Pc as
input. As output, it produces unique values for drift rate
(v), boundary separation (a), and nondecision time (Ter).
The drift rate v is a fixed property of the condition or the
participant, but a is under the control of the participant.
Conclusions regarding participant ability or task difficulty
that are based solely on MRT or VRT are suspect, since the
participant may here change the response threshold a to
decrease MRT and VRT at the expense of decreasing Pc.
PARAMETER RECOVERY
FOR THE EZ-DIFFUSION MODEL
This section evaluates performance of the EZ-diffusion
model in terms of the accuracy with which the model recovers parameter values used to generate simulated data.
The Monte Carlo simulations show that the parameters
recovered by the model are relatively close to their true
values. The variability of the recovered parameter values
is acceptable, and decreases with sample size. Bias (i.e.,
systematic deviation from the true value) is virtually nonexistent. One of the main reasons why the EZ model is
able to recover parameters accurately with only few data
RT Variance
EZ-Diffusion
Drift Rate
Separation
Nondecision
Discriminability
False Alarm
Signal Detection
Figure 5. Schematic representation of the similarity between a signal detection analysis and
an EZ-diffusion model analysis. The circles at the bottom denote unobserved variables, and
the squares at the top denote observed variables. RT, response time.
EZ DIFFUSION 11
is that the observed quantities of interest (i.e., MRT, VRT,
and Pc) are estimated relatively efficiently.
In the Monte Carlo simulations reported here, we simulated an experiment with only one condition and a single
participant. The experiment had either 50, 250, or 1,000
observations.6 Also, drift rate v and boundary separation a
could each take on one of three values (i.e., v 0 {0.1, 0.2,
0.3}, a 0 {0.08, 0.11, 0.14}). These values were combined
to yield 3  3  9 separate sets of parameters that were
used to generate simulated data. These parameter values
were chosen so as to span a wide range of plausible values
 . In the simulations, Ter was
fixed at 0.300. This Ter value is arbitrary in the sense that
it is an additive constant, the value of which is determined
by subtracting the mean decision time from MRT. Thus, if
Ter had been fixed at 0.250, the parameter recovery results
would remain the same, save for a constant 50-msec shift.
The scaling parameter s was fixed at 0.1, a convention that
we adhere to throughout the article.
Next, each of the nine separate parameter combinations was used to generate 1,000 different data sets. For
each data set, MRT, VRT, and Pc were calculated, and the
EZ-diffusion model transformations were then applied
to yield estimates for v, a, and Ter. Note that MRT and
VRT were exclusively based on response times for correct
decisions.7
When the true values for drift rate v and boundary separation a are relatively large (e.g., v  0.3 and a  0.14),
this may result in error-free performance. When Pc  1,
Equations 5 and 7 include the undefined term logit(1).
The problem is similar to that of applying signal detection
theory to a participant who has either a perfect hit rate or a
zero false alarm rate—this yields an estimate for d that is
infinite. Several solutions have been proposed to address
this issue . Here
we chose to apply one of the standard edge-correction
methods, replacing Pc  1 with a value that corresponds
to one half of an error—that is,
For example, when n  50 and Pc  1, the replacement
value for Pc is .99, but when n  250, the replacement
value is .998.
Figure 6 shows the results for the parameter recovery
simulations with respect to drift rate v. Each panel plots
v = 0.1, a = 0.08
v = 0.3, a = 0.08
v = 0.2, a = 0.08
v = 0.1, a = 0.11
v = 0.3, a = 0.11
v = 0.2, a = 0.11
v = 0.1, a = 0.14
v = 0.3, a = 0.14
v = 0.2, a = 0.14
Figure 6. Drift rate parameter recovery for the EZ-diffusion model. Each panel corresponds to a
different combination of data-generating parameter values for v and a. The data-generating values
for drift rate are indicated by horizontal lines. Each box-plot is based on 1,000 replications.
12 WAGENMAKERS, VAN DER MAAS, AND GRASMAN
three box-and-whisker plots, one for each value of N 0
{50, 250, 1,000}. A box-and-whisker plot provides an efficient way to summarize an entire distribution, in this case a distribution of recovered parameter values. The box extends from the .25 quantile to the
.75 quantile, and the dot in the middle of the box is the .50
quantile (i.e., the median). The whiskers extend to the farthest points that are within 3/2 times the height of the box.
As can be seen from Figure 6, for all panels the median of the recovered parameter values (i.e., the dots in the
boxes) tends to coincide with the horizontal line that indicates the generative parameter value. Hence, parameter
recovery for v is unbiased. Also note that the whiskers generally extend as far upward as they extend downward, and
the dots are in the middle of the boxes. This means that the
distributions of recovered parameter values are symmetric. As is to be expected, Figure 6 also clearly shows that
the spread of the distributions decreases as N increases.
Upon close examination, it appears that recovery of v is
subject to more variability when boundary separation a
is decreased or drift rate v is increased. Thus, in Figure 6,
variability is highest when v  0.3 and a  0.08 (i.e., the
leftmost bottom panel), and variability is lowest when v 
0.1 and a  0.14 (i.e., the rightmost upper panel).
Figure 7 shows parameter recovery for the boundary
separation parameter a. Again, the distributions are symmetric, there is little indication of any bias, and the variability decreases with N. The variability of the distribution
of recovered parameter values increases as the true value
of a increases—that is, variability increases as we move
from the leftward panels to the rightward panels.
Finally, Figure 8 displays the Monte Carlo results for nondecision time Ter. Again, there is little evidence of any bias,
the distributions appear to be symmetric, and variability
decreases markedly with N. The variability for Ter increases
rather dramatically as boundary separation is increased and
drift rate is decreased. Hence, variability in recovery for Ter
is lowest for the v  0.3, a  0.08 leftmost bottom panel,
whereas it is highest for the v  0.1, a  0.14 rightmost
top panel. In other words, variability in Ter  MRT  MDT
increases as MDT (i.e., mean decision time) lengthens.
In sum, the Monte Carlo simulations show that the EZ-
diffusion model is able to recover the parameter values for
v, a, and Ter with virtually no bias. For N  50, the variability in the parameter estimates is considerable. However, it is important to note that this variability is based
on a single participant contributing 50 observations. In an
experiment with multiple participants, the mean of the in-
v = 0.1, a = 0.08
v = 0.2, a = 0.08
v = 0.3, a = 0.08
v = 0.1, a = 0.11
v = 0.2, a = 0.11
v = 0.3, a = 0.11
v = 0.1, a = 0.14
v = 0.2, a = 0.14
v = 0.3, a = 0.14
Figure 7. Boundary separation parameter recovery for the EZ-diffusion model. Each panel corresponds to a different combination of data-generating parameter values for v and a. The data-
generating values for boundary separation are indicated by horizontal lines. Each box-plot is based
on 1,000 replications.
EZ DIFFUSION 13
dividual parameters will obviously be much less variable
than any individual parameter. In practical applications,
the variability of the obtained parameter values can always
be assessed by sampling the observed data with replacement . For N  250 and N  1,000, the variability is low, even for a single participant.
ROBUSTNESS TO MISSPECIFICATION
The previous section demonstrated that the EZ-diffusion
method adequately recovers its parameter values. It is an
open question, however, how well the model performs
when the data-generating mechanism is different from the
one that the EZ-diffusion model assumes. For instance,
the EZ-diffusion model assumes that there is no variability across trials in any of the diffusion model parameters.
That is, the EZ-diffusion model assumes no across-trials
variability in nondecision time (i.e., st  0), starting point
(i.e., sz  0), and drift rate (i.e., h  0).
In this section, we focus on three situations in which
the EZ-diffusion model is “misspecified.” First, we consider a data-generating mechanism that has a considerable
amount of across-trials variability in nondecision time.
Next, we evaluate parameter recovery performance of the
EZ-diffusion model in the case in which across-trials variability in drift rate is very high and across-trials variability
in starting point is relatively low. Finally, we consider the
reverse situation, in which across-trials variability in drift
rate is relatively low and across-trials variability in starting
point is relatively high. The latter two situations closely resemble those examined by Ratcliff and Tuerlinckx .
In each of the three misspecification analyses reported
here, data were generated using three values of drift rate:
v 0 {0.1, 0.2, 0.3}. Boundary separation a was fixed at a
medium value of 0.11, and nondecision time Ter was fixed
at 0.300. This yielded three different sets of parameter
values. Next, each set of parameter values was used to
generate 3,000 data sets: 1,000 data sets with 50 observations each, 1,000 data sets with 250 observations each,
and 1,000 data sets with 1,000 observations each. EZ-
diffusion parameters were calculated for each data set.
Across-Trials Variability in Nondecision Time
In the first Monte Carlo simulation, the misspecification
refers to the presence of across-trials variability in nondeci-
v = 0.1, a = 0.08
v = 0.2, a = 0.08
v = 0.3, a = 0.08
v = 0.1, a = 0.11
v = 0.2, a = 0.11
v = 0.3, a = 0.11
v = 0.1, a = 0.14
v = 0.2, a = 0.14
v = 0.3, a = 0.14
Figure 8. Nondecision time parameter recovery for the EZ-diffusion model. Each panel corresponds to a different combination of data-generating parameter values for v and a. The data-
generating value for boundary separation was fixed at Ter  0.300 and is indicated by horizontal
lines. Each box-plot is based on 1,000 replications.
14 WAGENMAKERS, VAN DER MAAS, AND GRASMAN
sion time. The range of the uniform distribution on Ter was
set at 0.2 sec, which is at the high end of what is found in
empirical research . Figure 9 shows the results of the
parameter recovery analysis using box-and-whisker plots.
Panels in the top, middle, and bottom rows were generated
using v  0.1, v  0.2, and v  0.3, respectively. The horizontal lines indicate the true parameter values.
The panels in the first column of Figure 9 show that
the estimation of drift rate remains relatively unaffected
by across-trials variability in Ter: The values are recovered
with little bias, and the variability is not much increased
relative to the situation in which st  0 (see Figure 6). The
panels in the second column show that boundary separation is somewhat overestimated, especially for high values
of drift rate. Finally, panels in the third column reveal that
nondecision time is somewhat underestimated, and this
bias increases with drift rate. Overall, the parameter values are relatively robust against across-trials variability in
nondecision time.
Across-Trials Variability in Drift Rate
In the second misspecification analysis, we examined
the case of large across-trials variability in drift rate (i.e.,
normal standard deviation h  0.16) and much smaller
across-trials variability in starting point (i.e., range of a
uniform distribution sz  0.02). Note that the extent of
across-trials variability in h is rather extreme; in empirical
work, h is usually smaller .
Figure 10 shows the results. As in the previous figure,
panels in the top, middle, and bottom rows were generated
using v  0.1, v  0.2, and v  0.3, respectively. It is evident from Figure 10 that the inclusion of a large amount of
across-trials variability in drift rate leads to a systematic
Drift Rate v
Drift Rate v
Drift Rate v
Boundary Separation a
Boundary Separation a
Boundary Separation a
Nondecision Time Ter
Nondecision Time Ter
Nondecision Time Ter
Figure 9. Parameter recovery for the EZ-diffusion model under misspecification, with the datagenerating process affected by across-trials variability in nondecision time. The uniform distribution of nondecision time has a range of 0.200 sec, which is at the extreme end of what is observed in
practice . Boundary separation a was fixed at an intermediate value
of 0.11, and the mean of the nondecision time Ter was fixed at 0.300. Panels in the top, middle, and
bottom rows were generated using drift rate values of 0.1, 0.2, and 0.3, respectively. Data-generating
parameter values are indicated by horizontal lines. Each box-plot is based on 1,000 replications.
EZ DIFFUSION 15
underestimation of all three parameters. This bias is not
very pronounced for boundary separation (middle column)
and nondecision time (right column), but it is quite substantial for drift rate (left column). This drift rate bias is not
affected by the number of observations. Although the bias
is tolerable for v  0.1, it increases with the estimand, and
when v  0.3 the bias is a sizable 0.7. In sum, a substantial
amount of across-trials variability in drift rate leads to underestimation of all EZ parameters. This underestimation
is particularly pronounced for high values of drift rate.
Across-Trials Variability in Starting Point
A third misspecification analysis was done for the case
in which across-trials variability in drift rate is relatively
low (i.e., h  0.08) whereas across-trials variability in
starting point is relatively high (i.e., sz  0.07; see Figure 2, bottom middle panel). Figure 11 shows that the results are remarkably similar to those of Figure 10: Adding
the across-trials variabilities leads to an underestimation
of all parameters, and this effect is particularly pronounced
for high values of the drift rate parameter (i.e., the leftmost
bottom panel). When v  0.3, the bias is a sizeable 0.55.
Overall, the misspecification analyses have shown that
for the parameter values under consideration, the EZ-
diffusion method is fairly robust to across-trials variability
in nondecision time. With large across-trials variabilities
in drift rate and starting point, however, all parameters
are systematically underestimated. This underestimation
is particularly pronounced for high values of drift rate.
These results mean that when the EZ-diffusion model
is applied to experimental data, its estimates for drift rate
may turn out to be somewhat lower than those of the Ratcliff diffusion model. The empirical data presented later
support this assertion: Although the correlations between
the EZ parameters and the parameters of the Ratcliff diffusion model are generally quite high, the values for drift
Drift Rate v
Drift Rate v
Drift Rate v
Boundary Separation a
Boundary Separation a
Boundary Separation a
Nondecision Time Ter
Nondecision Time Ter
Nondecision Time Ter
Figure 10. Parameter recovery for the EZ-diffusion model under misspecification with the datagenerating process affected by high across-trials variability in drift rate (i.e., h  0.16), and low
across-trials variability in starting point (i.e., sz  0.02). The value for h is at the extreme end of
what is observed in practice . Boundary separation a was fixed at an
intermediate value of 0.11, and the mean of the nondecision time Ter was fixed at 0.300. Panels in the
top, middle, and bottom rows were generated using drift rate values of 0.1, 0.2, and 0.3, respectively.
Data-generating parameter values are indicated by horizontal lines. Each box-plot is based on 1,000
replications.
16 WAGENMAKERS, VAN DER MAAS, AND GRASMAN
rate are systematically lower for the EZ-diffusion model.
This effect is magnified for high values of drift rate, as our
simulations anticipate.
Three EZ Checks for Misspecification
In practical applications, the assumptions of the EZ-
diffusion model may be violated. Depending on the nature
and the seriousness of the violation, the results from the
EZ-diffusion model should be interpreted with caution
or the model should not be applied at all. In order to test
whether the EZ-diffusion model is misspecified, we suggest carrying out the following three simple checks. Each
check tests a prediction of the model that follows from one
of its implicit assumptions.
Check the shape of the RT distributions. The EZ model
should be applied only to RT data that show at least some
amount of right skew. In addition, the skew should become
more pronounced as task difficulty increases. Fortunately,
these regularities are present in the wide majority of data
sets . If the data are not skewed to the
right, or if the skew does not increase with task difficulty,
application of the EZ-diffusion model is inappropriate. A
statistical test for skewness was proposed by D’Agostino
Check the relative speed of error responses. As mentioned
above, the EZ-diffusion model predicts that the RT distributions of correct and error responses are identical. When
the starting point is equidistant from the response boundaries, fast error responses come about through across-trials
variability in starting point, and slow error responses come
about through across-trials variability in drift rate. Fast or
slow errors therefore indicate the presence of across-trials variability in starting point or drift rate, respectively. As
shown above, the EZ-diffusion model ignores the acrosstrials variabilities and this leads to an underestimation of all
parameters, in particular drift rate. Standard parametric and
Figure 11. Parameter recovery for the EZ-diffusion model under misspecification, with the datagenerating process affected by low across-trials variability in drift rate (i.e., h  0.08), and high
across-trials variability in starting point (i.e., sz  0.07). The value for sz is at the extreme end of
what is observed in practice . Boundary separation a was fixed at an
intermediate value of 0.11, and the mean of the nondecision time Ter was fixed at 0.300. Panels in the
top, middle, and bottom rows were generated using drift rate values of 0.1, 0.2, and 0.3, respectively.
Data-generating parameter values are indicated by horizontal lines. Each box-plot is based on 1,000
replications.
Drift Rate v
Drift Rate v
Drift Rate v
Boundary Separation a
Boundary Separation a
Boundary Separation a
Nondecision Time Ter
Nondecision Time Ter
Nondecision Time Ter
EZ DIFFUSION 17
nonparametric tests may be used to check whether errors
are systematically faster or slower than correct responses.
Check whether the starting point is unbiased. The present version of the EZ-diffusion model assumes that the two
stimulus categories in a two-alternative response time task
are a priori equally attractive. This means that the starting
point z is equidistant from the two response boundaries—
that is, z  a/2. In many situations, this simplification may
be acceptable (see Figure 3). In other situations (e.g., when
experimental manipulations include differential payoffs or
different presentation rates), the EZ assumption that z 
a/2 is almost surely violated, and the model should then
be applied only with extreme caution. In order to check
whether or not the data show evidence of a bias in starting point, one can compare the relative speed of correct
and error responses for the different stimulus categories.
When participants have an a priori bias that favors Category A over Category B, correct responses should be faster
than error responses for Category A stimuli, whereas correct responses should be slower than error responses for
Category B stimuli. As a statistical test, one can first determine whether or not stimulus category interacts with response correctness, and then plot the mean RTs to visually
judge whether the interaction crosses over in such a way
that errors are fast for one stimulus category and slow for
the other.
APPLICATION TO AN EXPERIMENT ON
PERCEPTUAL DISCRIMINATION
One of the most convincing ways to show that the EZ-
diffusion model presents a reasonable alternative to the
Ratcliff diffusion model is to compare the parameter estimates for both models on a set of empirical data. Here
we consider data from a perceptual discrimination experiment , to which we fit both the EZ model and the Ratcliff
model on a participant-by-participant basis.
The task of each participant was to indicate, as quickly as
possible without making errors, which of two vertical line
segments was longer. The line segments were presented
side by side and were joined by a horizontal line, either
at the top or at the bottom. The 100-msec presentation of
the line segments was terminated by the presentation of a
mask. Task difficulty was manipulated on three levels (i.e.,
easy, medium, and difficult) by varying the difference in
length between the vertical line segments: In the easy, medium, and difficult conditions, the length difference was 2,
4, and 6 mm, respectively.
Eighty-eight university students completed an 18-trial
practice block, followed by a total of 1,992 experimental trials in two blocks (i.e., 1,992/3  664 trials for each
level of difficulty). Twelve participants had an excessive
number of fast guesses (i.e., over 100 trials with response
times below 250 msec), and these participants were excluded from the analysis. Their exclusion did not affect
the qualitative pattern of results. Thus, the EZ-diffusion
model and the Ratcliff diffusion model were applied to the
data from N  76 participants.9 The EZ-diffusion model
was then used to determine v, a, and Ter for each participant and each difficulty level separately, yielding 76 
3  228 sets of parameter values. The Ratcliff diffusion
model was likewise used to determine v, a, and Ter.10 The
EZ-diffusion model parameters were used as starting values for the Ratcliff diffusion model fitting routine.
Figure 12 shows that the EZ parameters correlate quite
highly with parameter estimates obtained using the Ratcliff
diffusion model. Averaged across all nine panels, the correlation is .867. In the panels that correspond to drift rate and
boundary separation, the slope of the best-fitting line is decidedly smaller than 1. This indicates that the EZ-diffusion
estimates are lower than those of the Ratcliff diffusion
model. For drift rate, this effect is most pronounced for high
drift rates, as is evident from the flattening that occurs in the
panels corresponding to the easy and medium conditions.
As mentioned earlier, this effect may well be due to the fact
that the Ratcliff diffusion model has three variability parameters that soak up some of the variance that the EZ-diffusion
model attributes to drift rate and boundary separation.
To verify that the implicit assumptions of the EZ-
diffusion model had been met, the EZ checks were carried
out for all 76 participants and all 3 difficulty levels, resulting in 228 statistical comparisons for each check. The first
check used the D’Agostino test for skewness and confirmed that the RT distributions were clearly
right-skewed. The results from the second and third checks
were more ambiguous. The second check used the ANOVA
procedure to test whether correct responses were as fast as
error responses. Without any correction for multiple testing and an alpha level of .05, 14 out of 76 participants
failed this test for all three levels of difficulty. The majority
of the participants failed this test for at least one level of
difficulty. For some of the participants, errors were systematically faster than correct responses, and for others
errors were systematically slower than correct responses.
After the Bonferroni correction was applied and the alpha
level consequently reduced to .05/228  .0002, 6 participants still failed the test for all three levels of difficulty,
and 19 failed the test for at least one level of difficulty.
These results suggest that there might have been substantial across-trials variability in starting point and drift rate,
at least for some of the participants.
The third check used the ANOVA procedure to test
whether errors were fast for one stimulus category and
slow for the other, since this pattern is indicative of a bias
in starting point (i.e., z p a/2). If the starting point is biased, one would expect the interaction between stimulus
category and response correctness to be present for all
three difficulty levels. Without any correction for multiple
testing and an alpha level of .05, 6 out of 76 participants
showed a significant crossover interaction for at least two
of the levels of difficulty. Twenty-two participants showed
at least one significant crossover interaction. After applying
the Bonferroni correction, none of the participants showed
the crossover interaction for at least two levels of difficulty,
and only 2 out of 76 showed at least one significant crossover interaction. These results suggest that some participants might have had a bias in starting point. Exclusion of
the participants that failed the second or third EZ checks
did not greatly influence the pattern of correlations.
18 WAGENMAKERS, VAN DER MAAS, AND GRASMAN
In sum, the parameter values as determined by the EZ-
diffusion model correlate highly with those estimated by
the diffusion model. Despite this high correlation, the EZ-
diffusion model systematically yields estimates of drift
rate and boundary separation that are lower than those of
the Ratcliff diffusion model. For the drift rate parameter,
this effect is most pronounced when drift rate is high.
DISCUSSION
In the context of psychometric testing, Dennis and
Evans state that “it is important to recognize that there
is no ‘magic formula’ which will solve the problem of
different individuals adopting different speed–accuracy
compromises by collapsing the two measures into a single number representing ability” . The aim of the present article was to present just
such a formula for the kinds of speeded two-choice tasks
that have been popular in experimental psychology for
decades. The EZ-diffusion model does not just compute a
measure of ability or information uptake (i.e., drift rate),
it also yields measures for response conservativeness
(i.e., boundary separation) and nondecision time .
Thus, the EZ-diffusion model transforms the observed
variables to three unobserved variables, so that statistical
inference can be performed on the latent rather than on
the observed variables. The advantages of operating on
the level of latent variables is that each variable has a clear
psychological interpretation—in contrast, the traditional
method of analysis considers both response speed and response accuracy but is at a loss as to how to combine these
measures. The conceptual advantages of the EZ-diffusion
model are illustrated by Table 2, which shows the latent
variables for the data from Table 1 presented at the start
of this article.
Performance of the 4 Participants From Table 1 in Terms
of EZ-Diffusion Model Parameters
Participant
Separation
Nondecision
Note—Participants differed in terms of response conservativeness and
nondecision time, but not in terms of efficiency of stimulus processing.
See the text for details.
v, Full Model
v, EZ Model
Ter, Full Model
Ter, EZ Model
a, Full Model
a, EZ Model
v, EZ Model
Ter, EZ Model
a, EZ Model
v, Full Model
Ter, Full Model
a, Full Model
v, EZ Model
Ter, EZ Model
a, EZ Model
v, Full Model
Ter, Full Model
a, Full Model
Figure 12. Parameter estimates of the Ratcliff diffusion model and the EZ-diffusion model for a
two-choice perceptual discrimination experiment (N  76) featuring three difficulty levels.
EZ DIFFUSION 19
From the EZ parameters in Table 2, it is immediately clear
that information uptake (i.e., drift rate) is the same for all participants. The reason that George responds relatively slowly
is because he is cautious not to make errors (i.e., boundary
separation a  0.12) and has a relatively long nondecision
time (i.e., Ter  0.300). Mark, the fastest responder, is the opposite of George, in that Mark is a risky decision maker (i.e.,
a  0.08) who has relatively short nondecision time. Amy
and Rich differ from each other in that Amy is less cautious
than Rich, but Rich has a shorter nondecision time. These
kinds of psychologically meaningful conclusions can never
be derived by the standard analysis of two-choice tasks.
A Cautionary Note on Transformations
and Falsifiability
A considerable practical advantage of the EZ-diffusion
model is that it does not require any fitting: The EZ equations simply transform the observed quantities of MRT,
VRT, and Pc to the unobserved quantities of drift rate,
boundary separation, and nondecision time. This practical advantage, however, does come at a theoretical cost.
That is, the EZ equations will do their job, regardless of
whether or not the EZ model is appropriate to the situation at hand. For instance, the data under consideration
could be uniformly distributed, left-skewed, or even multimodal. In these cases, it is almost certain that the data
do not originate from a diffusion process with absorbing
boundaries, as shown in Figure 4.
Despite the fact that the EZ model is not appropriate for,
say, multimodal distributions, the EZ transformation will
nevertheless return estimated values of drift rate, boundary separation, and nondecision time. Consequently, these
estimated values may very well lead to conclusions that
are unwarranted. It should always be kept in mind that the
EZ-diffusion transformation is only appropriate when the
implicit assumptions of the EZ-diffusion model are met.
In sum, the EZ-diffusion model cannot be falsified on the
basis of a poor fit to the data: It will always produce a
perfect fit to the data, since it simply transforms the observed variables to unobserved variables without any loss
of information (see Figure 5).
What this means is that some attention should be paid
to the underlying assumptions of the EZ-diffusion model
when applying it to data. For instance, both the EZ- and
Ratcliff diffusion models are currently limited to tasks that
require only a single process for their completion. That is,
the present model should not be applied to tasks such as the
Eriksen flanker task , in which
one process may correspond to information accumulation
from the target arrow, and another process may correspond
to information accumulation from the distractor arrows.
We strongly recommend that the three EZ checks for misspecification mentioned earlier (i.e., check the shape of
the RT distributions, check the relative speed of error responses, and check whether the starting point is unbiased)
be carried out when the model is applied to data.
Future Directions and Extensions
The EZ-diffusion model described here can be extended
in several ways. First and foremost, the current “vanilla”
version of the EZ-diffusion model assumes that both
stimulus alternatives are equally preferable a priori—that
is, that z  a/2. However, it is possible to extend the EZ-
diffusion model to handle biased starting points—that is,
cases for which z p a/2. Consider again the lexical decision task, and assume that we need to estimate a number of
variables: drift rate for word stimuli vw, drift rate for nonword stimuli vnw, boundary separation a, starting point z,
nondecision time for word stimuli Ter,w, and nondecision
time for nonword stimuli Ter,nw. These six parameters can
be obtained by transformation from the six observed variables MRTw, MRTnw, VRTw, VRTnw, Pc,w, and Pc,nw.
Second, the present version of the EZ-diffusion model
does not allow parameters to be constrained across conditions. This may be desirable for several reasons. Consider,
for instance, an experiment designed to compare task performance of young adults with that of older adults. The hypothesis that the locus of the aging effect is in the efficiency
of information processing corresponds to an EZ-diffusion
model in which only drift rate is free to vary between the age
groups. A rival hypothesis may entail that the locus of the
aging effect is in response conservativeness, and this corresponds to an EZ-diffusion model in which only boundary
separation is free to vary between the age groups.
When parameters are constrained across experimental conditions or groups of participants, the number of
observed variables becomes larger than the number of
unobserved parameters, and this necessitates the use of
model fitting. This fitting procedure requires that the
lack of fit for MRT, VRT, and Pc be weighted, for instance by the precision with which these quantities are
estimated . Once parameters have been constrained and their
optimal values determined by the weighted least-squares
model-fitting procedure, the model selection issue becomes prominent again: Which model is better, the one
in which the effect of age is attributed to differences in
information uptake, or the one in which the age effect
is due to differences in response conservativeness? For
the EZ-diffusion model, an attractive model selection
procedure would be to use split-half cross-validation
 : That is, the parameters of the
model could be determined by fitting one half of the data
set. These particular parameter estimates could then be
used to assess the prediction error for the second half of
the data set. The model with the lowest prediction error
would be preferred.
EZ Diffusion or Ratcliff Diffusion?
The EZ-diffusion model is a considerable simplification of the Ratcliff diffusion model. This is both good and
bad. One of the advantages of using a simple model is that
the results are more readily interpretable—hence, more
easily communicated to other researchers. Another advantage is that simple models are easily implemented. Furthermore, simple models such as the EZ-diffusion model
can be applied to very large data sets in a matter of seconds. Finally, simple models are less prone to overfitting
(i.e., modeling noise), and may therefore yield relatively
low prediction errors to unseen data from the same source
20 WAGENMAKERS, VAN DER MAAS, AND GRASMAN
ematical Psychology, Memphis, Tennessee . We thank
Andrew Heathcote and Francis Tuerlinckx for making their diffusion
model fitting routines available to us. Correspondence concerning this
article may be addressed to E.-J. Wagenmakers, Department of Psychology, University of Amsterdam, Roetersstraat 15, 1018 WB Amsterdam,
The Netherlands (e-mail: ).