Received 14 Feb 2017 | Accepted 11 Apr 2017 | Published 5 Jun 2017
Universal fragment descriptors for predicting
properties of inorganic crystals
Olexandr Isayev1, Corey Oses2, Cormac Toher2, Eric Gossett2, Stefano Curtarolo2,3 & Alexander Tropsha1
Although historically materials discovery has been driven by a laborious trial-and-error
process, knowledge-driven materials design can now be enabled by the rational combination
of Machine Learning methods and materials databases. Here, data from the AFLOW
repository for ab initio calculations is combined with Quantitative Materials Structure-
Property Relationship models to predict important properties: metal/insulator classiﬁcation,
band gap energy, bulk/shear moduli, Debye temperature and heat capacities. The prediction’s
accuracy compares well with the quality of the training data for virtually any stoichiometric
inorganic crystalline material, reciprocating the available thermomechanical experimental
data. The universality of the approach is attributed to the construction of the descriptors:
Property-Labelled Materials Fragments. The representations require only minimal structural
input allowing straightforward implementations of simple heuristic design rules.
DOI: 10.1038/ncomms15679
1 Laboratory for Molecular Modeling, Division of Chemical Biology and Medicinal Chemistry, UNC Eshelman School of Pharmacy, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA. 2 Center for Materials Genomics, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina 27708, USA. 3 Materials Science,
Electrical Engineering, Physics and Chemistry, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina 27708, USA. Correspondence and requests for materials should be
addressed to O.I. (email: ) or to S.C. (email: ).
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 8:15679 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms15679 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
dvances in materials science are often slow and fortuitous1.
Coupling the ﬁeld’s combinatorial challenges with the
demanding efforts required for materials characterization
makes progress uniquely difﬁcult. The number of materials currently
characterized, either experimentally2,3 or computationally4, pales in
comparison with the anticipated potential diversity. Only considering
naturally occurring elements, 9,000 crystal structure prototypes2,3,
and stoichiometric compositions, there are roughly 3 1011 potential
quaternary compounds and 1013 quinary combinations. Indeed, it
has been estimated that the total number of theoretical materials can
be as large as 10100 (ref. 5). Exacerbating the issue, standard materials characterization practices, such as calculating the band structure,
can become expensive when considering ﬁnite-size scaling, charge
corrections6, and going beyond standard density functional theory
self-consistent GW approximation7,8. Ultimately, brute force exploration of this search space, even in high-throughput fashion1,9,
is entirely impractical.
To circumvent the issue, many knowledge-based structure–
property relationships have been conjectured over the years to aid
in the search for novel functional materials–ranging from the
simplest empirical relationships10 to complex advanced models11–17.
For instance, many (semi-)empirical rules have been developed to
predict band gap energies, such as those incorporating (optical18)
electronegativity19. More sophisticated Machine Learning (ML)
models were also developed for chalcopyrite semiconductors20,
perovskites21, and binary compounds22. Unfortunately, many of
these models are limited to a single family of materials, with narrow
applicability outside of their training scope.
The development of such structure–property relationships
has become an integral practice in the drug industry, which faces
a similar combinatorial challenge. The number of potential
organic molecules is estimated to be anywhere between 1013
and 10180 (ref. 23). In computational medicinal chemistry,
Quantitative Structure-Activity Relationship modelling coupled
with virtual screening of chemical libraries have been largely
successful in the discovery of novel bioactive compounds24.
Here, we introduce fragment descriptors of materials structure.
The combination of these descriptors with ML approaches affords
the development of universal models capable of accurate prediction
of properties for virtually any stoichiometric inorganic crystalline
material. First, the algorithm for descriptor generation is described,
along with implementation of ML methods for Quantitative
Materials Structure-Property Relationship (QMSPR) modelling.
Next, the effectiveness of this approach is assessed through
prediction of eight critical electronic and thermomechanical
properties of materials, including the metal/insulator classiﬁcation,
band gap energy, bulk and shear moduli, Debye temperature, heat
capacities (at constant pressure and volume) and thermal expansion
coefﬁcient. The impact and interaction among the most signiﬁcant
descriptors as determined by the ML algorithms are highlighted. As
a proof-of-concept, the QMSPR models are then employed to
predict thermomechanical properties for compounds previously
uncharacterized,
predictions
AEL–AGL integrated framework (Automatic Elasticity Library-
Automatic GIBBS Library)25,26. Such predictions are of particular
value as proper calculation pathways for thermomechanical
properties in the most efﬁcient scenarios still require analysis of
multiple DFT-runs, elevating the cost of already expensive
calculations. Finally, ML-predictions and calculations are both
compared to experimental values which ultimately corroborate the
validity of the approach.
Other investigations have predicted a subset of the target
properties discussed here by building ML approaches where
computationally obtained quantities, such as the cohesive energy,
formation energy and energy above the convex hull, are part of
the input data27. The approach presented here is orthogonal.
comparable
accuracies without the need of further ab initio data. All
necessary input properties are either tabulated or derived
directly from the geometrical structures. There are advantages:
(i) a priori, after the training, no further calculations need to be
performed, (ii) a posteriori, the modelling framework becomes
independent of the source or nature of the training data, for
example, calculated versus experimental. The latter allows for
rapid extension of predictions to online applications—given the
geometry of a cell and the species involved, eight ML predicted
properties are returned (aﬂow.org/aﬂow-ml).
Universal property-labelled materials fragments. Many cheminformatics investigations have demonstrated the critical importance of molecular descriptors, which are known to inﬂuence model
accuracy more than the choice of the ML algorithm28,29. For the
purposes of this investigation, fragment descriptors typically used for
characterization30. Molecular systems can be described as graphs
whose vertices correspond to atoms and edges to chemical bonds. In
this representation, fragment descriptors characterize subgraphs of
the full 3D molecular network. Any molecular graph invariant can be
uniquely represented as a linear combination of fragment descriptors.
They offer several advantages over other types of chemical
descriptors31, including simplicity of calculation, storage and
interpretation32.
disadvantages. Models built with fragment descriptors perform
poorly when presented with new fragments for which they were not
trained. In addition, typical fragments are constructed solely
with information of the individual atomic symbols (for example,
C, N, Na). Such a limited context would be insufﬁcient for modelling
the complex chemical interactions within materials.
Mindful of these constraints, fragment descriptors for materials
were conceptualized by differentiating atoms not by their symbols
but by a plethora of well-tabulated chemical and physical properties33. Descriptor features comprise of various combinations of
these atomic properties. From this perspective, materials can be
thought of as ‘coloured’ graphs, with vertices decorated according to
the nature of the atoms they represent34. Partitions of these graphs
form Property-Labelled Materials Fragments (PLMF).
Figure 1 shows the scheme for constructing PLMFs. Given a
crystal structure, the ﬁrst step is to determine the atomic
connectivity within it. In general, atomic connectivity is not a
trivial property to determine within materials. Not only must the
potential bonding distances among atoms be considered, but also
whether the topology of nearby atoms allows for bonding.
Therefore, a computational geometry approach is employed to
partition the crystal structure (Fig. 1a) into atom-centred
Voronoi-Dirichlet polyhedra35,36 (Fig. 1b). This partitioning
scheme was found to be invaluable in the topological analysis
of metal organic frameworks, molecules, and inorganic crystals37.
Connectivity between atoms is established by satisfying two
criteria: (i) the atoms must share a Voronoi face (perpendicular
bisector between neighbouring atoms), and (ii) the interatomic
distance must be shorter than the sum of the Cordero covalent
radii38 to within a 0.25 Å tolerance. Here, only strong interatomic
interactions are modelled, such as covalent, ionic, and metallic
bonding, ignoring van der Waals interactions. Owing to the
ambiguity within materials, the bond order (single/double/triple
bond classiﬁcation) is not considered. Taken together, the
Voronoi centres that share a Voronoi face and are within the
sum of their covalent radii form a three-dimensional graph
deﬁning the connectivity within the material.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms15679
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 8:15679 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms15679 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
In the ﬁnal steps of the PLMF construction, the full graph
and corresponding adjacency matrix (Fig. 1c) are constructed
from the total list of connections. The adjacency matrix A of a
simple graph (material) with n vertices (atoms) is a square matrix
(n  n) with entries aij ¼ 1 if atom i is connected to atom j, and
aij ¼ 0 otherwise. This adjacency matrix reﬂects the global
topology for a given system, including interatomic bonds
and contacts within the crystal. The full graph is partitioned
into smaller subgraphs, corresponding to individual fragments
(Fig. 1d). Although there are several subgraphs to consider
in general, the length l is restricted to a maximum of three,
where l is the largest number of consecutive, non-repetitive edges
in the subgraph. This restriction serves to curb the complexity
of the ﬁnal descriptor vector. In particular, there are two types
of fragments. Path fragments are subgraphs of at most l ¼ 3
that encode any linear strand of up to four atoms. Only the
shortest paths between atoms are considered. Circular fragments
are subgraphs of l ¼ 2 that encode the ﬁrst shell of nearest
neighbour atoms. In this context, circular fragments represent
coordination polyhedra, or clusters of atoms with anion/cation
centres each surrounded by a set of its respective counter ion.
Coordination polyhedra are used extensively in crystallography
and mineralogy39.
The PLMFs are differentiated by local (standard atomic/
elemental) reference properties33, which include: (i) general
properties: the Mendeleev group and period numbers (gP, pP),
number of valence electrons (NV); (ii) measured properties33:
atomic mass (matom), electron afﬁnity (EA), thermal conductivity
(l), heat capacity (C), enthalpies of atomization (DHat), fusion
(DHfusion) and vaporization (DHvapor), ﬁrst three ionization
potentials (IP1,2,3); and (iii) derived properties: effective atomic
charge (Zeff), molar volume (Vmolar), chemical hardness (Z)33,40,
absolute41,
electronegativity (w) and polarizability (aP). Pairs of properties
are included in the form of their multiplication and ratio, as
well as the property value divided by the atomic connectivity
(number of neighbours in the adjacency matrix). For every
property scheme q, the following quantities are also considered:
minimum (min(q)), maximum (max(q)), total sum (Pq),
average (avg(q)) and standard deviation (std(q)) of q among
the atoms in the material.
To incorporate information about shape, size and symmetry of
the crystal unit cell, the following crystal-wide properties are
incorporated: lattice parameters (a, b, c), their ratios (a/b, b/c,
a/c), angles (a, b, g), density, volume, volume per atom, number
of atoms, number of species (atom types), lattice type, point
group and space group.
All aforementioned descriptors (fragment-based and crystalwide) can be concatenated together to represent each material
uniquely. After ﬁltering out low variance (o0.001) and highly
correlated (r240.95) features, the ﬁnal feature vector captures
2,494 total descriptors.
Descriptor construction is inspired by the topological charge
indices42 and the Kier-Hall electro-topological state indices43.
Let M be the matrix obtained by multiplying the adjacency
matrix A by the reciprocal square distance matrix D ðDij¼1=r2
The matrix M, called the Galvez matrix, is a square n  n matrix,
where n is the number of atoms in the unit cell. From M,
descriptors of reference property q are calculated as
Crystal structure
Voronoi tessellation and
neighbours search
Decomposition to fragments
Infinite periodic graph
construction and property labelling
Nodes (atoms)
Path fragments of length l,
l = 2,3, ...
Circular fragments (polyhedrons)
Edges (bonds)
Figure 1 | Schematic representing the construction of the Property-Labelled Materials Fragments (PLMF). The crystal structure (a) is analysed for
atomic neighbours via Voronoi tessellation (b). After property labelling, the resulting periodic graph (c) is decomposed into simple subgraphs (d).
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms15679
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 8:15679 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms15679 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
where the ﬁrst set of indices count over all pairs of atoms and the
second is restricted to all pairs i, j of bonded atoms.
Quantitative materials structure–property relationship modelling.
In training the models, the same ML method and descriptors
are employed without any hand tuning or variable selection.
Speciﬁcally, models are constructed using the gradient boosting
decision tree (GBDT) technique44. All models were validated
through y-randomization (label scrambling). Five-fold cross
validation is used to assess how well each model will generalize
to an independent data set. Hyperparameters are determined with
grid searches on the training set and 10-fold cross validation.
The GBDT method44 evolved from the application of boosting
methods45 to regression trees46. The boosting method is based on
the observation that ﬁnding many weakly accurate prediction
rules can be a lot easier than ﬁnding a single, highly accurate
rule47. The boosting algorithm calls this ‘weak’ learner repeatedly,
at each stage feeding it a different subset of the training
examples. Each time it is called, the weak learner generates
a new weak prediction rule. After many iterations, the boosting
algorithm combines these weak rules into a single prediction
rule aiming to be much more accurate than any single weak rule.
The GBDT approach is an additive model of the following
F x gm; am
where h(x; am) are the weak learners (decision trees in this case)
characterized by parameters am, and M is the total count of
decision trees obtained through boosting.
It builds the additive model in a forward stage-wise fashion:
FmðxÞ¼Fm  1ðxÞ þ gmh x; am
At each stage (m ¼ 1, 2, y , M), gm and am are chosen to
minimize the loss function fL given the current model Fm  1(xi)
for all data points (count N),
Þ¼ arg min
fL yi; Fm  1 xi
ð Þ þ gh xi; a
Gradient boosting attempts to solve this minimization problem
numerically via steepest descent. The steepest descent direction is
the negative gradient of the loss function evaluated at the current
model Fm  1, where the step length is chosen using line search.
An important practical task is to quantify variable importance.
Feature selection in decision tree ensembles cannot differentiate
between primary effects and effects caused by interactions
between variables. Therefore, unlike regression coefﬁcients, a
direct comparison of captured effects is prohibited. For this
purpose, variable inﬂuence is quantiﬁed in the following way44.
Let us deﬁne the inﬂuence of variable j in a single tree h. Consider
that the tree has l splits and therefore l  1 levels. This gives rise
to the deﬁnition of the variable inﬂuence,
i is the empirical squared improvement resulting from
this split, and 1 is the indicator function. Here, 1 has a value of
one if the split at node xi is on variable j, and zero otherwise, that
is, it measures the number of times a variable j is selected for
splitting. To obtain the overall inﬂuence of variable j in the
ensemble of decision trees (count M), it is averaged over all trees,
j ¼M  1 X
The inﬂuences K2
are normalized so that they add to one.
Inﬂuences capture the importance of the variable, but not the
direction of the response (positive or negative).
Integrated modelling work-ﬂow. Eight predictive models are
developed in this work, including: a binary classiﬁcation model that
predicts if a material is a metal or an insulator and seven regression
models that predict: the band gap energy (EBG) for insulators, bulk
modulus (BVRH), shear modulus (GVRH), Debye temperature (yD),
heat capacity at constant pressure (Cp), heat capacity at constant
volume (CV), and thermal expansion coefﬁcient (aV).
Figure 2 shows the overall application work-ﬂow. A novel
candidate material is ﬁrst classiﬁed as a metal or an insulator. If
the material is classiﬁed as an insulator, EBG is predicted, whereas
Electronic properties
Crystal structure
Classification
Thermomechanical properties
modulus (VRH)
prediction
insulator?
prediction
Regression
Regression
Figure 2 | Outline of the modelling work-ﬂow. ML models are represented by orange diamonds. Target properties predicted by these models are
highlighted in green.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms15679
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 8:15679 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms15679 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
classiﬁcation as a metal implies that the material has no EBG. The
six thermomechanical properties are then predicted independent
of the material’s metal/insulator classiﬁcation. The integrated
modelling work-ﬂow has been implemented as a web application
at aﬂow.org/aﬂow-ml, requiring only the atomic species and
positions as input for predictions.
Although all three models were trained independently, the
accuracy of the EBG regression model is inherently dependent on
the accuracy of the metal/insulator classiﬁcation model in this
work-ﬂow. However, the high accuracy of the metal/insulator
classiﬁcation model suggests this not to be a practical concern.
Model generalizability. One technique for assessing model
quality is ﬁvefold cross validation, which gauges how well
the model is expected to generalize to an independent data set.
For each model, the scheme involves randomly partitioning
the set into ﬁve groups and predicting the value of each material
in one subset while training the model on the other four
subsets. Hence, each subset has the opportunity to play the
role of the ‘test set’. Furthermore, any observed deviations
in the predictions are addressed. For further analysis, all
predicted and calculated results are available in Supplementary
Calculated EBG (eV)
Predicted EBG (eV)
Predicted D (K)
Calculated D (K)
Calculated GVRH (GPa)
Predicted GVRH (GPa)
Calculated BVRH (GPa)
Calculated Cp (kB per atom)
Calculated CV (kB per atom)
Calculated V (K–1)
Predicted V (K–1)
Predicted Cp (kB per atom)
Predicted CV (kB per atom)
Predicted BVRH (GPa)
Electronic properties
Thermomechanical properties
1 – specificity
Sensitivity
Figure 3 | Five-fold cross validation plots for the eight ML models predicting electronic and thermomechanical properties. (a) Receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) curve for the classiﬁcation ML model. (b–h) Predicted versus calculated values for the regression ML models: (b) band gap energy
(EBG), (c) bulk modulus (BVRH), (d) shear modulus (GVRH), (e) Debye temperature (yD), (f) heat capacity at constant pressure (CP), (g) heat capacity at
constant volume (CV) and (h) thermal expansion coefﬁcient (aV).
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms15679
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 8:15679 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms15679 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
The accuracy of the metal/insulator classiﬁer is reported as
the area under the curve (AUC) of the receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) plot (Fig. 3a). The ROC curve illustrates the
model’s ability to differentiate between metallic and insulating
input materials. It plots the prediction rate for insulators
(correctly versus incorrectly predicted) throughout the full
prediction
thresholds.
1.0 represents a perfect test, whereas an area of 0.5 characterizes
a random guess (the dashed line). The model shows excellent
external predictive power with the area under the curve at 0.98,
an insulator-prediction success rate (sensitivity) of 0.95, a metalprediction success rate (speciﬁcity) of 0.92, and an overall
classiﬁcation rate of 0.93. For the complete set of 26,674
materials, this corresponds to 2,103 misclassiﬁed materials,
including 1,359
misclassiﬁed
metals and
744 misclassiﬁed
insulators. Evidently, the model exhibits positive bias toward
predicting insulators, where bias refers to whether a ML model
tends to over- or under-estimate the predicted property. This
low false-metal rate is fortunate as the model is unlikely to
misclassify a novel, potentially interesting semiconductor as
a metal. Overall, the metal classiﬁcation model is robust enough
to handle the full complexity of the periodic table.
The results of the ﬁvefold cross validation analysis for the band
gap energy (EBG) regression model are plotted in Fig. 3b.
In addition, a statistical proﬁle of these predictions, along with
that of the six thermomechanical regression models, is provided
in Table 1, which includes metrics such as the root-mean-square
error (RMSE), mean absolute error (MAE), and coefﬁcient of
determination (r2). Similar to the classiﬁcation model, the
EBG model exhibits a positive predictive bias. The biggest errors
come from materials with narrow band gaps, that is, the scatter in
the lower left corner in Fig. 3b. These materials predominantly
include complex ﬂuorides and nitrides. N2H6Cl2 (ICSD #23145)
prediction
SE ¼ 3.78 eV48. The most underestimated materials are HCN
(ICSD #76419) and N2H6Cl2 (ICSD #240903) with SE ¼  2.67
 3.19 eV49,50,
respectively.
surprising
considering that all three are molecular crystals. Such systems
are anomalies in the ICSD, and ﬁt better in other databases, such
as the Cambridge Structural Database51. Overall, 10,762 materials
are predicted within 25% accuracy of calculated values, whereas
824 systems have errors over 1 eV.
Figure 3c–h and Table 1 showcase the results of the ﬁvefold
cross validation analysis for the six thermomechanical regression
models. For both bulk (BVRH) and shear (GVRH) moduli, over 85%
of materials are predicted within 20GPa of their calculated values.
The remaining models also demonstrate high accuracy, with at
least 90% of the full training set (42,546 systems) predicted to
within 25% of the calculated values. Signiﬁcant outliers in
predictions of the bulk modulus include graphite (ICSD #187640,
SE ¼ 100 GPa,
anisotropy)
theoretical high-pressure boron nitrides (ICSD #162873 and
under-predicted
110 GPa)52,53.
theoretical systems are ill-predicted throughout the six properties,
including ZN (ICSD #161885), CN2 (ICSD #247676), C3N4 (ICSD
#151782) and CH (ICSD #187642)52,54–56. Predictions for the
GVRH, Debye temperature (yD), and thermal expansion coefﬁcient
(aV) tend to be slightly underestimated, particularly for higher
calculated values. In addition, mild scattering can be seen for yD
and yV, but not enough to have a signiﬁcant impact on the error or
correlation metrics.
Despite minimal deviations, both RMSE and mean absolute
error are within 4% of the ranges covered for each property,
and the predictions demonstrate excellent correlation with the
calculated properties. Note the tight clustering of points just
volume (CV). This is due to CV saturation in accordance with
the Dulong-Petit law occurring at or below 300 K for many
compounds.
Model interpretation. Model interpretation is of paramount
importance in any ML study. The signiﬁcance of each descriptor
is determined in order to gain insight into structural features that
impact molecular properties of interest. Interpretability is a strong
advantage of decision tree methods, particularly with the GBDT
approach. One can quantify the predictive power of a speciﬁc
descriptor by analysing the reduction of the RMSE at each node
of the tree.
Partial dependence plots offer yet another opportunity for
GBDT model interpretation. Similar to the descriptor signiﬁcance
analysis, partial dependence resolves the effect of a variable
(descriptor) on a property, but only after marginalising over all
other explanatory variables57. The effect is quantiﬁed by the
change of that property as relevant descriptors are varied. The
plots themselves highlight the most important interactions among
relevant descriptors as well as between properties and their
corresponding descriptors. Although only the most important
descriptors are highlighted and discussed, an exhaustive list of
relevant descriptors and their relative contributions can be found
in Supplementary Note 1.
Table 1 | Statistical summary of the ﬁvefold cross validated
predictions for the seven regression models.
0.09 kB per atom
0.05 kB per atom
0.07 kB per atom
0.04 kB per atom
1.47  10  5 K  1
5.69  10  6 K  1
The summary corresponds with Fig. 3.
avg(Vmolar rcov )
avg(ΔHfusion λ–1)
Insulators
Figure 4 | Semi-log scatter plot of the full data set (26,674 unique
materials) in a dual-descriptor space. avg(DHfusionl  1) versus
avg Vmolarr  1
. Insulators and metals are coloured in red and blue,
respectively.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms15679
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 8:15679 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms15679 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
For the metal/insulator classiﬁcation model, the descriptor
signiﬁcance
descriptors
importance
(equally),
avgðDHfusionl  1Þ
avgðVmolarr  1
cov Þ. avgðDHfusionl  1Þ is the ratio between the fusion
enthalpy (DHfusion) and the thermal conductivity (l) averaged over
all atoms in the material, and avgðVmolarr  1
cov Þ is the ratio between
the molar volume (Vmolar) and the covalent radius (rcov) averaged
over all atoms in the material. Both descriptors are simple nodespeciﬁc features. The presence of these two prominent descriptors
accounts for the high accuracy of the classiﬁcation model.
Figure 4 shows the projection of the full dataset onto the dualdescriptor space of avgðDHfusionl  1Þ and avgðVmolarr  1
cov Þ. In this
2D space, metals and insulators are substantially partitioned. To
further resolve this separation, the plot is split into four quadrants
approximately
avgðVmolarr  1
cov Þ¼11, avgðDHfusionl  1Þ¼2. Insulators are predominately located in quadrant I. There are several clusters (one
large and several small) parallel to the x axis. Metals occupy a
5oavgðVmolarr  1
cov Þo12 and 0:02oavgðDHfusionl  1Þo2. Quadrant II is mostly empty with a few materials scattered about the
origin. In the remaining quadrant (IV), materials have mixed
character.
Analysis of the projection shown in Fig. 4 suggests a simple
heuristic rule: all materials within quadrant I are classiﬁed as
insulators (EBG40), and all materials outside of this quadrant are
metals. Remarkably, this unsupervised projection approach
achieves a very high classiﬁcation accuracy of 86% for the entire
dataset of 26,674 materials. The model misclassiﬁes only 3,621
materials: 2,414 are incorrectly predicted as insulators and 1,207
are incorrectly predicted as metals. This example illustrates how
careful model analysis of the most signiﬁcant descriptors can
yield simple heuristic rules for materials design.
The regression model for the band gap energy (EBG) is more
complex. There are a number of descriptors in the model with
comparable contributions, and thus, all individual contributions
are small. This is expected as a number of conditions can affect
EBG. The most important are avg wZ  1
and avg(Cl  1) with
signiﬁcance scores of 0.075 and 0.071, respectively, where w is the
electronegativity, Zeff is the effective nuclear charge, C is the
speciﬁc heat capacity and l is the thermal conductivity of each
Figure 5 shows partial dependence plots focusing on (DIPbond)
as an example. It is derived from edge fragments of bonded atoms
(l ¼ 1) and deﬁned as an absolute difference in ionization
potentials averaged over the material. In other words, it is a
measure of bond polarity, similar to electronegativity. Figure 5a
shows a steady monotonic increase in EBG for larger values of
(DIPbond). The effect is small, but captures an expected physical
principle:
ﬂuorides) tend to have larger EBG.
Given the number of signiﬁcant interactions involved with
this phenomenon, tailoring EBG involves the optimization of a
highly non-convex, multidimensional object. Figure 5b illustrates
a 2D slice of this object as std(DIPbond) and avg(DIPbond)
vary simultaneously. Like avg(DIPbond), std(DIPbond) is the
s.d. of the set of absolute differences in IP among all bonded
atoms. In the context of these two variables, EBG responds to
deviations in DIPbond among the set of bonded atoms, but
remains constant across shifts in avg(DIPbond). This suggests
an opportunity to tune EBG by considering another composition
that varies the deviations among bond polarities. Alternatively, a
desired EBG can be maintained by considering another composition that preserves the deviations among bond polarities, even as
the overall average shifts. Similarly, Fig. 5c shows the partial
dependence on both the density (r) and avg(DIPbond). Contrary
Volume (Å3 per atom)
avg(ΔIPbond)
avg(ΔEAbond)
std(ΔIPbond)
avg(ΔIPbond)
std(ΔHvaporΔHatom)
 (g cm–3)
avg(ΔIPbond)
ΔBVRH (GPa)
Figure 5 | Partial dependence plots of the EBG, BVRH and hD models. (a) Partial dependence of EBG on the avg(DIPbond) descriptor. For EBG, the 2D
interaction between std(DIPbond) and avg(DIPbond) and between r (density) and avg(DIPbond) are illustrated in panels (b,c), respectively. (d) Partial
dependence of the BVRH on the crystal volume per atom descriptor. For yD, the 2D interaction between avg(DEAbond) and std DHvaporDH  1
and between
crystal lattice parameters b and c are illustrated in panels (e,f), respectively.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms15679
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 8:15679 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms15679 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
to the previous trend, larger avg(DIPbond) values correlate with
smaller EBG, particularly for low density structures. Materials with
higher density and lower avg(DIPbond) tend to have higher EBG.
Considering the elevated response (compared with Fig. 5b), the
inverse correlation of EBG with the average bond polarity in the
context of density suggests an even more effective means of
tuning EBG.
A descriptor analysis of the thermomechanical property
models reveals the importance of one descriptor in particular,
the volume per atom of the crystal. This conclusion certainly
resonates with the nature of these properties, as they generally
correlate with bond strength26. Figure 4d exempliﬁes such a
relationship, which shows the partial dependence plot of the bulk
modulus (BVRH) on the volume per atom. Tightly bound atoms
are generally indicative of stronger bonds. As the interatomic
distance increases, properties like BVRH generally reduce.
Two of the more interesting dependence plots are also shown
in Fig. 5e,f, both of which offer opportunities for tuning the
Debye temperature (yD). Figure 5e illustrates the interactions
among two descriptors, the absolute difference in electron
afﬁnities among bonded atoms averaged over the material
(avg(DEAbond)), and the s.d. of the set of ratios of the enthalpies
of vaporization (DHvapor) and atomization DHatom) for all
ðstdðDHvaporDH  1
these dimensions, two distinct regions emerge of increasing/
decreasing
avgðDEAatomÞ¼3. Within these partitions, there are clusters of
maximum gradient in yD—peaks within the left partition and
troughs within the right. The peaks and troughs alternate with
varying stdðDHvaporDH  1
atomÞ. Although stdðDHvapor DH  1
atomÞ is not
an immediately intuitive descriptor, the alternating clusters may
be a manifestation of the periodic nature of DHvapor and DHatom
(ref. 58). As for the partitions themselves, the extremes of
avg(DEAatom) characterize covalent and ionic materials, as
bonded atoms with similar EA are likely to share electrons,
whereas those with varying EA prefer to donate/accept electrons.
Considering that EA is also periodic, various opportunities for
carefully tuning yD should be available.
Finally, Fig. 5f shows the partial dependence of yD on the
lattice parameters b and c. It resolves two notable correlations:
(i) uniformly increasing the cell size of the system decreases yD,
but (ii) elongating the cell c=b  1
Þ increases it. Again, (i) can
be attributed to the inverse relationship between volume per atom
and bond strength, but does little to address (ii). Nevertheless,
the connection between elongated, or layered, systems and the
Debye temperature is certainly not surprising—anisotropy can be
Calculated CV (kB per atom)
Predicted CV (kB per atom)
Predicted Cp (kB per atom)
Calculated Cp (kB per atom)
Calculated BVRH (GPa)
Predicted BVRH (GPa)
Predicted GVRH (GPa)
Calculated GVRH (GPa)
Calculated D (K)
Calculated V (K–1)
Predicted D (K)
Predicted V (K–1)
Figure 6 | Model performance evaluation for the six ML models predicting thermomechanical properties of 770 characterized materials. Predicted
versus calculated values for the regression ML models: (a) bulk modulus (BVRH), (b) shear modulus (GVRH), (c) Debye temperature (yD), (d) heat capacity
at constant pressure (CP), (e) heat capacity at constant volume (CV), and (f) thermal expansion coefﬁcient (aV).
Table 2 | Statistical summary of the predictions for the six
thermomechanical regression models.
0.10 kB per atom
0.06 kB per atom
0.07 kB per atom
0.05 kB per atom
1.95  10  5 K  1
5.77  10  6 K  1
The summary corresponds with Fig. 6.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms15679
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 8:15679 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms15679 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
leveraged to enhance phonon-related interactions associated
conductivity59
superconductivity60–62.
Although the domain of interest is quite narrow, the impact
is substantial, particularly in comparison with that shown in
Model validation. Although the expected performances of the ML
models can be projected through ﬁvefold cross validation, there is
no substitute for validation against an independent dataset. The ML
models for the thermomechanical properties were leveraged to
make predictions for materials previously uncharacterized, and
these predictions were subsequently validated via the AEL–AGL
integrated
framework25,26.
illustrates
performance on the set of 770 additional materials, with relevant
statistics displayed in Table 2. For further analysis, all predicted and
calculated results are available in Supplementary Note 3.
Comparing with the results of the generalizability analysis shown
in Fig. 3 and Table 1, the overall errors are consistent with ﬁvefold
cross validation. Five out of six models have r2 of 0.9 or higher.
However, the r2 value for the thermal expansion coefﬁcient (aV) is
lower than forecasted. The presence of scattering suggests the need
for a larger training set—as new, much more diverse materials were
likely introduced in the test set. This is not surprising considering
the number of variables that can affect thermal expansion63.
Otherwise,
predictions
effectiveness of the PLMF representation, which is particularly
compelling considering: (i) the limited diversity training dataset
(only B11% as large as that available for predicting the electronic
properties) and (ii) the relative size of the test set (over a quarter the
size of the training set).
In the case of the bulk modulus (BVRH), 665 systems (86% of
test set) are predicted within 25% of calculated values. Only the
predictions of four materials, Bi (ICSD #51674), PrN (ICSD
#168643), Mg3Sm (ICSD #104868), and ZrN (ICSD #161885),
deviate beyond 100 GPa from calculated values. Bi is a highpressure phase (Bi-III) with a caged, zeolite-like structure64. The
structures of zirconium nitride (wurtzite phase) and praseodymium
nitride (B3 phase) were hypothesized and investigated via DFT
calculations54,65 and have yet to be observed experimentally.
For the shear modulus (GVRH) 482 materials (63% of the test
set) are predicted within 25% of calculated values. Just one system,
calculated value. The Debye temperature (yD) is predicted to
within 50 K accuracy for 540 systems (70% of the test set). BeF2
(ICSD #173557), yet another cage (sodalite) structure66, has among
the largest errors in three models including yD (SE ¼  423 K)
and both heat capacities (Cp: SE¼ 0.65 kB per atom; CV:
SE¼ 0.61 kB per atom). Similar to other ill-predicted structures,
this polymorph is theoretical, and has yet to be synthesized.
Comparison with experiments. A comparison between calculated, predicted and experimental results is presented in Fig. 7,
with relevant statistics summarized in Table 3. Data are
considered for the bulk modulus B, shear modulus G, and
(acoustic) Debye temperature ya for 45 well-characterized
A_cF8_227_a), zincblende (SG# 216, AB_cF8_216_c_a), rocksalt
AB_cF8_225_a_b),
AB_hP4_186_b_b) structures67,68. Experimental B and G are
compared with the BVRH and GVRH values predicted here, and ya
is converted to the traditional Debye temperature yD¼yan1=3,
where n is the number of atoms in the unit cell. All relevant
values are listed in Supplementary Note 4.
Excellent agreement is found between experimental and
calculated values, but more importantly, between experimental
and predicted results. With error metrics close to or under
tolerances
generalizability
comparison highlights effective experimental conﬁdence in the
approach. The experiments/prediction validation is clearly the
ultimate objective of the research presented here.
Discussion
Traditional trial-and-error approaches have proven ineffective in
discovering practical materials. Computational models developed
with ML techniques may provide a truly rational approach to
high-throughput
screenings
involve exhaustive calculations of all materials in the database,
often without consideration of previously calculated results.
Even at high-throughput rates, an average DFT calculation
of a medium size structure (B50 atoms per unit cell) takes
B1,170 CPU-hours of calculations or about 37 h on a 32-CPU
cores node. However, in many cases, the desired range of
values for the target property is known. For instance, the
conductivity
Experimental
Experimental
Experimental
Calculated
Calculated
Calculated
Figure 7 | Comparison of the AEL—AGL calculations and ML predictions with experimental values for three thermomechanical properties. (a) bulk
modulus (B), (b) shear modulus (G), and (c) Debye temperature (yD).
Table 3 | Statistical summary of the AEL–AGL calculations
and ML predictions versus experimental values for three
thermomechanical properties.
The summary corresponds with Fig. 7.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms15679
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 8:15679 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms15679 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
optoelectronic applications will depend on the power and voltage
conditions of the device63,69. Such cases offer an opportunity
to leverage previous results and savvy ML models, such as
those developed in this work, for rapid pre-screening of
potential materials. Researchers can quickly narrow the list of
extraneous
calculations—saving money, time and computational resources.
This approach takes full advantage of previously calculated
results, continuously accelerating materials discovery. With
prediction rates of about 0.1 s per material, the same 32-CPU
cores node can screen over 28 million material candidates per day
with this framework.
Furthermore, interaction diagrams as depicted in Fig. 5 offer a
pathway to design materials that meet certain constraints
and requirements. For example, substantial differences in thermal
expansion coefﬁcients among the materials used in high-power,
high-frequency optoelectronic applications leads to bending
and cracking of the structure during the growth process63,69.
facilitate
semiconductors with large band gap energies, high Debye
temperatures (thermal conductivity), but also materials with
similar thermal expansion coefﬁcients.
themselves
demonstrate
predictive power with minor deviations, outlier analysis reveals
theoretical structures to be among the worst offenders. This is not
surprising, as the true stability conditions (for example, highpressure/high-temperature) have yet to be determined, if they exist
at all. The ICSD estimates that structures for over 7,000 materials
(or roughly 4%) come from calculations rather than actual
experiment. Such discoveries exemplify yet another application
for ML modelling, rapid/robust curation of large data sets.
To improve large-scale high-throughput computational screening for the identiﬁcation of materials with desired properties, fast
and accurate data mining approaches should be incorporated into
the standard work-ﬂow. In this work, we developed a universal
QMSPR framework for predicting electronic properties of
inorganic materials. Its effectiveness is validated through the
prediction of eight key materials properties for stoichiometric
inorganic crystalline materials, including the metal/insulator
classiﬁcation, band gap energy, bulk and shear moduli, Debye
temperature, heat capacity (at constant pressure and volume)
and thermal expansion coefﬁcient. Its applicability extends to all
230 space groups and the vast majority of elements in the periodic
table. All models are freely available at aﬂow.org/aﬂow-ml.
Data preparation. Two independent data sets were prepared for the creation and
validation of the ML models. The training set includes electronic4,70–74 and
thermomechanical properties25,26 for a broad diversity of compounds already
characterized in the AFLOW database. This set is used to build and analyse the ML
models, one model per property. The constructed thermomechanical models are
then employed to make predictions of previously uncharacterized compounds in
the AFLOW database. Based on these predictions and consideration of
computational cost, several compounds are selected to validate the models’
predictive power. These compounds and their computed properties deﬁne the
test set. The compounds used in both data sets are speciﬁed in Supplementary
Notes 2 and 3, respectively.
Training set. I. Band gap energy data for 49,934 materials were extracted from the
AFLOW repository4,70–74, representing B60% of the known stoichiometric
inorganic crystalline materials listed in the Inorganic Crystal Structure Database
(ICSD)2,3. Although these band gap energies are generally underestimated with
respect to experimental values75, DFT þ U is robust enough to differentiate
between metallic (no EBG) and insulating (EBG40) systems76. In addition, errors in
band gap energy prediction are typically systematic. Therefore, the band gap energy
values can be corrected ad hoc with ﬁtting schemes77,78. Prior to model
development, both ICSD and AFLOW data were curated: duplicate entries,
erroneous structures, and ill-converged calculations were corrected or removed.
Noble gases crystals are not considered. The ﬁnal data set consists of 26,674 unique
materials (12,862 with no EBG and 13,812 with EBG40), covering the seven
lattice systems, 230 space groups and 83 elements (H-Pu, excluding noble
gases, Fr, Ra, Np, At and Po). All referenced DFT calculations were performed with
the Generalized Gradient Approximation PBE79 exchange-correlation functional
and projector-augmented wavefunction potentials80,81 according to the AFLOW
Standard for High-Throughput Computing76. The Standard ensures
reproducibility of the data, and provides visibility/reasoning for any parameters set
in the calculation, such as accuracy thresholds, calculation pathways, and mesh
dimensions. II. Thermomechanical properties data for just over 3,000 materials
were extracted from the AFLOW repository26. These properties include the bulk
modulus, shear modulus, Debye temperature, heat capacity at constant pressure,
heat capacity at constant volume, and thermal expansion coefﬁcient, and were
calculated using the AEL–AGL integrated framework25,26. The AEL (AFLOW
Elasticity Library) method26 applies a set of independent normal and shear strains
to the structure, and then ﬁts the calculated stress tensors to obtain the elastic
constants82. These can then be used to calculate the elastic moduli in the Voigt and
Reuss approximations, as well as the Voigt-Reuss-Hill (VRH) averages that are the
values of the bulk and shear moduli modelled in this work. The AGL (AFLOW
GIBBS Library) method25 ﬁts the energies from a set of isotropically compressed
and expanded volumes of a structure to a quasiharmonic Debye-Gru¨neisen
model83 to obtain thermomechanical properties, including the bulk modulus,
Debye temperature, heat capacity and thermal expansion coefﬁcient. AGL has been
combined with AEL in a single work-ﬂow, so that it can utilize the Poisson ratios
obtained from AEL to improve the accuracy of the thermal properties
predictions26. After a similar curation of ill-converged calculations, the ﬁnal data
set consists of 2,829 materials. It covers the seven lattice systems, includes unary,
binary and ternary compounds, and spans broad ranges of each thermomechanical
property, including high thermal conductivity systems such as C (ICSD #182729),
BN (ICSD #162874), BC5 (ICSD #166554), CN2 (ICSD #247678), MnB2 (ICSD
#187733) and SiC (ICSD #164973), as well as low thermal conductivity systems
such as Hg33(Rb,K)3 (ICSD #410567 and #410566), Cs6Hg40 (ICSD #240038),
Ca16Hg36 (ICSD #107690), CrTe (ICSD #181056) and Cs (ICSD #426937). Many of
these systems additionally exhibit extreme values of the bulk and shear moduli,
such as C (high bulk and shear moduli) and Cs (low bulk and shear moduli).
Interesting systems such as RuC (ICSD #183169) and NbC (ICSD #189090) with a
high bulk modulus (BVRH ¼ 317.92 GPa, 263.75 GPa) but low shear modulus
(GVRH ¼ 16.11 GPa, 31.86 GPa) also populate the set.
Test set. Although nearly all ICSD compounds are characterized electronically
within the AFLOW database, most have not been characterized thermomechanically owing to the added computational cost. This presented an opportunity to validate the ML models. Of the remaining compounds, several were
prioritized for immediate characterization via the AEL–AGL integrated framework25,26. In particular, focus was placed on systems predicted to have a large bulk
modulus, as this property is expected to scale well with the other aforementioned
thermomechanical properties25,26. The set also includes various other small
cell, high symmetry systems expected to span the full applicability domains of the
models. This effort resulted in the characterization of 770 additional compounds.
Data availability. All the ab initio data are freely available to the public as part of
the AFLOW online repository and can be accessed through aﬂow.org following the
REST-API interface70.