DECEMBER 2019
Chinese Public AI R&D
Spending: Provisional
CSET Issue Brief
Ashwin Acharya
Zachary Arnold
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 2
Executive Summary
China aims to become “the world’s primary AI innovation center” by 2030.1
Toward that end, the Chinese government is spending heavily on AI research
and development (R&D). This memo provides a provisional, open-source
estimate of China’s spending.
We assess with low to moderate confidence that China’s public investment
in AI R&D was on the order of a few billion dollars in 2018. With higher
confidence, we assess that China’s government is not investing tens of
billions of dollars annually in AI R&D, as some have suggested.2
Significant data gaps prevent us from producing a more precise estimate of
China’s spending at this time, especially with respect to defense R&D.
However, our rough estimate and the underlying analysis do allow us to rule
out higher estimates with moderate to high confidence.
Additional findings include:
• China’s government probably isn’t dramatically outspending the
U.S. government on AI R&D. While we did not analyze U.S. AI R&D
spending in any depth for this paper, our results indicate that China’s
spending in 2018 was on the same order of magnitude as U.S.
planned spending for FY 2020, as documented elsewhere.3
• Chinese public AI R&D spending probably tilts heavily toward
applied research and experimental development, not basic
research. This is consistent with China’s overall public R&D spending.4
• China’s government may be investing a few billion dollars a year
(at most) in private-sector AI activity through guidance funds—
essentially, state-backed venture capital funds. However, guidance
fund spending is not properly considered R&D spending and is likely
overstated, as we explain in Appendix 1.
This paper describes our analysis in detail. To estimate the Chinese
government’s civilian R&D spending, we integrated spending figures from
China’s Ministry of Finance with open-source data on two key Chinese
science and technology (S&T) programs: the National Natural Science
Foundation (国家自然科学基金委员会) research funding program and the
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 3
National Key R&D Programs (国家重点研发计划) initiative. Our estimate of
defense R&D spending, which is rougher than our civilian estimate, is based
on spending in the MOF data that is not attributed to specific line items; like
other analysts, we presume at least some of this spending was military
spending.5
Our findings rely on sparse and uneven open-source data, and our analysis
involves many assumptions. Consequently, our findings are preliminary, as
are the numerical figures we produced for various specific programs and subcategories of R&D. These figures, which are compiled in Section 4, were
calculated solely as inputs to a high-level, order-of-magnitude estimate and
should not be cited on their own.
Deriving estimates of Chinese public investment in AI-related research and
development is challenging for several reasons:6
• The information on Chinese public spending that is publicly available
(e.g., Ministry of Finance annual reports) is often aggregated to
present a high-level overview and does not specifically call out AIrelated spending. Chinese defense-related public spending is
particularly opaque as compared to civilian spending, or even
compared to U.S. defense spending.
• Identifying AI-related spending requires a level of detail that is usually
not found even in publicly available U.S. budgetary documentation—
and is even rarer in publicly available Chinese documents.
• Even when a line of spending can be associated with AI, identifying
the R&D portion of that spending is challenging. This is a problem
even in U.S. government spending documents, where spending on an
AI-enabled surveillance system (for example) is likely to include
development and acquisition of surveillance platforms and supporting
systems, spending on associated communications equipment, and pay
for personnel and/or contractor support; the portion of spending that
is AI-related research and development is rarely identified. The same
problem occurs in Chinese documents.
• While the primary Chinese documents related to AI R&D spending
are readily available and have been translated, a large corpus of
Chinese documents remains untranslated—and may contain
documents that have not yet been identified as relevant to this
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 4
CSET plans to continue studying China’s AI R&D spending and refining the
estimates presented in this paper in the coming months. We will explore
secondary sources of information on Chinese public spending on AI-related
R&D, test proxy measures that can be used to confirm and refine the estimates
here, and develop methods to better categorize AI and AI-relevant programs.
CSET is also expanding its efforts to translate Chinese-language documents
that may shed further light on Chinese public spending in general and AIrelated R&D in particular.
We welcome feedback on our research agenda. Please contact Zachary
Arnold ( ) and Igor Mikolic-Torreira
( ) with any suggestions.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 5
Section 1. Overview of methodology
Our analysis is based on aggregate “science and technology” (S&T; 科学技
术) spending data from Section V of China’s 2018 Ministry of Finance
(MOF) national expenditure report. We use these data to estimate civilian
and military AI R&D spending, then add the two for an overall estimate of
China’s AI-related public R&D spending in 2018.
For civilian spending, we isolate line items in MOF’s data corresponding to
basic research, applied research, and experimental development. We then
select representative public programs for these categories: National Natural
Science Foundation of China (NSFC; 国家自然科学基金委员会) grant
funding for basic research, and the National Key R&D Programs
(NKP; 国家重点研发计划) initiative for applied research and experimental
development. Next, we estimate the AI-related proportion of activity within
each representative program (expressed as a range of plausible values). For
the NSFC, we estimate this proportion using funded project descriptions and
NSFC’s own statistics. For NKPs, we use project descriptions in NKP funding
calls. Finally, we multiply these estimated AI-related proportions by MOF’s
topline figures for basic research, applied research, and experimental
development to estimate China’s total public investment in civilian AI R&D.
For military spending, we calculate the amount of S&T spending that was
included in MOF’s topline figures but not described in MOF’s spending line
items. Following prior scholarship, we presume this undisclosed spending may
have been defense-related and about 60 percent R&D.7 Lacking data on the
distribution of China’s defense R&D across technologies, we then assume that
the AI-related proportion of defense R&D was about the same as it was for
civilian spending. We then multiply that same proportion (expressed as a
range) by the undisclosed spending in MOF’s data to estimate China’s total
public investment in defense AI R&D.
We limit our analysis to a single year–2018–because of missing data in
other years. Specifically, we rely on NKP funding calls to estimate China’s
spending on applied research and experimental development, but we only
have access to funding calls from a limited period of time.8 Future research
efforts may include extending our analysis backward and forward in time
using other sources.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 6
Section 2. Estimating civilian R&D spending
To estimate overall Chinese civilian public spending on AI research and
development, we begin with MOF’s aggregate S&T spending figures.9
According to MOF, China’s government spent 832.7 billion RMB ($120.7
billion) on S&T in calendar year 2018.10 MOF divides this spending into
several categories: basic research, applied research, “technical research and
development” (技术研究与开发), administrative costs, “technological
conditions and services,”11 social science, S&T “popularization,” and S&T
“exchanges.”12 The first three categories correspond to basic research,
applied research, and experimental development—commonly accepted subcategories of R&D.13 We rely on MOF’s categorizations14 and assume
China’s 2018 R&D spending was the sum of reported spending in those three
categories: 436.7 billion RMB ($63.3 billion).
MOF reports that China spent 64.9 billion RMB ($9.4 billion) of this 436.7
billion RMB on basic research(基础研究), 175.7 billion RMB ($25.5 billion)
on applied research (应用研究), and 196.0 billion RMB ($28.4 billion) on
experimental development (技术研究与开发)15 in 2018.16 (Again, we rely
on MOF’s labels, but we caution that in some cases, MOF may draw different
boundaries between these categories than U.S. or OECD standards.17) We
select two specific Chinese government programs, the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (NSFC)’s grant program and the National Key
R&D Programs initiative, as proxies for these spending categories, and
estimate the proportion of each proxy program’s spending that was
meaningfully related to AI. We then multiply those proportions by the total
spending MOF reported in the relevant categories to estimate AI spending
across all reported R&D.
Basic Research
To estimate the AI-related portion of the 64.9 billion RMB ($9.4 billion) that
MOF says China spent on basic research in 2018, we examine the grant
program of one specific research agency, the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (NSFC), for which project descriptions are available.
We use NSFC grant funding to stand in for China’s overall investment in basic
research because the agency is China’s largest funder of basic research and
has historically tended to fund pre-commercial, scientist-led projects.18
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 7
We estimate the AI-related portion of the NSFC’s 2018 grant funding two
different ways; both give similar results.
First, we use the Dimensions academic grant database19 to estimate the
proportion of funded grants that were related to AI. Dimensions includes
detailed information for NSFC grants totaling $3.8 billion in calendar year
2018,20 roughly consistent with NSFC’s own disclosures.21 A search across
the titles and abstracts of these grants for keywords related to AI22 returned
1,268 grants, worth $118 million altogether: that is, 3.1 percent of all
Dimensions-tracked NSFC grant spending in 2018.23
Second, we referred to NSFC’s own analysis of its 2018 spending.
According to NSFC, “general program” funding, or funding for its principal
basic research program totaled 139 million RMB ($20 million) for “AI” and
219 million RMB ($30 million) for “automation.”24 NSFC spent 11.15 billion
RMB ($1.62 billion) across all general program areas in 2018.25 Therefore,
by NSFC’s accounting, it directed 1.2 and 3.2 percent of its general program
funding toward “AI” and “AI” plus “automation,” respectively.26
Measured two different ways, then, AI appears to comprise no more than a
few percent of NSFC research spending in 2018. We assume this distribution
was roughly representative of all basic research spending reported by MOF
for 2018.27 Under this assumption, we estimate that in 2018, China’s public
spending on basic research into AI was on the order of 1 to 3 percent of
64.9 billion RMB, MOF’s topline figure for basic research—in other words,
no more than about 2 billion RMB ($290 million), and possibly as low as
about 650 million RMB ($90 million).
Applied research and experimental development
To estimate the AI-related portion of the 371.8 billion RMB ($53.9 billion)
that MOF says China spent on applied research and experimental
development28 in 2018, we examine a subset of this funding, the National
Key R&D Programs, for which we have more detailed information. We
assume that the proportion of AI-related funding for this subset applies to the
overall applied research and experimental development budgets.
The National Key R&D Programs (also known as National Key Programs or
NKPs) are publicly funded research and development initiatives that,
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 8
according to a recent European Commission report, “[reflect] a top-down
and industry-university-research cooperation design which integrates basic
research, technology application, demonstration and commercialization.”29
Although some NKPs and NKP sub-projects entail some basic research, on
the whole, we understand NKPs as efforts to develop scientific and
technological solutions for practical problems of economic, political, and
military importance, and to commercialize those solutions. As such, we
consider NKPs to be a subset of MOF’s applied research and experimental
development spending categories.30
We estimated the AI-relevant portion of NKP spending by calculating the
prevalence of apparently AI-relevant sub-projects within NKP funding calls.
The central government designates NKPs and issues central funding for each
NKP through open calls. These calls invite proposals from the public for
specified sub-projects. With few exceptions, NKPs focus on broad domains of
technological application. Some of these domains are broadly AI-related,
such as “intelligent robots,” “IoT and smart cities,” and AI-enabled
transportation.31 Other NKPs are not consistently focused on AI, but their
funding calls include sub-project descriptions that appear to relate to AI or
would be likely to involve AI tools. For example, the NKP on “service industry
technology” includes a sub-project on “AI-based innovation and
entrepreneurship service technologies.”32
We estimated the AI portion of overall NKP spending in 2018 by using subproject descriptions to measure the proportion of proposed sub-projects
related to AI. This approach involves significant assumptions. First, we assume
that NKP sub-projects are entirely AI-relevant or entirely not AI-relevant.
Second, we assume the spending proposed in the calls we were able to
review, ranging from October 2018 to August 2019, is representative of
actual spending during calendar year 2018 (the spending year for our
broader analysis).33 We also assume the keywords used in brief, often vague
sub-project descriptions shed light on actual activities that will be funded.
Despite these assumptions, we believe our approach is an imprecise but
reasonable first cut at the data. The information in NKP funding calls is more
detailed and probably more reliable than data on other Chinese applied
research and experimental development initiatives.34
We began with a publicly available database of NKP funding calls.35 We
reviewed calls issued between October 26, 2018 and August 1, 2019—40
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 9
calls in total, corresponding to 13.6 billion RMB ($1.97 billion) in proposed
spending.36 From the 594 sub-projects described, we compiled a subset of
303 sub-projects whose descriptions suggested any potential relation to AI.37
Next, we isolated AI-relevant sub-projects. Because the sub-projects do not
identify themselves as AI-related, we developed two alternative standards,
one somewhat generous (representing an upper bound on AI-related
spending) and the other rather strict (a lower bound).
For the generous, upper-bound standard, we designated sub-projects as AIrelevant if their descriptions or their corresponding NKP’s descriptions used
keywords related to artificial intelligence, “smart” systems, autonomy or
robotics.38 Under this generous standard, 85 sub-projects, or 14.3 percent of
all sub-projects we reviewed, appeared AI-related.
For the stricter, lower-bound standard, we designated sub-projects as AIrelevant only if their descriptions (a) explicitly mentioned artificial intelligence
or intelligent systems or (b) used keywords related to AI methods, such as
neural networks.39 Under this strict standard, only 22 sub-projects, or 3.7
percent of all sub-projects we reviewed, appeared to be AI-related.
However, the above calculations count sub-projects, not sub-project funding.
Unfortunately, the funding calls don’t indicate planned funding at the subproject level. Lacking this information, we assume each sub-project within an
NKP receives an equal share of the NKP’s funding. Under this assumption,
using the strict standard, AI-related projects accounted for 3 percent of NKP
funds, and under the generous standard, 13 percent. However, much of the
funding meeting the generous standard was associated with robotics, “smart”
industry, or “smart” infrastructure projects; these likely involved significant
spending on developing hardware and potentially little to none on core AI
advances. Given the uncertainty over the distribution of funds to sub-projects,
the gap between our strict and generous estimates, and the over-inclusiveness
of our generous estimate, we simplify and round off our result: between 3 and
10 percent of proposed NKP spending in our sample of calls, assumed to be
representative of actual 2018 NKP spending,40 is AI-relevant.
We then further assume this NKP spending is representative of all of China’s
2018 spending on applied research and experimental development, such
that the same 3 to 10 percent proportion applies to that larger spending
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 10
pool.41 Under this admittedly crude assumption, China’s government spent on
the order of 3 to 10 percent of its 371.8 billion RMB outlays on applied
research and experimental development. In other words, somewhere
between 11 billion RMB ($1.6 billion) and 37 billion RMB ($5.4 billion)42
went toward applied research and experimental development in AI in 2018.
Proxies not chosen: SKLs and Megaprojects
Although we believe NSFC and the NKPs are reasonable proxies for the
Chinese government’s civilian R&D spending, other potential proxies exist. In
2014, China’s State Council announced a reorganization of most centrally
funded R&D initiatives into five “pillars:”
• the NSFC;
• government “guidance funds” (政府引导基金), which are essentially
state-backed venture capital funds;
• a “Megaprojects” (重大专项) program to accelerate innovation in a
small number of industries deemed strategically important;43 and
• a “Bases and Talents” (基地和人才) program to establish centrally
supported labs and research teams.44
As discussed above, we estimated the AI-related proportion of China’s total
civilian R&D spending using data from the NSFC and NKP only. We presume
MOF’s overall 2018 R&D figures, which form the basis of our estimates,
account for all public R&D spending, including any R&D spending under the
other three pillars. In other words, we believe our estimates cover AI R&D
spending for all five pillars (to the extent they involved R&D) and any other
civilian R&D funding sources, but we developed our estimate of the AI-related
portion using data from only two of the pillars.
We chose not to use guidance fund, Megaproject, or Bases and Talents
spending data to help infer overall proportions of AI-related R&D spending
for several reasons. As we explain in Appendix 1, although guidance fund
spending is significant, it is generally not R&D spending in any meaningful
sense.45 In contrast, Megaprojects do appear to involve genuine R&D activity
to some degree, but public data on Megaproject spending are too limited
and uneven for us to derive estimates of the AI-portion.46 Likewise, there is
scant public data on the initiatives within the Bases and Talents pillar.47 The
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 11
best-documented of these initiatives, the State Key Laboratories (SKL) funding
program for university and corporate research centers,48 probably spent
about 8.2 billion RMB ($1.2 billion) in 2018, but it’s not clear how this
money was distributed.49 This prevents us from credibly estimating the AIrelated R&D proportion of recent SKL activity, and in turn, from using that
estimate to infer the AI-relevant proportion of China’s R&D efforts overall.50
Consolidated estimates: civilian spending
Our estimates of China’s public, civilian AI R&D spending in 2018 are as
Lower bound
Upper bound
Basic research
64.9 billion RMB
($9.4 billion)
As reported by
MOF for “basic
research” (基础
AI-related
proportion
~1 percent
~3 percent
Based on NSFC
grant data.
Total AI-related
~650 million
($90 million)
~2 billion RMB
($290 million)
Applied research and experimental development
371.8 billion RMB
($53.9 billion)
As reported by
MOF for “applied
research” (应用
“technical research
and development” (
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 12
AI-related
proportion
~3 percent
~10 percent
spending and subproject
descriptions in
NKP funding calls.
Total AI-related
~11 billion RMB
($1.6 billion)
~37 billion RMB
($5.4 billion)
All civilian AI
R&D spending,
~11.7 billion
~39 billion
($5.7 billion)
Section 3. Estimating military R&D spending
China’s defense R&D budget is not public, so any estimates of Chinese
military R&D in AI will necessarily be indirect and extremely imprecise.52
However, because the Chinese military has expressed a strong interest in
adopting and investing in AI,53 we have generated a rough bounding
As with our civilian R&D estimate, we begin with aggregate science and
technology (S&T) spending data from MOF. According to MOF, China’s
government spent 832.7 billion RMB ($120.7 billion) on S&T in calendar
year 2018. Of this sum, 523.9 billion RMB ($75.9 billion) was attributed to
specific line items, and 308.8 billion RMB ($44.8 billion) was not.54
Following prior scholarship by Sun and Cao , we presume at least
some of the undisclosed spending was military spending.55 If all of it was
military spending, which we consider highly unlikely, then China’s 2018
defense S&T spending could have reached 308.8 billion RMB (about $44
billion).56
Next, building on Sun and Cao’s analysis, we assume around 60 percent of
this military S&T spending went to R&D activities
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 13
according to generally accepted definitions.57 If so, China may have spent as
much as about 185 billion RMB ($27 billion) on defense R&D in 2018.58
Estimating the AI-relevant proportion of this spending requires still more
speculation. The Chinese military’s strong interest in AI is well-known, but it is
also advancing on many other technological fronts. At a minimum, we lack
evidence that the military allocates significantly more or less of its R&D budget
to AI than do civilian S&T agencies. Given this, we assume that like those
civilian agencies we assessed in the previous section, China’s defense
agencies spent several percent of their 2018 R&D outlays on AI-relevant
projects—likely between 1 and 10 percent, as rough bounds. Under this
assumption, we estimate China spent no more than about 19 billion RMB
($2.7 billion) on AI-related defense R&D in 201859—and possibly much less,
depending on how much of the unattributed S&T spending went to defense
Section 4. Consolidated estimates
Our aggregate results are as follows:
Civilian AI R&D - basic
~650 million RMB ($90 million) to ~2 billion
RMB ($290 million) (low to moderate
certainty)
Civilian AI R&D - applied
research and
experimental
development
~11 billion RMB ($1.6 billion) to ~37 billion
RMB ($5.4 billion) (low certainty)
Defense AI R&D - all
~1.8 billion RMB ($300 million) to ~19 billion
RMB ($2.7 billion) (very low certainty)
Total AI R&D
~13.5 billion RMB ($2.0 billion) to ~57.5
billion RMB ($8.4 billion) (very low
certainty)
Given the pervasive uncertainties and assumptions in our analysis, we urge
readers not to draw anything from these figures other than rough orders of
magnitude. Our ultimate conclusion is that based on assumptions and
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 14
inferences we consider plausible, we believe China’s government
probably spent a few billion dollars—and at most, closer to 10 billion
dollars—on AI-related R&D in 2018, with basic research comprising a
small fraction of the total.
Given this finding, we believe it is highly unlikely that China is investing tens of
billions of dollars per year in AI R&D, as other sources suggest.60 Although
our findings and assumptions are tentative, inferring tens of billions of dollars
in annual R&D spending from publicly available data would require much
more extreme assumptions.61
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 15
Appendix 1. Assessing Chinese guidance fund spending
Overview of the guidance fund mechanism
Guidance funds (政府引导基金) are central to the Chinese government’s
strategy for supporting strategic industries. In a typical guidance fund, a
central or local government entity pledges a small amount of its own capital
and solicits a much larger amount of “social capital” from private venture
capitalists, larger companies, and state-owned enterprises and/or
institutional investors. The resulting fund is invested directly into commercial
ventures.62
Chinese guidance funds are inspired by successful initiatives in other countries
to foster new industries via government-backed venture capital, including the
U.S.’s SBIC and In-Q-Tel programs and Israel’s Yozma program.63 Starting
around 2014,64 the central government has prioritized guidance funds as a
means of state support for key industries, attempting to replace older,
inefficient subsidies and heavy-handed state involvement in the private sector.
By the end of 2018, there were more than a thousand announced guidance
funds with committed capital of about $584 billion and eventual funding
targets amounting to more than $1.7 trillion.65
Local governments created most of these funds to support local industry and
infrastructure rather than high technology. However, a number of large funds
(both centrally and locally funded) purport to focus on AI and related
industries, such as semiconductors and optoelectronics.66
Guidance funds vs. R&D spending
We chose not to use guidance fund spending data to help infer overall
proportions of AI-related R&D spending because generally, public investment
in guidance funds is not directly comparable to public R&D funding.
Guidance fund investments are not, to our knowledge, specifically earmarked
for R&D, and the targets likely spend only a fraction of what they receive on
R&D activities. In our view, guidance fund investment is analogous to equity
investment in AI businesses by private investors. An apples-to-apples
comparison between the United States and China that included guidance
fund spending would have to include this type of investment, as well. While
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 16
such a comparison is beyond the scope of this paper, given the scale and
maturity of the U.S. equity investment market and the preeminence of the U.S.
tech industry, we expect it would favor the United States.
In addition, from a strategic perspective, the guidance fund mechanism may
be less effective than direct R&D funding. First, the quantity of Chinese
guidance fund investment is uncertain and routinely overstated. Guidance
fund announcements generally assume private investors will match public
funds several times over, but both the public seed capital and the follow-on
private investments are often implausibly large67 and routinely fail to
materialize.68 Many observers also overlook that whatever capital is raised is
spent gradually, not all at once. Most funds are meant to spend their capital
over a period of up to 10 years.69
Second, guidance fund investments are often poor quality. Guidance funds
attract “social capital” by foregoing a portion of the returns, and often take
on most of the risk when investments fail. As a result, fund managers have
strong incentives to invest in safe bets rather than high-risk startups whose
success won’t enrich them or their supervisors.70 Often, these funds’ capital
goes toward larger, established companies or infrastructure projects like
industrial parks.71 Large funds competing to invest in particular sectors often
do so inefficiently. China is trying to put far more capital to work in its
guidance funds than other countries have done in analogous programs. With
such massive resources available to the market and a limited pool of talent
and value to invest in, fund capital may inflate prices and crowd out
sophisticated private investors, support low-value companies, or simply sit
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 17
Estimating guidance fund investment in AI
Although they are not comparable to R&D investment, guidance funds are an
important component of China’s AI innovation strategy, and Western
observers often refer to them—especially in the context of claims that China is
dramatically outpacing the United States in public AI investment.73
In reality, we believe guidance funds have directed far less public funding
toward AI activity than is commonly believed. Because data is scarce, it’s
difficult to measure their actual spending, but given the centrality of guidance
funds in China’s innovation efforts and their frequent use (and misuse) in
analyses of those efforts, we believe a rough estimate is worthwhile. As
discussed below, we estimate Chinese central and local governments could
have spent as much as several billion dollars on AI-related activity through
guidance funds in 2018. But although uncertainties in the data prevent us
from ruling out this upper bound, we suspect actual spending was probably
less, and spending on meaningful AI research and development was a small
portion of that amount.
To produce our estimate, we begin with a list of major guidance funds
compiled from several sources.74 We then manually isolate 48 funds that appeared to focus on AI, strategic technologies, or emerging
technology in consultation with subject matter experts. The funding targets of
these 48 plausibly AI-related funds totaled $628 billion. But public reports
suggest that, as of late 2018, China’s guidance funds as a whole had raised
no more than a third of their announced funding.75 Assuming this was also
true of the 48 AI-related funds, they likely managed no more than $209
billion as of late 2018. 
To estimate the portion of this capital pool that may have been invested in
2018, we use the relatively well-documented “Big Fund” for integrated
circuits as a rough proxy.77 In recent years, the Big Fund invested 20 percent
of its capital each year78—an unusually rapid rate compared to the typical
guidance fund. If the 48 selected funds invested at a similar clip, which we
consider unlikely, they would have invested about $40 billion in 2018.79
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 18
Finally, we estimate the portion of these funds invested in AI-related activity.
As with China’s public R&D support generally, most of the funds on our list
aim to invest in a wide range of strategic technologies. Our best estimate,
discussed above, is that China’s NSFC and NKP programs spend several
percent of their overall funding on AI. If we generously assume that China’s
guidance funds were about twice as focused on AI than the other funding
streams, then they would have invested between two and eight billion dollars
in AI-related business activity in 2018.80
Again, we emphasize that this upper bound estimate—a product of very
generous assumptions—is not an estimate of AI-related R&D spending (which
would be a fraction of this at best). And as discussed above, even if guidance
funds invested this amount in AI in 2018, the investment was probably
allocated sub-optimally and crowded out private capital to some extent.
Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge input from Huey-Meei Chang, Lorand
Laskai, Igor Mikolic-Torreira, Ben Murphy, Dahlia Peterson and Alexandra
Vreeman, but are solely responsible for the contents of this memo and any
errors. We also thank Thomas Colvin and Scott Harold for their comments on
earlier versions of the memo.
© 2019 by the Center for Security and Emerging Technology. This work is
licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-Non Commercial 4.0
International License.
To view a copy of this license, visit 
licenses/by-nc/4.0/.
Document Identifier: doi: 20190031
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 19
1 See Graham Webster et al., “Full Translation: China’s ‘New Generation Artificial
Intelligence Development Plan’ ,” DigiChina, August 1, 2017,
 
2 Most prominently, in 2018, U.S. Air Force General VeraLinn Jamieson stated: “[W]e
estimate the total spending for artificial intelligence systems in China for 2017 was $12
billion. We also estimate it will grow to at least $70 billion by 2020.” See VeraLinn “Dash”
Jamieson, speech at Air Force Association event, July 26, 2018,
 Although General Jamieson did not
specifically refer to AI R&D or even public spending, and the methodology behind her
estimate is not public, the $70 billion figure is frequently conflated with public R&D spending
in popular commentary. See, e.g., Dan Wood and Bradley Bowman, “America is in an AI
fight for its life,” The Hill, July 31, 2019,
 
 2020.”); Oriana Pawlyk, “China Leaving US
Behind on Artificial Intelligence: Air Force General,” Military.com, July 30, 2018,
 
3 See, e.g., Michael Kratsios, speech at Center for Data Innovation Forum on AI, September
18, 2019, ; Chris Cornillie,
“Finding Artificial Intelligence Money in the Fiscal 2020 Budget,” Bloomberg Government,
March 28, 2019, .
4 See, e.g., Dennis Normile, “Surging R&D spending in China narrows gap with United
States,” Science, October 10, 2018,
 
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 20
5 See Yutao Sun and Cong Cao, “Demystifying central government R&D spending in China,”
Science 345, no. 6200 : 1006-1008,
 
6 For a discussion of the difficulties of estimating these expenditures, and guidance on how to
approach them, see Thomas J. Colvin et. al, “A Tentative Framework for Examining U.S. and
Chinese Expenditures for Research and Development on Artificial Intelligence” , 
7 This figure is borrowed from a recent analysis of nondisclosed central S&T spending by
China’s defense agencies in 2011. Sun and Cao, “Demystifying central government R&D
spending in China,” and supporting materials thereto . Sun and Cao attribute 105.865 billion RMB in nondisclosed
central S&T spending to China’s defense agencies in 2011, and estimate that 60.937 billion
RMB of this spending, or 57.5 percent, was R&D.
8 See discussion at notes 34-37 and accompanying text.
9 See Section V of Ministry of Finance of China (MOF), “2018 National General Public
Budget Expenditure,”
 China’s National
Bureau of Statistics (NBS) also publishes data on R&D spending. Some analysts use NBS
numbers, including the OECD in its analysis of China’s R&D activity. See “Gross domestic
expenditure on R&D by sector of performance and source of funds,” OECD.Stat,
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development,
 , available at
 and National Bureau of Statistics of
China, 2018 China Statistical Yearbook , available at
 see also Jingping Li et al., 2018
“The Status Quo and Issues of R&D Statistics in China,” paper presented at 16th Conference
of the International Association for Official Statistics, Paris, France, September 2018,
 
Guan-Li-Zhang.pdf (discussing NBS’s application of OECD reporting standards). We use
MOF numbers instead for two reasons. First, MOF has published calendar year 2018
figures, but NBS figures are currently available through calendar year 2017 only. Second,
MOF data provide a more detailed cross-section of government spending by category,
helping us to extract potentially AI-relevant spending from aggregate numbers. See also Sun
and Cao, “Demystifying central government R&D spending in China” (using MOF numbers).
The topline NBS and MOF public R&D spending figures in 2017, the last year with data from
both sources, differed by about 13 percent (349 billion RMB ($50.6 billion) and 396 billion
RMB ($57.4 billion), respectively). Given this, we expect that our analysis would yield
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 21
roughly similar results if we had been able to use NBS numbers. For the 2017 MOF figure,
see Section V of Ministry of Finance of China, “2017 National General Public Budget
Expenditure,” on basic research, 157.6
billion RMB ($22.8 billion) on applied research, and 178.0 billion RMB ($25.8 billion) on
experimental development, per the MOF’s definitions, or 396.2 billion RMB ($57.4 billion)
total). For the NBS figure, see National Bureau of Statistics of China, 2018 China Statistical
Yearbook, Section 20-1 (reporting 349 billion RMB ($50.6 billion) in “government funds”
R&D expenditure in 2017).
10 This includes both local and central expenditures, as reported by MOF. We use a
conversion rate of 6.9:1 USD here and elsewhere.
11 We believe this term probably refers to S&T digital infrastructure, such as online platforms
for sharing research between government and industry. According to MOF, the Chinese
government spent 34.2 billion RMB ($5 billion) on “technological conditions and services” in
2018. See MOF, “2018 National General Public Budget Expenditure.”
12 MOF, “2018 National General Public Budget Expenditure.”
13 See National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, Definitions of Research and
Development: An Annotated Compilation of Official Sources , From our
review of MOF’s reports and related scholarship, we believe MOF’s “technical research and
development” term, 技术研究与开发, is interchangeable with the Chinese phrase for
“experimental development,” 试验发展. See, e.g., Zhu Yingchun 朱迎春, “创新型国家基
础研究经费 配置模式及其启示” (“Basic Research Funds Model and Its Enlightenment of
Innovation-Oriented Countries”), 中国科技论坛
(Forum on Science and Technology in China) 2018, no. 2 : 20,
 (equating 基础研究, 应用
研究 and 技术研究与开发 collectively with “R&D”).
14 This is a simplifying assumption. China’s S&T and R&D accounting standards are not
perfectly aligned with international standards, such as the OECD’s Frascati Manual. See,
e.g., Normile, “Surging R&D spending in China narrows gap with United States.” The suballocations provided by MOF give us some confidence that the numbers reported for these
categories include most of China’s “true” R&D spending and exclude to a significant extent
S&T spending that is clearly not R&D. We also note that in 2017 (the last year that both
agencies reported data), MOF’s topline numbers aligned fairly well with the National Bureau
of Statistics R&D figures, which outside observers including the OECD consider credible. See
discussion in note 9.
15 See discussion of this term in note 13.
16 See MOF, “2018 National General Public Budget Expenditure.”
17 See discussion in note 14.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 22
18 NSFC does fund some applied research, however. See, e.g., Hepeng Jia, “China
Reshuffles Science Governance,” C&EN, April 25, 2018,
 see also “NSFC at a Glance,” National Natural Science Foundation
of China (NSFC), 2017, 
(“Since its establishment, NSFC has comprehensively introduced and implemented a
rigorous and objective merit-review system to fulfill its mission of supporting basic research,
fostering talented researchers, developing international cooperation and promoting
socioeconomic development.”); Zhonghe Zhou and Weijie Zhao, “Funding System Reform
for Excellence in Science: an Interview with Jinghai Li, President of NSFC,” National Science
Review 6, no. 1 ,
 MOF, “2018 National
General Public Budget Expenditure” (listing about 30 billion RMB ($4.3 billion) in “natural
science funding” (自然科学基金), which may refer to NSFC, under basic research).
However, recent bureaucratic reforms may shift this balance. See Jia, “China Reshuffles
Science Governance.”
19 See generally Christian Bode, Christian Herzog, Daniel Hook, and Robert McGrath, “A
Guide to the Dimensions Data Approach,” ,
 
20 Specifically, $3.8 billion is the aggregate funding amount for grants in Dimensions that
have NSFC as a funder and 2018 as the starting year. We assume that this amount was
actually disbursed in 2018.
21 In a March 2019 statement, NSFC said that in calendar year 2018, it received 27.7
billion RMB ($4 billion) from the government (the term used is “coordinated the use of
financial resources” (统筹使用财政经费)) for grant activities, and actually spent 26 billion
RMB ($3.8 billion) in “direct funding” of research projects and an additional 4.7 billion RMB
($700 million) in “indirect funding.” See Zhang Qian, “自然科学基金委公布2018年资助
账单,” 中国青年报(China Youth Daily), March 27, 2019,
 This 26-30.7 billion
RMB ($3.8-4.4 billion) range accounts for 40-47 percent of the 64.9 billion RMB ($9.4
billion) in public basic research spending catalogued by the MOF in 2018.
22 The specific query: “(“artificial intelligence”) OR (“machine learning”) OR (one shot
learning) OR (“reinforcement learning”) OR (“supervised learning”) OR (“transfer
learning”) OR (“unsupervised learning”) OR (zero shot learning) OR (computer vision) OR
(natural language processing) OR (natural language understanding) OR (artificial neural
network) OR (convolutional neural network) OR (recurrent neural network) OR (“deep
learning”) OR (generative adversarial network) OR (“graphical model”) OR (“random
forest”) OR (restricted Boltzmann machine) OR (support vector machine)”.
23 3.1 percent may be high; a manual review of the top grants by value reveals several that
do not seem meaningfully related to AI, despite using one of our keywords. On the other
hand, our search may miss papers that don’t use our keywords but are meaningfully related
to AI nonetheless.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 23
24 See “信息科学部面上项目近两年资助情况一览表,” NSFC, 2019,
 NSFC uses
the term “general program” to refer to its main funding streams for basic research. General
program spending accounted for about 40 percent of all NSFC spending in 2018. See
NSFC, National Natural Science Fund Guide to Programs 2019 , 1,
 
ms2019.pdf ;
MOF, “2018 National General Public Budget Expenditure” (total NSFC spending was
about 30 billion RMB ($4.3 billion) according to Ministry of Finance statistics). Other NSFC
funding streams, including NSFC “key programs,” appear to also support significant basic
research, but NSFC has not (to our knowledge) disclosed the “AI” and “automation”
proportions of these streams.
25 NSFC, “National Natural Science Fund Guide to Programs 2019,” page 33.
26 That is, 139/1115 and (139+219)/1115, respectively.
27 To test this assumption, we also searched the Dimensions database for 2018’s Chinese
publications with the AI keywords listed in note 23, on the rough presumption that academic
publication trends reflect public basic research funding from all sources over the preceding
several years. According to our search, 3.2 percent of all Chinese academic articles
 
presume that roughly 3.2 percent of all of China’s public basic research funding went to AI in
the several years prior to 2018. We think AI’s share has probably increased significantly
since then; for example, additional Dimensions searches (using the same method and
keywords outlined above) indicate that NSFC’s AI-related grant spending roughly doubled
from 2014 to 2018. But even if 2018’s rate of AI-focused public basic research funding
from all sources was somewhat higher than 3.2 percent, it would be on a similar order of
magnitude with our rough “few percent” estimate derived from NSFC spending alone.
28 As discussed above, MOF’s terminology for these categories differs from other authorities.
See note 13.
29 See “National Key R&D Programmes,” chinainnovationfunding.eu, European Commission,
 “Interim Measures for the
Management of National Key R&D Programmes,” chinainnovationfunding.eu, European
Commission, June 28, 2017, 
30 We also note that based on our review of NKP funding calls, individual NKP sub-projects
generally have precise technical specifications, often including numerical targets of cost per
unit, size, and efficiency of physical components, and scalability, speed, and reliability of
algorithms and networks. A final type of target is scale of implementation, operationalized
not just in papers published, but often in patent applications or implementations in a given
industry. These targets demonstrate that NKPs are generally targeted at direct practical
application, not blue-sky research. See also European Commission, “National Key R&D
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 24
Programmes” (NKPs “feature several well-targeted and defined objectives and deliverables
to be achieved in a period ranging from three to five years”).
31 All three calls were announced on the MOST website on June 2019; see Ministry of
Science and Technology of the People’s Republic of China (MOST), 科技部关于发布国家
重点研发计划”智能机器人”等重点专项 2019 年度项目申报指南的通知, 国科
发资〔2019〕205号, June 14, 2019,
 
147261.htm. Further details on these AI-related NKPs are provided in annexes to the
announcement. On the Intelligent Robots 2019 call, see MOST, ““智能机器人”重点专项
2019 年度 定向项目申报指南,” 2019,
 
90801566650620304.pdf, and “NKP – Intelligent robots ,”
chinainnovationfunding.eu, European Commission, June 21, 2019,
 On
the IoT and Smart Cities 2019 call, see MOST, ““物联网与智慧城市关键技术及示范”重
点专项 2019 年度项目申报指南,” 2019,
 
1571078438548.pdf, and “NKP – IoT and smart cities ,”
chinainnovationfunding.eu, European Commission, June 21, 2019,
 On
the Smart Transportation 2019 call, see MOST, ““综合交通运输与智能交通”重点专项
2019 年度项目申报指南,” 2019,
 
1571077032479.pdf, and “NKP – Comprehensive and intelligent transports ,” chinainnovationfunding.eu, European Commission, June 21, 2019,
 
32 See MOST, ““现代服务业共性关键技术研发及应用示范” 重点专项 2019 年度项
目申报指南,” 2019
 
1571076252007.pdf; “NKP – Modern service industry key technologies ,” chinainnovationfunding.eu, European Commission, June 21, 2019,
 
2019-annual-call/.
33 At this time, we have no reliable data on actual NKP spending in 2018 and how it may
have differed from proposed spending in our sample.
34 We also note that our analysis only uses NKP spending figures to produce an AI-relevant
proportion of spending, which we then apply to MOF R&D figures to obtain a dollar/RMB
result. That is, the NKP spending data isn’t directly included in our
final result.
35 See “Chinese Funding Database,” chinainnovationfunding.eu, European Commission,
 on the source, see generally
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 25
“R&D and innovation funding in China: project introduction,” chinainnovationfunding.eu,
European Commission, The database is sponsored by the European Commission (EC) and the European
Union. It draws on the original calls published by China’s Ministry of Science and
Technology. MOST publishes the original calls online, but they are difficult to locate and
compile directly. From a cursory review of MOST’s website, we believe the EC database is
fairly comprehensive and rely on it here. Follow-on research efforts may entail a more
comprehensive review of original MOST data.
36 The August 2019 round of calls was the most recent round posted when we conducted our
research; the October 2018 calls were the earliest collected by the EC. The EC states that
projects receive final approval three to five months after calls are announced, so an
exhaustive analysis of 2018-relevant NKP announcements would include project calls as far
back as July or August 2017. See European Commission, “National Key R&D Programmes,”
at “project cycle and application process” (application deadlines are four to five weeks after
tender publication, followed in one to two months by second-round evaluations, which are
followed by project announcements after another one to two months).
37 Specifically, we collected each sub-project whose description referred to artificial
intelligence, “smart” technologies, computing-relevant hardware (e.g., integrated circuits and
semiconductors), computer science, robotics, sensors, telecommunications, data acquisition,
data analysis, telecommunications, technologies related to media, neurology, and modeling.
We collected this sample, rather than all of the sub-projects in the EC database, in the interest
of time. We plan to validate our sample-based result against all of the sub-projects, but given
the breadth of the concepts we used to build our sample, we believe the sample includes
essentially all sub-projects with a significant AI dimension.
38 We used the following keywords: AI, intelligence, intelligent, smart, robot, robotic, robotics,
autonomous, autonomy.
39 We used the following keywords: AI, artificial intelligence, data mining, (intelligent OR
intelligence OR smart) AND system, (intelligence OR intelligent OR smart) AND control.
Consistent with our Dimensions keyword searches (see note 23), we also included a large
number of machine learning keywords (including neural network, reinforcement learning,
etc.), but these yielded zero search hits because the NKP sub-project headlines did not
specify the desired technique. Example queries yielding zero hits: machine learning, one shot
learning, reinforcement learning, supervised learning, transfer learning, unsupervised
learning, zero shot learning, computer vision, natural language processing, natural language
understanding, artificial neural network, convolutional neural network, recurrent neural
network, deep learning, generative adversarial network, graphical model, random forest,
restricted Boltzmann machine, support vector machine.
40 See discussion in text accompanying note 34 above.
41 We believe this sub-assumption is reasonable for present purposes, since NKPs are a
prominent R&D initiative, forming one of the so-called “five pillars” of central science and
technology funding established by the State Council in December 2014. See “The reform of
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 26
the Chinese national STI funding system,” chinainnovationfunding.eu, European Commission,
 
42 175.8 billion RMB + 196.0 billion RMB = 371.8 billion RMB; 20 billion RMB is about 5
percent of 371.8 billion RMB.
43 See generally 国家科技重大专项, MOST, accessed November 2019,
 
44 See European Commission, “The reform of the Chinese national STI funding system.”
Ongoing programs not covered by the “pillars” include the Thousand Talents recruitment
program, some ministry-specific research programs, and core central funding for public
research universities.
45 Because of this, we expect guidance fund investment does not factor into MOF’s R&D
figures (and, in turn, it does not factor into our AI R&D estimates).
46 Reported Megaproject funding has been extremely variable in recent years, and currently
seems to be in a lull as the past batch of 2020-targeted Megaprojects reaches completion
and the new 2030 Innovation Megaprojects are not yet underway. The 2030 New
Generation Artificial Intelligence Megaproject, which announced 870 million RMB ($126
million) in funding across up to 39 projects in October 2018, is indicative of China’s growing
interest in artificial intelligence, but there is little information available on spending for other
Megaprojects; based on searches of the MOST Information System
( and the EU Commission’s Program Database
( only a few Megaprojects
seem to have reported spending in 2018. To the extent that the New Generation Artificial
Intelligence Megaproject was in fact an outsize contributor to overall Megaproject spending
in 2018, we expect the balance will shift significantly in future years as the new
Megaprojects begin allocating funds. See generally “‘2030 Megaproject’ – New
Generation Artificial Intelligence ,” chinainnovationfunding.eu, European
Commission, October 12, 2018, MOST, 科技部关于发布科技创新
2030—”新一代人工智能”重大项目2018年度项目申报指南的通知, 国科发资〔
2018〕208号, October 12, 2018,
 
012_142131.htm.
47 The Bases and Talents pillar incorporates a hodgepodge of pre-existing initiatives. See
generally “The reform of the Chinese national STI funding system.”
48 See “Chinese State Key Labs,” Datenna, July 17, 2014,
 “China to have 700
national key labs by 2020,” China Daily, June 6, 2018,
 
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 27
49 MOF reported R&D expenditures of about 8.2 billion RMB ($1.2 billion) on “key
laborator[ies] and related facilities” in 2018. MOF, “2018 National General Public Budget
Expenditure.” We believe this mostly consists of SKL spending.
50 A very crude estimate can be calculated from data compiled by Datenna, a Dutch
research consultancy. In June 2018, Datenna collected names and descriptions of 230 SKLs
from Chinese government and academic sources, particularly the Platform for the National
Science and Technology Infrastructures at escience.gov.cn (inaccessible as of this writing; see
archived versions in Chinese and English:
 
 
x.html). Datenna’s source data is available at
 
On an informal review, fewer than 10 percent of the SKLs on Datenna’s list included AIrelevant keywords in their names or descriptions. This broadly corroborates our AI relevance
estimates from NSFC and NKP data.
51 See discussion at note 13.
52 See generally “What does China really spend on its military?”, China Power,
 
53 See, e.g., Kristin Huang, “Will China’s embrace of military AI trigger a new arms race?,”
South China Morning Post, May 4, 2019,
 
54 See MOF, “2018 National General Public Budget Expenditure.”
55 Sun and Cao, “Demystifying central government R&D spending in China.”
56 As discussed above, MOF’s figures include both central and local government spending.
See note 9. The 308.8 billion RMB ($44.8 billion) figure for presumed S&T spending
includes 88 billion RMB ($12.8 billion) in unattributed central S&T spending and 300 billion
RMB ($43.5 billion) in unattributed local S&T spending. Although Sun and Cao did not
address unattributed local spending in their analysis, which was expressly limited to central
government R&D activity, their inference about unattributed central spending could plausibly
be applied to local spending as well, and our analysis does so in the interest of producing a
comprehensive upper bound estimate. We also note that the allocation of some ‘local’ funds
to defense would help explain the apparent stagnation of defense R&D over time. After
accounting for inflation, Sun and Cao’s estimate of 105 billion RMB for the central
government’s defense S&T spending in 2011 is considerably greater than the 88 billion RMB
($12.8 billion) undisclosed in MOF’s 2018 central S&T spending numbers. See Sun and
Cao, “Demystifying central government R&D spending in China,” and supporting materials
thereto . We think Chinese defense S&T spending probably hasn’t actually
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 28
shrunk overall since 2011. Instead, we suspect that at least some of MOF’s unattributed local
S&T spending in 2018 was defense-related.
57 See Sun and Cao, “Demystifying central government R&D spending in China,” and
supporting materials thereto .
58 Given Sun and Cao’s estimate of 60.9 billion RMB of military R&D spending in 2011, this
would imply that Chinese military R&D spending tripled in nominal RMB terms between 2011
and 2018, with an annualized growth rate of 17 percent. However, Chinese public R&D
spending reported to the OECD roughly doubled in a similar period, growing at an
annualized rate of about 12.7 percent between 2011 and 2017. For comparison, applying
a 12.7 percent annual growth rate to the 2011 defense R&D spending identified by Sun and
Cao would suggest Chinese military R&D expenditures of around 140 billion RMB ($20.5
billion USD) in 2018.) Given this, the implied growth rate for military R&D seems within the
realm of plausibility.
59 That is, about 10 percent of 185 billion RMB.
60 See discussion at note 2.
61 Consider, for example, that China’s total reported public R&D spending in 2018 was
about $63 billion. See discussion in Section 2. Tens of billions of dollars in AI R&D spending
would count for a very large portion of this figure, implying that China is either investing
orders of magnitude more in AI than in other strategic technologies or massively
underreporting its R&D spending. Neither scenario is likely: China is known to be investing
heavily in a wide range of technologies, and its R&D reporting is widely considered
plausible, albeit not fully aligned with international accounting standards. (If anything, the
Chinese government’s ongoing push to raise R&D investment would tend to cause
overreporting, not underreporting.) See discussion at notes 9 and 14.
62 See, e.g., Tianlei Huang, “Government-Guided Funds in China: Financing Vehicles for
State Industrial Policy,” Peterson Institute for International Economics, June 17, 2019,
 
63 Lance Noble, “Paying for Industrial Policy,” ,
 (copy on file with CSET).
64 In December 2014, the State Council issued a plan to reform science and technology
funding, establishing guidance funds as one of the “five pillars” of S&T support. See “The
reform of the Chinese national STI funding system,” chinainnovationfunding.eu, European
Commission, 
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 29
65 See Huang, “Government-Guided Funds in China”; Sophy Yang, “China’s 2,041
Government Guidance Funds’ Size Reaches $530B: Report,” ChinaMoneyNetwork,
November 12, 2018, 
2041-government-guidance-funds-size-reaches-530b-report.
66 See, e.g., Huang, “Government-Guided Funds in China.”
67 See, e.g., Pan Yue, “China’s $798B Government Funds Redraw Investment Landscape,
Here Are The Largest Funds You Must Know,” ChinaMoneyNetwork, October 31, 2017,
 
68 See, e.g., Yue, “China’s $798B Government Funds Redraw Investment Landscape.”
69 Noble, “Paying for Industrial Policy.” Even the national “Big Fund” for integrated circuits
took about five years to invest its initial endowment. See “China announces measures to
boost IC industry,” ChinaDaily USA, June 25, 2014,
 ; Zhao Jianwei, “国家大基金二期正募集
千亿布局集成电路产业链,” Xinhua, May 4, 2018, 
05/04/c_1122781205.htm ; Wei Sheng, “China’s ‘Big
Fund’ raises RMB 200 billion to fuel chip industry,” TechNode, July 26, 2019,
 . The “Big Fund” is a direct investment vehicle for the central government and
is structured differently from guidance funds. However, it has been held out as a
representative example and a success story for China’s public investment efforts generally.
See generally Li Tao, “How China’s ‘Big Fund’ is helping the country catch up in the global
semiconductor race,” South China Morning Post, May 10, 2018,
 
70 Noble, “Paying for Industrial Policy.” This risk aversion problem was also described in an
August 2018 article about guidance funds from state news outlet Xinhua. See Xu Zhouchao,
“国内共成立1171只政府引导基金 总目标规模达5.85万亿元,” Xinhua, August 21,
2018, 
71 Noble, “Paying for Industrial Policy.”
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 30
72 See, e.g., Shuli Ren, “China’s $856 Billion Startup Juggernaut Is Getting Stuck,”
Washington Post, December 16, 2018, 
0a601226ff6b_story.html. This might be especially true of smaller and less developed
provinces trying to move into AI. For discussion of many local governments’ plans to foster AI
development, including some smaller ones that seem less AI-ready, see Jaqueline Ives and
Anna Holzmann, “Local governments power up to advance China’s national AI agenda,”
MERICS Blog – European Voices on China, April 26, 2018,
 
73 A representative example is Thomas H. Davenport, “China is overtaking the U.S. as the
leader in artificial intelligence,” MarketWatch, March 7, 2019,
 
74 Our sources included Yue, “China’s $798B Government Funds Redraw Investment
Landscape,” and a May 2018 Chinese-language report by CCID Consulting (available at
 We also used unpublished
lists compiled by experts in contact with CSET. We augmented these published sources with
funds collected from news reports and conversations with subject matter experts. The full list is
on file with CSET and is available upon request.
75 See Yang, “China’s 2,041 Government Guidance Funds’ Size Reaches $530B: Report.”
76 See “Shanghai to set up multi-billion-dollar fund to develop AI,” China Daily, September
 
 ; Meng
Jing, “Tianjin city in China eyes US $16 billion fund for AI work, dwarfing EU’s plan to spend
US $1.78 billion,” South China Morning Post, May 16, 2018,
 ; MOST, “北京科创基金正式启动” (“Beijing Science and Technology Fund
officially launched”), June 28, 2018,
 . Shanghai’s AI
fund began operations this August with only a tenth of its targeted $15 billion in funding. See
He Wei, “Shanghai launches AI investment fund,” China Daily, August 31, 2019,
 
77 As noted above, the “Big Fund” is not a guidance fund, but has been held out as a
representative example and a success story for China’s public investment efforts generally.
See discussion at note 69.
78 See sources cited in note 69.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 31
79 That is, 20 percent of $209 billion.
80 That is, ~five to 20 percent of $40 billion.