Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association
Nov / Dec 1997
Brief Review n
Natural Language Generation
in Health Care
ALISON J. CAWSEY, MSC, PHD, BONNIE L. WEBBER, PHD,
RAY B. JONES, MSC, PHD
A b s t r a c t
Good communication is vital in health care, both among health care
professionals, and between health care professionals and their patients. And well-written
documents, describing and/or explaining the information in structured databases may be easier
to comprehend, more edifying, and even more convincing than the structured data, even when
presented in tabular or graphic form. Documents may be automatically generated from
structured data, using techniques from the ﬁeld of natural language generation. These techniques
are concerned with how the content, organization and language used in a document can be
dynamically selected, depending on the audience and context. They have been used to generate
health education materials, explanations and critiques in decision support systems, and medical
reports and progress notes.
n J Am Med Inform Assoc. 1997;4:473–482.
Effective communication is vital in health care, both
between health care providers and their patients and
among health care providers themselves. Different
participants in the health care process—consultants,
nurses, general practitioners, medical researchers, patients, their relatives, and even accountants and
administrators—must all be able to obtain and communicate relevant information on patients and their
treatment. But there are many obstacles in the way of
effective communication: Participants may use different terms to describe the same thing—a particular
problem for patients who do not understand medical
terminology. Different participants frequently have
different information needs and little time to ﬁlter
information, so that no single report is truly adequate
Afﬁliations of the authors: Department of Computing and Electrical Engineering, Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, Scotland
(AJC); Computing and Information Science Department, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA (BLW); Department
of Public Health, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland
This work has been supported in part by the National Library
of Medicine under grants R01 LM05764-01 and RO1 LM06325,
and the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council
under grant GR/K55271.
Correspondence and reprints: Alison Cawsey, Department of
Computing and Electrical Engineering, Heriot-Watt University,
Edinburgh EH14 4AS, Scotland. E-mail: 
Received for publication: 5/29/97; accepted for publication:
for all. And the different participants may rarely have
time to meet, yet the care of a patient is shared and
passed between them.
The information required by different participants is
increasingly available in coded and structured forms
—in the patient record, in drug databases, and in
knowledge bases of medical terminology. For population studies (in epidemiology and administration),
having data in a coded and structured form enables
precise queries to be formulated and quantitative
analyses to be done on large bodies of data. Yet when
data are being used to convince, justify, or explain, or
to describe the status of a single individual, the more
familiar medium of plain text and graphics may be
more appropriate and effective: A focused coherent
written report may be easier to deal with than the
output from a set of database queries.
In health care, the evident need to translate between
textual forms (human authored texts) and structured
information has led to a large and continually growing body of research and development in natural
language understanding.1 In this article we consider
problem—how
may be produced from structured data. In particular,
we show how a range of current natural language
generation techniques can be used to produce from
the same data, many different documents with different content, terminology and style, and thereby
help meet diverse information needs within health
CAWSEY ET AL., Natural Language Generation in Health Care
Brief Overview of Natural Language
Generation
Natural language generation (NLG) is concerned with
automatically generating texts in English (or other human languages) from computer-accessible data. (Bateman and Hovy provide a recent review.2)* NLG techniques range from the simplest report generation and
mail merge† systems, to sophisticated discourse and
dialogue generation systems that reason about the effect various forms and presentational structures will
have on their recipients. Simple mail merge techniques have been used in practice, as well as in various experiments on whether personalisation of material used in patient education3 – 7 can increase its
effectiveness. However, the problem with such techniques is that they are inﬂexible, allowing relatively
little variation in the texts produced. Attempts at allowing wider variation may result in texts that are no
longer coherent, requiring post-editing by a person.
Improving such systems requires more knowledge of
language; more sophisticated NLG systems and techniques exploit research on human language processing. For example, NLG systems can exploit linguistic
theories about where pronouns can be used and what
they can be used to refer to, to automatically choose
between using a pronoun or a full noun phrase at a
particular point in a text. This might partially avoid
the need for human post-editing in a report generation system.
Natural language generation may be divided into
stages. One proposed division8 is as follows:
n Text planning: The basic content of the text is selected for the particular readership and organised
coherently. Theories of text organisation may be
used to ﬁnd a good ordering of information.
n Sentence planning: The information is split into
sentences and paragraphs, and appropriate use
made of conjunctions, pronouns, etc.
n Realization: Grammatically correct sentences are
produced. A grammar of the language (e.g., Eng-
*A more detailed and up to date survey is available online at
 
HLTsurvey.html, chapter 4.
†Mail merge systems, available with most word processors, allow information from a database to be incorporated into a text
document in simple ways, allowing, for example, mass production of personalised letters using information from a customer database. Simple IF-THEN statements often allow different chunks of text to be output depending on the current data.
lish) may be used, and knowledge of when different grammatical forms are appropriate.
Consider the task of producing a summary of the
structured information in a patient record. Text planning methods would be used to extract and select the
relevant information and decide on the basic ordering
of that information. For example, the most recent information might be selected and ordered so that ﬁrst
all diagnoses and then all treatments are listed. Sentence planning methods would be used to divide that
information into sentences, for example deciding to
combine two separate facts (such as that the patient
had a cough and that the patient has a sore throat)
into one sentence. Finally, realization methods would
be used to ﬁnd a way to express the sentences in
grammatical English: for example, as in the sentence,
‘‘The patient has a cough and a sore throat.’’
Not all systems will automate every stage. For example, current report generation and mail merge systems typically provide only for a simple form of text
planning, and replace sentence planning and realization with simple ‘‘ﬁll-in-the-blank’’ word strings. With
respect to text planning, these systems allow information in a database or spreadsheet to control the selection of paragraph and sentence templates, but the
basic form of each template must be provided by a
human author. The system cannot automatically
change the way facts are split into sentences or dynamically vary the grammatical forms or the terminology used.
More complex methods of text planning, sentence
planning, and realization allow greater ﬂexibility to
be achieved. Terminology and style can be varied according to readership, and content can be selected to
meet speciﬁc needs. The question that must be answered is how much ﬂexibility is needed in a given
application; if there is little variation in what the intended text is about or who is it for, then simple methods may sufﬁce. However, the more variation in the
intended audience, the more inherent complexity in
the material to be presented; or the more the desire
for communication to be a ‘‘two-way’’ interchange
(i.e., a dialogue) rather than a one-time delivery of
information, the more ﬂexibility is needed. For many
practical systems, only a limited amount of ﬂexibility
may be required—for example, where the texts to be
produced have a standard structure (e.g., SOAP
notes9), and the process of content selection involves
ﬁlling out this structure. When only a small number
of basic sentence forms are regularly used, it may be
unnecessary to use a complex grammar to automatically generate sentences, as basic sentence templates
(e.g., ‘‘Patient-X is suffering from Disease-Y’’) may be
provided for all of the cases required.
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association
Nov / Dec 1997
For a particular application we have to decide
whether the additional ﬂexibility we get from using
the more sophisticated methods justiﬁes the costs; the
more sophisticated methods do require more work in
setting up for a particular application.10 This will depend on the kind of ﬂexibility required for that application.
Example Applications
Within health care, nature language generation techniques have been applied in a number of areas: generating explanations, advice, and critiques in medical expert systems11 – 18; generating reports, brieﬁngs,
professionals19 – 23; and generating explanatory materials for patients.24 – 28 This review considers each of
these areas, considering the applicability of different
language generation techniques in each.
Generating Expert System Explanations and
If the recommendations of an expert system or decision support system are to be understood and assessed by health professionals, then some explanation
of the reasoning or rationale behind the recommendation should be available. Generating such explanations is an NLG task—a text is generated from
computer-accessible data concerning the systems reasoning.
In the earliest work on explanation in rule-based
expert systems, very simple NLG methods were
viewed as sufﬁcient, as the input was very constrained (just the trace of the system’s reasoning), and
relatively little variability in the output was required.
Text could be generated to explain how the system
reached a conclusion or why the system was asking a
particular question. The text consisted of an English
sentence whose clauses corresponded to the antecedent and consequent clauses of the rule from which a
conclusion was drawn or that motivated a particular
question being asked. No text planning was necessary,
as only a single sentence was produced, and no sentence planning was necessary, since what was included in the sentence to be generated was ﬁxed by
the set of clauses in the rule. Realization consisted of
stringing together text using simple templates associated with expert system rules or primitive functions.
Early systems such as MYCIN showed how far this
basic approach could be taken.29
The explanations produced using these simple methods are far from ideal. However, improving them requires, as a basis, a richer source of information—a
simple rule trace will often miss key information that
should be included in order for an explanation to be
convincing. Swartout11 attempted to address this issue
by looking at how the underlying rationale behind
rules may be preserved and used in explanation. Although only simple generation methods were used,
this work is important in reminding us that one cannot get a good text without good data and that to
improve the output of a text generation system, the
ﬁrst thing needed may be to improve the input.
Explanations were based on richer input in proto-type
systems developed by Langlotz30 – 32 and by Jimison.33,34 Langlotz’s QxQ system was developed to
demonstrate that the clinical use of quantitative decision models could be facilitated through generating
non-quantitative explanations of their results—explaining which decision option was preferable, the basis for that preference, and the sensitivity of that preference to uncertainty in the relevant probabilities—
using both text and graphics.
In producing its explanations, QxQ used a basic form
of text planning; it had a small set of strategies modeled on the form and content of published medical
decision analyses that were viewed as presenting persuasive arguments. QxQ used heuristic rules to select
strategies that effectively used the available data to
argue for the results of the model, and then merged
the data with the selected frameworks to produce
symbolic expressions that justify the difference in expected utility. QxQ’s explanations required no sentence planning, as the type of material to be included
in each sentence was speciﬁed in the strategies,
and it used the same realization method as in the
earlier MYCIN work. Since QxQ’s explanations were
longer and more complex than MYCIN’s, more of the
problems of inﬂexible realization were apparent in
QxQ’s explanations. For example, in explaining why
intermittent pneumatic compression prophylaxis is
strongly indicated in a case of deep vein thrombosis,
QxQ produced the following sentence:
‘‘The decision is supported by the fact that the
probability of deep vein thrombosis with no prophylaxis is greater than the probability of deep
vein thrombosis with intermittent pneumatic
compression prophylaxis.’’
If QxQ’s realization strategies could make use of demonstrative pronouns and contextual abbreviations,
this sentence could be more simply realised as:
‘‘This decision is supported by the fact that the
probability of deep vein thrombosis with no prophylaxis is greater than that with IPC prophylaxis.’’
CAWSEY ET AL., Natural Language Generation in Health Care
Although intubation of this patient was not proposed, it is clearly desirable. Not intubating this
patient would have the risk of aspiration.
Looking at the other aspects of the proposed
plan, for a patient with chronic renal failure, Curare is a reasonable selection since it is reliably
metabolized by the liver, and Halothane is a
good choice since it has no nephrotoxicity.
F i g u r e 1 Example Text From ATTENDING critiquing
n Caution: get a chest x-ray immediately to rule
out a simple right pneumothorax.
n Caution: get a chest x-ray immediately to rule
out a simple right hemothorax.
n Do not perform local visual exploration of all
abdominal wounds until after getting a chest
x-ray. The outcome of the latter may affect the
need to do the former.
n Please get a chest x-ray before performing local
exploration
wounds because it has a higher priority.
Integrated Critique Produced by TraumaGEN:
n Caution: get a chest x-ray to rule out a simple
right pneumothroax and rule out a simple
right hemothorax, and use the results of the
chest x-ray to decide whether or not to perform local visual exploration of all abdominal
F i g u r e 2 Critiques Produced by TraumaGEN.
Jimison’s system produced explanations that incorporated patient-speciﬁc characteristics (such as their
occupation, leisure activities and past experience of
pain), as well as clinical factors.33,34 These personal
characteristics inﬂuence patient preferences for different outcomes, and hence the choice of treatment. Jimison observed that texts which present decision models implicitly refer to additional variables such as
these, yet these don’t appear in the decision model.
She showed how adding such variables explicitly to
the model, along with distributions on their range of
possible values, could be used to produce explanations that could contrast the recommendation for a
speciﬁc patient with that for the typical or generic patient. This allowed the physician who was given the
explanation to understand the importance of each variable to the particular decision. The methods used for
producing texts were similar to that used in QxQ.
While both QxQ and Jimison’s system remained prototypes, both stand as signiﬁcant proofs of concept.
Because QxQ had only a small set of presentation
strategies, it had no need for more complex text
planning—for example, to mediate between strategies
when more than one applied. More ﬂexible and richer
explanations may be generated by treating text or explanation planning as an independent problem. This
is discussed by Moore35 (although not for a medical
domain). A simple example of independent text planning in a medical expert system is HF-EXPLAIN,12
which generates explanations for a heart failure expert
system based on a causal model. Rather than merely
providing a trace of the causal processes, the system
tries to follow the typical structure of human explanations in this domain by making use of simple schemata.
Turning from the generation of explanations to that of
critiques, a critiquing expert system comments on the
user’s suggestions rather than generating its own.
Such a system must therefore generate a coherent critique based on its analysis of the user’s proposal. For
example, ATTENDING analyses the risks and beneﬁts
associated with a proposed anaesthesia plan, and generates an English critique.13,14 The basic content and
structure of this critique is fairly rigid—there is no
explicit text planning stage. However, the way a critique is expressed requires ﬂexibility because of the
complexity of ATTENDING’s analysis of the user’s
plan: simple template-based approaches would not
be sufﬁciently ﬂexible to produce ﬂuent output.
ATTENDING uses a slightly more complex realisation
method for its generation system (PROSENET) based
on an augmented transition network labelled with
fragments of English. Traversing a particular network
should result in a grammatically correct utterance
whose details depend on contextual factors and details of the input. An example fragment of output is
given in Figure 1.
Recent work on medical decision support has started
to consider the issue of how evidence-based guidelines may be made widely available. In a computerbased guideline system, although the underlying reasoning may be simple, there is still the question of
how best to present the guidelines (and patient speciﬁc advice) is the health professional. This has been
explored by Barnes and Barnett36 and by Day et al.37
Barnes and Barnett, for example, use an approach
similar to PROSENET to produce coherent patientspeciﬁc guidelines.
Where many guidelines are simultaneously active
however, such simple presentational methods may
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association
Nov / Dec 1997
(deﬁne-text-plan-operator
:name alleviate-fears-female-pre-menopausal
:effect (alleviate-fears ?patient (forever ?disease))
:constraints
((female ?patient)
(pre-menopausal ?patient)
(not (in-patient-history? estrogens))
:nucleus ((BEL ?patient
(improve ?disease (after menopause)))
(BEL ?patient
(improve ?disease aging)))))
F i g u r e 3 Example Text Planning Operator in Migraine.
not be sufﬁcient. In such cases, a text planner must be
able to take an arbitrary set of communicative goals,
each relating to a different piece of advice, and produce text that expresses the entire set both concisely
and coherently. This is done in TraumaGEN,18 which
has been designed to produce coherent critiques in
initial deﬁnitive management of multiple trauma.
TraumaGEN works on the output of Trauma TIQ,16,17
which produces individual critiques of physician orders (or the lack thereof) based on what it infers to
be the physician’s current plan and on the recommendations of its associated expert system, TraumAID.38
TraumaGEN addresses the problem that, while in isolation each of TraumaTIQ’s noted critiques may effectively warn a physician about a problem, usually several problems are detected simultaneously, producing
multiple critiques whose aggregation can be confusing (Fig. 2). TraumaGEN takes the set of individual
critiques and integrates them into a more concise, coherent, and thereby more effective, form.
Generating Patient Information Materials
There are many reasons why patients should be given
better information: to reduce patient anxiety, to enable
patients to share in management decisions, to enable
and encourage them to change their behavior (e.g., to
stop smoking), to enable and encourage them to comply with treatment, to enable them to manage chronic
conditions, and simply to increase patient satisfaction.
Improved patient education through better information has the potential to save large amounts of time
and money as well as lead to more satisﬁed and
healthier patients. There is a large literature on the
subject, but a good overview is given by Ley.39
Currently,
through verbal interaction with health professionals
and through leaﬂets, posters, and other printed material. However, health professionals have limited
time (and are not always good communicators), and
generic leaﬂets are impersonal and unspeciﬁc, not addressing a particular patient’s particular needs. Patient education researchers recognize the need for
more personalised materials,40 and simple mail merge
techniques have been used effectively to produce personalised leaﬂets,3 – 5 which appear more effective than
general ones. Simple interactive systems have also
been shown to be acceptable to patients.41,42 Patients
may be less embarrassed asking questions of a computer than of their doctors.43
Although it is possible to produce personalized materials (leaﬂets and interactive systems) using fairly
simple techniques, it is an area where NLG techniques
can lead to more ﬂexible systems and more coherent,
ﬂuent texts. Several recent projects (Migraine, Piglit,
OPADE, and HealthDoc) have explored this. In each,
a text-generation system has been used to produce
leaﬂets or interactive materials, based on a combination of (a) data from drug databases and/or medical
knowledge bases, and (b) data on the speciﬁc patient.
Information is selected to be included in the text,
based on the patient’s needs, including information
speciﬁc to that patient.
The Migraine project24,25 is concerned with generating
interactive materials for migraine patients. Screens of
text are generated using an NLG system, with the user
able to ask follow-up questions via a mixture of hypertext and menu selection. A fairly sophisticated text
planner35 is used to select content appropriate to each
individual. The approach allows responses to later
questions to be answered in the context of previous
replies, referring to these earlier responses and avoiding excessive repetition.44 The medical knowledge
base required was constructed using the UMLS semantic network,45,46 and patient data were obtained
through an online interview.
Text planning in Migraine proceeds by using text
planning operators to expand goals into subgoals, depending on constraints, until a subgoal can be conveyed using a simple phrase or sentence. A sample
text planning operator for Migraine is given in Figure
3. It states that one way to alleviate a female premenopausal patient’s fears about the disease in question
is to get her to believe that the disease improves after
menopause and with aging. Given such a goal of alleviating patient fears, this plan operator could be
used to expand that goal for an appropriate patient,
eventually producing a phrase or sentence aimed at
getting her to believe that the disease improves after
menopause and one aimed at getting her to believe
that the disease improves with aging. This goal-directed method of selecting text content has proved
CAWSEY ET AL., Natural Language Generation in Health Care
BEZAFIBRATE
Bezaﬁbrate is a cardiovascular drug which reduces the amount of some kinds of fat in the
bloodstream. According to your record you are
currently undergoing this treatment. It is often
used to treat hyperlipidaemia. It could have
some side effects, in particular nausea. Your
preKscription of bezaﬁbrate comes in 200 mg
tablets. It is to be taken three times each day.
YOUR RECORD
Discuss with doctor?
F i g u r e 4 Example Text from the PIGLIT system.
more ﬂexible than methods used in mail merge and
similar software.
Piglit27 was similar to Migraine in many ways, using
text planning methods to generate hypertext explanations for diabetes patients. Piglit, however, had
closer links with the patient record, enabling the patients to explore topics mentioned in their records,
while the record was used in turn to determine how
these topics should be explained and to add personal
reminders. Text planning was kept simple, with planning operators specifying the information that should
be included when describing a particular class of
medical concept (e.g., when describing a disease, describe its symptoms and possible treatments). Information relevant to a speciﬁc patient could be added
(e.g., if the patient has this disease, describe its onset
and how it is being treated). The medical knowledge
base was constructed based on the organization of
concepts in the Read coding scheme (used by the National Health Service in the UK) but has since been
modiﬁed to use the GRAIL representation language
from the GALEN medical terminology project.47 Figure 4 gives an example text from the original system
(words in bold can be clicked on for further information).
Both Piglit and Migraine use simple surface realization based on selecting from human-authored templates (e.g., ‘‘The symptoms of Disease-X are Symptoms-Y’’) and ﬁlling in with speciﬁc data. They have
both resulted in working systems that have been evaluated with a small number of patients. A much larger
randomized trial is now in progress, looking at the
beneﬁts of personalized information for cancer patients, using a system based on Piglit.48 A recognized
problem with both systems is the effort required to
author the knowledge base (containing the general
medical information that may be communicated to the
patient). However, once a suitable knowledge base is
constructed, it appears easier to maintain it (as medical knowledge changes) than to maintain materials in
a textual form. A particular fact (say, the drug recommended for a particular disease) will only appear
once in the knowledge base, but it may be mentioned
many times in textual documents, using many different surface forms.
The OPADE project looked at generating personalized
leaﬂets about drugs.26 As in Piglit and Migraine, the
emphasis was on text planning. A notable feature of
OPADE was that the knowledge to be communicated
all came from existing resources (a drug database and
the prescription), so authoring or adapting a knowledge base was not required. OPADE also attempted
to address the problem of the potential conﬂict between what the doctor wants to communicate and
what the patient wants to know.49
The most recent project in this area is the HealthDoc
project.28 HealthDoc takes an unusual approach to text
generation. Rather than generating text from a knowledge base, HealthDoc starts with a master document.
Generation involves selecting from this master document and repairing the result to produce a coherent
document. For example, when material is cut from the
master text, pronouns (e.g., ‘‘it’’) may be left without
a referent. Repairing a text might involve replacing
one or more of these pronouns with a full noun
phrase (e.g., ‘‘the angina pectoris’’).
The HealthDoc approach thus places most of its effort
at the sentence-planning stage and may prove an effective practical technique when there is a relatively
small amount of material to be selected from and
when existing report generation or mail merge software results in texts that require signiﬁcant post-editing by a human.
The above systems also differ in the techniques that
were used to elicit system requirements—the kind of
material patients require, and how material can best
be adapted for an individual patient. In the Migraine
project, ethnographic studies were used with patients.50 In OPADE, surveys and questionnaires were
used to ﬁnd which topics patients considered important and what ordering of information was prefered,51
as well as interviews with health professionals, who
were asked to explain topics to hypothetical patients.26
Piglit27 used (primarily) questionnaire-based feedback
on early prototypes but also interviews with health
professionals.
Generating Reports and Progress Notes
Another area in which NLG techniques have been
tried experimentally in health care is in the generation
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association
Nov / Dec 1997
The angina pectoris is progressive and moderate. It has an aching, burning, possibly intermittent character, is aggravated by cold and movement and relieved by rest. There is a cough and
no breathlessness.
The cough is improving and mild. It has a dry,
non-productive character and a bovine, harsh
sound character. It is aggravated by dust and
smoking and relieved by rest.
F i g u r e 6 Example Report from Pen & Pad Reporter.
SUBJECTIVE:
Constitutional:
Mild frontal headaches for the last 2 days. No
fever and no chills.
Constant, moderate sore throat for the last 1 day.
The sore throat is worsening. No nasal discharge.
OBJECTIVE:
Vital Signs:
Oral temp: 99.8 F. Right brachial pulse: 89 sitting. Right upper arm bp 130/85 sitting.
F i g u r e
5 Fraction of Progress Note Generated by
of discharge summaries and progress notes. When the
care of a patient is shared among or passed on to
other health professionals, it is important that a clear
and accurate account is presented of the current state
of the illness and treatment. Yet, producing such accounts is time consuming,52 and the required clarity
demands both ﬂuency and coherence.53 Computerbased patient record systems may already have simple report generation facilities built in, which can be
used to assist the health care professional. Because the
resulting output may lack ﬂuency, requiring signiﬁcant post-ending, several researchers in medical informatics have looked at ways of generating better
reports.19 – 21,54
Generating better reports does not appear to require
sophisticated text planning methods, as the structure
of a progress note or discharge summary is generally
fairly constrained. Indeed, the requirement for a consistent, easy-to-scan format may mean that too much
variability in the output is undesirable. However,
merely stringing together data in a sequence of short
sentences or clauses will result in a report that lacks
ﬂuency and is overly verbose. Here, what is required
are sentence planning techniques, especially ones that
deal with aggregation (i.e., combining and merging
clauses into concise sentences) and with pronominalization, both of which reduce repetition—hence, reducing verbosity—and increase coherence by bringing together related material. Simple methods can
normally be used for realization, as frequently only a
small number of basic sentence forms are needed.
The IVORY system,21 for example, was designed to
generate textual progress notes given data entered by
the physician. User-centered design methods were
used to try to ensure that the system met the needs
of physicians, and the format of the notes followed
that used by physicians when writing progress notes
by hand. In this case the SOAP format was used: ﬁrst,
subjective data are given (patient’s reported symptoms); then, objective data (physician’s observations
and measurements); next, the physician’s assessment;
and ﬁnally, the physician’s plan for treatment or further tests. While text planning in IVORY simply involved ﬁlling out the basic SOAP template with the
relevant data, signiﬁcant attention was paid to sentence planning, particularly combining clauses as a
way of avoiding repetition. As a simple example,
rather than generating ‘‘Three day history of cough.
Three day history of sore throat,’’ IVORY would generate ‘‘Three day history of cough and sore throat.’’
An example fragment from a progress note generated
by IVORY is given in Figure 5. IVORY does not generate fully grammatical English sentences, but rather
abbreviated phrases, similar to those used by many
physicians and nurses. (The style is, in fact, rather
standard ‘‘telegraphic’’ American English, which can
be observed in a wide range of applications and is not
speciﬁc to health care.) The structured progress note
form is preferred by many health professionals, allowing easy access to relevant parts of the report. As the
telegraphic style used in IVORY employs rather short
constructions, a sophisticated grammar-based realization component was not seen to be required.
A similar system has been developed recently19 for
generating summaries from the Pen&Pad patient record system.55 While most work in this area focuses on
the speciﬁc needs of the application, this work specifically considers NLG issues. Text planning is based on
simple schemas56 that provide a ﬂexible way to structure the text. Sentence planning includes aggregation
and pronominalization methods, and a realization
module is based on a simple grammar, producing
grammatically well-formed output (Fig. 6).
Other report-generation applications have used more
sophisticated realization modules, corresponding to
CAWSEY ET AL., Natural Language Generation in Health Care
more variability in the input. For example, Abella et
al.22 describe a system for generating reports on radiographs, using a fairly sophisticated off-the-shelf
sentence planning and realization system, FUF,57 to
produce sentences. Bernauer et al.20 argue that for producing reports on bone scan studies, the variety of
possible kinds of observations requires a relatively sophisticated realization module; they use one developed specially for their task. It appears that for generating medical reports there is no one generation
architecture perfect for every application, but each
speciﬁc application may make different demands and
require different sorts of ﬂexibility and variability to
be supported.
The work mentioned above has been concerned with
generating a written textual report. However, some
information can be conveyed more effectively through
graphics, while the use of spoken (rather than written)
text can allow someone to attend to both text and
graphics (or to both text and the world outside) simultaneously. This has led to a recent interest in multimedia generation. Generating a multimedia presentation from data involves selecting the appropriate
modality (text, graphics, etc.) for communication and
coordinating the presentation so that, for example, images are referred to in the text. Recent work at Columbia23 has considered how multimedia postoperative
brieﬁngs can be generated that the meet the different
needs of nurse and physician.
Generating Descriptions of Medical Concepts
In most of the above applications there is a need for
generating descriptions of medical concepts given a
standard code (e.g., SNOMED, ICD-9) for that concept. The complexity of this problem depends on the
coding scheme used. In a system such as ICD-9, where
a separate code is given for every distinguishable concept, then a simple mapping of code to a preferred
English phrase may be possible. But in more complex compositional schemes, such as that used in the
GALEN terminology server,47 generating the appropriate English phrase for a compositional concept becomes more difﬁcult.58,59 However, although the generation
approach can pay off if multilingual output is required.57 While the 1997 version of the UMLS46 correlates terminologies in Spanish, German, Potuguese,
and French with those in English, the mapping of
terms is only partial; there are only translations available for all these languages for MeSH terms. For these
languages and others, entering a preferred phrase by
hand for each uncovered concept will require extensive effort.
In a compositional scheme, on the other hand, much
can be achieved based on combining words from a
relatively simple lexicon.
Discussion
The above systems have used a wide range of natural
language generation (NLG) techniques, from the very
simple to the complex. Some have emphasized text
planning11 – 12,24 – 27,18; others have emphasized sentence
planning19,21,28 or realization.13,14,59 In most cases, those
using more sophisticated techniques11 – 15,18,19,23 – 28,59 are
research prototypes; these, while aiming to address a
real need, have not been used in practice beyond
small-scale evaluations. Here we brieﬂy consider both
where more advanced NLG techniques are likely to
be worthwhile in practice and which methods are
likely to be most useful.
Sometimes the costs of using advanced NLG techniques may outweigh the beneﬁts.9 For example, if
using them requires authoring a special-purpose
knowledge base whose life span is short, then (unless
the techniques allow one to serve a signiﬁcantly larger
population than one otherwise could) simple techniques such as those used in mail merge systems may
be adequate. One useful compromise, which can be
seen even in the research systems discussed earlier,
may be to use advanced techniques for part of the
process and simpler techniques for the rest. For example, simple text planning can be combined with
sophisticated sentence planning and realization methods if good ﬂuency is required or depending on context. Alternatively, simple ﬁll-in-the-blanks sentence
templates can be combined with sophisticated text
planning methods if the selecting and structuring of
the content are quite complex.
Clearly, whatever techniques are used, for a system to
be used in practice it is important that it is integrated
both with existing clinical systems (patient records,
drug databases, etc.) and also with existing practice.
This point has been frequently made for medical
expert systems and applies equally to NLG systems
used in health care. A system that gave ‘‘added value’’
to an existing patient record system would be more
persuasive than a stand-alone system requiring separate or idiosyncratic data entry. Research prototypes
may not go as far as using actual patient record systems, but they should at least take account of the medical coding schemes in use in such systems.
Conclusions
In health care communication, there is a real need for
the generation of textual reports and explanatory ma-
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association
Nov / Dec 1997
terials from structured data. Natural language generation is a rapidly maturing ﬁeld. As techniques become better understood and more off-the-shelf tools
become readily available, NLG offers real potential for
better health care communication, increasing the ﬂexibility and adaptability of systems and the ﬂuency of
output texts. There will always be a cost associated
with using more sophisticated techniques, and these
costs must be weighed against the beneﬁts. However,
intermediate techniques, using simpler techniques for
part of the process, may provide ways to get maximum beneﬁt for a particular application with minimal
cost. The appropriate techniques will depend on the
kind of ﬂexibility and the style of text required for the
particular problem.
References n
1. Friedman C, Johnson SB. Medical text processing: past
achievements, future directions. In: Ball M, Morris C (eds).
Aspects of the Computer-based Patient Record. New York:
Springer-Verlag, 1992;212–28.
2. Bateman JA, Hovy EH. An overview of computational text
generation In: Butler C (ed). Computers and Texts: An Applied Perspective. London: Basil Blackwell, 1992;53–74.
3. Osman LM, Abdulla MI, Beattie JAG, et al. Reducing hospital admission through computer-supported education for
asthma patients. British Medical Journal. 1994;308:568–71.
4. Campbell MK, DeVellis BM, Strecher VJ, Ammerman AS,
DeVellis RF, Sandler RS. Improving dietary behavior: the
efﬁcacy of tailored messages in primary care settings. American Journal of Public Health. 1994;84:783–7.
5. Strecher VJ, Kreuter M, DenBoer D, Kobrin S, Hospers HJ,
Skinner VS. The effects of computer-tailored smoking cessation letters in family practice settings. Journal of Family
Practice. 1994;39:262–270.
6. Meldrum P, Turnbull D, Dobson HM, Coquhoun C, Gilmour WH, McIllwaine GM. Tailored written invitations for
second round breast cancer screening: a randomised controlled trial. Journal of Medical Screening. 1994;1:245–8.
7. Brug J, Steenhuis I, van Assema P, de Vries, H. The impact
of a computer-tailored nutrition intervention. Preventive
Medicine. 1996;25:236–42.
8. Reiter E. Has a consensus NL Generation architecture
emerged, and is it psycholinguistically plausible? In: Proceedings of the Seventh International Workshop on Natural
Language Generation . 1994;163–70.
9. Weed LL. Medical Records, Medical Education and Patient
Care. Cleveland, OH: Case Western Reserve, 1969.
10. Reiter E, Mellish C. Optimizing the costs and beneﬁts of
natural language generation. In: Proceedings of the 13th International
Conference
Intelligence
 . Chambery, France, 1993;1164–9.
11. Swartout WR. Explaining and justifying in expert consulting programs. In: Proceedings of the 7th International Joint
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-81), University
of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 1981, 815–22.
12. Lewin HC. HF-Explain: a natural language generation system for explaining a medical expert system. In: Proceedings
of the Annual Symposium on Computer Applications in
Medical Care. New York: McGraw Hill, 1991;644–8.
13. Miller PL. Expert Critiquing Systems: Practice-based Medical Consultation by Computer. New York: Springer-Verlag,
14. Miller PL. ATTENDING: critiquing a physicians management plan. IEEE Transactions of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence. 1983;5:449–61.
15. Haimowitz IJ. Modeling all dialogue system participants to
generate empathetic responses. In: Computer Methods &
Programs in Biomedicine. 1991;35:321–30.
16. Gerntner A, Webber B, Clarke J. Upholding the maxim of
relevance during patient-centered activities. In: Proceedings, 4th International Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing. Stuttgart, Germany, October 1994.
17. Gerntner A, Webber B, Clarke J, Hayward C, Santora T,
Wagner D. On-line quality assurance in the initial deﬁnitive
management of multiple trauma: evaluating system potential. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine. 1997;9.
18. Carberry S, Harvey T. Generating coherent messages in
real-time decision support: exploiting discourse theory for
disclosure. In: Proceedings, 19th Annual Conference of Cognitive Science Society. August 1997, San Jose CA.
19. Bullock JC. Text Generation from Semantic Network Based
Medical Records. Master’s thesis, University of Manchester,
20. Bernauer J, Gumrich K, Kutz S, Linder P, Pretschner DP. An
interactive report generator for bone scan studies. In: Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on Computer Applications in Medical Care. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1991;858–
21. Campbell KE, Wieckert K, Fagan LM, Musen M. A Computer-based tool for generation of progress notes. In: Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on Computer Applications in Medical Care. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1993;
22. Abella A, Kender J, Starren J. Description generation of abnormal densities found in radiographs. In: Proceedings of
the Annual Symposium on Computer Applications in Medical Care. Philadelphia: Hanley and Belfus, 1995;542–6.
23. Dalal M, Feiner S, McKeown K. MAGIC: An experimental
system for generating multimedia brieﬁngs about postbypass patient status. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 1996; symposium supplement.
24. Buchanan BG, Moore JD, Forsythe DE, Carenini G, Ohlsson
S, Banks G. An intelligent interactive system for delivering
individualised information to patients. Artiﬁcial Intelligence
in Medicine. 1995;7:117–54.
25. Buchanan BG, Moore J, Forsythe D, Banks G, Ohlsson S.
Involving patients in health care: using medical informatics
for explanation in the clinical. In: Proceedings of the Symposium on Computer Applications in Medical Care. New
York: McGraw-Hill, 1992;510–14.
26. de Carolis B, de Rosis F, Grasso F. Generating recipientcentered explanations about drug prescription. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine. 1996;8:123–45.
27. Binsted K, Cawsey A, Jones RB. Generating personalized
information using the medical record. In: Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine: Proceedings of AIME 95. New York:
Springer-Verlag, 1995;29–41.
28. Hirst G, DiMarco C, Hovy E. Authoring and generating
health-education documents that are tailored to the needs
of the individual patient. In: Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on User Modeling, Sardinia, Italy. 1997;
29. Scott AC, Clancey WJ, Davis R, Shortliffe EH. Methods for
generating explanations. In: Buchanan BG, Shortliffe, EH
(eds). Rule-Based Expert Systems. The MYCIN Experiments
CAWSEY ET AL., Natural Language Generation in Health Care
of the Stanford Heuristic Programming Project. Reading,
MA: Addison-Wesley, 1984;338–62.
30. Langlotz C, Fagan L, Tu S, Sikic B, Shortliffe, E. A therapy
planning architecture that combines decision theory and artiﬁcial intelligence techniques. Computers and Biomedical
Research. 1987;20:279–303.
31. Langlotz C, Shortliffe E, Fagan L. A methodology for generating computer-based explanations of decision-theoretic
advice. Medical Decision Making. 1988;8:290–303.
32. Langlotz C. A Decision-Theoretic Approach to Heuristic
Planning. PhD Thesis, Section on Medical Informatics,
School of Medicine, Stanford University, 1989.
33. Jimison HB. Generating explanations of decision models
based on an augmented representation of uncertainty. In:
Shacter RD, Levit TS, Kanal LN, Lemmer JF (eds). Proceedings, Fourth Annual Conference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial
Intelligence. 1990;351–65.
34. Jimison HB, Fagan L, Shacter R. Patient-speciﬁc explanation
in models of chronic disease. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine. 1992;4:191–205.
35. Moore JD. Participating in Explanatory Dialogues: Interpreting and Responding to Questions in Context. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1994.
36. Barnes M, Barnett GO. An architecture for a distributed
guideline server. Proceedings of the Symposium on Computer Applications of Medical Care. Philadelphia: Hanley
and Belfus, 1995;233–37.
37. Day F, Hoang LP, Ouk S, Nagda S, Schriger DL. The impact
of a guideline-driven computer charting system on the
emergency care of patients with acute low back pain. In:
Proceedings of the Symposium on Computer Applications
of Medical Care. Philadelphia: Hanley and Belfus, 1995;576–
38. Webber BL, Rymon R, Clarke JR. Flexible support for
trauma management through goal-directed reasoning and
planning. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine. 1992;4:145–63.
39. Ley P. Communicating with patients: Improving Communication,
Satisfaction
Compliance. London: Croon
Helm, 1988.
40. Marshall WR, Rotherberger LA, Bunnell SL. The efﬁcacy of
personalized audiovisual patient education. Journal of Family Practice. 1984;19:659–63.
41. Jones RB, Navin LM, Murray KJ. Use of a community-based
touch-screen
public-access
information
Health Bulletin. 1993;51:34–42.
42. Gillespie MA, Ellis LBM. Computer-based patient education
revisited. Journal of Medical Systems. 1993;17:119–25.
43. Al-Barwani F, Jones R, Cawsey A, Knill-Jones RP. A randomised trial of different patient–computer interactions. In:
Richards B (ed). HC97, Current Perspectives in Healthcare
Computing. Weybridge, Surrey: BJHC Books, 1997;77–84.
44. Carenini G, Moore JD. Generating explanations in context.
In: Proceedings of the 1993 International Workshop on Intelligent User Interfaces. ACM Press, 1993;175–82.
45. Carenini G, Moore JD. Using the UMLS semantic network
as a basis for constructing a terminological knowledge base.
Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on Computer Applications in Medical Care. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1993.
46. Lindberg DAB, Humphreys BL, McCray AT. The Uniﬁed
Medical Language System. Methods of Information in Medicine. 1993;32:281–91.
47. Rector AL, Zanstra P, Solomon WD, and GALEN Consortium. Galen: terminology services for clinical information
systems. In: Laires MF, Ladeira MJ, Christensen JP (eds).
Health in the New Communications Age: Health Care Telematics for the 21st Century. New York: IOS Press, 1995;90
48. Jones RB, Pearson J, Cawsey A, Barrett A. Information for
patients with cancer: does personalization make a difference? Pilot study results and randomized trial in progress.
J Am Med Inform Assoc (symposium supplement). 1996;
49. de Rosis F, Grasso F. Mediating hearer’s and speaker’s view
in the generation of adaptive explanations. Expert Systems
With Applications. 1995;8:429–43.
50. Forsythe DE. Using ethnography in the design of an explanation system. Expert Systems with Applications. 1995;8:
51. Berry D, Gillie T, Banbury S. What do patients want to
know? An empirical approach to explanation generation
and validation. Expert Systems with Applications. 1995;8:
52. Hohnloser JH, Engelmeier T. Writing the discharge summary: a cost performance analysis using a computerized
patient record system. In: Proceedings of the Symposium
on Computer Applications of Medical Care. Philadelphia:
Hanley and Belfus, 1995;949.
53. Quaak RF, Westerman JA, Schouten JA, Hasman A, van
Bemmel JH. Appraisal of computerized medical histories:
comparison between computerized and conventional records. Comp Biomed Res. 1986;19:551–64.
54. Trace D, Naeymi-Rad F, Haimes D, Shanthi Robert JJ, Almeia deSouza F, Carmony L, et al. Intelligent Medical Record-Entry (IMR-E). Journal of Medical Systems. 1993;17:
55. Rector AL, Nowlan WA, Kay S. Foundations for an electronic medical record. Methods of Information in Medicine.
1991;30:179–86.
56. McKeown KR. Text Generation: Using Discourse Strategies
and Focus Constraints to Generate Natural Language Text.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985.
57. Elhadad
Using Argumentation
Choice: A Functional Uniﬁcation Implementation. PhD thesis, Columbia University, 1992.
58. Solomon WD. Concept modelling and natural language
processing in medicine. In: SALT Workshop on Empirical
and Theoretical Methods in Text and Speech Processing.
April 1996.
59. Wagner JC, Solomon WD, Michel PA, et al. Multilingual
natural language generation as part of a medical terminology server. In: Greenes RA et al. (eds). MEDINFO 95 Proceedings. 1992;100–104.