The most important function of selective visual attention is to direct our gaze rapidly towards objects of
interest in our visual environment1–9. This ability to
orientate rapidly towards salient objects in a cluttered
visual scene has evolutionary significance because it
allows the organism to detect quickly possible prey,
mates or predators in the visual world.A two-component framework for attentional deployment has
recently emerged, although the idea dates back to
William James1, the father of American psychology.
This framework suggests that subjects selectively
direct attention to objects in a scene using both bottom-up, image-based saliency cues and top-down,
task-dependent cues.
Some stimuli are intrinsically conspicuous or
salient in a given context. For example, a red dinner
jacket among black tuxedos at a sombre state affair,or a
flickering light in an otherwise static scene, automatically and involuntarily attracts attention. Saliency is
independent of the nature of the particular task, operates very rapidly and is primarily driven in a bottomup manner, although it can be influenced by contextual, figure-ground effects. If a stimulus is sufficiently
salient, it will pop out of a visual scene. This suggests
that saliency is computed in a pre-attentive manner
across the entire visual field, most probably in terms of
hierarchical CENTRE-SURROUND MECHANISMS. The speed of
this saliency-based form of attention is on the order of
25 to 50 ms per item.
The second form of attention is a more deliberate
and powerful one that has variable selection criteria,
depending on the task at hand (for example,‘look for
the red, horizontal target’). The expression of this topdown attention is most probably controlled from higher areas,including the frontal lobes,which connect back
into visual cortex and early visual areas.Such volitional
deployment of attention has a price, because it takes
time — 200 ms or more, which rivals the time needed
to move the eyes. So, whereas certain features in the
visual world automatically attract attention and are
experienced as ‘visually salient’, directing attention to
other locations or objects requires voluntary ‘effort’.
Both mechanisms can operate in parallel.
Attention implements an information-processing
bottleneck that allows only a small part of the incoming
sensory information to reach short-term memory and
COMPUTATIONAL MODELLING OF
VISUAL ATTENTION
Laurent Itti* and Christof Koch‡
We review recent work on computational models of focal visual attention, with emphasis on the
bottom-up, image-based control of attentional deployment. We highlight five important trends
that have emerged from the computational literature. First, the perceptual saliency of stimuli
critically depends on the surrounding context. Second, a unique ‘saliency map’ that
topographically encodes for stimulus conspicuity over the visual scene has proved to be an
efficient and plausible bottom-up control strategy. Third, inhibition-of-return, the process by
which the currently attended location is prevented from being attended again, is a crucial element
of attentional deployment. Fourth, attention and eye movements tightly interplay, posing
computational challenges with respect to the coordinate system used to control attention. And
last, scene understanding and object recognition strongly constrain the selection of attended
locations. Insights from these five key areas provide a framework for a computational and
neurobiological understanding of visual attention. [Author: OK?]
CENTRE-SURROUND
MECHANISMS
These involve neurons that
respond to image differences
between a small central region
and a broader concentric
antagonistic surround region
[Author: OK?].
NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE
VOLUME 2 | FEBRUARY 2001 | 1
*Hedco Neuroscience
Building,University of
Southern California,3641
Watt Way,Los Angeles,
California 90089-2520,
USA. ‡Division of Biology,
Caltech,Pasadena,
California 91125,USA.
Correspondence to C.K.
 
[Author: Addresses OK?]
2 | FEBRUARY 2001 | VOLUME 2
www.nature.com/reviews/neuro
R E V I E W S
focus on biologically plausible computational modelling
of a saliency-based form of focal bottom-up attention.
Much less is known about the neural instantiation of the
top-down,volitional component of attention16,17.As this
aspect of attention has not been modelled in such detail,
it is not our primary focus here.
The control of focal visual attention involves an intricate network of brain areas (BOX 1).In a first approximation, selecting where to attend next is primarily controlled by the DORSAL STREAM of visual processing18,
although object recognition in the VENTRAL STREAM can
bias the next attentional shift through top-down control
(see below). The basis of most computational models
are the experimental results obtained using the visual
search paradigm of Treisman and colleagues,in particular the distinction between pop-out and conjunctive
searches developed in the early 1980s2.
The first explicit, neurally plausible computational
architecture for controlling visual attention was proposed by Koch and Ullman19 in 1985 (FIG.1) (for an earlier related model of vision and eye movements, see
Didday and Arbib20). Koch and Ullman’s model was
centred around a ‘saliency map’, that is, an explicit twodimensional topographical map that encodes stimulus
conspicuity, or saliency, at every location in the visual
scene.The saliency map receives inputs from early visual
processing,and provides an efficient control strategy by
which the focus of attention simply scans the saliency
map in order of decreasing saliency.Following this basic
architecture, we concentrate on five essential compovisual awareness10,11. So, instead of attempting to fully
process the massive sensory input (estimated to be on
the order of 107–108 bits per second at the optic nerve)
in parallel, a serial strategy has evolved that achieves
near real-time performance despite limited computational capacity.Attention allows us to break down the
problem of understanding a visual scene into rapid
series of computationally less demanding, localized
visual analysis problems.In addition to these orientating
and scene analysis functions,attention is also characterized by a feedback modulation of neural activity for the
visual attributes and at the location of desired or selected targets. This feedback is believed to be essential for
binding the different visual attributes of an object,such
as colour and form, into a unitary percept2,12,13. By this
account,attention not only serves to select a location of
interest but also enhances the cortical representation of
objects at that location.As such, focal visual attention
has been compared to a ‘stagelight’, successively illuminating different players as they take centre stage14.
Finally, attention is involved in triggering behaviour,
and is consequently intimately related to recognition,
planning and motor control15.
Developing computational models that describe
how attention is deployed within a given visual scene
has been an important challenge for computational
neuroscience. The potential application of these architectures in artificial vision for tasks such as surveillance,
automatic target detection,navigational aids and robotics control provides additional motivation. Here, we
Box 1 | Neuronal mechanisms for the control of attention
The brain regions that participate in the deployment of visual
attention include most of the early visual processing area.A
simplified overview of the main brain areas involved is shown
in the figure.Visual information enters the primary visual
cortex via the lateral geniculate nucleus (not shown),although
weaker pathways,for example,to the superior colliculus (SC),
also exist.From there,visual information progresses along
two parallel hierarchical streams.Cortical areas along the
‘dorsal stream’(including the posterior parietal cortex; PPC)
are primarily concerned with spatial localization and
directing attention and gaze towards objects of interest in the
scene.The control of attentional deployment is consequently
believed to mostly take place in the dorsal stream.Cortical
areas along the ‘ventral stream’(including the inferotemporal
cortex; IT) are mainly concerned with the recognition and
identification of visual stimuli.Although probably not
directly concerned with the control of attention,these ventralstream areas have indeed been shown to receive attentional
feedback modulation,and are involved in the representation
of attended locations and objects (that is,in what passes
through the attentional bottleneck).In addition,several
higher-function areas are thought to contribute to attentional
guidance,in that lesions in those areas causes a condition of‘neglect’in which patients seem unaware of parts of their
visual environment (see REF.111 for an overview of the regions involved).
From a computational viewpoint,the dorsal and ventral streams must interact,as scene understanding involves both
recognition and spatial deployment of attention.One region where such interaction has been extensively studied is the
prefrontal cortex (PFC),which is bidirectionally connected to both the PPC and the IT (see REF.15).So,in addition to
being responsible for planning of action (such as the execution of eye movements through the SC),the PFC has an
important role in modulating,in a feedback manner,the dorsal and ventral processing streams.
DORSAL STREAM
Brain areas involved in the
localization of objects and
mostly found in the posterior/
superior part of the brain.
VENTRAL STREAM
Brain areas involved in the
identification of objects and
mostly found in the posterior/
inferior part of the brain.
Eye movement
Memory and
other systems
Visual information
Visual cortex
parietal cortex
Prefrontal
colliculus
Inferotemporal
NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE
VOLUME 2 | FEBRUARY 2001 | 3
R E V I E W S
are tuned to simple visual attributes such as INTENSITY
CONTRAST, COLOUR OPPONENCY, orientation, direction and
velocity of motion, or stereo disparity at several spatial
scales. NEURONAL TUNING becomes increasingly more specialized with the progression from low-level to highlevel visual areas, such that higher-level visual areas
include neurons that respond only to corners or junctions22,shape-from-shading cues23,24 or views of specific
real-world objects25–28.
Early visual features are computed pre-attentively in
a massively parallel manner across the entire visual
field (note, however, that we do not imply here that
such computation is purely feedforward, as object
recognition and attention can influence it29). Indeed,
neurons fire vigorously in these early areas even if the
nents of any model of bottom-up attention. These are
the pre-attentive computation of early visual features
across the entire visual scene,their integration to yield a
single attentional control command, the generation of
attentional scanpaths, the interaction between covert
and overt attentional deployment (that is, eye movements) and the interplay between attention and scene
understanding.
Pre-attentive computation of visual features
The first processing stage in any model of bottom-up
attention is the computation of early visual features. In
biological vision, visual features are computed in the
retina,superior colliculus,lateral geniculate nucleus and
early visual cortical areas21.Neurons at the earliest stages
Multiscale
low-level feature
extraction
Input image
Red, green, blue, yellow,
On, off, etc.
Orientations
0°, 45°, 90°,
135°, etc.
Motion, junctions
and terminators,
stereo disparity,
shape from shading,
Saliency map
combinations
Winner-take-all
attentional bias
and training
Center-surround
differences and
spatial competition
Inhibition of return
Feature maps
Figure 1 | Flow diagram of a typical model of the control of bottom-up attention. This diagram is based on Koch and Ullman’s19 hypothesis that a centralized
two-dimensional saliency map can provide an efficient control strategy for the deployment of attention on the basis of bottom-up cues. The input image is
decomposed through several pre-attentive feature detection mechanisms (sensitive to colour, intensity and so on), which operate in parallel over the entire visual
scene. Neurons in the feature maps then encode for spatial contrast in each of those feature channels. In addition, neurons in each feature map spatially compete for
salience, through long-range connections that extend far beyond the spatial range of the classical receptive field of each neuron. After competition, the feature maps
are combined into a unique saliency map, which topographically encodes for saliency irrespective of the feature channel in which stimuli appeared salient. The saliency
map is sequentially scanned by attention through the interplay between a winner-take-all network (which detects the point of highest saliency at any given time) and
inhibition-of-return (which suppresses the last attended location from the saliency map, so that attention can focus onto the next most salient location). Top-down
attentional bias and training can modulate, top-down, most stages of this bottom-up model.
INTENSITY CONTRAST
Spatial difference (for example,
detected by centre-surround
mechanisms) in light intensity
(luminance) in a visual scene.
COLOUR OPPONENCY
Spatial difference in colours,
computed in the brain using
red/green and blue/yellow
centre-surround mechanisms.
NEURONAL TUNING
Property of visual neurons to
only respond to certain classes of
stimuli (for example,vertically
orientated bars).
4 | FEBRUARY 2001 | VOLUME 2
www.nature.com/reviews/neuro
R E V I E W S
Another interesting approach consists of implementing
detectors that respond best to those features that are
present at the locations visited by observers while freeviewing images50,51. For instance, Zetzsche et al.50,52
showed using an eye-tracking device how the eyes preferentially fixate regions with multiple superimposed
orientations such as corners, and derived nonlinear
operators that specifically detect those regions.
Irrespective of the method used for early feature
detection, several fundamental computational principles have emerged from both experimental and modelling studies. First, different features contribute with
different strengths to perceptual saliency53, and this relative feature weighting can be influenced depending
on the demands of the task through top-down modulation38,54 and through training55–58. Second, at a given
visual location, there is little evidence for strong interactions across different visual modalities, such as
colour and orientation53. This is not too surprising
from a computational viewpoint, as one would otherwise expect these interactions to also be subject to
training and top-down modulation, and this would
result in the ability to learn to detect conjunctive targets efficiently, which we lack2,59.Within a given broad
feature dimension, however, strong local interactions
between filters sensitive to different properties of that
feature (for example, between different orientations
within the broad orientation feature) have been precisely characterized, both in physiology60 and psychophysics45. Less evidence exists for within-feature
competition across different spatial scales45.
Last and most importantly, what seems to matter in
guiding bottom-up attention is feature contrast rather
than local absolute feature strength61. Indeed, not only
are most early visual neurons tuned to some type of
local spatial contrast (such as centre-surround or orientated edges), but neuronal responses are also strongly
modulated by context, in a manner that extends far
beyond the range of the classical receptive field (cRF)62.
In a first approximation, the computational consequences of non-classical surround modulation are
twofold. First, a broad inhibitory effect is observed
when a neuron is excited with its preferred stimulus but
that stimulus extends beyond the neuron’s cRF, compared with when the stimulus is restricted to the cRF
and the surrounding visual space is either empty or
contains non-preferred stimuli63–65. Second, long-range
excitatory connections in V1 seem to enhance responses of orientation-selective neurons when stimuli extend
to form a contour66,67. These interactions are thought to
be crucial in perceptual grouping68,69. The net result is
that activity in early cortical areas is surprisingly sparse
when monkeys are free-viewing natural scenes70, compared with the vigorous responses that can be elicited
by small laboratory stimuli presented in isolation.
So, the computation of early visual features entails
more than localized operations limited to the cRF of
visual neurons, as local responses crucially depend on
longer-range contextual influences. To explicitly
demonstrate this idea with a computer model, Itti et
al.71 compared purely local spatial frequency ‘richness’
animal is attending away from the receptive field at the
site of recording30, or is anaesthetized31. In addition,
several psychophysical studies, as well as introspection,
indicate that we are not blind to the world outside the
focus of attention.Thus we can make simple judgments
on objects to which we are not attending32, although
those judgments are limited and less accurate than
those made in the presence of attention2,12,13,33–36. So
although attention does not seem to be mandatory for
early vision, it has recently become clear that attention
can vigorously modulate, in a top-down manner, early
visual processing, both in a spatially-defined and in a
non-spatial but feature-specific manner37–39. This modulatory effect of attention has been described as
enhanced gain30,biased40,41 or intensified33 competition,
or enhanced spatial resolution34, or as modulated background activity42, effective stimulus strength43 or
noise44. That attention can modulate early visual processing in a manner equivalent to an increase of stimulus strength43 is computationally an important finding,
which directly supports the metaphor of attention as a
stagelight. Of particular interest from a computational
perspective is a recent study by Lee et al.33 that measured PSYCHOPHYSICAL THRESHOLDS for three simple pattern-discrimination tasks (contrast, orientation and
spatial-frequency discriminations) and two spatialmasking tasks (32 thresholds in total).A dual-task paradigm was used to measure thresholds either when
attention was fully available to the task of interest, or
when it was less available because it was engaged elsewhere by a concurrent attention-demanding task. The
mixed pattern of attentional modulation observed in
the thresholds (up to threefold improvement in orientation discrimination with attention, but only 20%
improvement in contrast discrimination) can be quantitatively accounted for by a computational model.This
model predicts that attention activates a winner-takeall competition among neurons tuned to different orientations and spatial frequencies within one cortical
HYPERCOLUMN33,45,a proposition that has recently received
further experimental support46.Because feedback modulation influences the computation of bottom-up features, models of bottom-up attention need to take this
into account. An example of a mixed bottom-up and
top-down model in which attention enhances spatial
resolution47 is discussed later.
Computational models may or may not include
explicit details about early visual feature extraction.
Models that do not are restricted to images for which
the responses of feature detectors can reasonably be
guessed.Models that do have the widest applicability to
any visual stimulus,including natural scenes.Computer
implementations of early visual processes are often
motivated by an imitation of biological properties. For
example,the response of a neuron tuned to INTENSITY CEN-
TRE-SURROUND CONTRAST can be computed by convolving
the luminance channel of the input image by a DIFFER-
ENCE-OF-GAUSSIANS (Mexican Hat) filter. Similarly, the
responses of orientation-selective neurons are usually
obtained through convolution by GABOUR WAVELETS,which
resemble biological IMPULSE RESPONSE FUNCTIONS48,49.
PSYCHOPHYSICAL THRESHOLDS
Smallest difference between two
visual stimuli (for example,
vertical versus tilted bar) than
can reliably (that is,with a given
probability of error) be reported
by an observer.
HYPERCOLUMN
A patch of cortex including
neurons responding to all
orientations and many spatial
scales,all for a single location in
the visual field.
INTENSITY CENTRE-SURROUND
Author: please define
DIFFERENCE-OF-GAUSSIAN
A filter obtained by taking the
difference between a narrow
Gaussian distribution (the
excitatory centre) and a broader
Gaussian distribution with same
mean (the inhibitory surround).
GABOUR WAVELET
Product of a sinusoidal grating
and a two-dimensional Gaussian
IMPULSE RESPONSE FUNCTION
The response of a filter to a
single point (Dirac) stimulus.
NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE
VOLUME 2 | FEBRUARY 2001 | 5
R E V I E W S
gy for focusing attention to salient locations without
consideration of the detailed feature responses that
made those locations salient.
Not surprisingly, many successful models for the
bottom-up control of attention are built around a
saliency map.What differentiates the models, then, is
the strategy used to prune the incoming sensory input
and extract saliency. In an influential model mostly
aimed at explaining visual search experiments,Wolfe54
hypothesized that the selection of relevant features for a
given search task could be performed top-down,
through spatially-defined and feature-dependent
weighting of the various feature maps. Saliency is then
computed in this model as the likelihood that a target
will be present at a given location, based both on bottom-up feature contrast and top-down feature weight.
This view has recently received experimental support
from the many studies of top-down attentional modulation mentioned earlier.
Tsotsos and colleagues72 implemented attentional
selection using a combination of a feedforward bottomup feature extraction hierarchy and a feedback selective
tuning of these feature extraction mechanisms. In this
model, the target for attention focusing is selected at
the top level of the processing hierarchy (the equivalent of a saliency map), on the basis of feedforward
activation and possible additional top-down biasing
for certain locations or features. That location is then
propagated back through the feature extraction hierarchy, through the activation of a cascade of winnertake-all networks embedded within the bottom-up
processing pyramid. Spatial competition for saliency is
thus refined at each level of processing, as the feedforward paths not contributing to the winning location
are pruned (resulting in the feedback propagation of
an ‘inhibitory beam’around the selected target).
Milanese and colleagues73 used a relaxation process
to minimize an energy measure consisting of four
terms: first, minimizing inter-feature incoherence
favours those regions that excite several feature maps;
second, minimizing intra-feature incoherence favours
grouping of initially spread activity into small numbers of clusters; third, minimizing total activity in each
map enforces intra-map spatial competition for saliency; and last, maximizing the dynamic range of each
map ensures that the process does not converge
towards uniform maps at some average value.
Although the biological plausibility of this process
remains to be tested, it has yielded a rare example of a
model that can be applied to natural colour images.
Itti et al.71,74 consider a purely bottom-up model, in
which spatial competition for saliency is directly modelled after non-classical surround modulation effects.
The model uses an iterative spatial competition scheme
with early termination.At each iteration,a feature map
receives additional inputs from the convolution of itself
by a large difference-of-Gaussians filter. The result is
half-wave rectified,a nonlinear process that ensures that
the locations losing the competition are entirely eliminated.The net effect of this competitive process is similar
to a winner-take-all process with limited inhibitory
(as measured by computing local Fourier components
with a magnitude above a certain threshold) with a
saliency measure that included broad non-classical surround inhibition. They designed images with uniformly rich spatial frequency content (using colour speckle
noise), but containing a perceptually salient target.
Although the target was undifferentiated from its surround in terms of spatial frequency content, it was correctly detected by the mechanism including contextual
competition.
Pre-attentive mechanisms that extract early visual
features across the entire visual scene should not be
overlooked in future modelling efforts. Indeed, it has
recently become clear that early vision is far from being
a passive and highly prototyped image-processing frontend that can be accurately modelled by linear filtering
operations. Perceptually, whether a given stimulus is
salient or not cannot be decided without knowledge of
the context in which the stimulus is presented.So computationally,one must also account for nonlinear interactions across distant spatial locations, which mediate
contextual modulation of neuronal responses.
We have seen how the early stages of visual processing
decompose the incoming visual input through an
ensemble of feature-selective filtering processes
endowed with contextual modulatory effects.The question that arises next is how to control a single attentional
focus based on multiple neuronal networks that encode
the incoming sensory signals using multiple representations.To solve this problem,most models of bottom-up
attention follow that of Koch and Ullman19 and hypothesize that the various feature maps feed into a unique
‘saliency’or ‘master’map2,19.The saliency map is a scalar,
two-dimensional map whose activity topographically
represents visual saliency, irrespective of the feature
dimension that makes the location salient. That is, an
active location in the saliency map encodes the fact that
this location is salient,no matter whether it corresponds
to a red object in a field of green objects,or to a stimulus
moving towards the right while others move towards
the left. On the basis of this scalar topographical representation, biasing attention to focus onto the most
salient location is reduced to drawing attention towards
the locus of highest activity in the saliency map.
Computationally, an explicit representation of
saliency in a dedicated map reinforces the idea that
some amount of spatial selection should be performed
during pre-attentive feature detection. Otherwise, the
divergence from retinal input to many feature maps
could not be followed by a convergence into a saliency
map without ending up with a representation in the
saliency map that is as complex, cluttered and difficult
to interpret as the original image. On the basis of this
divergence, selection and convergence process, a location is defined as salient if it wins the spatial competition in one or more feature dimensions at one or more
spatial scales. The saliency map then encodes for an
aggregate measure of saliency not tied to any particular
feature dimension,providing an efficient control strate-
6 | FEBRUARY 2001 | VOLUME 2
www.nature.com/reviews/neuro
R E V I E W S
and by a saliency map, but instead is implicitly coded in
a distributed modulatory manner across the various
feature maps.Attentional selection is then performed
on the basis of top-down enhancement of the feature
maps relevant to a target of interest and extinction of
those that are distracting, but without an explicit computation of salience. At least one model successfully
applied this strategy to synthetic stimuli76; note, however, that such top-down biasing (also used in Wolfe’s
Guided Search model to select the weights of various
feature contributions to the saliency map) requires that
a specific search task be performed for the model to
yield useful predictions.
Although originally a theoretical construct supported by sparse experimental evidence, the idea of a
unique,centralized saliency map seems today to be challenged by the apparent existence of multiple areas that
encode stimulus saliency in the visual system of the
monkey.These regions include areas in the lateral intraparietal sulcus of the posterior parietal cortex (FIG.2),the
frontal eye fields,the inferior and lateral subdivisions of
the pulvinar and the superior colliculus77–82.
One possible explanation for this multiplicity could
be that some of the neurons in these areas are indeed
concerned with the explicit computation of saliency,but
are located at different stages along the sensorimotor
processing stream. For example, other functions have
also been assigned to the posterior parietal cortex, such
as that of mapping retinotopic to head-centred coordinate systems and of memorizing targets for eye or arm
movements83,84. So more detailed experimental studies
are needed to reveal subtle differences in the functions
and representations found in these brain areas. Most
probably, the main difference between these brain
regions is the balance between their role in perception
and action15,82. Meanwhile, it is worth noting that, in
addition to the physiological findings just mentioned,
recent psychophysical results also support the idea of an
explicit encoding of saliency in the brain85.
Attentional selection and inhibition-of-return
The saliency map guides where the attentional stagelight
or spotlight86 is to be deployed,that is,to the most salient
location in the scene.One plausible neural architecture
to detect the most salient location is that of a winnertake-all network,which implements a neurally distributed maximum detector19,87. Using this mechanism,
however, raises another computational problem: how
can we prevent attention from permanently focusing
onto the most active (winner) location in the saliency
map? One efficient computational strategy, which has
received experimental support, consists of transiently
inhibiting neurons in the saliency map at the currently
attended location.After the currently attended location is
thus suppressed,the winner-take-all network naturally
converges towards the next most salient location, and
repeating this process generates attentional scanpaths19,71.
Such inhibitory tagging of recently attended locations has been widely observed in human psychophysics as a phenomenon called ‘inhibition-ofreturn’(IOR)88,89.A typical psychophysical experiment
spread,and allows only a sparse population of locations
to remain active.After competition,all feature maps are
simply summed to yield the scalar saliency map at the
core of the model.Because it includes a complete frontend,this model has been widely applied to the analysis of
natural colour scenes.Experimental results include the
reproduction by the model of human behaviour in classical visual search tasks (popout versus conjunctive
search,and search asymmetries2,74),a demonstration of
very robust saliency computation with respect to image
noise71,the automatic detection of traffic signs and other
salient objects in natural environments58 and the detection of pedestrians in natural scenes (see below for preliminary results).Finally,the performance of the model
at detecting military vehicles in the high-resolution
Search2 NATO database of colour rural scenes75 exceeded human performance in terms of the estimated number of locations that need to be visited by the attentional
searchlight before the target is located74.
In view of the numerous models based on a saliency
map,it is important to note that postulating centralized
control based on such a map is not the only computational alternative for the bottom-up guidance of attention.In particular,Desimone and Duncan10 argued that
saliency is not explicitly represented by specific neurons
a Stimulus appears in RF
b Stimulus brought into RF by saccade
Recent onset stimulus
Stable stimulus
Figure 2 | Recording saliency. [Author: OK?] Once a purely computational hypothesis, the
idea that saliency might be explicitly encoded by specific neurons in the cortex has recently
received experimental support from many electrohpysiological studies77–82. How can one design
an experiment that specifically tests whether a neuron responds to the saliency of a stimulus,
rather than to the mere presence of that stimulus in the visual environment? In a particularly
interesting experiment, Gottlieb and colleagues80, recording from the lateral intraparietal sulcus
of the awake monkey, found neurons that responded to visual stimuli only when those stimuli
were made salient (by rapidly flashing them on a computer screen), but not otherwise. Their
experiment cleverly used the retinotopic nature of the receptive fields of these neurons to bring a
stimulus into their receptive field (RF) through a saccadic eye movement. a | In the control
condition, a stimulus is presented in the RF of the neuron being recorded from, and elicits a
response. That response could be simply visual, or indicating the saliency of this stimulus
suddenly appearing in the visual field. b | To differentiate between these possibilities, two
additional experiments were designed to be identical for the neuron of interest: a stimulus
entered the RF through a saccade. However, a vigorous response was observed only when the
stimulus had been made salient shortly before the beginning of the trial (by flashing it on and off
while it still was outside the RF of the neuron; ‘recent onset’ condition). [Author: please define
FP] Macmillan Magazines Ltd.)
NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE
VOLUME 2 | FEBRUARY 2001 | 7
R E V I E W S
body can move (BOX 2). This frame-of-reference problem should be accounted for in computational models.
Note that the idea of IOR is not necessarily contradicted
by the recent findings of Horowitz and Wolfe98 that
visual search does not seem to involve memory: when
elements of a search array were randomly reorganized
at short time intervals while subjects were searching for
a specific target, search efficiency was not degraded
compared with when the search array remained stationary.Although these results preclude perfect memorization of all previously attended locations (otherwise,
search on a stable array should be more efficient than
on a constantly changing array), they do not preclude
that the positions of the last few visited items were
remembered, in accordance with the limited lifespan
reported for IOR90.
Although simple in principle,IOR is computationally a very important component of attention, in that it
allows us — or a model — to rapidly shift the attentional focus over different locations with decreasing saliency,
rather than being bound to attend only to the location
of maximal saliency at any given time. The role of IOR
in active vision and overt attention also poses challenges
that will need to be addressed in more detail by future
models (BOX 2).
Attention and recognition
So far, we have reviewed computational modelling and
supporting experimental evidence for a basic architecture concerned with the bottom-up control of attention: early visual features are computed in a set of topographical feature maps; spatial competition for saliency
prunes the feature responses to only preserve a handful
of active locations; all feature maps are then combined
into a unique scalar saliency map; and, finally, the
saliency map is scanned by the focus of attention
through the interplay between winner-take-all and IOR.
Although such a simple computational architecture
might accurately describe how attention is deployed
within the first few hundreds of milliseconds after the
presentation of a new scene, it is obvious that a more
complete model of attentional control must include
top-down, volitional biasing influences as well. The
computational challenge,then,lies in the integration of
bottom-up and top-down cues, such as to provide
coherent control signals for the focus of attention, and
in the interplay between attentional orientating and
scene or object recognition.
One of the earliest models that combines object
recognition and attention is MORSEL99,in which attentional selection was shown to be necessary for object
recognition.This model is applied to the recognition of
words processed through a recognition hierarchy.
Without attentional selection, the representations of
several words in a scene would conflict and confuse that
recognition hierarchy, yielding multiple superimposed
representations at the top level. The addition of a topdown attentional selection process allowed the model to
disambiguate recognition by focusing on one word at a
time. Another early model that is worth mentioning
here is described in REF.100.
to evaluate IOR consists of performing speeded local
pattern discriminations at various locations in the
visual field; when a discrimination is performed at a
location to which the observer has been previously
cued, reaction times are slightly, but significantly, higher than at locations not previously visited90. These
results indicate that visual processing at recently
attended locations might be slower, possibly owing to
some inhibitory tagging at attended locations. Several
authors have specifically isolated an attentional component of IOR in addition to a motor (response delay)
component91–93.
Computationally, IOR implements a short-term
memory of the previously visited locations and allows
the attentional selection mechanism to focus instead on
new locations. The simplest implementation of IOR
consists of triggering transient inhibitory conductances
in the saliency map at the currently attended location74.
However,this only represents a coarse approximation of
biological IOR, which has been shown to be objectbound, so that it should track and follow moving
objects, and compensate for a moving observer as
well94–97. The frame of reference in which IOR is
expressed is an important issue because the eyes and the
Box 2 | Attention and eye movements
Most of the models and experiments reviewed here are concerned with covert attention,
that is,shifts of the focus of attention in the absence of eye movements.In normal
situations,however,we move our eyes 3–5 times per second (that is,150,000 to 250,000
times every day),to align locations of interest with our foveas.Overt and covert attention,
however,are closely related,as revealed by psychophysical112–115 physiological79,81,83,116
and imaging112,117 studies.The neuronal structures involved include the deeper parts of
the superior colliculus; parts of the pulvinar; the frontal eye fields in the macaque and its
homologue in humans,the precentral gyrus; and areas in the intraparietal sulcus in the
macaque and around the intraparietal and postcentral sulci and adjacent gyri in humans.
An example of overlapping functionality in humans is the study by Hoffman and
Subramaniam114.They designed an experiment in which subjects performed a saccade
just preceded by a target detection task; the greater accuracy found when the target to be
detected appeared at the endpoint location of the saccade suggests that covert attention
had been deployed to that endpoint in preparation to the saccade [Author: please clarify
this sentence] .
For models,the addition of eye movements poses several additional computational
challenges.Of particular interest is the need for compensatory mechanisms to shift the
saliency map (typically in retinotopic coordinates) as eye movements occur.Dominey
and Arbib118 proposed a biologically plausible computational architecture that could
perform such dynamic remapping in posterior parietal cortex (PPC).They noted that
eye velocity signals have not been found in PPC; however,cells modulated by eye
position have been reported83.They thus devised an iterative scheme to shift the
contents of the saliency map according to the difference between current eye position
and a temporally damped eye position signal.Their algorithm builds a convolution
kernel from the difference between current and damped eye positions,which,when
applied to the saliency map,translates it in the direction opposite to that difference.A
related approach was proposed by Pouget and Sejnowski84,in which the observed
modulation of neuronal responses in PPC by retinal location and eye position (‘gain
field’80) is modelled by a set of basis functions,then used to transform from retinotopic
to head-centred coordinates.
The interaction between overt and covert attention is particularly important for models
concerned with visual search119–121.Further modelling of such interactions promises a
better understanding of many mechanisms,including saccadic suppression,dynamic
remapping of the saliency map and inhibition of return,covert pre-selection of targets
for overt saccades,and the online understanding of complex visual scenes.
8 | FEBRUARY 2001 | VOLUME 2
www.nature.com/reviews/neuro
R E V I E W S
scene or object to be recognized.When presented with a
new image,the model starts by selecting candidate scanpaths by [Author:OK?] matching bottom-up features in
the image to those stored in the ‘what’memory.For each
candidate scanpath,the model deploys attention according to the directives in the ‘where’ memory and compares the local contents of the ‘what’ memory at each
fixation with the local image features. This model can
recognize complex greyscale scenes and faces in a translation-,rotation- and scale-independent manner.
Deco and Zihl have recently proposed another
model that combines attentional selection and object
recognition47.Their model starts by selecting candidate
object locations bottom-up through a coarse-scale
analysis of the image.An attentional mechanism scans
the candidate locations in a serial fashion and performs
object recognition at progressively finer scales until a
sufficient recognition score is obtained for an object
stored in memory. This model has been sucessfully
applied to psychophysical experiments that show attentional enhancement of spatial resolution (see also REFS
34,103 for related experiments and modelling).
A more extreme view is expressed by the ‘scanpath
theory’ of Stark104, in which the control of eye movements is almost exclusively under top-down control.
The theory proposes that what we see is only remotely
related to the patterns of activation in our retinas.This is
suggested by our permanent illusion of vivid perception
over the entire field of view, although only the central
two degrees of our foveal vision provide crisp sampling
of the visual world. Rather, the scanpath theory argues
that a cognitive model of what we expect to see is the
basis for our percept; the sequence of eye movements
that we make to analyse a scene, then, is mostly controlled by our cognitive model of that scene.This theory
has had several successful applications to robotics control, in which an internal model of a robot’s working
environment was used to restrict the analysis of incoming video sequences to a small number of circumscribed
regions important for a given task105.
One important challenge for combined models of
attention and recognition is finding suitable neuronal
correlates for the various components.Despite the biological inspiration in these architectures, the models
reviewed here do not relate in much detail to biological
correlates of object recognition.Although several biologically plausible models have been proposed for object
recognition in the ventral ‘what’stream (in particular,
REFS 106,107),their integration with neurobiological models concerned with attentional control in the dorsal
‘where’stream remains an open issue. This integration
will, in particular, have to account for the increasing
experimental support for an object-based spatial focus
of attention108–110.
Here, we have discussed recent advances in the study of
biologically plausible computational models of attention, with a particular emphasis on bottom-up control
of attentional deployment. Throughout this review, we
have stressed five important computational trends that
A very interesting model that uses spatial shifts of
attention during recognition was recently provided by
Schill et al.101. Their model performs scene (or object)
recognition, using attention (or eye movements) to
focus on those parts of the scene that are most informative when disambiguating identity.To this end,a hierarchical knowledge tree is built through training. Here,
leaves represent identified objects, intermediary nodes
represent more general object classes and links between
nodes contain sensorimotor information used for discrimination between possible objects (that is, bottomup feature response to be expected for particular points
in the object and eye movements targeted at those
points). During the iterative recognition of an object,
the system programs its next fixation towards the location that will maximize the gain of information about
the object. This permits the model to discriminate
between the current candidate object classes (FIG.3).
Rybak et al.102 proposed a related model, in which
scanpaths (containing motor control directives stored in
a ‘where’memory and locally expected bottom-up features stored in a ‘what’ memory) are learned for each
All scene and object classes
Incoming visual scene
Top-down processing
Bottom-up feature
extraction
Salient locations
Sensory input
at current eye position
Eye movement with
maximum information gain
Rectangles
Acquired knowledge
Figure 3 | Combined model of attentional selection and object recognition. Attention
scans the scene such as to gather as much information as possible that can help discriminate
between several recognition hypotheses. The model has two main components. First, a bottomup feature extraction pathway extracts informative image regions from an incoming visual scene
(for example, the corners of the diamond in the present illustration). Second, a trained knowledge
base hierarchically represents object classes and encodes for both expected visual features at a
set of critical points on these objects, and motor commands to move the eyes from one critical
point to another. Recognition is then achieved by choosing for the next eye movement the one
that maximizes information gain, that is, that best prunes the tree of known objects. In the
hypothetical example shown to illustrate this idea, the first eye movement might thus go to the top
corner of the object; finding sharp edges there would then suggest that this is a polygonal
drawing. The knowledge base would then direct gaze to the most salient point directly below the
currently fixated one, as that eye movement would best discriminate between the several known
polygonal shapes; looking at the orientations of the features there, it becomes clear that the
object is a diamond rather than a square or one of several possible rectangles. (Adapted with
permission from REF.101 xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx.)
NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE
VOLUME 2 | FEBRUARY 2001 | 9
R E V I E W S
substrate. This poses serious computational problems
with respect to the frame of reference in which saliency
and IOR are computed.Recent evidence for world-centred and object-centred frames of reference need to be
integrated into models. Last, the control of attentional
deployment is intimately related to scene understanding
and object recognition. Although several computer
vision models with restricted biological plausibility have
been proposed that integrate both attentional orientating and object identification, many exciting research
challenges still lie in attempting to provide a more complete account of the dorsal and ventral processing
streams in primate brains.
Controlling where attention should be deployed is
not an autonomous feedforward process. Possible
future directions for modelling work include modelling
of interactions between task demands and top-down
cues, bottom-up cues, mechanistic constraints (for
example,when eye and body movements are executed)
and neuroanatomical constraints such as feedback
modulation.
have emerged from this literature. First, saliency is
derived from low-level visual features but, more than
absolute feature strength or other detailed characteristics of the features, what seems to be important for the
computation of saliency is feature contrast with respect
to the contextual surround.Second,saliency increasingly seems to be a quantity that is coded explicitly in cortex separate from the visual features.This reinforces the
once hypothetical concept of an explicit saliency map.
Furthermore, several models have demonstrated the
computational usefulness and plausibility of such an
explicit map by successfully reproducing the behaviour
of humans and monkeys in search tasks. Meanwhile,
neural analogues of the saliency map are being found at
multiple locations in the visual system of the macaque,
hence posing a new challenge of integration of these
many maps to yield unitary behaviour.Third,attention
will not shift unless the currently attended (most
salient) location is somehow disabled (otherwise, any
model looking for saliency will keep coming back to the
most salient location).IOR is consequently an essential
computational component of attention and, indeed, it
has been recently described as a complex, object-based
and dynamically adaptive process that needs to be better
modelled.Fourth,covert attention and eye movements
are increasingly believed to share a common neuronal
FURTHER INFORMATION Supplementary material for
James, W. The Principles of Psychology .
Treisman, A. M. & Gelade, G. A feature-integration theory of
attention. Cogn. Psychol. 12, 97–136 .
An influencial theory of attention and visual search.
Bergen, J. R. & Julesz, B. Parallel versus serial processing in
rapid pattern discrimination. Nature 303, 696–698 .
Treisman, A. Features and objects: The fourteenth Bartlett
memorial lecture. Q. J. Exp. Psychol. A 40, 201–237 .
Nakayama, K. & Mackeben, M. Sustained and transient
components of focal visual attention. Vision Res. 29,
1631–1647 .
Braun, J. & Sagi, D. Vision outside the focus of attention.
Percept. Psychophys. 48, 45–58 .
Hikosaka, O., Miyauchi, S. & Shimojo, S. Orienting a spatial
attention-its reflexive, compensatory, and voluntary
mechanisms. Brain Res. Cogn. Brain Res. 5, 1–9 .
Braun, J. & Julesz, B. Withdrawing attention at little or no
cost: detection and discrimination tasks. Percept.
Psychophys. 60, 1–23 .
Braun, J., Itti, L., Lee, D. K., Zenger, B. & Koch, C. in Visual
Attention and Neural Circuits (eds Braun, J., Koch,C. &
Davis, J.) (MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts, in the press).
Desimone, R. & Duncan, J. Neural mechanisms of selective
visual attention. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 18, 193–222 .
Crick, F. & Koch, C. Constraints on cortical and thalamic
projections: the no-strong-loops hypothesis. Nature 391,
245–250 .
Hummel, J. E. & Biederman, I. Dynamic binding in a neural
network for shape recognition. Psychol. Rev. 99, 480–517
Reynolds, J. H. & Desimone, R. The role of neural
mechanisms of attention in solving the binding problem.
Neuron 24, 19–29 .
Weichselgartner, E. & Sperling, G. Dynamics of automatic
and controlled visual attention. Science 238, 778–780
Miller, E. K. The prefrontal cortex and cognitive control.
Nature Rev. Neurosci. 1, 59–65 .
Hopfinger, J. B., Buonocore, M. H. & Mangun, G. R. The
neural mechanisms of top-down attentional control. Nature
Neurosci. 3, 284–291 .
Corbetta, M., Kincade, J. M., Ollinger, J. M., McAvoy, M. P.
& Shulman, G. L. Voluntary orienting is dissociated from
target detection in human posterior parietal cortex. Nature
Neurosci. 3, 292–297 ; erratum 3, 521 .
Ungerlaider, L. G. & Mishkin, M. in Analysis of Visual
Behavior (eds Ingle, D. J., Goodale, M. A. & Mansfield, R. J.
W.) .
Koch, C. & Ullman, S. Shifts in selective visual attention:
towards the underlying neural circuitry. Hum. Neurobiol. 4,
219–227 .
One of the first explicit computational models of
bottom-up attention, at the origin of the idea of a
“saliency map”.
Didday, R. L. & Arbib, M. A. Eye movements and visual
perception: A “two visual system’’ model. Int. J.
Man–Machine Studies 7, 547–569 .
Suder, K. & Worgotter, F. The control of low-level information
flow in the visual system. Rev. Neurosci. 11, 127–146
Pasupathy, A. & Connor, C. E. Responses to contour
features in macaque area v4. J. Neurophysiol. 82,
2490–2502 .
Braun, J. Shape-from-shading is independent of visual
attention and may be a ‘texton’. Spat. Vis. 7, 311–322
Sun, J. & Perona, P. Early computation of shape and
reflectance in the visual system. Nature 379, 165–168
Logothetis, N. K., Pauls, J. & Poggio, T. Shape
representation in the inferior temporal cortex of monkeys.
Curr. Biol. 5, 552–563 .
Bar, M. & Biederman, I. Localizing the cortical region
mediating visual awareness of object identity. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA 96, 1790–1793 .
Vogels, R., Biederman, I., Bar, M. & Lorincz, A. Inferior
temporal neurons show greater sensitivity to nonaccidental
than metric differences. J. Cogn. Neurosci. (in the press).
[Author: update?]
Kreiman, G., Koch, C. & Fried, I. Category-specific visual
responses of single neurons in the human medial temporal
lobe. Nature Neurosci. 3, 946–953 .
29. He, Z. J. & Nakayama, K. Perceiving textures: beyond
filtering. Vision Res. 34, 151–162 .
Treue, S. & Maunsell, J. H. Attentional modulation of visual
motion processing in cortical areas mt and mst. Nature 382,
539–541 .
Hubel, D. H. & Wiesel, T. N. Receptive fields, binocular
interaction and functional architecture in the cat’s visual
cortex. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 160, 106–154 .
DeSchepper, B. & Treisman, A. Visual memory for novel
shapes: implicit coding without attention. J. Exp. Psychol.
Learn. Mem. Cogn. 22, 27–47 .
Lee, D. K., Itti, L., Koch, C. & Braun, J. Attention activates
winner-take-all competition among visual filters. Nature
Neurosci. 2, 375–381 .
A detailed neural model is used to quantitatively
predict attentional modulation of psychophysical
pattern discrimination performance in terms of
intensified competition between visual neurons.
Yeshurun, Y. & Carrasco, M. Attention improves or impairs
visual performance by enhancing spatial resolution. Nature
396, 72–75 .
35. Mack, A., Tang, B., Tuma, R., Kahn, S. & Rock, I. Perceptual
organization and attention. Cogn. Psychol. 24, 475–501
Moore, C. M. & Egeth, H. Perception without attention:
evidence of grouping under conditions of inattention. J. Exp.
Psychol. Hum. Percept. Perform. 23, 339–352 .
Motter, B. C. Neural correlates of attentive selection for color
or luminance in extrastriate area v4. J. Neurosci. 14,
2178–2189 .
Treue, S. & Trujillo, J. C. M. Feature-based attention
influences motion processing gain in macaque visual cortex.
Nature 399, 575–579 .
Investigates two types of feedback attentional
modulation: spatial-based, and non-spatial but
feature-based.
Barcelo, F., Suwazono, S. & Knight, R. T. Prefrontal
modulation of visual processing in humans. Nature
Neurosci. 3, 399–403 .
Moran, J. & Desimone, R. Selective attention gates visual
processing in the extrastriate cortex. Science 229, 782–784
Niebur, E., Koch, C. & Rosin, C. An oscillation-based model
for the neuronal basis of attention. Vision Res. 33,
2789–2802 .
Chawla, D., Rees, G. & Friston, K. J. The physiological basis
of attentional modulation in extrastriate visual areas. Nature
Neurosci. 2, 671–676 .
Reynolds, J. H., Pasternak, T. & Desimone, R. Attention
increases sensitivity of v4 neurons. Neuron 26, 703–714
Dosher, B. A. & Lu, Z. L. Mechanisms of perceptual
attention in precuing of location. Vision Res. 40, 1269–1292
Itti, L., Koch, C. & Braun, J. Revisiting spatial vision: Towards
a unifying model. J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 17, 1899–1917 .
Carrasco, M., Penpeci-Talgar, C. & Eckstein, M. Spatial
covert attention increases contrast sensitivity across the csf:
support for signal enhancement. Vision Res. 40, 1203–1215
10 | FEBRUARY 2001 | VOLUME 2
www.nature.com/reviews/neuro
R E V I E W S
Deco, G. & Zihl, J. A neurodynamical model of visual
attention: Feedback enhancement of spatial resolution in a
hierarchical system. J. Comp. Neurosci. (in the press).
[Author: update?]
Daugman, J. G. Spatial visual channels in the
fourier plane. Vision Res. 24, 891–910 .
Palmer, L. A., Jones, J. P. & Stepnoski, R. A. in The Neural
Basis of Visual Function (ed. Leventhal, A. G.) 246–265
 .
Zetzsche, C. et al. Investigation of a sensorimotor system for
saccadic scene analysis: an integrated approach. Proc. 5th
Int. Conf. Simulation Adaptive Behav. 5, 120–126 .
Reinagel, P. & Zador, A. M. Natural scene statistics at the
centre of gaze. Network Comp. Neural Sys. 10, 341–350
Barth, E., Zetzsche, C. & Rentschler, I. Intrinsic twodimensional features as textons. J. Opt. Soc. Am. A Opt.
Image. Sci. Vis. 15, 1723–1732 .
Nothdurft, H. Salience from feature contrast: additivity
across dimensions. Vision Res. 40, 1183–1201 .
Studies psychophysically how orientation, motion,
luminance and colour contrast cues combine to yield
the saliency of visual stimuli.
Wolfe, J. M. Visual search in continuous, naturalistic stimuli.
Vision Res. 34, 1187–1195 .
Braun, J. Vision and attention: the role of training. Nature
393, 424–425 .
Ahissar, M. & Hochstein, S. The spread of attention and
learning in feature search: effects of target distribution and
task difficulty. Vision Res. 40, 1349–1364 .
Sigman, M. & Gilbert, C. D. Learning to find a shape. Nature
Neurosci. 3, 264–269 .
Itti, L. & Koch, C. Feature combination strategies for
saliency-based visual attention systems. J. Electronic
Imaging (in the press). [Author: update?]
Wolfe, J. in Attention (ed. Pashler, H.) [Author: page no’s]
 .
Carandini, M. & Heeger, D. J. Summation and division by
neurons in primate visual cortex. Science 264, 1333–1336
Nothdurft, H. C. Texture discrimination by cells in the cat
lateral geniculate nucleus. Exp. Brain Res. 82, 48–66 .
Allman, J., Miezin, F. & McGuinness, E. Stimulus specific
responses from beyond the classical receptive field:
neurophysiological mechanisms for local-global
comparisons in visual neurons. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 8,
407–430 .
One of the first reports that activity of a visual neuron
can be modulated by the presence of distant stimuli,
far outside the neuron’s receptive field.
Cannon, M. W. & Fullenkamp, S. C. Spatial interactions in
apparent contrast: inhibitory effects among grating patterns
of different spatial frequencies, spatial positions and
orientations. Vision Res. 31, 1985–1998 .
Sillito, A. M., Grieve, K. L., Jones, H. E., Cudeiro, J. & Davis,
J. Visual cortical mechanisms detecting focal orientation
discontinuities. Nature 378, 492–496 .
Levitt, J. B. & Lund, J. S. Contrast dependence of
contextual effects in primate visual cortex. Nature 387,
73–76 .
Gilbert, C. D. & Wiesel, T. N. Columnar specificity of intrinsic
horizontal and corticocortical connections in cat visual
cortex. J. Neurosci. 9, 2432–2442 .
Gilbert, C., Ito, M., Kapadia, M. & Westheimer, G.
Interactions between attention, context and learning in
primary visual cortex. Vision Res. 40, 1217–1226 .
Ben-Av, M. B., Sagi, D. & Braun, J. Visual attention and
perceptual grouping. Percept. Psychophys. 52, 277–294
Grossberg, S. & Raizada, R. D. Contrast-sensitive
perceptual grouping and object-based attention in the
laminar circuits of primary visual cortex. Vision Res. 40,
1413–1432 .
Vinje, W. E. & Gallant, J. L. Sparse coding and decorrelation
in primary visual cortex during natural vision. Science 287,
1273–1276 .
Itti, L., Koch, C. & Niebur, E. A model of saliency-based
visual attention for rapid scene analysis. IEEE Trans. Patt.
Anal. Mach. Intell. 20, 1254–1259 .
Tsotsos, J. K. et al. Modeling visual-attention via selective
tuning. Artif. Intell. 78, 507–545 .
Milanese, R., Gil, S. & Pun, T. Attentive mechanisms for
dynamic and static scene analysis. Opt. Eng. 34,
2428–2434 .
Itti, L. & Koch, C. A saliency-based search mechanism for
overt and covert shifts of visual attention. Vision Res. 40,
1489–1506 .
Toet, A., Bijl, P., Kooi, F. L. & Valeton, J. M. A High-
Resolution Image Dataset for Testing Search and Detection
Models (TNO-TM-98–A020) .
Hamker, F. H. in Proc. 5th Neural Comp. Psychol. Workshop
(NCPW’98) (eds von Heinke, D., Humphreys, G. W. & Olson,
A.) [Author: page no’s] .
Laberge, D. & Buchsbaum, M. S. Positron emission
tomographic measurements of pulvinar activity during an
attention task. J. Neurosci. 10, 613–619 .
Robinson, D. L. & Petersen, S. E. The pulvinar and visual
salience. Trends Neurosci. 15, 127–132 .
Kustov, A. A. & Robinson, D. L. Shared neural control of
attentional shifts and eye movements. Nature 384, 74–77
Gottlieb, J. P., Kusunoki, M. & Goldberg, M. E. The
representation of visual salience in monkey parietal cortex.
Nature 391, 481–484 .
Electrophysiological experiments in the awake
monkey indicating that some neurons might explicitly
encode for saliency in the posterior parietal cortex.
Colby, C. L. & Goldberg, M. E. Space and attention in
parietal cortex. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 22, 319–349 .
Thompson, K. G. & Schall, J. D. Antecedents and correlates
of visual detection and awareness in macaque prefrontal
cortex. Vision Res. 40, 1523–1538 .
Andersen, R. A., Bracewell, R. M., Barash, S., Gnadt, J. W.
& Fogassi, L. Eye position effects on visual, memory, and
saccade-related activity in areas lip and 7a of macaque. J.
Neurosci. 10, 1176–1196 .
Pouget, A. & Sejnowski, T. J. Spatial transformations in the
parietal cortex using basis functions. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 9,
222–237 .
Blaser, E., Sperling, G. & Lu, Z. L. Measuring the
amplification of attention. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 96,
11681–11686 .
Brefczynski, J. A. & DeYoe, E. A. A physiological correlate of
the ‘spotlight’ of visual attention. Nature Neurosci. 2,
370–374 .
Amari, S. & Arbib, M. A. in Systems Neuroscience (ed.
Metzler, J.) 119–165 .
Posner, M. I. & Cohen, Y. in Attention and Performance Vol.
X (eds Bouma, H. & Bouwhuis, D.) 531–556 .
Kwak, H. W. & Egeth, H. Consequences of allocating
attention to locations and to other attributes. Percept.
Psychophys. 51, 455–464 .
Klein, R. M. Inhibition of return. Trends Cogn. Sci. 4,
138–147 .
A very complete review of IOR.
Shimojo, S., Tanaka, Y. & Watanabe, K. Stimulus-driven
facilitation and inhibition of visual information processing in
environmental and retinotopic representations of space.
Brain Res. Cogn. Brain Res. 5, 11–21 .
Kingstone, A. & Pratt, J. Inhibition of return is composed of
attentional and oculomotor processes. Percept.
Psychophys. 61, 1046–1054 .
Taylor, T. L. & Klein, R. M. Visual and motor effects in
inhibition of return. J. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Percept. Perform.
26, 1639–1656 .
Tipper, S. P., Driver, J. & Weaver, B. Object-centred inhibition
of return of visual attention. Q. J. Exp. Psychol. A 43,
289–298 .
Gibson, B. S. & Egeth, H. Inhibition of return to object-based
and environment-based locations. Percept. Psychophys.
55, 323–339 .
Ro, T. & Rafal, R. D. Components of reflexive visual orienting
to moving objects. Percept. Psychophys. 61, 826–836
Becker, L. & Egeth, H. Mixed reference frames for dynamic
inhibition of return. J. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Percept. Perform.
26, 1167–1177 .
Horowitz, T. S. & Wolfe, J. M. Visual search has no memory.
Nature 394, 575–577 .
99. Mozer, M & Sitton, S. in Attention [Author: eds?] [Author:
page numbers] 
100. Guigon, E., Grandguillaume, P., Otto, I., Boutkhil, L. &
Burnod, Y. Neural network models of cortical functions
based on the computational properties of the cerebral
cortex. J. Physiol. (Paris) 88, 291–308 .
101. Schill, K., Umkehrer, E., Beinlich, S., Krieger, G. & Zetzsche,
C. Scene analysis with saccadic eye movements: top-down
and bottom-up modeling. J. Electronic Imaging (in the
press). [Author: update?]
102. Rybak, I. A., Gusakova, V. I., Golovan, A. V., Podladchikova,
L. N. & Shevtsova, N. A. A model of attention-guided visual
perception and recognition. Vision Res. 38, 2387–2400
103. Deco, G. & Schurmann, B. A hierarchical neural system with
attentional top-down enhancement of the spatial resolution
for object recognition. Vision Res. 40, 2845–2859 .
104. Stark, L. W. & Choi, Y. S. in Visual Attention and Cognition
(eds Zangemeister, W. H., Stiehl, H. S. & Freska, C.) 3–69
 .
105. Stark, L. W. et al. Representation of human vision in the
brain: how does human perception recognize images? J.
Electronic Imaging (in the press). [Author: update?]
106. Riesenhuber, M. & Poggio, T. Hierarchical models of object
recognition in cortex. Nature Neurosci. 2, 1019–1025
107. Riesenhuber, M. & Poggio, T. Models of object recognition.
Nature Neurosci. S3, 1199–1204 .
108. O’Craven, K. M., Downing, P. E. & Kanwisher, N. fmri
evidence for objects as the units of attentional selection.
Nature 401, 584–587 .
109. Roelfsema, P. R., Lamme, V. A. & Spekreijse, H. Objectbased attention in the primary visual cortex of the macaque
monkey. Nature 395, 376–381 .
110. Abrams, R. A. & Law, M. B. Object-based visual attention
with endogenous orienting. Percept. Psychophys. 62,
818–833 .
111. Corbetta, M. Frontoparietal cortical networks for directing
attention and the eye to visual locations: identical,
independent, or overlapping neural systems? Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA 95, 831–838 .
112. Webster, M. J. & Ungerleider, L. G. in The Attentive Brain
(ed. Parasuraman, R.) 19–34 .
113. Shepherd, M., Findlay, J. M. & Hockey, R. J. The relationship
between eye movements and spatial attention. Q. J. Exp.
Psychol. 38, 475–491 .
114. Sheliga, B. M., Riggio, L. & Rizzolatti, G. Orienting of
attention and eye movements. Exp. Brain Res. 98, 507–22
115. Hoffman, J. E. & Subramaniam, B. The role of visual
attention in saccadic eye movements. Percept.
Psychophys. 57, 787–795 .
116. Kowler, E., Anderson, E., Dosher, B. & Blaser, E. The role of
attention in the programming of saccades. Vision Res. 35,
1897–916 .
117. Schall, J. D., Hanes, D. P. & Taylor, T. L. Neural control of
behavior: countermanding eye movements. Psychol. Res.
63, 299–307 .
118. Nobre, A. C., Gitelman, D. R., Dias, E. C. & Mesulam, M. M.
Covert visual spatial orienting and saccades: overlapping
neural systems. Neuroimage 11, 210–216 .
119. Dominey, P. F. & Arbib, M. A. A cortico-subcortical model for
generation of spatially accurate sequential saccades. Cereb.
Cortex 2, 153–175 .
A complete neural network model for the control of
saccadic eye movements.
120. Motter, B. C. & Belky, E. J. The guidance of eye movements
during active visual search. Vision Res. 38, 1805–1815
121. Gilchrist, I. D., Heywood, C. A. & Findlay, J. M. Saccade
selection in visual search: evidence for spatial frequency
specific between-item interactions. Vision Res. 39,
1373–1383 .
122. Wolfe, J. M. & Gancarz, G. in Basic and Clinical Applications
of Vision Science (ed. Lakshminarayanan, V.) 189–192
 .
Acknowledgements
The research carried out in the laboratories of the authors on visual
attention is supported by the National Science Foundation, the
National Institute of Mental Health and the Office of Naval Research.
NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE
VOLUME 2 | FEBRUARY 2001 | 11
O N L I N E
Laurent Itti received his M.S. in Image Processing from the Ecole Nationale Superieure des Telecommunications (Paris) in 1994, and Ph.D. in
Computation and Neural Systems from Caltech (Los Angeles) in 2000.In September 2000,he became assistant professor of Computer Science at the
University of Southern California.His primary research interest is in biologically plausible computational brain modelling,and in the comparison of
model simulations to empirical measurements from living systems. Of particular interest in his laboratory is the development of computational
models of biological vision with applications to machine vision.
Professor Christof Koch has a Ph.D.in Physics from the University of Tubingen,Germany.His research focuses on understanding the biophysical
mechanisms underlying information processing in individual nerve cells as well as the neuronal operations underlying spatial vision,motion,shape
perception and visual attention in the primate visual system, using electrophysiological, brain imaging, psychophysical and computational tools.
Together with Dr Francis Crick,he works on the neuronal basis of visual consciousness.
• We review recent work on computational models of focal visual attention,with emphasis on the bottom-up,saliency- or image-based control of
attentional deployment.We highlight five important trends that have emerged from the computational literature:
• First,the perceptual saliency of stimuli critically depends on surrounding context; that is,a same object may or may not appear salient depending
on the nature and arrangement of other objects in the scene. Computationally, this means that contextual influences, such as non-classical surround interactions,must be included in models.
• Second,a unique ‘saliency map’topographically encoding for stimulus conspicuity over the visual scene has proved to be an efficient and plausible
bottom-up control strategy.Many successful models are based on such architecture,and electrophysiological as well as psychophysical studies have
recently supported the idea that saliency is explicitly encoded in the brain.
• Third,inhibition-of-return (IOR),the process by which the currently attended location is prevented from being attended again,is a critical element of attentional deployment.Without IOR,indeed,attention would endlessly be attracted towards the most salient stimulus.IOR thus implements a memory of recently visited locations,and allows attention to thoroughly scan our visual environment.
• Fourth, attention and eye movements tightly interplay, posing computational challenges with respect to the coordinate system used to control
attention.Understanding the interaction between overt and covert attention is particularly important for models concerned with visual search.
• Last,scene understanding and object recognition strongly constrain the selection of attended locations.Although several models have approached,
in an information-theoretical sense, the problem of optimally deploying attention to analyse a scene, biologically plausible implementations of
such a computational strategy remain to be developed.
Supplementary information for Figure 2