Transformer in Transformer
Kai Han1,2 An Xiao2 Enhua Wu1,3∗Jianyuan Guo2 Chunjing Xu2 Yunhe Wang2∗
1State Key Lab of Computer Science, ISCAS & UCAS
2Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies
3University of Macau
{hankai,weh}@ios.ac.cn, 
Transformer is a new kind of neural architecture which encodes the input data as
powerful features via the attention mechanism. Basically, the visual transformers
ﬁrst divide the input images into several local patches and then calculate both
representations and their relationship. Since natural images are of high complexity
with abundant detail and color information, the granularity of the patch dividing is
not ﬁne enough for excavating features of objects in different scales and locations.
In this paper, we point out that the attention inside these local patches are also
essential for building visual transformers with high performance and we explore
a new architecture, namely, Transformer iN Transformer (TNT). Speciﬁcally, we
regard the local patches (e.g., 16×16) as “visual sentences” and present to further
divide them into smaller patches (e.g., 4×4) as “visual words”. The attention of
each word will be calculated with other words in the given visual sentence with
negligible computational costs. Features of both words and sentences will be aggregated to enhance the representation ability. Experiments on several benchmarks
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed TNT architecture, e.g., we achieve an
81.5% top-1 accuracy on the ImageNet, which is about 1.7% higher than that of the
state-of-the-art visual transformer with similar computational cost. The PyTorch
code is available at and
the MindSpore code is available at 
tree/master/research/cv/TNT.
Introduction
In the past decade, the mainstream deep neural architectures used in the computer vision (CV) are
mainly established on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) . Differently, transformer
is a type of neural network mainly based on self-attention mechanism , which can provide the
relationships between different features. Transformer is widely used in the ﬁeld of natural language
processing (NLP), e.g., the famous BERT and GPT-3 models. The power of these transformer
models inspires the whole community to investigate the use of transformer for visual tasks.
To utilize the transformer architectures for conducting visual tasks, a number of researchers have
explored for representing the sequence information from different data. For example, Wang et al. explore self-attention mechanism in non-local networks for capturing long-range dependencies
in video and image recognition. Carion et al. present DETR , which treats object detection
as a direct set prediction problem and solve it using a transformer encoder-decoder architecture.
Chen et al. propose the iGPT , which is the pioneering work applying pure transformer model (i.e.,
without convolution) on image recognition by self-supervised pre-training.
∗Corresponding author.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .
 
Linear Projection of Visual Sentences and Words
Transformer
Transformer
Transformer
Outer Transformer Block
Sentence position
Word embedding
Word position
Class token
Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed Transformer-iN-Transformer (TNT) framework. The inner
transformer block is shared in the same layer. The word position encodings are shared across visual
sentences.
Different from the data in NLP tasks, there exists a semantic gap between input images and the
ground-truth labels in CV tasks. To this end, Dosovitskiy et al. develop the ViT , which paves the
way for transferring the success of transformer based NLP models. Concretely, ViT divides the given
image into several local patches as a visual sequence. Then, the attention can be naturally calculated
between any two image patches for generating effective feature representations for the recognition
task. Subsequently, Touvron et al. explore the data-efﬁcient training and distillation to enhance the
performance of ViT on the ImageNet benchmark and obtain an about 81.8% ImageNet top-1 accuracy,
which is comparable to that of the state-of-the-art convolutional networks. Chen et al. further treat the
image processing tasks (e.g., denosing and super-resolution) as a series of translations and develop
the IPT model for handling multiple low-level computer vision problems . Nowadays, transformer
architectures have been used in a growing number of computer vision tasks such as image
recognition , object detection , and segmentation .
Although the aforementioned visual transformers have made great efforts to boost the models’
performances, most of existing works follow the conventional representation scheme used in ViT, i.e.,
dividing the input images into patches. Such a exquisite paradigm can effectively capture the visual
sequential information and estimate the attention between different image patches. However, the
diversity of natural images in modern benchmarks is very high, e.g., there are over 120 M images with
1000 different categories in the ImageNet dataset . As shown in Figure 1, representing the given
image into local patches can help us to ﬁnd the relationship and similarity between them. However,
there are also some sub-patches inside them with high similarity. Therefore, we are motivated to
explore a more exquisite visual image dividing method for generating visual sequences and improve
the performance.
In this paper, we propose a novel Transformer-iN-Transformer (TNT) architecture for visual recognition as shown in Figure 1. To enhance the feature representation ability of visual transformers,
we ﬁrst divide the input images into several patches as “visual sentences” and then further divide
them into sub-patches as “visual words”. Besides the conventional transformer blocks for extracting
features and attentions of visual sentences, we further embed a sub-transformer into the architecture
for excavating the features and details of smaller visual words. Speciﬁcally, features and attentions
between visual words in each visual sentence are calculated independently using a shared network so
that the increased amount of parameters and FLOPs (ﬂoating-point operations) is negligible. Then,
features of words will be aggregated into the corresponding visual sentence. The class token is also
used for the subsequent visual recognition task via a fully-connected head. Through the proposed
TNT model, we can extract visual information with ﬁne granularity and provide features with more
details. We then conduct a series of experiments on the ImageNet benchmark and downstream
tasks to demonstrate its superiority and thoroughly analyze the impact of the size for dividing visual
words. The results show that our TNT can achieve better accuracy and FLOPs trade-off over the
state-of-the-art transformer networks.
In this section, we describe the proposed transformer-in-transformer architecture and analyze the
computation and parameter complexity in details.
Preliminaries
We ﬁrst brieﬂy describe the basic components in transformer , including MSA (Multi-head
Self-Attention), MLP (Multi-Layer Perceptron) and LN (Layer Normalization).
In the self-attention module, the inputs X ∈Rn×d are linearly transformed to three parts,
i.e., queries Q ∈Rn×dk, keys K ∈Rn×dk and values V ∈Rn×dv where n is the sequence length, d,
dk, dv are the dimensions of inputs, queries (keys) and values, respectively. The scaled dot-product
attention is applied on Q, K, V :
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax(QKT
Finally, a linear layer is used to produce the output. Multi-head self-attention splits the queries, keys
and values to h parts and perform the attention function in parallel, and then the output values of each
head are concatenated and linearly projected to form the ﬁnal output.
The MLP is applied between self-attention layers for feature transformation and non-linearity:
MLP(X) = FC(σ(FC(X))),
FC(X) = XW + b,
where W and b are the weight and bias term of fully-connected layer respectively, and σ(·) is the
activation function such as GELU .
Layer normalization is a key part in transformer for stable training and faster convergence.
LN is applied over each sample x ∈Rd as follows:
LN(x) = x −µ
where µ ∈R, δ ∈R are the mean and standard deviation of the feature respectively, ◦is the
element-wise dot, and γ ∈Rd, β ∈Rd are learnable afﬁne transform parameters.
Transformer in Transformer
Given a 2D image, we uniformly split it into n patches X = [X1, X2, · · · , Xn] ∈Rn×p×p×3, where
(p, p) is the resolution of each image patch. ViT just utilizes a standard transformer to process the
sequence of patches which corrupts the local structure of a patch, as shown in Fig. 1(a). Instead, we
propose Transformer-iN-Transformer (TNT) architecture to learn both global and local information
in an image. In TNT, we view the patches as visual sentences that represent the image. Each patch is
further divided into m sub-patches, i.e., a visual sentence is composed of a sequence of visual words:
Xi →[xi,1, xi,2, · · · , xi,m],
where xi,j ∈Rs×s×3 is the j-th visual word of the i-th visual sentence, (s, s) is the spatial size of
sub-patches, and j = 1, 2, · · · , m. With a linear projection, we transform the visual words into a
sequence of word embeddings:
Y i = [yi,1, yi,2, · · · , yi,m],
yi,j = FC(Vec(xi,j)),
where yi,j ∈Rc is the j-th word embedding, c is the dimension of word embedding, and Vec(·) is
the vectorization operation.
In TNT, we have two data ﬂows in which one ﬂow operates across the visual sentences and the other
processes the visual words inside each sentence. For the word embeddings, we utilize a transformer
block to explore the relation between visual words:
l−1 + MSA(LN(Y i
l + MLP(LN(Y ′i
where l = 1, 2, · · · , L is the index of the l-th block, and L is the total number of stacked blocks. The
input of the ﬁrst block Y i
0 is just Y i in Eq. 5. All word embeddings in the image after transformation
are Yl = [Y 1
l , · · · , Y n
l ]. This can be viewed as an inner transformer block, denoted as Tin. This
process builds the relationships among visual words by computing interactions between any two
visual words. For example, in a patch of human face, a word corresponding to the eye is more related
to other words of eyes while interacts less with forehead part.
For the sentence level, we create the sentence embedding memories to store the sequence of sentencelevel representations: Z0 = [Zclass, Z1
0, · · · , Zn
0 ] ∈R(n+1)×d where Zclass is the class token
similar to ViT , and all of them are initialized as zero. In each layer, the sequence of word
embeddings are transformed into the domain of sentence embedding by linear projection and added
into the sentence embedding:
l−1 + FC(Vec(Y i
l−1 ∈Rd and the fully-connected layer FC makes the dimension match for addition. With the
above addition operation, the representation of sentence embedding is augmented by the word-level
features. We use the standard transformer block for transforming the sentence embeddings:
l = Zl−1 + MSA(LN(Zl−1)),
l + MLP(LN(Z′
This outer transformer block Tout is used for modeling relationships among sentence embeddings.
In summary, the inputs and outputs of the TNT block include the visual word embeddings and
sentence embeddings as shown in Fig. 1(b), so the TNT can be formulated as
Yl, Zl = TNT(Yl−1, Zl−1).
In our TNT block, the inner transformer block is used to model the relationship between visual
words for local feature extraction, and the outer transformer block captures the intrinsic information
from the sequence of sentences. By stacking the TNT blocks for L times, we build the transformerin-transformer network. Finally, the classiﬁcation token serves as the image representation and a
fully-connected layer is applied for classiﬁcation.
Position encoding.
Spatial information is an important factor in image recognition. For sentence
embeddings and word embeddings, we both add the corresponding position encodings to retain
spatial information as shown in Fig. 1. The standard learnable 1D position encodings are utilized
here. Speciﬁcally, each sentence is assigned with a position encodings:
Z0 ←Z0 + Esentence,
where Esentence ∈R(n+1)×d are the sentence position encodings. As for the visual words in a
sentence, a word position encoding is added to each word embedding:
0 + Eword, i = 1, 2, · · · , n
where Eword ∈Rm×c are the word position encodings which are shared across sentences. In this
way, sentence position encoding can maintain the global spatial information, while word position
encoding is used for preserving the local relative position.
Complexity Analysis
A standard transformer block includes two parts, i.e., the multi-head self-attention and multi-layer
perceptron. The FLOPs of MSA are 2nd(dk + dv) + n2(dk + dv), and the FLOPs of MLP are
2ndvrdv where r is the dimension expansion ratio of hidden layer in MLP. Overall, the FLOPs of a
standard transformer block are
FLOPsT = 2nd(dk + dv) + n2(dk + dv) + 2nddr.
Since r is usually set as 4, and the dimensions of input, key (query) and value are usually set as the
same, the FLOPs calculation can be simpliﬁed as
FLOPsT = 2nd(6d + n).
The number of parameters can be obtained as
ParamsT = 12dd.
Our TNT block consists of three parts: an inner transformer block Tin, an outer transformer block
Tout and a linear layer. The computation complexity of Tin and Tout are 2nmc(6c + m) and
2nd(6d + n) respectively. The linear layer has FLOPs of nmcd. In total, the FLOPs of TNT block
FLOPsT NT = 2nmc(6c + m) + nmcd + 2nd(6d + n).
Similarly, the parameter complexity of TNT block is calculated as
ParamsT NT = 12cc + mcd + 12dd.
Although we add two more components in our TNT block, the increase of FLOPs is small since
c ≪d and O(m) ≈O(n) in practice. For example, in the DeiT-S conﬁguration, we have d = 384
and n = 196. We set c = 24 and m = 16 in our structure of TNT-S correspondingly. From Eq. 15
and Eq. 17, we can obtain that FLOPsT = 376M and FLOPsT NT = 429M. The FLOPs ratio of
TNT block over standard transformer block is about 1.14×. Similarly, the parameters ratio is about
1.08×. With a small increase of computation and memory cost, our TNT block can efﬁciently model
the local structure information and achieve a much better trade-off between accuracy and complexity
as demonstrated in the experiments.
Network Architecture
We build our TNT architectures by following the basic conﬁguration of ViT and DeiT . The
patch size is set as 16×16. The number of sub-patches is set as m = 4 · 4 = 16 by default. Other
size values are evaluated in the ablation studies. As shown in Table 1, there are three variants of
TNT networks with different model sizes, namely, TNT-Ti, TNT-S and TNT-B. They consist of 6.1M,
23.8M and 65.6M parameters respectively. The corresponding FLOPs for processing a 224×224
image are 1.4B, 5.2B and 14.1B respectively.
Table 1: Variants of our TNT architecture. ‘Ti’ means tiny, ‘S’ means small, and ‘B’ means base.
The FLOPs are calculated for images at resolution 224×224.
Inner transformer
Outer transformer
Experiments
In this section, we conduct extensive experiments on visual benchmarks to evaluate the effectiveness
of the proposed TNT architecture.
Table 2: Details of used visual datasets.
Train size
ImageNet 
Oxford 102 Flowers 
Classiﬁcation
Oxford-IIIT Pets 
iNaturalist 2019 
CIFAR-10 
CIFAR-100 
COCO2017 
ADE20K 
Segmentation
Datasets and Experimental Settings
ImageNet ILSVRC 2012 is an image classiﬁcation benchmark consisting of 1.2M
training images belonging to 1000 classes, and 50K validation images with 50 images per class. We
adopt the same data augmentation strategy as that in DeiT including random crop, random clip,
Rand-Augment , Random Erasing , Mixup and CutMix . For the license of ImageNet
dataset, please refer to 
In addition to ImageNet, we also test on the downstream tasks with transfer learning to evaluate
the generalization ability of TNT. The details of used visual datasets are listed in Table 2. The data
augmentation strategy of image classiﬁcation datasets are the same as that of ImageNet. For COCO
and ADE20K, the data augmentation strategy follows that in PVT . For the licenses of these
datasets, please refer to the original papers.
Implementation Details.
We utilize the training strategy provided in DeiT . The main advanced technologies apart from common settings include AdamW , label smoothing ,
DropPath , and repeated augmentation . We list the hyper-parameters in Table 3 for better
understanding. All the models are implemented with PyTorch and MindSpore and trained on
NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPUs. The potential negative societal impacts may include energy consumption
and carbon dioxide emissions of GPU computation.
Table 3: Default training hyper-parameters used in our method, unless stated otherwise.
TNT on ImageNet
We train our TNT models with the same training settings as that of DeiT . The recent transformerbased models like ViT and DeiT are compared. To have a better understanding of current
progress of visual transformers, we also include the representative CNN-based models such as
ResNet , RegNet and EfﬁcientNet . The results are shown in Table 4. We can see
that our transformer-based model, i.e., TNT outperforms all other visual transformer models. In
particular, TNT-S achieves 81.5% top-1 accuracy which is 1.7% higher than the baseline model DeiT-
S, indicating the beneﬁt of the introduced TNT framework to preserve local structure information
inside the patch. Compared to CNNs, TNT can outperform the widely-used ResNet and RegNet.
Note that all the transformer-based models are still inferior to EfﬁcientNet which utilizes special
depth-wise convolutions, so it is yet a challenge of how to beat EfﬁcientNet using pure transformer.
Table 4: Results of TNT and other networks on ImageNet.
Resolution
Params (M)
ResNet-50 
ResNet-152 
RegNetY-8GF 
RegNetY-16GF 
EfﬁcientNet-B3 
EfﬁcientNet-B4 
Transformer-based
DeiT-Ti 
DeiT-S 
PVT-Small 
T2T-ViT_t-14 
ViT-B/16 
DeiT-B 
T2T-ViT_t-24 
Params (M)
Accuracy (%)
Accuracy (%)
(a) Acc v.s. Params
(b) Acc v.s. FLOPs
Figure 2: Performance comparison of the representative visual backbone networks on ImageNet.
We also plot the accuracy-parameters and accuracy-FLOPs line charts in Fig. 2 to have an intuitive
comparison of these models. Our TNT models consistently outperform other transformer-based
models by a signiﬁcant margin.
Inference speed.
Deployment of transformer models on devices is important for practical applications, so we test the inference speed of our TNT model. Following , the throughput is measured
on an NVIDIA V100 GPU and PyTorch, with 224×224 input size. Since the resolution and content
inside the patch is smaller than that of the whole image, we may need fewer blocks to learn its
representation. Thus, we can reduce the used TNT blocks and replace some with vanilla transformer
blocks. From the results in Table 5, we can see that our TNT is more efﬁcient than DeiT and PVT by
achieving higher accuracy with similar inference speed.
Table 5: GPU throughput comparison of vision transformer models.
Indices of TNT blocks
Throughput (images/s)
DeiT-S 
DeiT-B 
PVT-Small 
PVT-Medium 
 
 
 
Ablation Studies
Table 6: Effect of position encoding.
Position encoding
Sentence-level
Word-level
Effect of position encodings.
Position information is important for image recognition. In
TNT structure, sentence position encoding is
for maintaining global spatial information, and
word position encoding is used to preserve locally relative position. We verify their effect by
removing them separately. As shown in Table 6,
we can see that TNT-S with both patch position
encoding and word position encoding performs
the best by achieving 81.5% top-1 accuracy. Removing sentence/word position encoding results in
a 0.8%/0.7% accuracy drop respectively, and removing all position encodings heavily decrease the
accuracy by 1.0%.
Number of heads.
The effect of #heads in standard transformer has been investigated in multiple
works and a head width of 64 is recommended for visual tasks . We adopt the head
width of 64 in outer transformer block in our model. The number of heads in inner transformer block
is another hyper-parameter for investigation. We evaluate the effect of #heads in inner transformer
block (Table 7). We can see that a proper number of heads (e.g., 2 or 4) achieve the best performance.
Table 7: Effect of #heads in inner transformer block in TNT-S.
Table 8: Effect of #words m.
Number of visual words.
In TNT, the input image is
split into a number of 16×16 patches and each patch is
further split into m sub-patches (visual words) of size
(s, s) for computational efﬁciency. Here we test the effect of hyper-parameter m on TNT-S architecture. When
we change m, the embedding dimension c also changes
correspondingly to control the FLOPs. As shown in Table 8, we can see that the value of m has
slight inﬂuence on the performance, and we use m = 16 by default for its efﬁciency, unless stated
otherwise.
(a) Feature maps in Block-1/6/12.
(b) T-SNE of Block-12.
Figure 3: Visualization of the features of DeiT-S and TNT-S.
Visualization
Visualization of Feature Maps.
We visualize the learned features of DeiT and TNT to further
understand the effect of the proposed method. For better visualization, the input image is resized
to 1024×1024. The feature maps are formed by reshaping the patch embeddings according to their
spatial positions. The feature maps in the 1-st, 6-th and 12-th blocks are shown in Fig. 3(a) where 12
feature maps are randomly sampled for these blocks each. In TNT, the local information are better
preserved compared to DeiT. We also visualize all the 384 feature maps in the 12-th block using
t-SNE (Fig. 3(b)). We can see that the features of TNT are more diverse and contain richer
information than those of DeiT. These beneﬁts owe to the introduction of inner transformer block for
modeling local features.
In addition to the patch-level features, we also visualize the pixel-level embeddings of TNT in Fig. 4.
For each patch, we reshape the word embeddings according to their spatial positions to form the
feature maps and then average these feature maps by the channel dimension. The averaged feature
maps corresponding to the 14×14 patches are shown in Fig. 4. We can see that the local information
is well preserved in the shallow layers, and the representations become more abstract gradually as the
network goes deeper.
Visualization of Attention Maps.
There are two self-attention layers in our TNT block, i.e., an
inner self-attention and an outer self-attention for modeling relationship among visual words and
sentences respectively. We show the attention maps of different queries in the inner transformer
in Figure 5. For a given query visual word, the attention values of visual words with similar
appearance are higher, indicating their features will be interacted more relevantly with the query.
These interactions are missed in ViT and DeiT, etc. The attention maps in the outer transformer can
be found in the supplemental material.
Figure 4: Visualization of the averaged word embeddings of TNT-S.
Figure 5: Attention maps of different queries in the inner transformer. Red cross symbol denotes the
query location.
Transfer Learning
To demonstrate the strong generalization ability of TNT, we transfer TNT-S, TNT-B models trained
on ImageNet to the downstream tasks.
Pure Transformer Image Classiﬁcation.
Following DeiT , we evaluate our models on 4
image classiﬁcation datasets with training set size ranging from 2,040 to 50,000 images. These
datasets include superordinate-level object classiﬁcation (CIFAR-10 , CIFAR-100 ) and
ﬁne-grained object classiﬁcation , shown in Table 2. All models are ﬁne-tuned with an image resolution of 384×384. We
adopt the same training settings as those at the pre-training stage by preserving all data augmentation
strategies. In order to ﬁne-tune in a different resolution, we also interpolate the position embeddings
of new patches. For CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100, we ﬁne-tune the models for 64 epochs, and for
ﬁne-grained datasets, we ﬁne-tune the models for 300 epochs. Table 9 compares the transfer learning
results of TNT to those of ViT, DeiT and other convolutional networks. We ﬁnd that TNT outperforms
DeiT in most datasets with less parameters, which shows the superiority of modeling pixel-level
relations to get better feature representation.
Table 9: Results on downstream image classiﬁcation tasks with ImageNet pre-training. ↑384 denotes
ﬁne-tuning with 384×384 resolution.
Params (M)
Graﬁt ResNet-50 
Graﬁt RegNetY-8GF 
EfﬁcientNet-B5 
Transformer-based
ViT-B/16↑384 
DeiT-B↑384 
Pure Transformer Object Detection.
We construct a pure transformer object detection pipeline
by combining our TNT and DETR . For fair comparison, we adopt the training and testing settings
in PVT and add a 2×2 average pooling to make the output size of TNT backbone the same as
that of PVT and ResNet. All the compared models are trained using AdamW with batch size
of 16 for 50 epochs. The training images are randomly resized to have a shorter side in the range
of and a longer side within 1333 pixels. For testing, the shorter side is set as 800 pixels.
The results on COCO val2017 are shown in Table 10. Under the same setting, DETR with TNT-S
backbone outperforms the representative pure transformer detector DETR+PVT-Small by 3.5 AP
with similar parameters.
Table 10: Results of object detection on COCO2017 val set with ImageNet pre-training. †Results
from our implementation.
ResNet-50 
DeiT-S† 
PVT-Small 
PVT-Medium 
Table 11: Results of semantic segmentation on
ADE20K val set with ImageNet pre-training.
†Results from our implementation.
ResNet-50 
DeiT-S† 
PVT-Small 
Pure Transformer Semantic Segmentation.
We adopt the segmentation framework of
Trans2Seg to build the pure transformer
semantic segmentation based on TNT backbone.
We follow the training and testing conﬁguration
in PVT for fair comparison. All the compared models are trained by AdamW optimizer
with initial learning rate of 1e-4 and polynomial
decay schedule. We apply random resize and
crop of 512×512 during training. The ADE20K
results with single scale testing are shown in Table 11. With similar parameters, Trans2Seg with
TNT-S backbone achieves 43.6% mIoU, which is 1.0% higher than that of PVT-small backbone and
2.8% higher than that of DeiT-S backbone.
Conclusion
In this paper, we propose a novel Transformer-iN-Transformer (TNT) network architecture for visual
recognition. In particular, we uniformly split the image into a sequence of patches (visual sentences)
and view each patch as a sequence of sub-patches (visual words). We introduce a TNT block in
which an outer transformer block is utilized for processing the sentence embeddings and an inner
transformer block is used to model the relation among word embeddings. The information of visual
word embeddings is added to the visual sentence embedding after the projection of a linear layer.
We build our TNT architecture by stacking the TNT blocks. Compared to the conventional vision
transformers (ViT) which corrupts the local structure of the patch, our TNT can better preserve
and model the local information for visual recognition. Extensive experiments on ImageNet and
downstream tasks have demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed TNT architecture.
Acknowledgement
This work was supported by NSFC (62072449, 61632003), Guangdong-Hongkong-Macao Joint
Research Grant (2020B1515130004) and Macao FDCT .
Visualization of Attention Maps
Attention between Patches.
In Figure 6, we plot the attention maps from each patch to all the
patches. We can see that for both DeiT-S and TNT-S, more patches are related as layer goes deeper.
This is because the information between patches has been fully communicated with each other in
deeper layers. As for the difference between DeiT and TNT, the attention of TNT can focus on the
meaningful patches in Block-12, while DeiT still pays attention to the tree which is not related to the
Attention between Class Token and Patches.
In Figure 7, we plot the attention maps between
class token to all the patches for some randomly sampled images. We can see that the output feature
mainly focus on the patches related to the object to be recognized.
Figure 6: Visualization of the attention maps between all patches in outer transformer block.
Figure 7: Example attention maps from the output token to the input space.
Exploring SE module in TNT
Inspired by squeeze-and-excitation (SE) network for CNNs , we propose to explore channel-wise
attention for transformers. We ﬁrst average all the sentence (word) embeddings and use a two-layer
MLP to calculate the attention values. The attention is multiplied to all the embeddings. The SE
module only brings in a few extra parameters but is able to perform dimension-wise attention for
feature enhancement. From the results in Table 12, adding SE module into TNT can further improve
the accuracy slightly.
Table 12: Exploring SE module in TNT.
Resolution
Params (M)
TNT-S + SE
Object Detection with Faster RCNN
As a general backbone network, TNT can also be applied with multi-scale vision models like Faster
RCNN . We extract the features from different layers of TNT to construct multi-scale features.
In particular, FPN takes 4 levels of features ( 1
32) as input, while the resolution of feature
of every TNT block is
16. We select the 4 layers from shallow to deep (3rd, 6th, 9th, 12th) to form
multi-level representation. To match the feature shape, we insert deconvolution/convolution layers
with proper stride. We evaluate TNT-S and DeiT-S on Faster RCNN with FPN . The DeiT
model is used in the same way. The COCO2017 val results are shown in Table 13. TNT achieves
much better performance than ResNet and DeiT backbones, indicating its generalization for FPN-like
framework.
Table 13: Results of Faster RCNN object detection on COCO minival set with ImageNet pre-training.
†Results from our implementation.
Params (M)
ResNet-50 
DeiT-S†