PET/MRI for Neurologic Applications
Ciprian Catana1, Alexander Drzezga2, Wolf-Dieter Heiss3, and Bruce R. Rosen1
1Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Charlestown, Massachusetts; 2Nuklearmedizinische Klinik und Poliklinik der Technischen Universität München,
Klinikum rechts der Isar, Munich, Germany; and 3Max Planck Institute for Neurological Research, Cologne, Germany
PET and MRI provide complementary information in the study
of the human brain. Simultaneous PET/MRI data acquisition
allows the spatial and temporal correlation of the measured
signals, creating opportunities impossible to realize using
stand-alone instruments. This paper reviews the methodologic
improvements and potential neurologic and psychiatric applications of this novel technology. We ﬁrst present methods for
improving the performance and information content of each
modality by using the information provided by the other
technique. On the PET side, we discuss methods that use the
simultaneously acquired MRI data to improve the PET data
quantiﬁcation. On the MRI side, we present how improved PET
quantiﬁcation can be used to validate several MRI techniques.
Finally, we describe promising research, translational, and
clinical applications that can beneﬁt from these advanced tools.
simultaneous
multimodal
J Nucl Med 2012; 53:1916–1925
DOI: 10.2967/jnumed.112.105346
MRI and PET provide complementary anatomic, physiologic, metabolic, and functional information about the
brain. Pooling information obtained with each modality
has long been performed through a parallel analysis of
the sequentially acquired data and, more commonly today,
by using software coregistration techniques. However, underlying such studies is the assumption that no signiﬁcant
changes in physiologic or cognitive conditions have occurred between the 2 examinations. Although a good assumption for some studies, this may not be the case more
generally. For example, a subject’s mental state may change
on time frames from minutes to even seconds while physiologic and metabolic changes can occur on the order of minutes in some disease conditions such as acute ischemic
stroke or migraine. Likewise, rapid changes in baseline physiology can occur with some therapeutic interventions, such as
neurooncologically directed treatments with antiangiogenic
One means to address such potential pitfalls is through
the simultaneous collection of MRI and PET data. The
feasibility of simultaneous PET and MRI data acquisition
for human studies was ﬁrst demonstrated in 2007, and
proof-of-principle brain data (Fig. 1) were collected using
a prototype MRI-compatible PET insert—called BrainPET—
positioned inside a commercially available 3-T MRI Trio
system (Siemens Healthcare Inc.) (1). In 2010, a fully integrated PET/MRI scanner also became available for human
whole-body imaging (Biograph mMR; Siemens) (2).
Simultaneous PET/MRI allows for both spatial and
temporal correlation of the signals, creating opportunities
impossible to realize using sequentially acquired data. The
features of this new technology may be particularly
appealing to applications in neuroscience and translational
neurologic and psychiatric research, considering that MRI
represents the ﬁrst-line diagnostic imaging modality for
numerous indications and that a great number of speciﬁc
PET tracers are available today to assess functional and
molecular processes in the brain. In the study of physiologic brain function, simultaneous acquisition may allow
improved in vivo assessment and cross-correlation of
several neuropsychologic events, such as changes in
hemodynamics, including quantitative assessment of cerebral blood ﬂow (CBF), volume (CBV), and oxygenation;
neurovascular coupling; inﬂammation and microglial activation; ischemia; necrosis; and apoptosis. The understanding of the pathophysiologic mechanisms underlying disease
states and the clinical evaluation of various disorders of the
central nervous system over time might also be improved,
such as quantitative measurements of pathologic processes
in brain cancer before and after treatment; neurodegenerative diseases; and acute and chronic stroke, including
neuroplasticity associated with stroke recovery. In addition,
other disorders associated with changes in mental status,
such as depression, dementia, schizophrenia, and obsessive–
compulsive disorders, might be investigated in new ways,
combining anatomic, functional, and metabolic measurements during identical examination conditions.
In this article, we discuss the methodologic opportunities
created by simultaneous PET/MRI data acquisition and
Received Aug. 15, 2012; revision accepted Oct. 19, 2012.
For correspondence or reprints contact: Ciprian Catana, Athinoula A.
Biomedical
Department
Radiology,
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Building
149, Room 2301, 13th St., Charlestown, MA 02129.
E-mail: 
Published online Nov. 9, 2012.
COPYRIGHT ª 2012 by the Society of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular
Imaging, Inc.
THE JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR MEDICINE • Vol. 53 • No. 12 • December 2012
describe how this novel imaging modality might beneﬁt
neurologic and psychiatric applications.
METHODOLOGIC AND SCIENTIFIC ADVANTAGES
Simultaneous acquisition immediately brings to mind the
possibility of improving the performance and information
content of one instrument using the information obtained
from the other instrument. This street does not need to be
1-way: the perspective to combine the strengths of both
techniques for mutual improvement appears tempting. The
accuracy of the PET estimates might be improved by
including the MRI information as the structural framework
underlying the distribution of the PET signal. Reciprocally,
the strength of PET to provide absolute quantitative
information might help validate several MRI techniques
in vivo. Next, we give examples of methodologic improvements made possible via simultaneous acquisition.
MRI-Based PET Motion Correction
Subject head motion is difﬁcult to avoid, leading to PET
image blurring that could even offset the beneﬁt of using
high-resolution scanners. Various techniques have been
proposed for restraining the subject’s head (with limited
success) or for correcting for head movements (3–11).
However, most of these methods require a relatively unobstructed view of the optical sensors from outside the
scanner—not typically the case on an integrated PET/MRI
scanner because of the radiofrequency coils.
In an integrated scanner, the MRI data acquired simultaneously with the PET data can be used to obtain hightemporal-resolution rigid-body motion estimates, most
often in the background of the actual MRI data acquisition.
One such method consists of repeatedly acquiring anatomic
data and coregistering the individual MRI volumes. When
fast imaging with EPI or spiral sequences is performed,
such methods provide temporal updating of spatial information in times typically from 2 to 6 s. These methods are
particularly attractive because they allow the simultaneous
acquisition of functional MRI (fMRI) and PET data, which is
of interest for several research applications. For more
conventional acquisition methods (e.g., high-resolution anatomic imaging), motion estimates with very high temporal
resolution (e.g., every 20 ms) can be obtained using embedded
navigator pulses (12). Their potential use to correct the PET
data in very short frames could be particularly important for
performing motion correction in the early phases of a dynamic
PET study, when frames as short as 1 s are often used to
sample the radiotracer arterial input function (AIF).
Proof-of-principle MRI-assisted PET rigid-body motion
correction studies have already been performed on healthy
volunteers using the BrainPET scanner (Fig. 2) (13). MRIbased motion correction has the potential to improve PET
as a quantitative method. First, the nominal spatial resolution of the current state-of-the-art scanners can be achieved.
Second, the mismatch between the attenuation and emission volumes can be eliminated, assuming that the former
was also derived from the simultaneously acquired MRI
data (14). Third, better estimates of the radiotracer AIF
might be obtained using image-based approaches from the
motion-corrected data. Together, these methods might increase the reliability and reproducibility of the PET data, thus
potentially beneﬁting several neurologic applications that require precise quantiﬁcation (e.g., neuroreceptor studies) or
that involve uncooperative subjects (e.g., Alzheimer disease,
movement disorders, or pediatric patients).
Partial-Volume Effect (PVE) Correction
PVEs lead in PET to an under- or overestimation of
tissue activity concentrations that depends on the activity
distribution and the size and shape of the structures of
interest (15). As a general rule, the signal is not accurately
First simultaneous PET/MRI
study in 66-y-old healthy volunteer. MRI
sequences included T2-weighted turbo spin
echo, echo planar, time-of-ﬂight MR angiography, and MR spectroscopy. PET image
displayed was reconstructed from 20-min
emission data recorded at steady state after
injection of 370 MBq of 18F-FDG. Data were
acquired on BrainPET prototype (Siemens).
MPRAGE 5 magnetization-prepared rapid
gradient echo; MRS 5 MR scintigraphy;
TSE 5 turbo spin echo. (Reprinted with permission of (1).)
PET/MRI FOR NEUROLOGIC APPLICATIONS
Catana et al.
recovered in structures smaller than 2–3 times the fullwidth-at-half-maximum spatial resolution of the scanner.
Because the spatial resolution of the current state-of-theart clinical PET scanners is comparable to the cortical gray
matter thickness (i.e., 2–3 mm), the activity concentration
in these structures is clearly affected by PVEs in virtually
all neurologic studies performed today (Fig. 3).
Several algorithms have been proposed for correcting for
PVEs. Some methods apply the correction to the measured
values derived from regions of interest (16–19) or attempt
to apply the correction on a voxel-by-voxel basis (20).
Other methods use the anatomic information provided by
MRI as prior information to regularize the PET images in
statistical reconstruction algorithms (21–23) and thus to
model the PVEs in the reconstruction. Although these
methods have been used for numerous clinical studies, none
has been widely accepted because many factors affect the
accuracy of PVE correction: segmentation of structures of
interest from the anatomic MRI data, spatial coregistration of
the MRI and PET volumes, characterization of the scanner’s
point-spread function, and the assumptions made during the
correction (23–25). The spatial coregistration problems are
eliminated in the case of an integrated PET/MRI system,
for which simultaneous acquisition guarantees spatial correlation. Furthermore, head motion, which is an additional
source of image blurring, can be minimized using MRI-based
motion correction.
Image-Based Radiotracer AIF Estimation
Accurate PET quantiﬁcation requires an input function
(i.e., plasma time–activity curve of tracer delivery to the
tissue) to the compartment models used for estimating
parameters of interest related to normal and pathologic
changes in tissue function or metabolism. The gold standard for determining the AIF involves radial artery catheterization, which limits usefulness in routine clinical PET
studies. Alternatively, less invasive methods such as arterialized venous blood sampling, or noninvasive techniques
such as those that are image-based or population-based,
have been proposed (26).
One image-based approach is to derive the AIF from
a region of interest placed across blood vessels after tracer
administration. Correct deﬁnition of the region of interest
over the vessel and correction for confounding effects such
as spill-in from adjacent tissues or spill-out in the case of
relatively small vessels can be challenging using only the
PET images. In a combined scanner, the anatomic and
physiologic MRI information might be used for this
purpose. The coregistered MRI anatomic images can be
used to accurately determine the position and the size of the
vessels of interest (e.g., from the MR angiography data).
With coadministration of both MRI contrast and PET
tracers, MRI might also provide additional information
about the dynamics of bolus delivery to the tissue of interest
and assess any local changes in blood ﬂow, potentially
reducing the problems of bolus delay and dispersion
inherent in the global AIF estimate. For some radiotracers,
however, the AIF may still not be a suitable predictor of the
input function of the parent radiolabeled compound, and
additional information about metabolites may be required.
Technique Cross-Calibration and Validation
Cerebral Perfusion. H215O PET is considered the gold
standard for measuring CBF, but a variety of MRI methods
MRI-assisted PET motion correction in healthy volunteer using echo planar imaging–derived motion estimates. (Top)
Plots of motion estimates: translations along (black) and rotations
about (gray) 3 orthogonal axes. (Bottom) PET data reconstructed
before (left) and after (right) motion correction. Substantial improvement in image quality can be observed after correction. Data were
acquired on BrainPET prototype at Martinos Center, Massachusetts
General Hospital.
Inﬂuence of MRI-based PVE correction on PET image
contrast for normal brain. From left to right are shown MRI image
used to automatically segment ROIs of multiple brain structures,
original PET image, PVE correction factors for mean ROI values
calculated via geometric transfer matrix method using segmented
MRI and original PET images as inputs, and original PET image after
application of recovery coefﬁcients. Data were acquired on Brain-
PET prototype at Martinos Center, Massachusetts General Hospital.
(Courtesy of Spencer Bowen.)
THE JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR MEDICINE • Vol. 53 • No. 12 • December 2012
have also emerged for the same purpose, including dynamic
susceptibility contrast imaging (27) and arterial spin labeling (28). Perhaps not surprisingly, there are notable discrepancies between PET and MRI CBF measures (29) (as well
as between the individual MRI methods), but the degree
to which these discrepancies represent a true technique
variation, versus differences in physiologic state between
distinct measurement periods, is unknown. Thus, the use
of simultaneous PET/MRI for an initial cross-validation
of different techniques offers a unique means to begin
to address confounds associated with this fundamental
physiologic measurement. Furthermore, beyond perfusion,
both PET and MRI can be used independently to assess
CBV, cerebral metabolic rate of oxygen, and oxygen extraction fraction. Given the overlapping abilities to perform these measurements with MRI-based methods, a
combined instrument might simultaneously perform multiple comparisons, cross-validating several physiologic
measurements.
Neuronal Activation. During periods of increased (or
decreased) neural activation, a variety of physiologic states
are known to change, including both hemodynamic and
metabolic parameters. These changes, particularly in CBF
and CBV, have been assessed for many years by PET to
characterize regional brain activity, and similar functional
studies are now possible with MRI (30,31). One interesting
observation from early PET experience is that the increase
in CBF was shown to be greater than the increase in the
cerebral metabolic rate of oxygen (32). The decrease in the
concentration of paramagnetic deoxyhemoglobin in the venous blood as a result of the increase in venous blood
oxygenation level is the basis of the increased blood oxygen
level–dependent (BOLD) signal intensity (33), which is
most typically used for human fMRI studies. The decrease
in the cerebral oxygen extraction fraction can also be measured using 15O2 PET. Combined PET/MRI allows for the
validation and detailed quantitative modeling of the relationship between oxygen extraction fraction, CBV, CBF,
and BOLD signals and perhaps might reveal new aspects
not obvious when the experiments are performed using
separate instruments at different times. A simultaneous
measurement of H215O PET activation and fMRI would
also permit a more selective differentiation of local
responses in the tissue (CBF PET) from those in the vascular system (BOLD or CBF MRI). Such data should permit a better understanding of the coupling between regional
neuronal activity, changes in CBF and CBV, and oxygen
metabolism.
Brain Baseline State. The concept of baseline state is an
essential, though often overlooked, aspect of brain activation studies because the change in signal reported in
response to a stimulus (measured either with PET or MRI
techniques) is typically assessed with respect to an
(unquantiﬁed) baseline condition. Furthermore, identifying
a physiologic baseline state is extremely relevant for
assessing pathologic changes in several conditions (e.g.,
Alzheimer disease, head trauma, stroke, and neuropsychiatric disorders). PET and MRI techniques have been
proposed for studying many aspects of this complex state.
For example, the CBF measurements mentioned above
(e.g., H215O-PET and arterial spin labeling MRI) can be
used to obtain precise measurement of the resting cerebral
perfusion, measurements of the cerebral metabolic rate of
glucose and cerebral metabolic rate of oxygen can inform
us about the basal metabolism, and oxygen extraction fraction can be used to provide a functional baseline (34,35).
Even with these advanced methods, brain activity at rest
is far from being completely understood. An integrated
PET/MRI scanner offers the unique opportunity to simultaneously quantify and correlate the physiologic, metabolic,
and functional baselines of the brain.
Brain Connectivity Measures. The brain remains the organ
about which we know the least regarding the fundamental
relationship between its structure and its function, in large
part because methods to map the complex organizational
relationships between its component parts in vivo have not
existed. This is beginning to change. For example, diffusion
MRI allows the identiﬁcation of white matter orientation
locally, permitting estimates of white matter connectivity
between brain regions. In addition to information on
structural connectivity, resting-state fMRI procedures allow
the identiﬁcation of functional connectivity between different brain areas through the observation of the interregional
correlation of physiologic noise on time scales of seconds
(36). What is missing in these measurements is of course
the role of speciﬁc neurotransmitters. Adding information
on transmitter release and receptor occupancy, as well as on
metabolism in connected areas of functional networks, may
be of special interest.
Such data are of more than just academic interest. It may
be of great clinical relevance to study the state of functional
connectivity together with functional PET markers. Recent
studies were already able to demonstrate a regional interrelation between hypometabolism (18F-FDG PET) and
disruption of functional connectivity in patients at risk for
Alzheimer disease (37). As another example, diffusion tractography, which can provide important clinical information
on brain tumors by revealing the displacement and integrity
of peritumoral ﬁber tracts, may—combined with PET ligand
data on the location of vital tumor tissue—be highly important for treatment planning. Identiﬁcation of epileptic foci
can be conﬁrmed with conﬁdence through the conﬂuence
of connectional and metabolic data. Ultimately, the diagnosis
of developmental “connectopathies” such as autism and
schizophrenia, and other behavioral disorders, may come
within reach of this approach.
ADVANTAGES OF SIMULTANEOUS PET/MRI IN
CLINICAL AND RESEARCH APPLICATIONS
Simultaneous PET/MRI is expected to be a more quantitatively accurate tool than either method alone, and several
diseases may yield their secrets best to highly quantitative
PET/MRI FOR NEUROLOGIC APPLICATIONS
Catana et al.
methods. This advantage alone could have a positive impact
on all clinical and research applications that require
improved quantiﬁcation.
One practical advantage that cannot be overstated is that
because most patients undergoing PET for neuropsychiatric
diseases typically also undergo MRI as part of their routine
care, the option to perform the 2 examinations at the same
time in the same scanner represents a signiﬁcant increase in
patient comfort. This 1-stop shop decreases the number of
visits the patient must make to the imaging departments and
reduces the overall imaging time.
Although technical challenges still exist, particularly on the
PET side (e.g., MRI-based attenuation correction is still an
area of active research), the goal of the scanner manufacturers
is to combine the 2 devices without compromising their
individual performance. Indeed, all the standard and advanced
MRI methods for assessing brain anatomy—physiologic
parameters, water diffusion, metabolite concentrations, and
the like—are available in a combined scanner and can be
proﬁtably combined with PET methods (Fig. 1) using proven
and novel radiotracers.
Next, without aiming to comprehensively review the
usefulness of all MRI and PET techniques for all potential
applications, we describe applications that might take
advantage of the improved quantiﬁcation or cross-calibrated
measurements and we provide examples of how one might
use simultaneous PET/MRI to further our knowledge of
these ﬁelds. In each case, we ﬁrst describe some of the
limitations of the existing techniques. We then discuss how
simultaneous PET/MRI might help from a methodologic
point of view, and we cautiously speculate on the potential
clinical impact.
Brain Tumors
MRI is ﬁrmly established as a diagnostic and assessment
method of choice for brain tumor patients and has found
increasing use as a cancer imaging biomarker (38–41). Several
quantitative MRI methods (e.g., dynamic contrast-enhanced
MRI, dynamic susceptibility contrast MRI, MR spectroscopy, and diffusion MRI) have been used to improve cancer
imaging. However, these MRI techniques also have limitations. Dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI, for example, provides a marker of enhancement, but enhancement depends
on CBF and CBV, the permeability of the capillary bed, and
the surface area of the capillary bed (42), and sorting out
which of these is changing after a given treatment can be
challenging (43). Furthermore, contrast enhancement in the
brain is dependent on the integrity of the blood–brain barrier. PET tracers for studying amino acid transport (e.g.,
11C-methionine and 18F-ﬂuoroethyltyrosine), cellular proliferation (e.g., 18F-ﬂuorothymidine), and tissue hypoxia
(e.g., 18F-ﬂuoromisonidazole) (Fig. 4) have been demonstrated to have the potential to circumvent several of the
existing limitations of MRI for brain tumor diagnosis. However, the PET estimates are also inﬂuenced by permeability
or other delivery-related factors that might be better understood using MRI techniques. For example, separating the
18F-ﬂuorothymidine transport and metabolic trapping components (44,45) and comparing these with the permeability
changes assessed with MRI might provide insights beyond
those provided by either modality alone. As another example, the importance of assessing tumor perfusion and hypoxia independently was demonstrated using a dynamic
model for analyzing dynamic 18F-ﬂuoromisonidazole PET
data (46), and MRI offers the ability to directly quantify
brain and tumor perfusion for inclusion in PET kinetic
modeling. All these studies would greatly beneﬁt from
the improved PET data quantiﬁcation obtained using the
simultaneously acquired MRI information.
Glioblastoma, the most aggressive and uniformly fatal
brain tumor, is a disease in desperate need of successful
therapies, and quantitative imaging biomarkers are required
for evaluating the effects and understanding the mechanisms of action of novel therapeutic agents (e.g., antiangio-
Simultaneous PET/MRI studies in patients with brain
tumors. From left to right are shown axial MRI, PET, and fused
18F-ﬂuoromisonidazole
(FMISO), 18F-ﬂuorothymidine (FLT) (data were acquired on BrainPET
prototype at Martinos Center, Massachusetts General Hospital) and
18F-ﬂuoroethyltyrosine (FET) (data were acquired on BrainPET prototype at Forschungszentrum Juelich). (Images courtesy of Hans
Herzog and Karl-Josef Langen.)
THE JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR MEDICINE • Vol. 53 • No. 12 • December 2012
genic agents (47,48)). Simultaneous MRI measurements of
microvascular proliferation, permeability, and PET tracer uptake might help quantify precisely how tumor proliferation,
tumor vascular properties, and antitumor effects occur and
interact, thus enabling better understanding of tumor biology,
evolution, and therapeutic response on an individual basis.
In combination, PET and MRI data should allow
improved diagnostic accuracy and might be used for
surgery and radiation therapy planning (49). It has been
demonstrated that the combination of both modalities can
change the target volume used for radiation therapy, potentially having a signiﬁcant effect on patient outcome (50).
An integrated imaging device becomes especially important
in the planning of radiation therapy or surgical intervention
when brain areas of critical function in the vicinity of
tumors must be identiﬁed (51).
Dementia/Neurodegeneration
In the work-up of patients with cognitive impairment or
suspected dementia, morphologic procedures (i.e., CT or
MRI) are used to exclude nonneurodegenerative and
potentially treatable causes for the symptoms. Recently,
novel MRI techniques have emerged that go beyond this
use. These include quantitative MRI morphology (52–56),
diffusion tensor imaging (57,58), fMRI (59,60), and methods that allow the assessment of changes in the resting-state
functional connectivity networks of the brain, such as the
default mode network (61,62). However, these tools have
not yet been proven to provide high diagnostic sensitivity
and speciﬁcity. PET ﬁndings, on the other hand, allow more
reliable diagnosis and differential diagnosis of dementing
disorders, as well as prediction in predementia stages.
These include speciﬁc patterns of regional glucose metabolism indicating neuronal dysfunction (Fig. 5) (63) and
changes in neurotransmitter systems (e.g., cholinergic, serotonergic, or dopaminergic) (63–66). Recently, new tracers
for molecular imaging of b-amyloid plaques (67,68) have
been introduced. Many modern therapy approaches are directed toward the prevention or removal of this pathology,
and thus, expectations about these PET tracers with regard
to early diagnosis, patient selection, and therapy monitoring
However, PET estimates in small and anatomically
complex structures (such as those ﬁrst affected in the
progression of neurodegenerative disorders) are biased by
confounding effects (e.g., patient motion or atrophy-induced
PVEs). PVEs can actually be opposing, depending on the
type of tracer used: for example, regional atrophy might
lead to overestimation of cortical hypometabolism as
measured by 18F-FDG but to underestimation of amyloid
tracer uptake as measured by 11C-Pittsburgh compound B.
Simultaneous PET/MRI offers the unique option of carefully addressing these issues through accurate MRI-based
motion and PVE correction. Furthermore, the exact relationship between PET and MRI ﬁndings can be investigated. This ability is of special interest because both
strong overlap (69) and considerable discrepancy between
MRI structural changes and PET metabolic changes or amyloid deposits (70) have been demonstrated in previous
studies on the development of Alzheimer disease (71,72).
Because atrophy is thought to represent a more downstream
event in the course of neurodegeneration, the assessment of
functional and molecular abnormalities together with the
detection of the onset and extent of pathology may allow
more precise staging of disease. In addition, simultaneous
acquisition of resting-state fMRI, arterial spin labeling
MRI, and PET may allow for a direct comparison between
these functional parameters and for a cross-evaluation of
their diagnostic value.
Deep brain stimulation (e.g., repetitive transcranial
magnetic stimulation or direct current stimulation of
selected cortical areas) has recently been suggested for
the treatment of Alzheimer disease. Multiparametric functional imaging might improve our understanding of the
effect of stimulation therapy on functional networks (fMRI)
and neuroreceptor/transmitter systems (PET).
Finally, the opportunity to obtain complementary PET
and MRI data simultaneously in a single imaging session is
also likely to represent a major convenience, particularly in
these often elderly and fragile patients.
Simultaneous PET/MRI study in Alzheimer disease patient. (Top) Axial 18F-FDG PET, high-resolution MRI, and fusion image. Areas with reduced metabolism (green) representing impaired
neuronal function are visible in left temporoparietal cortex. (Middle
and bottom) Surface projections of cerebral metabolism and of z
score images (comparison with controls). Data were acquired on
Biograph mMR scanner at Nuklearmedizinische Klinik und Poliklinik
der Technischen Universität München.
PET/MRI FOR NEUROLOGIC APPLICATIONS
Catana et al.
Stroke/Cerebrovascular Disorders
Based on the pioneering work performed with both PET
and MRI in ischemic stroke, the concept of a potentially
salvageable penumbra has emerged and is the most
important (and today the only effective) basis for treatment of ischemic stroke. Therefore, an exact determination of potentially
salvageable tissue is mandatory.
Although PET methods are still considered a gold standard for noninvasively identifying the relevant regions of
hemodynamic and metabolic compromise in ischemic
stroke (73), PET is not routinely integrated into the ﬁrstline diagnostic evaluation of patients with suspected cerebrovascular issues or stroke, because the PET studies that
would be the most useful in the acute phase of ischemic
stroke (i.e., those involving 15O- or 11C-labeled tracers)
are also the most challenging logistically. In the acute
setting, a fast diagnosis is needed because “time is brain,”
particularly regarding differentiation between ischemic
and hemorrhagic strokes, which require very different
therapeutic approaches. Diagnosis is usually obtained by
CT or increasingly also by MRI (74,75). The MRI perfusion/diffusion-weighted mismatch is believed to reﬂect
tissue that is potentially salvageable (similar to the PET
penumbra). However, perfusion-weighted imaging does
not correctly estimate the PET penumbra; it demonstrates
only hypoperfusion in the vascular bed. A direct comparison of simultaneously determined perfusion-weighted
imaging hypoperfusion and low ﬂow-preserved oxygensupplied tissue (increased oxygen extraction fraction) is necessary to really discriminate tissue that can beneﬁt from
recanalization therapies or to exclude patients who are not
likely to beneﬁt from thrombolytic therapy.
Simultaneous measurements might elucidate the ongoing
debate concerning the relationship between the perfusion–
diffusion mismatch and the PET penumbra (Fig. 6) (76–
79). PET/MRI cross-calibration and validation studies are
likely to lead to the adoption of new perfusion-weighted
imaging thresholds (80) that will allow a better selection of
those patients who might still beneﬁt from therapeutic interventions beyond the accepted 4.5-h time window. As previously stated, “the time has come to calibrate simpler and
widely applicable functional imaging procedures—especially
diffusion- and perfusion-weighted MRI—on PET in order to
make these modalities a reliable tool in the study of acute
ischemic stroke” (76).
In the follow-up of ischemic stroke it is important to
demonstrate the relationship between progression of a lesion
(assessed using
15O-PET or microglial activation using
translocator protein PET) and changes in perfusion- and
diffusion-weighted images. Because these changes occur
in small areas around the primary lesion and are transient,
a simultaneous determination is necessary. In this context,
activation studies (fMRI) would help to better understand
the progression (or the recovery) of functional impairment
in the surroundings of the ischemic lesion and within the
functional network.
Ictal–interictal SPECT is most often used for detecting
the epileptogenic focus but relies on the presence of
seizure activity. An imaging modality that allows the
interictal detection of the lesion would be preferred, and
combining the PET and MRI data (Fig. 7) might facilitate
this task. It is known that there is a high probability that
regional interictal hypometabolic lesions detected on 18F-
FDG PET represent epileptogenic foci, even in MRInegative cases, or that the responsible focus can be selected from several structural abnormalities present on
the MRI ﬁndings (81). In MRI-negative patients with temporal lobe epilepsy, 11C-ﬂumazenil PET has been shown
to be useful to detect the epileptic foci due to the reduced
binding of this ligand to the inhibitory g-aminobutyric
acid receptors (82). Nevertheless, high-resolution MRI
brain scans are required for focus localization, and precise coregistration of the PET and MRI volumes is important for planning surgery. The combination of PET
and fMRI may also allow the detection of eloquent brain
areas and topographic association with the epileptogenic
A major advantage of integrated PET/MRI for diagnosing
epilepsy is that the number of times sedation or anesthesia is
required might be reduced, particularly in younger children
who cannot remain motionless during the scans. Furthermore, the reduced radiation when compared with PET/CT
could be particularly useful for assessing medically intractable epilepsy in children.
Comparison of MRI time-to-peak (TTP) and PET oxygen
extraction fraction (OEF) images in 2 patients measured in chronic
phase of stroke illustrating mismatch–penumbra debate. Disagreement between the 2 techniques is observed in ﬁrst patient (top
row), and agreement is observed in second patient (bottom row).
(Reprinted with permission of (80).)
THE JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR MEDICINE • Vol. 53 • No. 12 • December 2012
Neurobiology of Brain Activation
Simultaneous PET/MRI may improve the understanding of
the interaction between neurochemistry/transmitter-mediated
processes and their functional, metabolic, and hemodynamic
consequences in healthy brains and various disorders.
For example, in Parkinson disease, PET and MRI data
might be used to simultaneously interrogate different
phases of a complex pharmacologic response such as the
rate of dopamine synthesis, release, transport, and receptor
expression (PET) and neuronal activation (fMRI) after
amphetamine stimulation (83).
Using an integrated scanner, the effect of deep brain
stimulation of the nucleus accumbens (84) on metabolism
and transmitter–receptor interaction in deﬁned regions together with the connecting ﬁber tracts can be investigated.
Similarly, one can study the effects of repetitive transcranial
magnetic stimulation or of direct-current stimulation, which
can be used to activate or inhibit selected areas of the cortex,
on regional metabolism and on the involvement of transmitter–receptor systems with the connecting networks (85).
A highly interesting scientiﬁc option is the simultaneous
measurement of neurochemical changes (PET) and changes
in regional brain activity (BOLD-fMRI), including the
effects of activation by speciﬁc tasks on transmitter release
or receptor binding. For example, during learning of motor
skills, the effects of regional neuronal activation might be
dynamically monitored by BOLD-fMRI and, simultaneously, might be detected by a PET study in which
a dopamine receptor ligand is displaced from the receptor
site (86). By analogy, the response to pain with regard to
neuronal activation and, for example, opiate receptor displacement might be assessed simultaneously. Findings from
such simultaneous multimodal imaging might also be related to task performance, behavior, hormone levels, and
subjective perception, among others. Because neurons represent the fastest-acting cells in the human body, sequential
imaging approaches may never be able to truly reproduce
a situation and to synchronize the ﬁndings from the 2 modalities. Perfusion, metabolism, neuronal activity, receptor/
transmitter status, and functional connectivity may change
within seconds. Furthermore, cerebral processes are affected by mood, hormonal status, vigilance, or levels of
medication, which can change within minutes. Finally, habituation may lead to differences in the performance of
repeated tasks (or their cerebral processing), as well as to
changes in expectation or in the subjective evaluation of
any repeated sensation. Thus, in a sequential approach, it
neither will be possible to establish a temporal relation
between PET and MRI ﬁndings nor can it be ensured
that the brain processes investigated are comparable. In
contrast, simultaneous PET/MRI may open totally new perspectives in the analysis of neurochemical and electrophysiologic interactions in the brain.
Translational Research
Tremendous progress is constantly being made in the
molecular and cellular imaging ﬁeld. Integrated PET/MRI will
be of great value for the transfer of these ﬁndings to humans
and the development of innovative treatment strategies.
Examples of applications that might beneﬁt from simultaneous
assessment of various parameters are monitoring the therapeutic effects of targeted gene transfer, stem cell transplantation,
and cell replacement approaches.
Targeted genes can be transferred using various vectors
for induction of foreign enzyme expression in selected
cells. These foreign enzymes can render the induced cells
susceptible to speciﬁc drugs, which then are converted into
toxic compounds. This approach was applied for experimental treatment of glioblastoma by transferring the herpes
simplex thymidine kinase gene, which made the cells
susceptible to ganciclovir. The expression of the transferred
gene and the effect on tumor metabolism and growth could
be followed by PET and MRI (87).
Simultaneous PET/MRI can be used to show the viability
and differentiation of transplanted cells and their effect on the
neuronal network. Embryonic stem cells can be implanted
into brain lesions; for example, the destroyed striatum and the
proliferation and differentiation of dopaminergic cells can be
followed using combined measurements. The restored functional activity of the transplanted cells can be demonstrated
by the response to amphetamine, which causes an increase in
relative CBV due to dopamine release (88).
Cell replacement approaches have been proposed for
treatment of various neurologic disorders (e.g., ischemic
stroke). For this strategy, it is essential to monitor the
location and follow the migration of grafted stem or
progenitor cells. Various methods can be used for labeling
these cells, making them detectable by MRI (e.g., iron
oxide particles) (89). The migration of these cells to the
border zone of damaged brain tissue in the affected hemisphere can be followed by MRI. Monitoring viability and
migration, as well as integration of cells into functional
networks, by simultaneous PET/MRI might become a qualifying step in strategies relying on transplantation of fetal
grafts in various neurologic diseases.
Simultaneous PET/MRI study in epilepsy patient. From
left to right are shown axial FDG PET (60–75 min after injection),
high-resolution MRI scan, and fusion image. Distinct hypometabolism is visible in polar region of left temporal lobe, typically corresponding to epileptogenic focus. Data were acquired on Biograph
mMR scanner at Nuklearmedizinische Klinik und Poliklinik der Technischen Universität München.
PET/MRI FOR NEUROLOGIC APPLICATIONS
Catana et al.
CONCLUSION
For years, simultaneous PET/MRI was thought of as
a potential Holy Grail of molecular imaging, and of
molecular neuroimaging in particular. Integrated PET/MRI
offers several promising options regarding the clinical
evaluation of disorders of the brain. The high diagnostic
value of MRI and PET procedures for neuropsychiatric
conditions may turn PET/MRI into the hybrid imaging
modality of choice for diagnostic questions directed toward
pathologies inside the brain. PET/MRI may have an improved diagnostic value, compared with the value of each of
the individual procedures, and may optimize workﬂow and
increase patient comfort.
From a scientiﬁc perspective, PET/MRI should improve
our understanding of healthy-brain physiology and function
and open new insights into the pathophysiologic interrelation between different parameters involved in disorders of
the central nervous system. The clever design and analysis
of data obtained with speciﬁc tracers will allow for
estimation of changes in receptor binding in response to
a stimulus, a concept directly complementary to fMRI
activation studies to investigate brain physiology. As we
probe illnesses of the mind more thoroughly, the state of
the mind and the state of the brain at any given instant
become more relevant. In our quest for understanding how
our mind works, the great opportunity (and challenge)
created by simultaneous PET/MRI is to use dynamic measures
of brain physiology from MRI and new generations of
receptor-speciﬁc tracers (with long plasma half-lives and
rapidly reversible displaceability) to perform receptor-speciﬁc
activation mapping using fMRI-like paradigms.
Although a range of existing studies requiring data from
both modalities might beneﬁt from this new imaging
technique, we expect that the most exciting opportunities
will emerge from new molecular neuroimaging applications
that will provide scientiﬁc and medical beneﬁts.
DISCLOSURE
Dr. Catana has received honoraria from Siemens Healthcare for lectures. The authors of this article have indicated
no other relevant relationships that could be perceived as
a real or apparent conﬂict of interest.