IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, ACCEPTED FOR PUBLICATION
A Novel Combined Data-Driven Approach for
Electricity Theft Detection
Kedi Zheng, Student Member, IEEE, Qixin Chen, Senior Member, IEEE, Yi Wang, Student Member, IEEE,
Chongqing Kang, Fellow, IEEE, and Qing Xia, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—The two-way flow of information and energy is
an important feature of the Energy Internet. Data analytics
is a powerful tool in the information flow that aims to solve
practical problems using data mining techniques. As the problem
of electricity thefts via tampering with smart meters continues
to increase, the abnormal behaviors of thefts become more
diversified and more difficult to detect. Thus, a data analytics
method for detecting various types of electricity thefts is required.
However, the existing methods either require a labeled dataset
or additional system information which is difficult to obtain
in reality or have poor detection accuracy. In this paper, we
combine two novel data mining techniques to solve the problem.
One technique is the Maximum Information Coefficient (MIC),
which can find the correlations between the non-technical loss
(NTL) and a certain electricity behavior of the consumer. MIC
can be used to precisely detect thefts that appear normal in
shapes. The other technique is the clustering technique by fast
search and find of density peaks (CFSFDP). CFSFDP finds the
abnormal users among thousands of load profiles, making it quite
suitable for detecting electricity thefts with arbitrary shapes.
Next, a framework for combining the advantages of the two
techniques is proposed. Numerical experiments on the Irish smart
meter dataset are conducted to show the good performance of
the combined method.
Index Terms—Electricity Theft Detection, Data Mining, Energy
Internet, Non-Technical Loss, Smart Meter, Cyber Security
NOMENCLATURE
Set of all users in an area.
Set of benign users in the area.
Set of fraudulent users in the area.
Set of ordered data pairs.
Time interval index.
Electricity user index.
Load profile indices.
Day index.
Variables and Parameters
Ground truth consumption for user i at time t.
Recorded consumption for user i at time t.
Manuscript received July 18, 2018; revised September 10, 2018; accepted
September 28, 2018. This work was supported by National Key R&D Program
of China (No. 2016YFB0900100). Paper No. TII-18-1861. (Corresponding
Author: Qixin Chen)
The authors are with the State Key Lab of Power Systems, the Department
of Electrical Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084 China. (Email: )
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2018.2873814
Ground truth load profile for user i.
Recorded load profile for user i.
Normalized load profile for user i at day j.
Ground truth consumption of the area at time t.
Non-technical loss of the area at time t.
Non-technical loss series of the area.
A grid used to seperate D into discrete values.
Number of bins in x-axis and y-axis of G.
Characteristic matrix.
Local density of load profile p.
Minimal distance of load profile p from other load
Distance between load profiles p and q.
Cut-off distance for CFSFDP.
Density abnormality for load profiles p.
Size of a set.
Corr(·, ·)
Correlation measurement for two vectors.
Mutual Information of data.
Upper bound function for the scale of G.
Maximum Information Coefficient of data.
Kernel function used in CFSFDP.
I. INTRODUCTION
HE ENERGY Internet, which is proposed as the next
step in the evolution of Smart Grid , has the important
feature of bi-directional energy and information flow. The
advanced metering infrastructure (AMI) is the basis of the
information flow in the Energy Internet. With the deployment
of smart meters, AMI now provides power utilities with
massive amounts of electricity consumption data at a higher
frequency, thus enabling precise user behavior modeling ,
load forecasting , load estimation , and demand response . However, making the information flow of Energy
Internet secure has proved to be a challenging issue due to the
unique characteristics of AMI. Fraudulent users can tamper
with the smart meter data using digital tools or cyber attacks.
Thus, the form of electricity thefts in Energy Internet is very
different from the thefts in the past, which relies mostly on
physically bypassing or destructing mechanical meters .
Cases of organized energy theft spreading tampering tools
and methods against smart meters that caused severe loss
of power utilities were reported by the U.S. Federal Bureau
of Investigation and Fujian Daily in China. In total,
the non-technical loss (NTL) due to consumer fraud in the
© 2018 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media,
including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers
or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.
 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, ACCEPTED FOR PUBLICATION
electrical grid in the U.S. was estimated to be $6 billion/year
 . Because the traditional detection methods of sending
technical staff or Video Surveillance are quite time-consuming
and labor-intensive, electricity theft detection methods that
take the advantage of Energy Internet’s information flow are
urgently needed to solve the problem of the ”Billion-Dollar
non-hardware
electricity
methods can be classified into three categories: artificial
intelligence-based (AI-based), state-based, and game theorybased . The AI-based methods use machine learning
techniques, such as classification and clustering to analyze the
load profiles of consumers to find the abnormal users because
the consumption patterns of fraudulent users are believed to
differ from those of benign users. Classification methods –
 usually require the labeled dataset to train the classifier,
whereas clustering methods – are unsupervised and
can be applied to an unlabeled dataset. The state-based methods , use additional measurements, such as power,
voltage, and current in the distribution network to detect
electricity thefts. Because fraudulent users are incapable of
tampering with the network measurements, so conflicts will
arise between the system states and smart meter records.
Although high detection accuracy can be achieved, these
methods require the network topology and additional meters.
The game theory-based methods , assume that there
is a game between fraudulent users and power utilities and that
different distributions of fraudulent users’ and benign users’
consumption can be derived from the game equilibrium. Detection can be conducted according to the difference between
the distributions. Because the game theory-based methods
focus on theoretical analysis with strong assumptions, they
are beyond the scope of this paper.
A brief review of the existing state- and AI-based electricity
theft detection methods in the literature is presented here.
The physical model of a power network indicates that the
system variables should satisfy certain mathematical equations, which derives the consistency of the variables. The
state-based methods utilize the fact that tampering with smart
meter data will certainly create inconsistencies between system
variables including power, voltage and current. In , a
linear regression method is used to estimate the resistance of
distribution lines from active power and current measurements;
next, the NTL of each line is calculated according to the
estimated resistance value to find the electricity theft. A stateestimation-based approach for distribution transformer load
estimation is exploited to detect meter tampering in . The
variance of measurements and estimated values is analyzed
to create a suspect list of customers with metering problems.
Neto et al. proposed a probabilistic methodology for NTL
estimation in the distribution network . The technical loss
sensitivity in relation to the load variation is derived and
the probabilistic distributions of total loss and technical loss
are calculated. In their methodology, if the two distributions
have big differences, then the NTL is indicated. Han et al.
proposed a fast NTL fraud detection (FNFD) scheme in ,
where the NTL is calculated from observer meters and the
Recursive Least Square (RLS) algorithm is used to find the
correlation between smart meter data and the NTL. FNFD
can catch proportional electricity thieves who steal energy at
a fixed proportion. In , a deep-learning-based real-time
mechanism for detecting electricity thefts was proposed. In
this mechanism, the state vector estimator (SVE) calculates the
attack vector and the state vector from real-time measurements
and the power system topology, and an identification scheme
based on a deep belief network helps the SVE finds the false
data injection (FDI). Xiao et al. proposed an algorithm for
regional and individual electricity theft detection using random
matrix theory (RMT) in . A pattern signal is constructed
from real time power and voltage measurements as an indicator
for NTL. Most of the state-based methods rely on the realtime acquisition of the system topology and additional physical
measurements, which is sometimes unattainable.
In almost all occasions, the tampered load profiles differ
from the original ones. The AI-based methods attempt to
find the abnormal patterns among all load profiles of the
consumers. Nizar et al. applied the Extreme Learning Machine
(ELM) for electricity theft detection . The ELM-based
approach extracts patterns of customer behavior from historical kWh consumption data and detects abnormal behaviors.
In , a multi-class support vector machine (SVM) was
trained to detect whether a new sample of load profiles is
normal or malicious. The problem of imbalanced training
dataset is addressed and solved by generating a synthetic
dataset. In , a Wide & Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) model was developed and applied to analyze
the electricity thefts in Smart Grid. In , an optimum-path
forest (OPF) based unsupervised NTL identification method
was proposed and compared with other well-known clustering
methods including k-means and Birch. Zanetti et al. proposed
a fraud detection system (FDS) based on anomaly detection
on the energy consumption reports from smart meters .
In their approach, an FDS state machine is designed to
judge whether a grid subsystem is in an abnormal state, and
unsupervised techniques of k-means, fuzzy c-means (FCM)
and self-organized map (SOM) are used to detect FDI. In our
previous work , the clustering technique by fast search and
find of density peaks (CFSFDP) is applied to detect load
profiles with abnormal shapes. In , various modeling techniques including supervised SVM, decision trees and bayesian
networks, unsupervised OPF and real time state estimation
are reviewed. Their basic assumptions, methodologies, and
simulation results are presented systematically.
In fact, the existing methods have some issues that must be
addressed further. For AI-based methods, due to the difficulty
in building a labeled dataset of electricity thefts, the application of classification methods is limited. Because the clustering
methods are unsupervised, tampered load profiles with normal
shapes can not be detected, resulting in low detection accuracy.
For the state-based methods, the measurement data and system
information acquisition are much more difficult to obtain. In
real applications, the consumption patterns which are the focus
of AI-based methods and the state consistency which is the
focus of state-based methods should be both considered and
In this paper, a real and general scene in which an observer
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, ACCEPTED FOR PUBLICATION
meter is installed for every area containing a group of users
is considered. The recorded data of the observer meter are
the sum of the electricity consumptions of the area during a
certain time interval. The data are available to most of the
distribution system operators (DSOs) or electricity retailers.
We attempt to combine the advantages of AI- and state-based
methods to propose a detecting framework that adapts to
the least parameters or system information to ensure general
application and achieves good accuracy without any labeled
training set. In particular, the maximum information coefficient
(MIC) is used to detect the association between NTL
and the tampered load profiles with minimal additional system
information. Next, CFSFDP is applied to catch thieves whose
load profiles are more random and arbitrary according to their
abnormal density features. We ensemble the two techniques
by combining the suspicion ranks to cover most types of
electricity thefts. The main contributions of this paper are as
1) Novel Framework: Proposing a complementary combined electricity theft detecting framework which can
quantify the suspicion ranks from both the shapesimilarity perspective and the magnitude-correlation perspective.
2) New Techniques: Applying advanced and efficient
machine learning techniques for abnormal detection.
Specifically, MIC is used as a state-based electricity
theft detecting method for correlation analysis, which
only requires the observer meter data (i.e., the area total
electricity consumption data) in addition to the load
profiles and has high accuracy in detecting electricity
thefts that appear normal in shapes; the unsupervised
learning technique CFSFDP, a parameter-free method,
is used to detect load profiles with unusual shapes that
MIC cannot consider.
3) Comprehensive Experiments: Conducting comprehensive numerical experiments for different types of electricity theft behaviors and comparing our method with
various state-off-the-art methods to verify the effectiveness and superiority of the framework.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
describes the applicable scene and gives the basic problem
statement. Section III presents a theory of the two techniques
and shows the framework of combined electricity theft detection. Numerical experiments are conducted and the evaluation
results are shown in Section IV. Finally, Section V draws
conclusions.
II. PROBLEM STATEMENT
A. Observer Meters
Our method is applicable to the scene of Fig. 1, where
an observer meter is installed in an area with a group of
customers. An observer meter is more secure than a normal
smart meter is, making it almost impossible for fraudulent
users to tamper with the meter. We believe that DSOs and
electricity retailers have access to the observer meter data.
'LVWULEXWLRQV\VWHPRSHUDWRUV
RUHOHFWULFLW\UHWDLOHUV
Fig. 1: Observer meters for areas and smart meters for customers
TABLE I: Six FDI types1 
Modification
where 0.2 < α < 0.8 is randomly generated
where γ is a randomly defined cut-off point,
and γ < max x
˜xt ←max {xt −γ, 0}
where γ is a randomly defined cut-off point,
and γ < max x
˜xt ←f(t) · xt
where f(t) =
if t1 < t < t2
t1 −t2 is a randomly defined time period
longer than 4 hours
where 0.2 < αt < 0.8 is randomly generated
where 0.2 < αt < 0.8 is randomly generated,
¯x is the average consumption of the load profile
1 The index i in xi,t, ˜xi,t and xi is omitted here for simplicity
B. False Data Injection
Electricity thieves tend to reduce the quantity of their billed
electricity, thus an FDI that has certain impacts on the tampered load profiles is used to simulate the tampering behaviors
of the electricity thieves. We use six FDI types similar to
those mentioned in that have time-variant modifications
on load profiles. Table I shows our FDI definitions, and Fig. 2
gives an example of the tampered load profiles. In Table I,
xt is the ground true power consumption during time interval
t, and ˜xt is the tampered data recorded by the smart meter.
There are many other FDI types in the literature , .
However, an characteristic can be generalized according to
their definitions and examples: an FDI type either keeps the
features and fluctuations of the original curve, or creates new
patterns. This is the same for other sophisticated FDI types,
so our method can handle them as well.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, ACCEPTED FOR PUBLICATION
power consumption/kWh
Fig. 2: An example of the FDI types
C. A State-based Method of Correlation
The NTL of an area et can be calculated by subtracting the
observer meter data Et from the sum of the smart meter data
˜xi,t in the area:
Let F denote the set of the labels of tampered meters in the
area. Eq. (1) can be represented as:
(xi,t −˜xi,t)
where xi,t is the ground truth electricity consumption by
consumer i. According to the analysis in Subsection II-B, if the
tampered data ˜xi,t have a positive correlation with the ground
truth data xi,t, then the NTL value of (xi,t −˜xi,t) caused by
user i is also correlated with ˜xi,t. Because et is composed
of several (xi,t −˜xi,t), the correlation between vector e and
˜xi when i ∈F should be stronger than the correlation when
Corr(e, ˜xi)
i∈F > Corr(e, ˜xi)
where Corr(·, ·) is a proper correlation measurement for
two vectors. Fig. 3 shows a real electricity theft case in
Shenzhen , where e and ˜xi have a high correlation. In
FDI1, the correlation is linear and certain; however, in many
other situations, the correlation is rather fuzzy. Note that
Eq. (3) may not hold for some FDI types (e.g., FDI6 which
produces a totally random curve); however, we can filter out a
large part of electricity thefts by using Eq. (3). The selection
of measurement Corr(·, ·) that can precisely reveal the fuzzy
relationship between NTL and tampered load profiles is of
vital importance.
III. METHODOLOGY AND DETECTION FRAMEWORK
The overall detection methodology is based on the two novel
data mining techniques, i.e., MIC and CFSFDP. MIC utilize
the analysis in Subsection II-C to detect associations between
the area NTL and tampered load profiles. CFSFDP is used to
determine the load profiles with abnormal shapes. According
power consumption/kWh
Kengzi substation F04 line #2 user
Fig. 3: A real case of NTL and power consumption of the
suspected user 
to the suspicion ranks given by the two methods, an combined
rank is given to take the advantages of both methods.
A. Maximum Information Coefficient
In statistics, the Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC) is
an effective measurement for the correlation between two
vectors. The PCC has a value between +1 and −1. If two
vectors have a strict linear correlation, then the absolute value
of PCC is 1. If two vectors are irrelevant, then the value
is 0. However, the PCC cannot detect more sophisticated
associations, such as quadratic or cubic, and time-variant
relations. The mutual information (MI) of two variables is
used as a good measurement of relevance because it detects
all types of associations. MIC is based on the calculation of
MI and has proved to have a better performance than MI in
many occasions .
Given a finite set D of ordered pairs, the x-values of D
can be partitioned into a bins and the y-values of D can be
partitioned into b bins. This creates an a-by-b grid G in the
finite 2D space. Let D|G be the distribution induced by the
points in D on the cells of G. For D ⊂R2 and a, b ∈N∗,
I∗(D, a, b) = max
where the maximum is over all grids G with a columns and b
rows, and I(D|G) is the MI of D|G. The characteristic matrix
M(D) is defined as
I∗(D, a, b)
log min{a, b}
The MIC of a finite set D with sample size |D| and grid size
less than B(n) is given by
ab<B(|D|){M(D)a,b}
We use B(|D|) = |D|0.6 in this paper because it is found to
work well in practice. The value of MIC falls in the range of
 , and a larger value indicates a stronger association.
The MIC(·) is applied as the Corr(·, ·) in Eq. (3) to detect
electricity thefts whose consumption behaviors have strong
relevance to the NTL in the area.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, ACCEPTED FOR PUBLICATION
Fig. 4: An example distribution of data points
B. CFSFDP-based Unsupervised Detection
To tackle the FDI types that cannot be detected by the
method of correlation, we use clustering to find the outliers in
the numerous load profiles. Density-based clustering methods
have been widely adopted in anomaly detecting. CFSFDP 
is a newly-proposed method that has proved to be very
powerful in large dataset clustering and outlier detection.
In CFSFDP, two values are defined for the p-th load profile:
its local density ρp and its distance δp from other load profiles
of higher density. Both values depend on the distances dpq
between the data points. Eq. (7) gives the definition of ρp:
χ(dp,q −dc)
where dc is the cut-off distance and χ(·) is the kernel function.
The cut-off kernel is χ(x) =
1, if x < 0
0, otherwise
. Because the
local density ρp is discrete in Eq. (7), a Gaussian kernel is
occasionally used to estimate ρp, as shown in Eq. (8), to avoid
conflicts:
The definition of δp is shown in Eq. (9):
q:ρq>ρp dp,q
For those load profiles with the highest local density, δp is
conventionally written as
Although the cut-off distance dc is exogenous in the definitions, it can be automatically chosen by a rule of thumb
suggested in . Fig. 4 shows an example of 28 data points
among which #26∼28 are abnormal. The abnormal data points
usually deviate from the normal majority, thus they only have a
few neighborhood points and their distance to the high density
area is larger than the normal points. From the definitions
Fig. 5: Scatter plot of (ρp, δp) of the example data points
above, the spatial distribution of the abnormal points results
in a small ρp and a large δp (Fig. 5). We define the degree of
abnormality ζp in Eq. (11):
Compared with k-means and other partition-based clustering
methods, density-based clustering can consider clusters with
an arbitrary shape without any parameter selection. Moreover,
the algorithm of CFSFDP is so simple that once the local
density ρp of all the load profiles is calculated, δp and ζp
can be easily obtained without any iteration. Load profiles
with strange or arbitrary shapes are very likely to have a high
value of ζp. Thus we can find out the abnormal load profiles
according to their ζp value, which is very helpful in detecting
electricity thefts that MIC cannot consider.
C. Combined Detecting Framework
Fig. 6 shows the framework of how to utilize MIC and
CFSFFDP in electricity detecting and how to combine the
results of the two independent but complementary methods.
For an area with n consumers and m-day recorded data
series, a time series of NTL is first calculated using Eq. (1).
Next, we normalize each load profile ˜xp by dividing it with
maxt ˜xp and then reconstruct the smart meter dataset into
a normalized load profile dataset with n × m vectors. This
procedure retains the shape of each load curve to the greatest
extent and helps the clustering method focus on the detection
of arbitrary load shapes. Let ui,j denote the normalized vector
of the i-th consumer’s load profile on the j-th day and ej
denote the NTL loss vector of the area on the j-th day. For
every i and j, MIC(ui,j, ej) is calculated according to the
equations in Subsection III-A. Moreover, ρi,j and δi,j are
calculated using CFSFDP, and the degree of abnormality ζi,j
for vector ui,j is obtained.
For consumer i with m MIC or ζ values, a k-means
clustering method with k = 2 is used to detect the MIC or
ζ values of suspicious days by classifying the m days into
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, ACCEPTED FOR PUBLICATION
Smart Meter
Meter Data
Normalized
Load Profiles
Reconstruction
& normalization
Correlation
calculation
Raise an alarm of electricity thefts
for those who have a high rank
Fig. 6: The detection framework of the MIC-CFSFDP combined method
2 groups. The mean of the MIC or ζ values that belong to
the more suspicious group is taken as the suspicion degree for
consumer i. Thus, the two suspicion ranks of the n consumers
can be extracted by inter-comparing the n×m MIC or ζ values.
The idea of combining the two ranks is based on the famous
Rank Product (RP) method , which is frequently used in
Biostatistics. In this paper, we use the arithmetic mean and
the geometric mean of the two ranks to combine the methods,
as in Eq. (12).
RankArith = Rank1 + Rank2
or RankGeo =
Rank1 × Rank2
Finally, a consumer is considered committing electricity theft
if his combined Rank is high.
IV. NUMERICAL EXPERIMENTS
A. Dataset
We use the smart meter dataset from Irish CER Smart
Metering Project that contains the load profiles of over
5000 Irish residential users and small & medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) for more than 500 days. Because all users have
completed the pre-trial or post-trial surveys, the original data
are considered ground truth. We use the load profiles of all 391
SMEs in the dataset from July 15 to August 13, 2009. Thus,
we have 391 × 30 = 11 730 load profiles in total, and each
load profile consists of 48 points, with a time interval of half
an hour. The 391 SMEs are randomly and evenly divided into
several areas with observer meters. For each area, several users
are randomly chosen as fraudulent users, and certain types of
FDI are used to tamper with their load profiles. Fifteen of the
30 load profiles of each fraudulent user are tampered with.
B. Comparisons and Evaluation Criteria
To demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method,
we use other correlation analysis and unsupervised outlier
detection methods for comparison:
• Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC): a famous statistic
method for bivariate correlation measurement.
• Kraskov’s estimator for mutual information : an improved method for estimating the MI of two continuous
• Fuzzy C-Means (FCM): an unsupervised fuzzy clustering
method. The number of cluster centers is chosen to range
from 4 to 12 in this paper.
• Density-based Local Outlier Factor (LOF) : A commonly used method of density-based outlier detection.
To obtain comprehensive evaluation results in the unbalanced dataset, we use the AUC (Area Under Curve) and MAP
(Mean Average Precision) values mentioned in . The two
evaluation criteria have been widely adopted in classification
tasks. The AUC is defined as the area under the receiver
operating characteristic (ROC) curve, which is the trace of
the false positive rate and the true positive rate. Define the set
of fraudulent users F as the positive class and benign users
B as the negative class. The suspicion Rank is in ascending
order according to the suspicion degree of the users. AUC can
be calculated using Rank as in Eq. (13):
i∈F Ranki −1
2|F|(|F| + 1)
Let Yk denote the number of electricity thieves who rank at
top k, and define the precision P@k = Yk
k . Given a certain
number of N, MAP@N is the mean of P@k defined in
where r is the number of electricity thieves who rank in the
top N and ki is the position of the i-th electricity thieves. We
use MAP@20 in this paper. In the random guess (RG), the
true positive rate equals the false positive rate; thus, the AUC
for RG is always 0.5, and the MAP for RG is |F|/(|F|+|B|)
which is the proportion of electricity thieves among all users.
We consider these values to be the benchmarks.
Note that all the numerical experiments in this paper are
repeated for 100 randomly generated scenarios to avoid contingency among the results. The values of AUC and MAP
are calculated using the mean value to show the average
performance.
C. Numerical Results
In this subsection, we divide the users into 10 areas and
randomly choose 5 electricity thieves for each area. Thus, each
area has approximately 39 users, and the ratio of fraudulent
users is 12.8%.
Fig. 7 shows the comparison results of the methods. Table II
shows the detailed values of AUC and MAP@20 of the
correlation-based methods and the unsupervised clusteringbased methods for the six FDI types. The type MIX indicates
that the 5 electricity thieves randomly choose one of the
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, ACCEPTED FOR PUBLICATION
TABLE II: Average Evaluation Results of the Methods
Correlation
Unsupervised clustering
Correlation
Unsupervised clustering
(a) AUC values of the methods
(b) MAP@20 values of the methods
Fig. 7: The evaluation results of the original and combined
six types. We believe that different fraudulent users might
choose different FDI types. The results for detection of single
FDI types show the advantage of each method under certain
situations, while the results for type MIX are of significance
in practice. In CFSFDP, the cut-off kernel is used because
it is faster than the Gaussian kernel and because we have a
large dataset in which conflicts do not occur. In the application
of FCM, there are 9 different results due to the number of
CFSFDP FCM
Standard deviation
Fig. 8: Standard deviations of the evaluation results
CFSFDP FCM-4 FCM-12
time consumption (s)
Fig. 9: Time consumption of the correlation and clustering
based methods
cluster centers, and we only present the best among them. MI
denotes the Kraskov’s estimator for mutual information, and
Arith and Geo are abbreviations for arithmetic and geometric
mean, respectively. The best results among the 8 methods are
bold for each FDI type in Table II.
The results demonstrate that the correlation-based methods
exhibit excellent performance in detecting FDI1. The blue
lines in Fig. 7 show that MIC has a more balanced performance
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, ACCEPTED FOR PUBLICATION
The number of electricity theives per area
(a) AUC values of the methods
The number of electricity theives per area
(b) MAP@20 values of the methods
Fig. 10: Performance of the methods with different number of
electricity thieves per area
in both AUC and MAP@20. MIC also shows its superiority in
detecting type MIX. The correlation-based method performs
poorly in detecting FDI5 and FDI6 because the tampered load
profiles become quite random and the correlation no longer exists. The unsupervised clustering methods, especially CFSFDP
and LOF, have quite high values of AUC in detecting FDI4,
FDI5, and FDI6; however, they have zero performance in FDI1
because after normalization the tampered load profiles appear
exactly the same as the original load profiles. FCM have poor
performance in types, except for FDI6; thus FCM may not be
a good tool for electricity theft detection. Furthermore, during
the numerical experiments, we noticed that the performance of
FCM was heavily affected by the number of cluster centers,
and it is quite unpractical in tuning the number in a wider
range. From the black lines in Fig. 7, CFSFDP is found to have
the best performance in detecting FDI5, FDI6 and type MIX
among all the clustering methods. The MAP@20 of CFSFDP
is much higher than that of LOF for these types.
The combined methods have taken the advantages of both
MIC and CFSFDP. For FDI1, for which MIC specializes in,
the performance of our combined methods is not as good
as that of MIC. However, our methods achieves a rather
high AUC of 0.766 in detecting FDI1. For FDI5 and FDI6,
for which CFSFDP specializes in, our methods also have
high values of AUC and MAP@20. The combined methods
achieved improvements in the remaining types. The MIC-
CFSFDP combined methods maintain the excellent performance of the original two methods in their own specialized
situations while achieving significant improvements in the
remaining situations, resulting in the best detection accuracy in
type MIX and a high and steady detection accuracy for FDI1
to FDI6. The AUC value for type MIX increased from 0.748 to
0.816 (approximately 10%), and the MAP@20 value for type
MIX increasd from 0.693 to 0.831 (approximately 20%). The
results for Arith and Geo are similar in most cases, and Arith
performs slightly better in AUC. It is worthwhile to mention
that weight factors in type MIX alter the detection accuracy.
Although we assume identical weights for the FDI types, the
combinded methods achieve improvements in accuracy for
other non-extreme weight factors.
Fig. 8 shows the standard deviations σ of AUC and
MAP@20 in the 100 randomly generated scenes of type MIX
for each method. σ of AUC is approximately 4% for all the
methods, and Arith has a minimum σAUC of 3.08%. σMAP@20
is distributed between 9% and 17%. σMAP@20 of Arith and
Geo are 9.16% and 9.13%, respectively, and are smaller than
that of all the other methods. The combined methods improve
both the accuracy and the stability of the original methods.
Fig. 9 presents the average time consumption of the six
methods for one detection of the whole 11 730 load profiles.
For FCM, we only show the results of 4 and 12 cluster centers.
The test was done on an Intel Core 
desktop computer with 32GB RAM. Among these methods,
Kraskov’s estimator for MI has the most time consumption.
The combining process only requires simple calculation and
sorting, and its time consumption is less than 1 s.
D. Sensitivity Analysis
When applying the electricity detection methods in realworld conditions, the number of electricity consumers or
electricity thieves per area varies over a wide range, resulting
in different detection accuracy and stability. In this subsection,
we attempt to analyze the sensitivity in the two aspects. First,
we hold the number of electricity consumers per area to 39
and change the number of electricity thieves per area from 1 to
7. Seven electricity thieves per area represent approximately
18% of all users; this is a very severe condition. Next, we
hold the number of electricity thieves per area to 5 and change
the number of electricity consumers per area from 30 to 98
(which is achieved by dividing the 391 users into 4 to 13
areas). Fig. 10 and Fig. 11 show the evaluation results for the
two aspects of sensitivity analysis. Due to space limitations,
we only present the results for type MIX.
As the number of electricity thieves per area changes, we
can see from the AUC values that MIC and PCC perform
well under the conditions of fewer electricity thieves and that
MI is more robust in this aspect. However, MIC and PCC
perform better in MAP@20 than MI. MIC can detect electricity thieves more precisely under these conditions. CFSFDP
always performs the best of the three unsupervised clustering
methods. The combined method of Arith maintains excellent
performance for both AUC and MAP@20.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, ACCEPTED FOR PUBLICATION
The number of electricity consumers per area
(a) AUC values of the methods
The number of electricity consumers per area
(b) MAP@20 values of the methods
Fig. 11: Performance of the methods with different numbers
of electricity consumers per area
As the number of electricity consumers per area increases,
most of the methods give a stable performance against the
benchmark value. MIC is the best overall of the correlationbased methods, and CFSFDP is the best of the clusteringbased methods. The combined methods achieve improvements
against other methods in all conditions.
Fig. 12 shows the change in standard deviations during the
two aspects of sensitivity analysis. σAUC shows a certain trend
as the number of electricity thieves or electricity consumers
increases. As the electricity theft problem becomes more severe, σAUC decreases slightly. The change of σMAP@20 is more
disorderly. σMAP@20 of most methods have an upward trend
as the number of electricity consumers per area increases.
Although the combined methods do not always have the
smallest standard deviation, the change of σ is over a rather
small range, which is adequate for the methods in the practical
application.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper proposes an combined method for detecting
electricity thefts against AMI in the Energy Internet. We first
analyze the basic structure of the observer meters and the
smart meters. Next, a correlation-based detection method using
MIC is given to quantify the association between the tampered
load profiles and the NTL. Considering the FDI types that
have little association with the original data, an unsupervised
CFSFDP-based method is proposed to detect outliers in the
smart meter dataset. To improve the detection accuracy and
stability, we ensemble the two techniques by combining the
suspicion ranks. The numerical results show that the combined
method achieves a good and steady performance for all FDI
types in various conditions.