Part-of-Speech Tagging for Twitter: Annotation, Features, and Experiments
Kevin Gimpel, Nathan Schneider, Brendan O’Connor, Dipanjan Das, Daniel Mills,
Jacob Eisenstein, Michael Heilman, Dani Yogatama, Jeffrey Flanigan, and Noah A. Smith
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon Univeristy, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
{kgimpel,nschneid,brenocon,dipanjan,dpmills,
jacobeis,mheilman,dyogatama,jflanigan,nasmith}@cs.cmu.edu
We address the problem of part-of-speech tagging for English data from the popular microblogging service Twitter. We develop a tagset,
annotate data, develop features, and report
tagging results nearing 90% accuracy.
data and tools have been made available to the
research community with the goal of enabling
richer text analysis of Twitter and related social media data sets.
Introduction
The growing popularity of social media and usercreated web content is producing enormous quantities of text in electronic form. The popular microblogging service Twitter (twitter.com) is one
particularly fruitful source of user-created content,
and a ﬂurry of recent research has aimed to understand and exploit these data . However, the bulk of this work eschews
the standard pipeline of tools which might enable
a richer linguistic analysis; such tools are typically
trained on newstext and have been shown to perform
poorly on Twitter .
One of the most fundamental parts of the linguistic pipeline is part-of-speech (POS) tagging, a basic
form of syntactic analysis which has countless applications in NLP. Most POS taggers are trained from
treebanks in the newswire domain, such as the Wall
Street Journal corpus of the Penn Treebank . Tagging performance degrades
on out-of-domain data, and Twitter poses additional
challenges due to the conversational nature of the
text, the lack of conventional orthography, and 140character limit of each message (“tweet”). Figure 1
shows three tweets which illustrate these challenges.
(a) @Gunservatively@
whenR PA∧electsV aD RepublicanA GovernorN
nextP Tue∧., CanV youO sayV redistrictingV ?,
(b) SpendingV theD dayN withhhP mommmaN !,
(c) lmao! ..., s/oV toP theD coolA assN asianA
ofﬁcerN 4P #1$ notR runninV myD licenseN and&
#2$ notR takinV druN booN toP jailN ., ThankV
uO God∧., #amen#
Figure 1: Example tweets with gold annotations. Underlined tokens show tagger improvements due to features
detailed in Section 3 (respectively: TAGDICT, METAPH,
and DISTSIM).
In this paper, we produce an English POS tagger
that is designed especially for Twitter data. Our contributions are as follows:
• we developed a POS tagset for Twitter,
• we manually tagged 1,827 tweets,
• we developed features for Twitter POS tagging
and conducted experiments to evaluate them, and
• we provide our annotated corpus and trained POS
tagger to the research community.
Beyond these speciﬁc contributions, we see this
work as a case study in how to rapidly engineer a core NLP system for a new and idiosyncratic dataset.
This project was accomplished in
200 person-hours spread across 17 people and two
This was made possible by two things:
(1) an annotation scheme that ﬁts the unique characteristics of our data and provides an appropriate
level of linguistic detail, and (2) a feature set that
captures Twitter-speciﬁc properties and exploits existing resources such as tag dictionaries and phonetic
normalization. The success of this approach demonstrates that with careful design, supervised machine
learning can be applied to rapidly produce effective
language technology in new domains.
Description
Nominal, Nominal + Verbal
common noun (NN, NNS)
books someone
pronoun (personal/WH; not
possessive; PRP, WP)
it you u meeee
nominal + possessive
books’ someone’s
proper noun (NNP, NNPS)
lebron usa iPad
proper noun + possessive
nominal + verbal
he’s book’ll iono
(= I don’t know)
proper noun + verbal
Other open-class words
verb incl. copula,
auxiliaries (V*, MD)
might gonna
ought couldn’t is
adjective (J*)
good fav lil
adverb (R*, WRB)
2 (i.e., too)
interjection (UH)
lol haha FTW yea
Other closed-class words
determiner (WDT, DT,
WP$, PRP$)
the teh its it’s
pre- or postposition, or
subordinating conjunction
while to for 2 (i.e.,
to) 4 (i.e., for)
coordinating conjunction
and n & + BUT
verb particle (RP)
out off Up UP
existential there,
predeterminers (EX, PDT)
X + verbal
there’s all’s
Twitter/online-speciﬁc
hashtag (indicates
topic/category for tweet)
@ at-mention (indicates
another user as a recipient
of a tweet)
@BarackObama
discourse marker,
indications of continuation
of a message across
multiple tweets
RT and : in retweet
construction RT
@user : hello
URL or email address
 
:-) :b (: <3 o O
Miscellaneous
numeral (CD)
2010 four 9:30
punctuation (#, $, '', (,
), ,, ., :, ``)
!!! .... ?!?
other abbreviations, foreign
words, possessive endings,
symbols, garbage (FW,
POS, SYM, LS)
ily (I love you) wby
(what about you) ’s
awesome...I’m
The set of tags used to annotate tweets. The
last column indicates each tag’s relative frequency in the
full annotated data (26,435 tokens). (The rates for M and
Y are both < 0.0005.)
Annotation
Annotation proceeded in three stages. For Stage 0,
we developed a set of 20 coarse-grained tags based
on several treebanks but with some additional categories speciﬁc to Twitter, including URLs and hashtags. Next, we obtained a random sample of mostly
American English1 tweets from October 27, 2010,
automatically tokenized them using a Twitter tokenizer ,2 and pre-tagged
them using the WSJ-trained Stanford POS Tagger
 in order to speed up manual annotation. Heuristics were used to mark tokens
belonging to special Twitter categories, which took
precedence over the Stanford tags.
Stage 1 was a round of manual annotation: 17 researchers corrected the automatic predictions from
Stage 0 via a custom Web interface.
A total of
2,217 tweets were distributed to the annotators in
this stage; 390 were identiﬁed as non-English and
removed, leaving 1,827 annotated tweets (26,436 tokens).
The annotation process uncovered several situations for which our tagset, annotation guidelines,
and tokenization rules were deﬁcient or ambiguous.
Based on these considerations we revised the tokenization and tagging guidelines, and for Stage 2,
two annotators reviewed and corrected all of the
English tweets tagged in Stage 1.
A third annotator read the annotation guidelines and annotated
72 tweets from scratch, for purposes of estimating
inter-annotator agreement. The 72 tweets comprised
1,021 tagged tokens, of which 80 differed from the
Stage 2 annotations, resulting in an agreement rate
of 92.2% and Cohen’s κ value of 0.914. A ﬁnal
sweep was made by a single annotator to correct errors and improve consistency of tagging decisions
across the corpus. The released data and tools use
the output of this ﬁnal stage.
We set out to develop a POS inventory for Twitter
that would be intuitive and informative—while at
the same time simple to learn and apply—so as to
maximize tagging consistency within and across an-
1We ﬁltered to tweets sent via an English-localized user interface set to a United States timezone.
2 
notators. Thus, we sought to design a coarse tagset
that would capture standard parts of speech3 (noun,
verb, etc.) as well as categories for token varieties
seen mainly in social media: URLs and email addresses; emoticons; Twitter hashtags, of the form
#tagname, which the author may supply to categorize a tweet; and Twitter at-mentions, of the form
@user, which link to other Twitter users from within
Hashtags and at-mentions can also serve as words
or phrases within a tweet; e.g. Is #qadafﬁgoing down?.
When used in this way, we tag hashtags with their
appropriate part of speech, i.e., as if they did not start
with #. Of the 418 hashtags in our data, 148 (35%)
were given a tag other than #: 14% are proper nouns,
9% are common nouns, 5% are multi-word expresssions (tagged as G), 3% are verbs, and 4% are something else. We do not apply this procedure to atmentions, as they are nearly always proper nouns.
Another tag, ~, is used for tokens marking speciﬁc Twitter discourse functions. The most popular
of these is the RT (“retweet”) construction to publish
a message with attribution. For example,
RT @USER1 : LMBO ! This man ﬁled an
EMERGENCY Motion for Continuance on
account of the Rangers game tonight ! ≪
indicates that the user @USER1 was originally the
source of the message following the colon. We apply ~ to the RT and : (which are standard), and
also ≪, which separates the author’s comment from
the retweeted material.4 Another common discourse
marker is ellipsis dots (. . . ) at the end of a tweet,
indicating a message has been truncated to ﬁt the
140-character limit, and will be continued in a subsequent tweet or at a speciﬁed URL.
Our ﬁrst round of annotation revealed that, due to
nonstandard spelling conventions, tokenizing under
a traditional scheme would be much more difﬁcult
3Our starting point was the cross-lingual tagset presented by
Petrov et al. . Most of our tags are reﬁnements of those
categories, which in turn are groupings of PTB WSJ tags (see
column 2 of Table 1). When faced with difﬁcult tagging decisions, we consulted the PTB and tried to emulate its conventions
as much as possible.
4These “iconic deictics” have been studied in other online
communities as well .
than for Standard English text. For example, apostrophes are often omitted, and there are frequently
words like ima (short for I’m gonna) that cut across
traditional POS categories. Therefore, we opted not
to split contractions or possessives, as is common
in English corpus preprocessing; rather, we introduced four new tags for combined forms: {nominal,
proper noun} × {verb, possessive}.5
The ﬁnal tagging scheme (Table 1) encompasses
25 tags. For simplicity, each tag is denoted with a
single ASCII character. The miscellaneous category
G includes multiword abbreviations that do not ﬁt
in any of the other categories, like ily (I love you), as
well as partial words, artifacts of tokenization errors,
miscellaneous symbols, possessive endings,6 and arrows that are not used as discourse markers.
Figure 2 shows where tags in our data tend to occur relative to the middle word of the tweet. We
see that Twitter-speciﬁc tags have strong positional
preferences: at-mentions (@) and Twitter discourse
markers (~) tend to occur towards the beginning of
messages, whereas URLs (U), emoticons (E), and
categorizing hashtags (#) tend to occur near the end.
Our tagger is a conditional random ﬁeld , enabling the incorporation of arbitrary local features in a log-linear model.
base features include: a feature for each word type,
a set of features that check whether the word contains digits or hyphens, sufﬁx features up to length 3,
and features looking at capitalization patterns in the
word. We then added features that leverage domainspeciﬁc properties of our data, unlabeled in-domain
data, and external linguistic resources.
TWORTH: Twitter orthography. We have features
for several regular expression-style rules that detect
at-mentions, hashtags, and URLs.
NAMES: Frequently-capitalized tokens.
Microbloggers are inconsistent in their use of capitalization, so we compiled gazetteers of tokens which are
frequently capitalized.
The likelihood of capitalization for a token is computed as Ncap+αC
N+C , where
5The modiﬁed tokenizer is packaged with our tagger.
6Possessive endings only appear when a user or the tokenizer has separated the possessive ending from a possessor; the
tokenizer only does this when the possessor is an at-mention.
Figure 2: Average position, relative to the middle word in the tweet, of tokens labeled with each tag. Most tags fall
between −1 and 1 on this scale; these are not shown.
N is the token count, Ncap is the capitalized token count, and α and C are the prior probability
and its prior weight.7
We compute features for
membership in the top N items by this metric, for
N ∈{1000, 2000, 3000, 5000, 10000, 20000}.
TAGDICT: Traditional tag dictionary.
features for all coarse-grained tags that each word
occurs with in the PTB8 (conjoined with their frequency rank). Unlike previous work that uses tag
dictionaries as hard constraints, we use them as soft
constraints since we expect lexical coverage to be
poor and the Twitter dialect of English to vary signiﬁcantly from the PTB domains. This feature may
be seen as a form of type-level domain adaptation.
DISTSIM: Distributional similarity. When training data is limited, distributional features from unlabeled text can improve performance . We used 1.9 million tokens from
134,000 unlabeled tweets to construct distributional
features from the successor and predecessor probabilities for the 10,000 most common terms. The successor and predecessor transition matrices are horizontally concatenated into a sparse matrix M, which
we approximate using a truncated singular value decomposition: M ≈USVT, where U is limited to
50 columns. Each term’s feature vector is its row
in U; following Turian et al. , we standardize
and scale the standard deviation to 0.1.
METAPH: Phonetic normalization. Since Twitter
includes many alternate spellings of words, we used
the Metaphone algorithm 9 to create
a coarse phonetic normalization of words to simpler
keys. Metaphone consists of 19 rules that rewrite
consonants and delete vowels. For example, in our
100, C = 10; this score is equivalent to the posterior
probability of capitalization with a Beta(0.1, 9.9) prior.
8Both WSJ and Brown corpora, no case normalization. We
also tried adding the WordNet and Moby
 lexicons, which increased lexical coverage but did
not seem to help performance.
9Via the Apache Commons implementation:
commons.apache.org/codec/
data, {thangs thanks thanksss thanx thinks thnx}
are mapped to 0NKS, and {lmao lmaoo lmaooooo}
map to LM. But it is often too coarse; e.g. {war we’re
wear were where worry} map to WR.
We include two types of features. First, we use
the Metaphone key for the current token, complementing the base model’s word features. Second,
we use a feature indicating whether a tag is the most
frequent tag for PTB words having the same Metaphone key as the current token. (The second feature
was disabled in both −TAGDICT and −METAPH ablation experiments.)
Experiments
Our evaluation was designed to test the efﬁcacy of
this feature set for part-of-speech tagging given limited training data. We randomly divided the set of
1,827 annotated tweets into a training set of 1,000
(14,542 tokens), a development set of 327 (4,770 tokens), and a test set of 500 (7,124 tokens). We compare our system against the Stanford tagger. Due
to the different tagsets, we could not apply the pretrained Stanford tagger to our data. Instead, we retrained it on our labeled data, using a standard set
of features: words within a 5-word window, word
shapes in a 3-word window, and up to length-3
preﬁxes, length-3 sufﬁxes, and preﬁx/sufﬁx pairs.10
The Stanford system was regularized using a Gaussian prior of σ2 = 0.5 and our system with a Gaussian prior of σ2 = 5.0, tuned on development data.
The results are shown in Table 2. Our tagger with
the full feature set achieves a relative error reduction
of 25% compared to the Stanford tagger. We also
show feature ablation experiments, each of which
corresponds to removing one category of features
from the full set. In Figure 1, we show examples
that certain features help solve. Underlined tokens
10We used the following feature modules in the Stanford tagger: bidirectional5words, naacl2003unknowns,
wordshapes(-3,3), prefix(3), suffix(3),
prefixsuffix(3).
Our tagger, all features
independent ablations:
88.31 (−1.06)
88.31 (−1.06)
88.37 (−1.00)
88.95 (−0.42)
89.39 (+0.02)
Our tagger, base features
Stanford tagger
Annotator agreement
Tagging accuracies on development and test
data, including ablation experiments.
Features are ordered by importance: test accuracy decrease due to ablation (ﬁnal column).
Table 3: Accuracy (recall) rates per class, in the test set
with the full model. (Omitting tags that occur less than
10 times in the test set.) For each gold category, the most
common confusion is shown.
are incorrect in a speciﬁc ablation, but are corrected
in the full system (i.e. when the feature is added).
The −TAGDICT ablation gets elects, Governor,
and next wrong in tweet (a). These words appear
in the PTB tag dictionary with the correct tags, and
thus are ﬁxed by that feature. In (b), withhh is initially misclassiﬁed an interjection (likely caused by
interjections with the same sufﬁx, like ohhh), but is
corrected by METAPH, because it is normalized to the
same equivalence class as with. Finally, s/o in tweet
(c) means “shoutout”, which appears only once in
the training data; adding DISTSIM causes it to be correctly identiﬁed as a verb.
Substantial challenges remain; for example, despite the NAMES feature, the system struggles to
identify proper nouns with nonstandard capitalization.
This can be observed from Table 3, which
shows the recall of each tag type: the recall of proper
nouns (ˆ) is only 71%. The system also struggles
with the miscellaneous category (G), which covers
many rare tokens, including obscure symbols and artifacts of tokenization errors. Nonetheless, we are
encouraged by the success of our system on the
whole, leveraging out-of-domain lexical resources
(TAGDICT), in-domain lexical resources (DISTSIM),
and sublexical analysis (METAPH).
Finally, we note that, even though 1,000 training examples may seem small, the test set accuracy
when training on only 500 tweets drops to 87.66%,
a decrease of only 1.7% absolute.
Conclusion
We have developed a part-of-speech tagger for Twitter and have made our data and tools available to the
research community at 
cmu.edu/TweetNLP.
More generally, we believe that our approach can be applied to address
other linguistic analysis needs as they continue to
arise in the era of social media and its rapidly changing linguistic conventions. We also believe that the
annotated data can be useful for research into domain adaptation and semi-supervised learning.
Acknowledgments
We thank Desai Chen, Chris Dyer, Lori Levin, Behrang
Mohit, Bryan Routledge, Naomi Saphra, and Tae Yano
for assistance in annotating data. This research was supported in part by: the NSF through CAREER grant IIS-
1054319, the U. S. Army Research Laboratory and the
U. S. Army Research Ofﬁce under contract/grant number W911NF-10-1-0533, Sandia National Laboratories
(fellowship to K. Gimpel), and the U. S. Department of
Education under IES grant R305B040063 (fellowship to
M. Heilman).