SegNet: A Deep Convolutional Encoder-Decoder
Architecture for Image Segmentation
Vijay Badrinarayanan, Alex Kendall
, and Roberto Cipolla, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—We present a novel and practical deep fully convolutional neural network architecture for semantic pixel-wise segmentation
termed SegNet. This core trainable segmentation engine consists of an encoder network, a corresponding decoder network followed
by a pixel-wise classiﬁcation layer. The architecture of the encoder network is topologically identical to the 13 convolutional layers in the
VGG16 network . The role of the decoder network is to map the low resolution encoder feature maps to full input resolution feature
maps for pixel-wise classiﬁcation. The novelty of SegNet lies is in the manner in which the decoder upsamples its lower resolution input
feature map(s). Speciﬁcally, the decoder uses pooling indices computed in the max-pooling step of the corresponding encoder to
perform non-linear upsampling. This eliminates the need for learning to upsample. The upsampled maps are sparse and are then
convolved with trainable ﬁlters to produce dense feature maps. We compare our proposed architecture with the widely adopted FCN 
and also with the well known DeepLab-LargeFOV , DeconvNet architectures. This comparison reveals the memory versus
accuracy trade-off involved in achieving good segmentation performance. SegNet was primarily motivated by scene understanding
applications. Hence, it is designed to be efﬁcient both in terms of memory and computational time during inference. It is also
signiﬁcantly smaller in the number of trainable parameters than other competing architectures and can be trained end-to-end using
stochastic gradient descent. We also performed a controlled benchmark of SegNet and other architectures on both road scenes and
SUN RGB-D indoor scene segmentation tasks. These quantitative assessments show that SegNet provides good performance with
competitive inference time and most efﬁcient inference memory-wise as compared to other architectures. We also provide a Caffe
implementation of SegNet and a web demo at 
Index Terms—Deep convolutional neural networks, semantic pixel-wise segmentation, indoor scenes, road scenes, encoder, decoder,
pooling, upsampling
INTRODUCTION
EMANTIC segmentation has a wide array of applications
ranging from scene understanding, inferring supportrelationships among objects to autonomous driving. Early
methods that relied on low-level vision cues have fast been
superseded by popular machine learning algorithms. In particular, deep learning has seen huge success lately in handwritten digit recognition, speech, categorising whole images
and detecting objects in images . Now there is an active
interest for semantic pixel-wise labelling , , , , ,
 , , , , , , , . However, some of these
recent approaches have tried to directly adopt deep architectures designed for category prediction to pixel-wise labelling
 . The results, although very encouraging, appear coarse
 . This is primarily because max pooling and sub-sampling
reduce feature map resolution. Our motivation to design
SegNet arises from this need to map low resolution features
to input resolution for pixel-wise classiﬁcation. This mapping must produce features which are useful for accurate
boundary localization.
Our architecture, SegNet, is designed to be an efﬁcient
architecture for pixel-wise semantic segmentation. It is primarily motivated by road scene understanding applications
which require the ability to model appearance (road, building), shape (cars, pedestrians) and understand the spatialrelationship (context) between different classes such as road
and side-walk. In typical road scenes, the majority of the
pixels belong to large classes such as road, building and
hence the network must produce smooth segmentations.
The engine must also have the ability to delineate objects
based on their shape despite their small size. Hence it is
important to retain boundary information in the extracted
image representation. From a computational perspective, it
is necessary for the network to be efﬁcient in terms of both
memory and computation time during inference. The ability
to train end-to-end in order to jointly optimise all the
weights in the network using an efﬁcient weight update
technique such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is
an additional beneﬁt since it is more easily repeatable. The
design of SegNet arose from a need to match these criteria.
The encoder network in SegNet is topologically identical
to the convolutional layers in VGG16 . We remove the
fully connected layers of VGG16 which makes the SegNet
encoder network signiﬁcantly smaller and easier to train
than many other recent architectures , , , . The
key component of SegNet is the decoder network which
consists of a hierarchy of decoders one corresponding to
each encoder. Of these, the appropriate decoders use the
The authors are with the Machine Intelligence Lab, Department of
Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1TN, United
Kingdom. E-mail: {vb292, agk34, cipolla}@eng.cam.ac.uk.
Manuscript received 7 Dec. 2015; revised 25 Aug. 2016; accepted 18 Dec.
2016. Date of publication 1 Jan. 2017; date of current version 10 Nov. 2017.
Recommended for acceptance by T. Brox.
For information on obtaining reprints of this article, please send e-mail to:
 , and reference the Digital Object Identiﬁer below.
Digital Object Identiﬁer no. 10.1109/TPAMI.2016.2644615
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE,
DECEMBER 2017
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License. For more information, see 
max-pooling
corresponding
encoder to perform non-linear upsampling of their input
feature maps. This idea was inspired from an architecture
designed for unsupervised feature learning . Reusing
max-pooling indices in the decoding process has several
practical advantages; (i) it improves boundary delineation,
(ii) it reduces the number of parameters enabling end-toend training, and (iii) this form of upsampling can be incorporated into any encoder-decoder architecture such as ,
 with only a little modiﬁcation.
One of the main contributions of this paper is our analysis of the SegNet decoding technique and the widely used
Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) . This is in order to
convey the practical trade-offs involved in designing segmentation architectures. Most recent deep architectures for
segmentation have identical encoder networks, i.e, VGG16,
but differ in the form of the decoder network, training and
inference. Another common feature is they have trainable
parameters in the order of hundreds of millions and thus
encounter difﬁculties in performing end-to-end training .
The difﬁculty of training these networks has led to multistage training , appending networks to a pre-trained
architecture such as FCN , use of supporting aids such as
region proposals for inference , disjoint training of classi-
ﬁcation and segmentation networks and use of additional training data for pre-training , or for full
training . In addition, performance boosting post-processing techniques have also been popular. Although all
these factors improve performance on challenging benchmarks , it is unfortunately difﬁcult from their quantitative results to disentangle the key design factors necessary
to achieve good performance. We therefore analysed the
decoding process used in some of these approaches , 
and reveal their pros and cons.
We evaluate the performance of SegNet on two scene
segmentation tasks, CamVid road scene segmentation 
and SUN RGB-D indoor scene segmentation . Pascal
VOC12 has been the benchmark challenge for segmentation over the years. However, the majority of this task has
one or two foreground classes surrounded by a highly varied background. This implicitly favours techniques used for
detection as shown by the recent work on a decoupled classiﬁcation-segmentation network where the classiﬁcation network can be trained with a large set of weakly
labelled data and the independent segmentation network
performance is improved. The method of also use the
feature maps of the classiﬁcation network with an independent CRF post-processing technique to perform segmentation. The performance can also be boosted by the use
additional inference aids such as region proposals , .
Therefore, it is different from scene understanding where
the idea is to exploit co-occurrences of objects and other spatial-context to perform robust segmentation. To demonstrate the efﬁcacy of SegNet, we present a real-time online
demo of road scene segmentation into 11 classes of interest
for autonomous driving (see link in Fig. 1). Some example
test results produced on randomly sampled road scene
images from Google and indoor test scenes from the SUN
RGB-D dataset are shown in Fig. 1.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In
Section 2 we review related recent literature. We describe
the SegNet architecture and its analysis in Section 3. In
Section 4 we evaluate the performance of SegNet on outdoor and indoor scene datasets. This is followed by a
Fig. 1. SegNet predictions on road scenes and indoor scenes. To try our system yourself, please see our online web demo at 
projects/segnet/.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE,
DECEMBER 2017
general discussion regarding our approach with pointers to
future work in Section 5. We conclude in Section 6.
LITERATURE REVIEW
Semantic pixel-wise segmentation is an active topic of
research, fuelled by challenging datasets , , , ,
 . Before the arrival of deep networks, the best performing
methods mostly relied on hand engineered features classifying pixels independently. Typically, a patch is fed into a classiﬁer, e.g., Random Forest , or Boosting , to
predict the class probabilities of the center pixel. Features
based on appearance or SfM and appearance , ,
 have been explored for the CamVid road scene understanding test . These per-pixel noisy predictions (often
called unary terms) from the classiﬁers are then smoothed by
using a pair-wise or higher order CRF , to improve
the accuracy. More recent approaches have aimed to produce high quality unaries by trying to predict the labels for
all the pixels in a patch as opposed to only the center pixel.
This improves the results of Random Forest based unaries
 but thin structured classes are classiﬁed poorly. Dense
depth maps computed from the CamVid video have also
been used as input for classiﬁcation using Random Forests
 . Another approach argues for the use of a combination
of popular hand designed features and spatio-temporal
super-pixelization to obtain higher accuracy . The best
performing technique on the CamVid test addresses the
imbalance among label frequencies by combining object
detection outputs with classiﬁer predictions in a CRF framework. The result of all these techniques indicate the need for
improved features for classiﬁcation.
Indoor RGBD pixel-wise semantic segmentation has also
gained popularity since the release of the NYU dataset .
This dataset showed the usefulness of the depth channel to
improve segmentation. Their approach used features such
as RGB-SIFT, depth-SIFT and pixel location as input to a
neural network classiﬁer to predict pixel unaries. The noisy
unaries are then smoothed using a CRF. Improvements
were made using a richer feature set including LBP and
region segmentation to obtain higher accuracy followed
by a CRF. In more recent work , both class segmentation
and support relationships are inferred together using a combination of RGB and depth based cues. Another approach
focuses on real-time joint reconstruction and semantic segmentation, where Random Forests are used as the classiﬁer
 . Gupta et al. use boundary detection and hierarchical grouping before performing category segmentation.
The common attribute in all these approaches is the use of
hand engineered features for classiﬁcation of either RGB or
RGBD images.
The success of deep convolutional neural networks for
object classiﬁcation has more recently led researchers to
exploit their feature learning capabilities for structured prediction problems such as segmentation. There have also
been attempts to apply networks designed for object categorization to segmentation, particularly by replicating the
deepest layer features in blocks to match image dimensions
 , , , . However, the resulting classiﬁcation is
blocky . Another approach using recurrent neural networks merges several low resolution predictions to create input image resolution predictions. These techniques
are already an improvement over hand engineered features
 but their ability to delineate boundaries is poor.
Newer deep architectures , , , , particularly designed for segmentation have advanced the state-ofthe-art by learning to decode or map low resolution image
representations to pixel-wise predictions. The encoder network which produces these low resolution representations
in all of these architectures is the VGG16 classiﬁcation network which has 13 convolutional layers and three fully
connected layers. This encoder network weights are typically pre-trained on the large ImageNet object classiﬁcation
dataset . The decoder network varies between these
architectures and is the part which is responsible for producing
multi-dimensional
classiﬁcation.
Each decoder in the Fully Convolutional Network architecture learns to upsample its input feature map(s) and
combines them with the corresponding encoder feature
map to produce the input to the next decoder. It is an architecture which has a large number of trainable parameters in
the encoder network (134 M) but a very small decoder network (0.5 M). The overall large size of this network makes it
hard to train end-to-end on a relevant task. Therefore, the
authors use a stage-wise training process. Here each
decoder in the decoder network is progressively added to
an existing trained network. The network is grown until no
further increase in performance is observed. This growth is
stopped after three decoders thus ignoring high resolution
feature maps can certainly lead to loss of edge information
 . Apart from training related issues, the need to reuse the
encoder feature maps in the decoder makes it memory
intensive in test time. We study this network in more detail
as it the core of other recent architectures , .
The predictive performance of FCN has been improved
further by appending the FCN with a recurrent neural network (RNN) and ﬁne-tuning them on large datasets ,
 . The RNN layers mimic the sharp boundary delineation
capabilities of CRFs while exploiting the feature representation power of FCN’s. They show a signiﬁcant improvement
over FCN-8 but also show that this difference is reduced
when more training data is used to train FCN-8. The main
advantage of the CRF-RNN is revealed when it is jointly
trained with an architecture such as the FCN-8. The fact that
joint training helps is also shown in other recent results ,
 . Interestingly, the deconvolutional network performs signiﬁcantly better than FCN although at the cost of a
more complex training and inference. This however raises
the question as to whether the perceived advantage of the
CRF-RNN would be reduced as the core feed-forward segmentation engine is made better. In any case, the CRF-RNN
network can be appended to any deep segmentation architecture including SegNet.
Multi-scale deep architectures are also being pursued
 , . They come in two ﬂavours, (i) those which use
input images at a few scales and corresponding deep feature extraction networks, and (ii) those which combine feature maps from different layers of a single deep architecture
 , . The common idea is to use features extracted at
multiple scales to provide both local and global context 
and the using feature maps of the early encoding layers
retain more high frequency detail leading to sharper class
BADRINARAYANAN ET AL.: SEGNET: A DEEP CONVOLUTIONAL ENCODER-DECODER ARCHITECTURE FOR IMAGE SEGMENTATION
boundaries. Some of these architectures are difﬁcult to train
due to their parameter size . Thus a multi-stage training
process is employed along with data augmentation. The
inference is also expensive with multiple convolutional
pathways for feature extraction. Others append a CRF
to their multi-scale network and jointly train them. However, these are not feed-forward at test time and require
optimization to determine the MAP labels.
Several of the recently proposed deep architectures for
segmentation are not feed-forward in inference time , ,
 . They require either MAP inference over a CRF ,
 or aids such as region proposals for inference. We
believe the perceived performance increase obtained by
using a CRF is due to the lack of good decoding techniques
in their core feed-forward segmentation engine. SegNet on
the other hand uses decoders to obtain features for accurate
pixel-wise classiﬁcation.
The recently proposed Deconvolutional Network and
its semi-supervised variant the Decoupled network use
the max locations of the encoder feature maps (pooling indices) to perform non-linear upsampling in the decoder network. The authors of these architectures, independently of
SegNet , proposed this
idea of decoding in the decoder network. However, their
encoder network consists of the fully connected layers from
the VGG-16 network which consists of about 90 percent of
the parameters of their entire network. This makes training
of their network very difﬁcult and thus require additional
aids such as the use of region proposals to enable training.
Moreover, during inference these proposals are used and
this increases inference time signiﬁcantly. From a benchmarking point of view, this also makes it difﬁcult to evaluate the performance of their architecture (encoder-decoder
network) without other aids. In this work we discard the
fully connected layers of the VGG16 encoder network which
enables us to train the network using the relevant training
set using SGD optimization. Another recent method 
shows the beneﬁt of reducing the number of parameters signiﬁcantly without sacriﬁcing performance, reducing memory consumption and improving inference time.
Our work was inspired by the unsupervised feature learning architecture proposed by Ranzato et al. . The key
learning module is an encoder-decoder network. An encoder
consists of convolution with a ﬁlter bank, element-wise tanh
non-linearity, max-pooling and sub-sampling to obtain the
feature maps. For each sample, the indices of the max locations computed during pooling are stored and passed to the
decoder. The decoder upsamples the feature maps by using
the stored pooled indices. It convolves this upsampled map
using a trainable decoder ﬁlter bank to reconstruct the input
image. This architecture was used for unsupervised pretraining for classiﬁcation. A somewhat similar decoding
technique is used for visualizing trained convolutional networks for classiﬁcation. The architecture of Ranzato
et al. mainly focused on layer-wise feature learning using
small input patches. This was extended by Kavukcuoglu
et al. to accept full image sizes as input to learn hierarchical encoders. Both these approaches however did not
attempt to use deep encoder-decoder networks for unsupervised feature training as they discarded the decoders after
each encoder training. Here, SegNet differs from these architectures as the deep encoder-decoder network is trained
jointly for a supervised learning task and hence the decoders
are an integral part of the network in test time.
Other applications where pixel wise predictions are
made using deep networks are image super-resolution 
and depth map prediction from a single image . The
authors in discuss the need for learning to upsample
from low resolution feature maps which is the central topic
of this paper.
ARCHITECTURE
SegNet has an encoder network and a corresponding
decoder network, followed by a ﬁnal pixelwise classiﬁcation
layer. This architecture is illustrated in Fig. 2. The encoder
network consists of 13 convolutional layers which correspond to the ﬁrst 13 convolutional layers in the VGG16 network designed for object classiﬁcation. We can therefore
initialize the training process from weights trained for classiﬁcation on large datasets . We can also discard the
fully connected layers in favour of retaining higher resolution feature maps at the deepest encoder output. This also
reduces the number of parameters in the SegNet encoder
network signiﬁcantly (from 134 to 14.7 M) as compared to
other recent architectures , (see. Table 6). Each encoder
layer has a corresponding decoder layer and hence the
decoder network has 13 layers. The ﬁnal decoder output is
fed to a multi-class soft-max classiﬁer to produce class probabilities for each pixel independently.
Fig. 2. An illustration of the SegNet architecture. There are no fully connected layers and hence it is only convolutional. A decoder upsamples its input
using the transferred pool indices from its encoder to produce a sparse feature map(s). It then performs convolution with a trainable ﬁlter bank to densify the feature map. The ﬁnal decoder output feature maps are fed to a soft-max classiﬁer for pixel-wise classiﬁcation.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE,
DECEMBER 2017
Each encoder in the encoder network performs convolution with a ﬁlter bank to produce a set of feature maps.
These are then batch normalized , ). Then an element-wise rectiﬁed-linear non-linearity (ReLU) maxð0; xÞ is
applied. Following that, max-pooling with a 2  2 window
and stride 2 (non-overlapping window) is performed and
the resulting output is sub-sampled by a factor of 2. Maxpooling is used to achieve translation invariance over small
spatial shifts in the input image. Sub-sampling results in a
large input image context (spatial window) for each pixel in
the feature map. While several layers of max-pooling and
sub-sampling can achieve more translation invariance for
robust classiﬁcation correspondingly there is a loss of spatial resolution of the feature maps. The increasingly lossy
(boundary detail) image representation is not beneﬁcial for
segmentation where boundary delineation is vital. Therefore, it is necessary to capture and store boundary information in the encoder feature maps before sub-sampling is
performed. If memory during inference is not constrained,
then all the encoder feature maps (after sub-sampling) can
be stored. This is usually not the case in practical applications and hence we propose a more efﬁcient way to store
this information. It involves storing only the max-pooling
indices, i.e, the locations of the maximum feature value in
each pooling window is memorized for each encoder feature map. In principle, this can be done using 2 bits for each
2  2 pooling window and is thus much more efﬁcient to
store as compared to memorizing feature map(s) in ﬂoat
precision. As we show later in this work, this lower memory
storage results in a slight loss of accuracy but is still suitable
for practical applications.
The appropriate decoder in the decoder network upsamples its input feature map(s) using the memorized maxpooling indices from the corresponding encoder feature
map(s). This step produces sparse feature map(s). This Seg-
Net decoding technique is illustrated in Fig. 3. These feature
maps are then convolved with a trainable decoder ﬁlter
bank to produce dense feature maps. A batch normalization
step is then applied to each of these maps. Note that the
decoder corresponding to the ﬁrst encoder (closest to the
multi-channel
although its encoder input has three channels (RGB). This is
unlike the other decoders in the network which produce
feature maps with the same number of size and channels as
their encoder inputs. The high dimensional feature representation at the output of the ﬁnal decoder is fed to a trainable soft-max classiﬁer. This soft-max classiﬁes each pixel
independently. The output of the soft-max classiﬁer is a K
channel image of probabilities where K is the number of
classes. The predicted segmentation corresponds to the class
with maximum probability at each pixel.
We add here that two other architectures, DeconvNet
 and U-Net share a similar architecture to SegNet
but with some differences. DeconvNet has a much larger
parameterization, needs more computational resources and
is harder to train end-to-end (Table 6), primarily due to the
use of fully connected layers (albeit in a convolutional manner) We report several comparisons with DeconvNet later
in the paper Section 4.
As compared to SegNet, U-Net (proposed for the
medical imaging community) does not reuse pooling indices but instead transfers the entire feature map (at the cost
of more memory) to the corresponding decoders and concatenates them to upsampled (via deconvolution) decoder
feature maps. There is no conv5 and max-pool ﬁve block in
U-Net as in the VGG net architecture. SegNet, on the other
hand, uses all of the pre-trained convolutional layer weights
from VGG net as pre-trained weights.
Decoder Variants
Many segmentation architectures , , share the same
encoder network and they only vary in the form of their
decoder network. Of these we choose to compare the Seg-
Net decoding technique with the widely used Fully Convolutional Network decoding technique , .
In order to analyse SegNet and compare its performance
with FCN (decoder variants) we use a smaller version of
SegNet, termed SegNet-Basic,1 which has four encoders and
four decoders. All the encoders in SegNet-Basic perform
max-pooling and sub-sampling and the corresponding
decoders upsample its input using the received max-pooling indices. Batch normalization is used after each convolutional layer in both the encoder and decoder network. No
biases are used after convolutions and no ReLU non-linearity is present in the decoder network. Further, a constant
Fig. 3. An illustration of SegNet and FCN decoders. a; b; c; d correspond to values in a feature map. SegNet uses the max pooling indices to
upsample (without learning) the feature map(s) and convolves with a trainable decoder ﬁlter bank. FCN upsamples by learning to deconvolve the
input feature map and adds the corresponding encoder feature map to produce the decoder output. This feature map is the output of the max-pooling
layer (includes sub-sampling) in the corresponding encoder. Note that there are no trainable decoder ﬁlters in FCN.
1. SegNet-Basic was earlier termed SegNet in a archival version of
this paper .
BADRINARAYANAN ET AL.: SEGNET: A DEEP CONVOLUTIONAL ENCODER-DECODER ARCHITECTURE FOR IMAGE SEGMENTATION
kernel size of 7  7 over all the encoder and decoder layers
is chosen to provide a wide context for smooth labelling,
i.e., a pixel in the deepest layer feature map (layer 4) can be
traced back to a context window in the input image of
106  106 pixels. This small size of SegNet-Basic allows us
to explore many different variants (decoders) and train
them in reasonable time. Similarly we create FCN-Basic, a
comparable version of FCN for our analysis which shares
the same encoder network as SegNet-Basic but with the
FCN decoding technique (see Fig. 3) used in all its decoders.
On the left in Fig. 3 is the decoding technique used by
SegNet (also SegNet-Basic), where there is no learning
involved in the upsampling step. However, the upsampled
maps are convolved with trainable multi-channel decoder
ﬁlters to densify its sparse inputs. Each decoder ﬁlter has
the same number of channels as the number of upsampled
feature maps. A smaller variant is one where the decoder ﬁlters are single channel, i.e they only convolve their corresponding upsampled feature map. This variant (SegNet-
Basic-SingleChannelDecoder) reduces the number of trainable
parameters and inference time signiﬁcantly.
On the right in Fig. 3 is the FCN (also FCN-Basic) decoding technique. The important design element of the FCN
model is dimensionality reduction step of the encoder feature maps. This compresses the encoder feature maps which
are then used in the corresponding decoders. Dimensionality reduction of the encoder feature maps, say of 64 channels, is performed by convolving them with 1  1  64  K
trainable ﬁlters, where K is the number of classes. The compressed K channel ﬁnal encoder layer feature maps are the
input to the decoder network. In a decoder of this network,
upsampling is performed by inverse convolution using a
ﬁxed or trainable multi-channel upsampling kernel. We set the
kernel size to 8  8. This manner of upsampling is also
termed as deconvolution. Note that, in comparison, SegNet
the multi-channel convolution using trainable decoder ﬁlters is performed after upsampling to densifying feature
maps. The upsampled feature map in FCN has K channels.
It is then added element-wise to the corresponding resolution encoder feature map to produce the output decoder
feature map. The upsampling kernels are initialized using
bilinear interpolation weights .
The FCN decoder model requires storing encoder feature maps during inference. This can be memory intensive
for embedded applications; for, e.g., storing 64 feature
maps of the ﬁrst layer of FCN-Basic at 180  240 resolution
in 32 bit ﬂoating point precision takes 11 MB. This can be
made smaller using dimensionality reduction to the 11 feature maps which requires  1.9 MB storage. SegNet on the
other hand requires almost negligible storage cost for the
pooling indices (.17 MB if stored using 2 bits per 2  2
pooling window). We can also create a variant of the FCN-
Basic model which discards the encoder feature map addition step and only learns the upsampling kernels (FCN-
Basic-NoAddition).
In addition to the above variants, we study upsampling
using ﬁxed bilinear interpolation weights which therefore
requires no learning for upsampling (Bilinear-Interpolation).
At the other extreme, we can add 64 encoder feature maps
at each layer to the corresponding output feature maps
from the SegNet decoder to create a more memory intensive
variant of SegNet (SegNet-Basic-EncoderAddition). Here both
the pooling indices for upsampling are used, followed by a
convolution step to densify its sparse input. This is then
added element-wise to the corresponding encoder feature
maps to produce a decoders output.
Another and more memory intensive FCN-Basic variant
(FCN-Basic-NoDimReduction) is where there is no dimensionality reduction performed for the encoder feature maps.
This implies that unlike FCN-Basic the ﬁnal encoder feature
map is not compressed to K channels before passing it to
the decoder network. Therefore, the number of channels at
the end of each decoder is the same as the corresponding
encoder (i.e 64).
We also tried other generic variants where feature maps
are simply upsampled by replication , or by using a ﬁxed
(and sparse) array of indices for upsampling. These performed quite poorly in comparison to the above variants. A
variant without max-pooling and sub-sampling in the
encoder network (decoders are redundant) consumes more
memory, takes longer to converge and performs poorly.
Finally, please note that to encourage reproduction of our
results we release the Caffe implementation of all the
variants.2
We use the CamVid road scenes dataset to benchmark the
performance of the decoder variants. This dataset is small,
consisting of 367 training and 233 testing RGB images (day
and dusk scenes) at 360  480 resolution. The challenge is to
segment 11 classes such as road, building, cars, pedestrians,
signs, poles, side-walk etc. We perform local contrast normalization to the RGB input.
The encoder and decoder weights were all initialized
using the technique described in He et al. . To train all
the variants we use stochastic gradient descent with a ﬁxed
learning rate of 0.1 and momentum of 0.9 using our
Caffe implementation of SegNet-Basic . We train the
variants until the training loss converges. Before each
epoch, the training set is shufﬂed and each mini-batch (12
images) is then picked in order thus ensuring that each
image is used only once in an epoch. We select the model
which performs highest on a validation dataset.
We use the cross-entropy loss as the objective function for training the network. The loss is summed up over
all the pixels in a mini-batch. When there is large variation
in the number of pixels in each class in the training set
(e.g. road, sky and building pixels dominate the CamVid
dataset) then there is a need to weight the loss differently
based on the true class. This is termed class balancing. We
use median frequency balancing where the weight
assigned to a class in the loss function is the ratio of the
median of class frequencies computed on the entire training set divided by the class frequency. This implies that
larger classes in the training set have a weight smaller
than 1 and the weights of the smallest classes are the highest. We also experimented with training the different variants without class balancing or equivalently using natural
frequency balancing.
2. See for our SegNet code
and web demo.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE,
DECEMBER 2017
To compare the quantitative performance of the different
decoder variants, we use three commonly used performance measures: global accuracy (G) which measures the
percentage of pixels correctly classiﬁed in the dataset, class
average accuracy (C) is the mean of the predictive accuracy
over all classes and mean intersection over union (mIoU)
over all classes as used in the Pascal VOC12 challenge .
The mIoU metric is a more stringent metric than class average accuracy since it penalizes false positive predictions.
However, mIoU metric is not optimized for directly through
the class balanced cross-entropy loss.
The mIoU metric otherwise known as the Jacard Index is
most commonly used in benchmarking. However, Csurka
et al. note that this metric does not always correspond
to human qualitative judgements (ranks) of good quality
segmentation. They show with examples that mIoU favours
region smoothness and does not evaluate boundary accuracy, a point also alluded to recently by the authors of FCN
 . Hence they propose to complement the mIoU metric
with a boundary measure based on the Berkeley contour
matching score commonly used to evaluate unsupervised
image segmentation quality . Csurka et al. simply
extend this to semantic segmentation and show that the
measure of semantic contour accuracy used in conjunction
with the mIoU metric agrees more with human ranking of
segmentation outputs.
The key idea in computing a semantic contour score is to
evaluate the F1-measure which involves computing the
precision and recall values between the predicted and
ground truth class boundary given a pixel tolerance distance. We used a value of 0.75 percent of the image diagonal
as the tolerance distance. The F1-measure for each class that
is present in the ground truth test image is averaged to produce an image F1-measure. Then we compute the whole
test set average, denoted the boundary F1-measure (BF) by
average the image F1 measures.
We test each architectural variant after each 1,000 iterations of optimization on the CamVid validation set until the
training loss converges. With a training mini-batch size of
12 this corresponds to testing approximately every 33
epochs (passes) through the training set. We select the iteration wherein the global accuracy is highest amongst the
evaluations on the validation set. We report all the three
measures of performance at this point on the held-out Cam-
Vid test set. Although we use class balancing while training
the variants, it is still important to achieve high global accuracy to result in an overall smooth segmentation. Another
reason is that the contribution of segmentation towards
autonomous driving is mainly for delineating classes such
as roads, buildings, side-walk, sky. These classes dominate
the majority of the pixels in an image and a high global
accuracy corresponds to good segmentation of these important classes. We also observed that reporting the numerical
performance when class average is highest can often correspond to low global accuracy indicating a perceptually
noisy segmentation output.
In Table 1 we report the numerical results of our analysis.
We also show the size of the trainable parameters and the
highest resolution feature map or pooling indices storage
memory, i.e, of the ﬁrst layer feature maps after max-pooling and sub-sampling. We show the average time for one
forward pass with our Caffe implementation, averaged
over 50 measurements using a 360  480 input on an NVI-
DIA Titan GPU with cuDNN v3 acceleration. We note that
the upsampling layers in the SegNet variants are not optimised using cuDNN acceleration. We show the results for
both testing and training for all the variants at the selected
iteration. The results are also tabulated without class balancing (natural frequency) for training and testing accuracies.
Below we analyse the results with class balancing.
From the Table 1, we see that bilinear interpolation based
upsampling without any learning performs the worst based
on all the measures of accuracy. All the other methods
Comparison of Decoder Variants
Median frequency balancing
Natural frequency balancing
Params (M) multiplier time (ms)
Fixed upsampling
Bilinear-Interpolation
77.9 61.1 43.3
20.83 89.1 90.2
82.7 52.5 43.8
23.08 93.5 74.1 59.9
Upsampling using max-pooling indices
SegNet-Basic
82.7 62.0 47.7
35.78 94.7 96. 2 92.7
84.0 54.6 46.3
36.67 96.1 83.9 73.3
SegNet-Basic-EncoderAddition
83.4 63.6 48.5
35.92 94.3 95.8
84.2 56.5 47.7
36.27 95.3 80.9 68.9
SegNet-Basic-SingleChannelDecoder
81.2 60.7 46.1
31.62 93.2 94.8
83.5 53.9 45.2
32.45 92.6 68.4 52.8
Learning to upsample (bilinear initialisation)
81.7 62.4 47.3
38.11 92.8 93.6
83.9 55.6 45.0
37.33 92.0 66.8 50.7
FCN-Basic-NoAddition
80.5 58.6 44.1
31.96 92.5 93.0
82.3 53.9 44.2
29.43 93.1 72.8 57.6
FCN-Basic-NoDimReduction
84.1 63.4 50.1
37.37 95.1 96.5
83.5 57.3 47.0
37.13 97.2 91.7 84.8
FCN-Basic-NoAddition-NoDimReduction 1.625
80.5 61.6 45.9
30.47 92.5 94.6
83.7 54.8 45.5
33.17 95.0 80.2 67.8
We quantify the performance using global (G), class average (C), mean of intersection over union (mIoU) and a semantic contour measure (BF). The testing and
training accuracies are shown as percentages for both natural frequency and median frequency balanced training loss function. SegNet-Basic performs at the
same level as FCN-Basic but requires only storing max-pooling indices and is therefore more memory efﬁcient during inference. Note that the theoretical memory
requirement reported is based only on the size of the ﬁrst layer encoder feature map. FCN-Basic, SegNet-Basic, SegNet-Basic-EncoderAddition all have high BF
scores indicating the need to use information in encoder feature maps for better class contour delineation. Networks with larger decoders and those using the
encoder feature maps in full perform best, although they are least efﬁcient in terms of inference time and memory.
BADRINARAYANAN ET AL.: SEGNET: A DEEP CONVOLUTIONAL ENCODER-DECODER ARCHITECTURE FOR IMAGE SEGMENTATION
which either use learning for upsampling (FCN-Basic and
variants) or learning decoder ﬁlters after upsampling (Seg-
Net-Basic and its variants) perform signiﬁcantly better. This
emphasizes the need to learn decoders for segmentation.
This is also supported by experimental evidence gathered
by other authors when comparing FCN with SegNet-type
decoding techniques .
When we compare SegNet-Basic and FCN-Basic we see
that both perform equally well on this test over all the measures of accuracy. The difference is that SegNet uses less
memory during inference since it only stores max-pooling
indices. On the other hand FCN-Basic stores encoder feature
maps in full which consumes much more memory (11 times
more). SegNet-Basic has a decoder with 64 feature maps in
each decoder layer. In comparison FCN-Basic, which uses
dimensionality reduction, has fewer (11) feature maps in
each decoder layer. This reduces the number of convolutions in the decoder network and hence FCN-Basic is faster
during inference (forward pass). From another perspective,
the decoder network in SegNet-Basic makes it overall a
larger network than FCN-Basic. This endows it with more
ﬂexibility and hence achieves higher training accuracy than
FCN-Basic for the same number of iterations. Overall we
see that SegNet-Basic has an advantage over FCN-Basic
when inference time memory is constrained but where
inference time can be compromised to some extent.
SegNet-Basic is most similar to FCN-Basic-NoAddition
in terms of their decoders, although the decoder of SegNet
is larger. Both learn to produce dense feature maps, either
directly by learning to perform deconvolution as in FCN-
Basic-NoAddition or by ﬁrst upsampling and then convolving with trained decoder ﬁlters. The performance of Seg-
Net-Basic is superior, in part due to its larger decoder size.
The accuracy of FCN-Basic-NoAddition is also lower as
compared to FCN-Basic. This shows that it is vital to capture
the information present in the encoder feature maps for better performance. In particular, note the large drop in the BF
measure between these two variants. This can also explain
the part of the reason why SegNet-Basic outperforms FCN-
Basic-NoAddition.
The size of the FCN-Basic-NoAddition-NoDimReduction
model is slightly larger than SegNet-Basic since the ﬁnal
encoder feature maps are not compressed to match the
number of classes K. This makes it a fair comparison in
terms of the size of the model. The performance of this FCN
variant is poorer than SegNet-Basic in test but also its training accuracy is lower for the same number of training
epochs. This shows that using a larger decoder is not
enough but it is also important to capture encoder feature
map information to learn better, particular the ﬁne grained
contour information (notice the drop in the BF measure).
Here it is also interesting to see that SegNet-Basic has a competitive training accuracy when compared to larger models
such FCN-Basic-NoDimReduction.
interesting comparison
FCN-Basic-
NoAddition and SegNet-Basic-SingleChannelDecoder shows
that using max-pooling indices for upsampling and an overall
larger decoder leads to better performance. This also lends
evidence to SegNet being a good architecture for segmentation, particularly when there is a need to ﬁnd a compromise
between storage cost, accuracy versus inference time. In the
best case, when both memory and inference time is not constrained, larger models such as FCN-Basic-NoDimReduction
and SegNet-EncoderAddition are both more accurate than
the other variants. Particularly, discarding dimensionality
reduction in the FCN-Basic model leads to the best performance amongst the FCN-Basic variants with a high BF score.
This once again emphasizes the trade-off involved between
memory and accuracy in segmentation architectures.
The last two columns of Table 1 show the result when no
class balancing is used (natural frequency). Here, we can
observe that without weighting the results are poorer for all
the variants, particularly for class average accuracy and
mIoU metric. The global accuracy is the highest without
weighting since the majority of the scene is dominated by
sky, road and building pixels. Apart from this all the inference from the comparative analysis of variants holds true
for natural frequency balancing too, including the trends for
the BF measure. SegNet-Basic performs as well as FCN-
Basic and is better than the larger FCN-Basic-NoAddition-
NoDimReduction. The bigger but less efﬁcient models
FCN-Basic-NoDimReduction and SegNet-EncoderAddition
perform better than the other variants.
We can now summarize the above analysis with the following general points.
The best performance is achieved when encoder feature maps are stored in full. This is reﬂected in the
semantic contour delineation metric (BF) most clearly.
When memory during inference is constrained,
then compressed forms of encoder feature maps
(dimensionality reduction, max-pooling indices) can
be stored and used with an appropriate decoder
(e.g., SegNet type) to improve performance.
Larger decoders increase performance for a given
encoder network.
BENCHMARKING
We quantify the performance of SegNet on two scene segmentation benchmarks using our Caffe implementation.3 The ﬁrst
task is road scene segmentation which is of current practical
interest for various autonomous driving related problems.
The second task is indoor scene segmentation which is of
immediate interest to several augmented reality (AR) applications. The input RGB images for both tasks were 360  480.
We benchmarked SegNet against several other well
adopted deep architectures for segmentation such as FCN
 , DeepLab-LargFOV and DeconvNet . Our objective
was to understand the performance of these architectures
when trained end-to-end on the same datasets. To enable
end-to-end training we added batch normalization 
layers after each convolutional layer. For DeepLab-Large-
FOV, we changed the max pooling 3 stride to 1 to achieve a
ﬁnal predictive resolution of 45  60. We restricted the feature size in the fully connnected layers of DeconvNet to
1,024 so as to enable training with the same batch size as
other models. Here note that the authors of DeepLab-
LargeFOV have also reported little loss in performance
by reducing the size of the fully connected layers.
3. Our web demo and Caffe implementation is available for evaluation at 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE,
DECEMBER 2017
In order to perform a controlled benchmark we used the
same SGD solver with a ﬁxed learning rate of 103 and
momentum of 0.9. The optimization was performed for
more than 100 epochs through the dataset until no further
performance increase was observed. Dropout of 0.5 was
added to the end of deeper convolutional layers in all models to prevent overﬁtting (see 
projects/segnet/tutorial.html for example caffe prototxt).
For the road scenes which have 11 classes we used a minibatch size of 5 and for indoor scenes with 37 classes we
used a mini-batch size of 4.
Road Scene Segmentation
A number of road scene datasets are available for semantic
parsing , , , . Of these we choose to benchmark SegNet using the CamVid dataset as it contains
video sequences. This enables us to compare our proposed
architecture with those which use motion and structure ,
 , and video segments . We also combine ,
 , , to form an ensemble of 3433 images to train
SegNet for an additional benchmark. For a web demo (see
footnote 3) of road scene segmentation, we include the Cam-
Vid test set to this larger dataset. Here, we would like to
note that another recent and independent segmentation
benchmark on road scenes has been performed for SegNet
and the other competing architectures used in this paper
 . However, the benchmark was not controlled, meaning
that each architecture was trained with a separate recipe
with varying input resolutions and sometimes with a validation set included. Therefore, we believe our more controlled benchmark can be used to complement their efforts.
The qualitative comparisons of SegNet predictions with
other deep architectures can be seen in Fig. 4. The qualitative results show the ability of the proposed architecture to
segment smaller classes in road scenes while producing a
smooth segmentation of the overall scene. Indeed, under
the controlled benchmark setting, SegNet shows superior
performance as compared to some of the larger models.
DeepLab-LargeFOV is the most efﬁcient model and with
post-processing
competitive
although smaller classes are lost. FCN with learnt deconvolution is clearly better than with ﬁxed bilinear upsampling.
DeconvNet is the largest model and the most inefﬁcient to
train. Its predictions do not retain small classes.
We also use this benchmark to ﬁrst compare SegNet with
several non deep-learning methods including Random Forests , Boosting , in combination with CRF based
methods . This was done to give the user a perspective
of the improvements in accuracy that has been achieved
using deep networks compared to classical feature engineering based techniques.
The results in Table 2 show SegNet-Basic, SegNet obtain
competitive results when compared with methods which
use CRFs. This shows the ability of the deep architecture to
extract meaningful features from the input image and map
it to accurate and smooth class segment labels. The most
interesting result here is the large performance improvement in class average and mIOU metrics that is obtained
when a large training dataset, obtained by combining ,
 , , , is used to train SegNet. Correspondingly, the
qualitative results of SegNet (see Fig. 4) are clearly superior
to the rest of the methods. It is able to segment both small
and large classes well. We remark here that we used median
frequency class balancing in training SegNet-Basic and
SegNet. In addition, there is an overall smooth quality of
segmentation much like what is typically obtained with
CRF post-processing. Although the fact that results improve
with larger training sets is not surprising, the percentage
improvement obtained using pre-trained encoder network
and this training set indicates that this architecture can
potentially be deployed for practical applications. Our random testing on urban and highway images from the internet
(see Fig. 1) demonstrates that SegNet can absorb a large
training set and generalize well to unseen images. It also
indicates the contribution of the prior (CRF) can be lessened
when sufﬁcient amount of training data is made available.
In Table 3 we compare SegNet’s performance with now
widely adopted fully convolutional architectures for segmentation. As compared to the experiment in Table 2, we
did not use any class blancing for training any of the deep
architectures including SegNet. This is because we found it
difﬁcult to train larger models such as DeconvNet with
median frequency balancing. We benchmark performance
at 40 K, 80 K and > 80 K iterations which given the minibatch size and training set size approximately corresponds
to 50, 100 and > 100 epochs. For the last test point we also
report the maximum number of iterations (here atleast 150
epochs) beyond which we observed no accuracy improvements or when over-ﬁtting set in. We report the metrics at
three stages in the training phase to reveal how the metrics
varied with training time, particularly for larger networks.
This is important to understand if additional training
time is justiﬁed when set against accuracy increases. Note
also that for each evaluation we performed a complete run
through the dataset to obtain batch norm statistics and
then evaluated the test model with this statistic (see http://
mi.eng.cam.ac.uk/projects/segnet/tutorial.html for code.).
These evaluations are expensive to perform on large training sets and hence we only report metrics at three time
points in the training phase.
From Table 3 we immediately see that SegNet, Deconv-
Net achieve the highest scores in all the metrics as compared to other models. DeconvNet has a higher boundary
delineation accuracy but SegNet is much more efﬁcient as
compared to DeconvNet. This can be seen from the compute
statistics in Table 6. FCN, DeconvNet which have fully connected layers (turned into convolutional layers) train much
more slowly and have comparable or higher forward-backward pass time with reference to SegNet. Here we note also
that over-ﬁtting was not an issue in training these larger
models, since at comparable iterations to SegNet their metrics showed an increasing trend.
For the FCN model learning the deconvolutional layers
as opposed to ﬁxing them with bi-linear interpolation
weights improves performance particularly the BF score. It
also achieves higher metrics in a far lesser time. This fact
agrees with our earlier analysis in Section 3.3.
Surprisingly, DeepLab-LargeFOV which is trained to
predict labels at a resolution of 45  60 produces competitive performance given that it is the smallest model in terms
of parameterization and also has the fastest training time as
per Table 6. However, the boundary accuracy is poorer and
BADRINARAYANAN ET AL.: SEGNET: A DEEP CONVOLUTIONAL ENCODER-DECODER ARCHITECTURE FOR IMAGE SEGMENTATION
this is shared by the other architectures. DeconvNet’s BF
score is higher than the other networks when trained for a
very long time. Given our analysis in Section 3.3 and the
fact that it shares a SegNet type architecture.
The impact of dense CRF post-processing can be
seen in the last time point for DeepLab-LargeFOV-denseCRF. Both global and mIoU improve but class average
diminshes. However a large improvement is obtained for
the BF score. Note here that the dense CRF hyperparameters
grid-search
process on a subset of the training set since no validation
set was available.
SUN RGB-D Indoor Scenes
SUN RGB-D is a very challenging and large dataset of
indoor scenes with 5,285 training and 5,050 testing images.
The images are captured by different sensors and hence
come in various resolutions. The task is to segment 37
indoor scene classes including wall, ﬂoor, ceiling, table,
chair, sofa etc. This task is made hard by the fact that object
Fig. 4. Results on CamVid day and dusk test samples. SegNet shows superior performance, particularly with its ability to delineate boundaries, as
compared to some of the larger models when all are trained in a controlled setting. DeepLab-LargeFOV is the most efﬁcient model and with CRF
post-processing can produce competitive results although smaller classes are lost. FCN with learnt deconvolution is clearly better. DeconvNet is the
largest model with the longest training time, but its predictions loose small classes. Note that these results correspond to the model corresponding to
the highest mIoU accuracy in Table 3.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE,
DECEMBER 2017
classes come in various shapes, sizes and in different poses.
There are frequent partial occlusions since there are typically many different classes present in each of the test
images. These factors make this one of the hardest segmentation challenges. We only use the RGB modality for our
training and testing. Using the depth modality would necessitate architectural modiﬁcations/redesign . Also the
quality of depth images from current cameras require careful post-processing to ﬁll-in missing measurements. They
may also require using fusion of many frames to robustly
extract features for segmentation. Therefore we believe
using depth for segmentation merits a separate body of
work which is not in the scope of this paper. We also note
that an earlier benchmark dataset NYUv2 is included as
part of this dataset.
Road scene images have limited variation, both in terms
of the classes of interest and their spatial arrangements.
When captured from a moving vehicle where the camera
position is nearly always parallel to the road surface limiting variability in view points. This makes it easier for deep
networks to learn to segment them robustly. In comparison,
images of indoor scenes are more complex since the view
points can vary a lot and there is less regularity in both the
number of classes present in a scene and their spatial
arrangement. Another difﬁculty is caused by the widely
varying sizes of the object classes in the scene. Some test
samples from the recent SUN RGB-D dataset are shown
in Fig. 5. We observe some scenes with few large classes
and some others with dense clutter (bottom row and right).
The appearance (texture and shape) can also widely vary in
indoor scenes. Therefore, we believe this is the hardest challenge for segmentation architectures and methods in computer vision. Other challenges, such as Pascal VOC12 
salient object segmentation have occupied researchers more
 , but we believe indoor scene segmentation is more challenging and has more current practical applications such as
in AR and robotics. To encourage more research in this
direction we compared well known deep architectures on
the large SUN RGB-D dataset.
The qualitative results of SegNet on samples of indoor
scenes of different types such as bedroom, living room, laboratory, meeting room, bathroom are shown in Fig. 5. We see
that SegNet obtains reasonable predictions when the size of
the classes are large under different view points. This is
Quantitative Comparisons of SegNet with Traditional Methods on the CamVid 11 Road Class Segmentation Problem 
Sign-Symbol
Pedestrian
Column-Pole
Class avg.
Global avg.
SfM+Appearance 
Boosting 
Dense Depth Maps 
Structured Random Forests 
Neural Decision Forests 
Local Label Descriptors 
Super Parsing 
SegNet (3.5K dataset training - 140K)
CRF based approaches
Boosting + pairwise CRF 
Boosting+Higher order 
Boosting+Detectors+CRF 
SegNet outperforms all the other methods, including those using depth, video and/or CRF’s on the majority of classes. In comparison with the CRF based methods
SegNet predictions are more accurate in 8 out of the 11 classes. It also shows a good  10 percent improvement in class average accuracy when trained on a large
dataset of 3.5 K images. Particularly noteworthy are the signiﬁcant improvements in accuracy for the smaller/thinner classes. * Note that we could not access predictions for older methods for computing the mIoU, BF metrics.
Quantitative Comparison of Deep Networks for Semantic Segmentation on the CamVid Test Set When Trained
on a Corpus of 3,433 Road Scenes Without Class Balancing
Network/Iterations
DeepLab-LargeFOV 
DeepLab-LargeFOV-denseCRF 
not computed
FCN (learnt deconv) 
DeconvNet 
When end-to-end training is performed with the same and ﬁxed learning rate, smaller networks like SegNet learn to perform better in a shorter time. The BF score
which measures the accuracy of inter-class boundary delineation is signiﬁcantly higher for SegNet, DeconvNet as compared to other competing models. Deconv-
Net matches the metrics for SegNet but at a much larger computational cost. Also see Table 2 for individual class accuracies for SegNet.
BADRINARAYANAN ET AL.: SEGNET: A DEEP CONVOLUTIONAL ENCODER-DECODER ARCHITECTURE FOR IMAGE SEGMENTATION
particularly interesting since the input modality is only RGB.
RGB images are also useful to segment thinner structures
such as the legs of chairs and tables, lamps which is difﬁcult
to achieve using depth images from currently available sensors. This can be seen from the results of SegNet, DeconvNet
in Fig. 5. It is also useful to segment decorative objects such
as paintings on the wall for AR tasks. However as compared
to outdoor scenes the segmentation quality is clearly more
noisy. The quality drops signiﬁcantly when clutter is
increased (see the result sample in the middle column).
The quantitative results in Table 4 show that all the deep
architectures share low mIoU and boundary metrics. The
global and class averages (correlates well with mIou) are
also small. SegNet outperforms all other methods in terms
of G,C, BF metrics and has a slightly lower mIoU than
DeepLab-LargeFOV. As a stand alone experiment we
trained SegNet with median frequency class balancing 
and the metrics were higher (see Table 4) and this agrees
with our analysis in Section 3.3. Interestingly, using the grid
search based optimal hyperparameters for the dense-CRF
worsened all except the BF score metric for DeepLab-Large-
FOV-denseCRF. More optimal settings could perhaps be
found but the grid search process was too expensive given
the large inference time for dense-CRFs.
One reason for the overall poor performance is the large
number of classes in this segmentation task, many of which
occupy a small part of the image and appear infrequently.
The accuracies reported in Table 5 clearly show that larger
classes have reasonable accuracy and smaller classes have
lower accuracies. This can be improved with larger sized
Fig. 5. Qualitative assessment of SegNet predictions on RGB indoor test scenes from the recently released SUN RGB-D dataset . In this hard
challenge, SegNet predictions delineate inter class boundaries well for object classes in a variety of scenes and their view-points. Overall rhe segmentation quality is better when object classes are reasonably sized but is very noisy when the scene is more cluttered. Note that often parts of an
image of a scene do not have ground truth labels and these are shown in black colour. These parts are not masked in the corresponding deep model
predictions that are shown. Note that these results correspond to the model corresponding to the highest mIoU accuracy in Table 4.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE,
DECEMBER 2017
datasets and class distribution aware training techniques.
Another reason for poor performance could lie in the inability of these deep architectures (all are based on the VGG
architecture) to large variability in indoor scenes. This conjecture on our part is based on the fact that the smallest
model DeepLab-LargeFOV produces the best accuracy in
terms of mIoU and in comparison, larger parameterizations
in DeconvNet, FCN did not improve perfomance even with
much longer training (DeconvNet). This suggests there
could lie a common reason for poor performance across all
architectures. More controlled datasets are needed to
verify this hypothesis.
DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
Deep learning models have often achieved increasing success due to the availability of massive datasets and expanding
parameterisation.
practice factors like memory and computational time during training and testing are important factors to consider
when choosing a model from a large bank of models. Training time becomes an important consideration particularly
when the performance gain is not commensurate with
increased training time as shown in our experiments. Test
time memory and computational load are important to
deploy models on specialised embedded devices, for example, in AR applications. From an overall efﬁciency viewpoint, we feel less attention has been paid to smaller and
more memory, time efﬁcient models for real-time applications such as road scene understanding and AR. This was
the primary motivation behind the proposal of SegNet,
which is signiﬁcantly smaller and faster than other competing architectures, but which we have shown to be efﬁcient
for tasks such as road scene understanding.
Segmentation challenges such as Pascal and MS-
COCO are object segmentation challenges wherein a
few classes are present in any test image. Scene segmentation is more challenging due to the high variability of indoor
scenes and a need to segment a larger number of classes
simultaneously. The task of outdoor and indoor scene segmentation are also more practically oriented with current
applications such as autonomous driving, robotics and AR.
The metrics we chose to benchmark various deep segmentation architectures like the boundary F1-measure (BF)
was done to complement the existing metrics which are
more biased towards region accuracies. It is clear from our
experiments and other independent benchmarks that
outdoor scene images captured from a moving car are easier
Quantitative Comparison of Deep Architectures on the SUNRGB-D Dataset When Trained on a Corpus of 5,250 Indoor Scenes
Network/Iterations
DeepLab-LargeFOV 
DeepLab-LargeFOV-denseCRF 
not computed
FCN (learnt deconv) 
DeconvNet 
Note that only the RGB modality was used in these experiments. In this complex task with 37 classes all the architectures perform poorly, particularly because of
the smaller sized classes and skew in the class distribution. DeepLab-Large FOV, the smallest and most efﬁcient model has a slightly higher mIoU but SegNet has
a better G,C,BF score. Also note that when SegNet was trained with median frequency class balancing it obtained 71.75, 44.85, 32.08, 14.06 (180 K) as the
Class Average Accuracies of SegNet Predictions for the 37 Indoor Scene Classes in the SUN RGB-D Benchmark Dataset
Shower curtain
Whiteboard
Night stand
The performance correlates well with size of the classes in indoor scenes. Note that class average accuracy has a strong correlation with mIoU metric.
A Comparison of Computational Time and Hardware Resources Required for Various Deep Architectures
GPU training
memory (MB)
GPU inference
memory (MB)
DeepLab-LargeFOV 
FCN (learnt deconv) 
DeconvNet 
The caffe time command was used to compute time requirement averaged over 10 iterations with mini batch size 1 and an image of 360  480 resolution We used nvidia-smi unix command to compute memory consumption. For training memory computation we used a mini-batch of size 4 and for
inference memory the batch size was 1. Model size was the size of the caffe models on disk. SegNet is most memory efﬁcient during inference model.
BADRINARAYANAN ET AL.: SEGNET: A DEEP CONVOLUTIONAL ENCODER-DECODER ARCHITECTURE FOR IMAGE SEGMENTATION
to segment and deep architectures perform robustly. We
hope our experiments will encourage researchers to engage
their attention towards the more challenging indoor scene
segmentation task.
An important choice we had to make when benchmarking different deep architectures of varying parameterization
was the manner in which to train them. Many of these architectures have used a host of supporting techniques and
multi-stage training recipes to arrive at high accuracies on
datasets but this makes it difﬁcult to gather evidence about
their true performance under time and memory constraints.
Instead we chose to perform a controlled benchmarking
where we used batch normalization to enable end-to-end
training with the same solver (SGD). However, we note that
this approach cannot entirely disentangle the effects of
model versus solver (optimization) in achieving a particular
result. This is mainly due to the fact that training these networks involves gradient back-propagation which is imperfect and the optimization is a non-convex problem in
extremely large dimensions. Acknowledging these shortcomings, our hope is that this controlled analysis complements other benchmarks and reveals the practical
trade-offs involved in different well known architectures.
For the future, we would like to exploit our understanding of segmentation architectures gathered from our analysis to design more efﬁcient architectures for real-time
applications. We are also interested in estimating the model
uncertainty for predictions from deep segmentation architectures , .
CONCLUSION
We presented SegNet, a deep convolutional network architecture for semantic segmentation. The main motivation behind
SegNet was the need to design an efﬁcient architecture for
road and indoor scene understanding which is efﬁcient both
in terms of memory and computational time. We analysed
SegNet and compared it with other important variants to
reveal the practical trade-offs involved in designing architectures for segmentation, particularly training time, memory
versus accuracy. Those architectures which store the encoder
network feature maps in full perform best but consume more
memory during inference time. SegNet on the other hand is
more efﬁcient since it only stores the max-pooling indices of
the feature maps and uses them in its decoder network to
achieve good performance. On large and well known datasets
SegNet performs competitively, achieving high scores for
road scene understanding. End-to-end learning of deep segmentation architectures is a harder challenge and we hope to
see more attention paid to this important problem.