A New Android Malware Detection Approach Using Bayesian Classification
Suleiman Y. Yerima, Sakir Sezer,
Gavin McWilliams
Centre for Secure Information Technologies
Queen’s University Belfast,
Belfast, Northern Ireland, United Kingdom
E-mail: {s.yerima, s.sezer, g.mcwilliams}@qub.ac.uk
Igor Muttik
Senior Research Architect
McAfee Labs
London, United Kingdom
E-mail: 
Abstract— Mobile malware has been growing in scale and
complexity as smartphone usage continues to rise. Android has
surpassed other mobile platforms as the most popular whilst
also witnessing a dramatic increase in malware targeting the
platform. A worrying trend that is emerging is the increasing
sophistication of Android malware to evade detection by
traditional signature-based scanners. As such, Android app
marketplaces remain at risk of hosting malicious apps that
downloaded
unsuspecting users. Hence, in this paper we present an
effective approach to alleviate this problem based on Bayesian
classification models obtained from static code analysis. The
models are built from a collection of code and app
characteristics that provide indicators of potential malicious
activities. The models are evaluated with real malware samples
in the wild and results of experiments are presented to
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach.
Keywords- mobile security; Android; malware detection;
bayesian classification; static analysis; machine learning; data
INTRODUCTION
The Android mobile platform is increasing in popularity
surpassing rivals like iOS, Blackberry, Symbian and
Windows mobile. It is estimated that there are currently
around 675,000 applications in the official Google’s Android
market, with an estimated 25 billion downloads . At the same time, malware targeting the
Android platform has risen sharply over the last two years.
According to a report from Fortinet , there exist approximately 2000 Android malware
samples belonging to 80 different families .
Since discovery of the first Android malware in August
2010 , new families have evolved in sophistication and are
becoming increasingly difficult to detect by traditional
signature-based anti-virus. More recent families have been
observed to exhibit polymorphic behavior, increased code
obfuscation, encryption of malicious payloads, as well as
stealthy command and control communication with remote
servers. In fact, some Android malware like AnserverBot are
known to have the capability to fetch and execute payload at
run time thus rendering its detection quite challenging.
Security experts believe that difficulties in spotting
malicious mobile applications results in most Android
malware remaining unnoticed for up to 3 months before
discovery . Furthermore, Oberheide et al. observed
that it took on average 48 days for a signature-based
antivirus engine to become capable of detecting new threats.
Clearly, there is a need for more effective detection
solutions to overcome the aforementioned challenges and
mitigate the impact of evolving Android malware. Hence, in
this paper we present a new approach - based on Bayesian
classification - which utilizes certain characteristic features
frequently observed with malware samples to classify an app
as ‘suspicious’ or ‘benign’. Our approach is developed as a
proactive method aimed at uncovering known families as
well as unknown malware so as to reduce incidents of
malware in marketplaces from evading detection.
The Bayesian
classification
based approach
complement
signature-based
harmless apps obtained from Android marketplaces to be
verified whilst isolating suspicious samples for further
scrutiny. Thus, it is a viable tool for filtering the vast amount
of apps added online on a daily basis; estimated to average
more than 1200 a day , while narrowing the window of
opportunity to reach end user devices and wreak havoc. The
approach is not only useful for prioritizing apps that may
require further scrutiny but is also a very effective tool for
uncovering unknown malware.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: related
work is discussed followed by background on the Android
system. Next, the Android reverse engineering and static
analyses that underpins our classification approach is
presented followed by the Bayesian classification model
formulation. Experiments, results and analyses follow; we
then conclude the paper and outline future work.
RELATED WORK
Different from earlier work on mobile malware detection
that rely on on-device anomaly or behavioral based
detection , , our approach is off-device, and employs
static analysis of Android application packages. Hence it is
aimed at detecting and filtering potentially malicious apps
before they installed or run on a device. Additionally, our
approach aims to close the window of opportunity for
undetected malware in marketplaces, whilst also avoiding
the challenges of device performance bottlenecks.
Static analysis has the advantage of being undetectable,
as obviously malware cannot modify its behavior during
analysis . Thus, it has been applied to vulnerability
assessment, profiling and malware detection for the Android
platform. For example, Comdroid is a static analysis tool
for application communication based vulnerabilities in
Android. Similarly, DroidChecker is an Android
application analysis tool which searches for capability
leakage vulnerability in Android applications. ProfileDroid
 , RiskRanker , and the tool presented in , all
leverage static analysis for profiling and analyzing Android
applications. Other existing works that employ static analysis
for detection of malicious activities like SCANDAL ,
AndroidLeaks , and the framework presented in ,
focus on privacy information leakage. Our work on the other
hand, covers detection of a wider scope of malicious
activities than privacy information loss.
In Blasing et al. presented an Android Application
Sandbox (AAS) that uses both static and dynamic analyses
on Android applications to automatically detect suspicious
applications. Compared to AAS, our approach covers a much
wider range of pattern attributes extracted not only from the
application code logic but also scrutiny of resources, assets,
and executable libraries where malicious payload could be
lurking. Additionally, these attributes contribute to a ranked
feature set which drives our Bayesian classification model.
In Apvrille and Strazzere employ a heuristics
approach based on static analysis for Android malware
detection. Their heuristic engine uses 39 different flags and
then outputs a risk score to highlight the most likely
malicious sample. Our approach shares similarity in the
reverse engineering technique, but differs by utilizing a
machine learning based method that offers more flexibility.
In , Schmidt et al. employ static analysis on executables
to extract their function calls using the readelf command.
They then compare these function call lists with those from
Linux malware executable in order to classifying the
executables using learning algorithms. In contrast, our static
analysis approach is based on automated analyses of Android
packages. Moreover, Android malware samples across a
range of existing families are employed in our work rather
than Linux malware executables.
Other earlier non-Android based papers have explored
data mining and machine learning techniques for malware
identification including for example and . For the
Android platform, a recent paper by Sahs and Khan 
presented a machine learning approach to Android Malware
detection based on SVM. A single-class SVM model derived
from benign samples alone is used. The approach in our
paper differs in that a more extensive set of code-based and
external attributes provide features for training the model
whereas used the Android permissions in the Manifest
files. Furthermore, unlike in , our classification models
are trained with both benign samples and a range of samples
from across 49 malware families discovered in the wild.
In summary, the main contributions of this paper
different from existing related works in the literature are as
A novel application of a machine learning technique,
i.e. Bayesian classification, for signature-free
Android malware detection using static code
Model building and in-depth empirical evaluation
with a range of representative malware samples from
across 49 existing malware families in the wild.
Our work is motivated by the sheer amount of Android
applications that require scanning and the rate at which new
ones keep appearing in different app markets. We also note
that there is significant delay between malware release and
its detection which even suggests that we are currently
unaware of several Android malware in the wild .
ANDROID SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
Android is designed for mobile devices with resource
constraints. It provides a sandboxed application execution
environment where a customized embedded Linux system
interacts with the phone hardware and off-processor cellular
radio while the Binder middleware and application API runs
on top of Linux. As shown in Figure 1, Android is
effectively a software stack for mobile devices that includes
an operating system, middleware and key applications and
uses a modified version of the Linux kernel. The Linux 2.6.x
kernel lying at the foundation of the Android platform serves
as a hardware abstraction layer, which offers an existing
memory management, process management, security and
networking model upon which the rest of the Android
platform is built. The native libraries such as SQLite, Webkit
and SSL, layered on top of the Linux kernel, provide most of
the functionality of the Android system. The Application
framework layer provides all the APIs that the applications
require to access the device hardware: location information,
running background services, etc. The application’s only
interface to the phone is through these API’s. Each
application is executed within a Dalvik Virtual Machine
(DVM) running under a unique UNIX uid.
At the higher operating system layers we have the user
applications such as the phone application, home application,
etc. which come pre-installed and other applications that are
downloaded from the Google Play market or alternative
marketplaces or even installed manually from .apk files.
These additional apps extend the functionality of the
smartphone and pose potential threat to user security and
privacy if they happen to be malicious.
Figure 1. Android System Architecture .
A. Android application basics
Android applications (or apps) are written in the Java
programming language. The Android SDK tools compile the
code—along with any data and resource files—into
an Android package, an archive file with an .apk suffix. All
the code in a single .apk file is considered to be one
application and it is this file that Android-powered devices
use to install the app.
The Android app is built from four different types of
components: Activities, Services, Broadcast Receivers, and
Content Providers . An app must declare its components
in a manifest file which must be at the root of the application
project directory. Before the Android system can start an
application component, the system must know that the
component exists by reading the application’s manifest file.
The manifest file also states the user permissions that the
application requires, such as internet access or read-access to
the user’s contacts.
Android apps are distributed as self-contained packages
called APKs. An APK (Android Package) is a compressed
consisting
AndroidManifest.xml (manifest file), classes.dex (A single
file which holds the complete bytecode to be interpreted by
Dalvik VM). Other binary or XML-based resources required
by the app to run may be held in res/ and assets/ folders.
The detection strategy developed in this paper leverages
the applications’ reliance on the platform APIs and their
structured packaging to extract certain properties that could
serve as indicators of suspicious activity, such as intent to
exfiltrate sensitive information, launch a malicious payload
at runtime, or presence of embedded secondary payload in
the external folders etc. These properties then form the basis
of our Bayesian classifier, which is used to determine
whether a given Android app is harmless or suspicious.
B. Application Reverse Engineering
In order to obtain the feature sets for building the
Bayesian model, we implemented a Java-based Android
package profiling tool for automated reverse engineering of
the APK files. The steps involved are shown in Figure 2.
Extract from .apk
files into folders
Convert Manifest.xml
binary to readable
manifest.xml.clean
Disassemble each
classes.dex file to
constituent .smali
Mine .smali files to
extract features
Build profile(s)
Mine manifest.xml.clean
files to extract features
Summary of functional steps in the custom built Java-based Android
package analyzer
Figure 2. Automated reverse engineering of the Android apps with the
Java-based APK analyzer.
To parse the .dex file, a tool called Baksmali is used,
which is a disassembler for the dex format used by Dalvik.
Baksmali disassembles .dex files into multiple files with
.smali extensions. Each .smali file contains only one class
information which is equivalent to a Java .class file.
C. Applying property detectors to reverse engineered
After reverse engineering an APK, a set of detectors are
applied within the Java-based APK analyzer to check for
properties which are then mapped into feature vectors for the
Bayesian classifier. The properties matched by the detectors
include API calls, Linux system commands and permissions
contained in the manifest files. Other properties such as
encryption of code, and the presence of secondary .apk or
.jar files are also matched.
1) API call detectors
Considering API calls provide the means for applications
to interact with the phone, their observation via static code
inspection can provide insight into the application’s intended
runtime activities. This allows the feature extractor to build a
profile of the apps based on the API calls which when used
in conjunction with other properties facilitates the discovery
of malicious intent via the Bayesian Classifier’s operation.
For example API calls to the Android Telephony
manager which is used to retrieve subscriber ID, phone ID,
and other similar information are monitored. Similarly, API
calls within the code, such as those for receiving/sending
retrieving
information, listing or installing other packages on the
phone, etc. are further properties which provide additional
features for the classifier.
2) Command detectors
API call detectors scrutinize the reverse engineered .dex
files to extract patterns for feature selection. In order to
improve the accuracy of the Bayesian classifier model,
command detectors are also used to extract further features
that are useful identifiers of potentially malicious activities.
Command detectors also inspect resources, assets and
libraries as these can be used to hosts malicious scripts or
hidden payloads that may not be detected by scrutinizing the
application code logic alone. Note that these, unlike API
calls, can be located within scripts of raw resources or assets
or even within external libraries. Attributes searched for by
the command detectors include system commands like
‘chmod’, ‘mount’, ‘remount’ ‘chown’. Others include the
Java Realtime.exec command through which persistent
background child processes containing malicious payload
can be launched. The command detector also matches
Android commands like ‘pm install’, which can enable
stealthy installation of additional packages.
3) Permissions detectors
These are used to glean information about the
permissions requested by the application declared within the
manifest file. In addition to providing information that could
build features for the Bayesian classification, the permission
detectors also provide information-rich profiling of the
applications, which can give insight for further analyses if
BAYESIAN CLASSIFICATION MODEL
Data mining technologies are becoming increasingly
important in the anti-malware industry, particularly in
augmenting well-established heuristics and generics methods
 . Data mining drives automation, which is motivated by
reducing maintenance costs associated with the traditional
heuristics and generics methods . Data mining employs
machine learning methods for inference, prediction,
classification etc. Hence, it is important to select an
appropriate method depending on the particular application.
Bayesian classification is well suited to our problem of
filtering large amounts of apps as it can perform relatively
fast classification with low computational overhead once
trained. Another important property which motivates its
implementation in our approach for detecting suspicious
Android applications, is the ability to model both an ‘expert’
and ‘learning’ system with relative ease compared to other
machine learning techniques. Bayesian method allows the
incorporation of prior probabilities (expert knowledge) even
before the training phase. This hybrid property can be
exploited to optimize the classifier’s performance without
incurring additional computational overhead. However, in
this research, only its applicability as a pure ‘learning’
method is explored. Evaluation of the hybrid property is
outside the scope of this paper.
A. The classifier model
The Bayesian based classifier consists of learning and
detection stages. The learning stage uses a training set in
form of known malicious samples in the wild and benign
Android applications, collectively called the app corpus. The
Java-based package analyzer uses the detectors to extract the
desired features from each app in the corpus. The feature set
is subsequently reduced by a feature reduction function while
the training function calculates the likely probability of each
selected feature occurring in the malicious and benign
applications. The training function also calculates the prior
probability of each class i.e. suspicious and benign.
The feature sets along with their likelihood probabilities
are stored for use in the subsequent classification stage. New
applications are assessed in the classification stage with
respect to the features in the selected feature set.
B. Feature ranking and selection
Let an application characteristic ri obtained from the
APK analyzer detectors be defined by a random variable:
eredby the
In order to ensure selection of the most relevant
application
Information
calculation is utilized to rank the extracted features within
the feature reduction function. Let C be a random variable
representing the application class, suspicious or benign:
suspicious benign
Every application is assigned a vector defined by
with ri being the result of the i-th random
variable Ri.
As the goal is to select the most relevant features, the
feature reduction function calculates the Mutual Information
of each random variable, thus:
After calculating the MI for each feature, the feature set is
then ranked from largest to smallest in order to select those
that maximize the MI between R and C thus enabling
optimum classifier performance.
C. Bayesian classification
According to Bayes theorem, the probability of an
application
belonging in class C is defined by:
estimated frequencies calculated on the app learning corpus.
While n is the number of features used in the classification
engine; c0 and c1 are the benign and suspicious classes
respectively.
An app represented by the vector
classified as benign if:
suspicious R
Otherwise, it is classified as suspicious. In terms of
classification error, two cases can occur: (a) A benign app
misclassified
suspicious.
suspicious
misclassified as benign. In the context of our problem, the
latter case is more critical since allowing a malicious app to
reach an end device is more critical than excluding a benign
app from the distribution chain to be subject to further
D. Evaluation measures
To evaluate the predictive accuracy of classifiers, several
measures have been proposed in the literature. In the context
of our problem the relevant measures utilized in our
experiments are given below.
be the number of benign applications
correctly classified as benign,
the number of
misclassified benign applications,
the number of
suspicious applications correctly identified as suspicious
represents the number of misclassified
suspicious applications. Accuracy and Error Rate are
respectively given by:
We also define the false positive rate (FPR), false negative
rate (FNR), true positive rate (TPR), true negative rate
(TNR) and precision (р) as follows:
METHODOLOGY AND EXPERIMENTS
As mentioned earlier, our implementation of an APK
analyzer includes the steps illustrated in Figure 2. A total of
2000 applications were analyzed in order to extract the
features which are then used by the feature selection function
to provide a relevance ranking according to the MI equation
(2) given earlier. The 2000 APKs consisted of 1000 malware
samples from 49 different families and 1000 benign apps
downloaded from official and third party Android markets.
The breakdown of the 49 malware families used and their
respective number of samples are shown in Table I. The
malware samples were obtained from the Android Malware
Genome Project .
The set of 1000 non-malicious apps were made up of
different categories in order to cover a wide variety of
application types. The categories include: entertainment,
tools, sports, health and fitness, news and magazines,
finance, music and audio, business, education, games and a
few other miscellaneous categories. The apps from third
party market places were screened using virustotal scanning
service and by manual inspection of extensive profile sets
created by our analyzer so as to discard any apps of highly
suspicious nature from the set.
A total of 58 feature attributes were defined as matching
criteria for the property detectors. 10 out of these did not
yield any match in both benign and malware sets and so were
discarded. The remaining 48 were subsequently applied to
the feature selection function which ranked them according
to the calculated MI. The top 25 features and their respective
frequencies in both sets are shown in Table II.
MALWARE FAMILIES USED AND THEIR NUMBERS
No of samples
No of samples
GingerMaster
AnserverBot
BaseBridge
Coinpirate
DroidCoupon
DroidDeluxe
DroidDream
DroidDreamLight
DroidKungFu1
RougeLemon
DroidKungFu2
RougeSPPush
DroidKungFu3
SMSReplicator
DroidKungFu4
DroidKungFuSapp
DroidKungFuUpdate
FakeNetflix
FakePlayer
GamblerSMS
TOP SELECTED FEATURES AND THEIR FREQUENCIES IN
BENIGN AND MALWARE SETS OF 1000 SAMPLES IN EACH CATEGORY
getSubscriberId (TelephonyManager)
getDeviceId (TelephonyManager)
getSimSerialNumber (TelephonyManager)
.apk (secondary payload)
intent.action.BOOT_COMPLETED
chmod (system command)
Runtime.exec( ) (Executing process)
abortBroadcast (intercepting broadcast notifications)
getLine1Number (TelephonyManager)
/system/app
/system/bin
createSubprocess (creating child process)
getSimOperator (TelephonyManager)
remount (system command)
DexClassLoader (stealthily loading a class)
pm install (installing additional packages)
getCallState (TelephonyManager)
chown (system command)
.jar (secondary payload)
mount (system command)
KeySpec (code encryption)
/system/bin/sh
SMSReceiver
getNetworkOperator (TelephonyManager)
SecretKey (code encryption)
Table II shows that some of the properties were only
found to be present in the malware samples, while references
to system commands mainly appeared in the malware class.
Although the Telephony manager API calls are present in
both classes as expected, higher occurrences were observed
in malware samples. The references to .apk and .jar files,
which are meant to detect the presence of secondary apps are
found in both classes with more in the malware set. Whilst
secondary apps can be used to hide malicious payload, some
legitimate apps such as popular ad and mobile payment
frameworks also utilize them. Notwithstanding the use of
some properties by both malicious and legitimate apps,
classification
probabilistically combine several of them including those
that are almost exclusively found in one class only to enable
more effective discrimination.
A. Bayesian Classifier training
For the training of the classification model, the same set
of 2000 samples comprising 1000 malware and 1000 benign
apps were used. In order to provide for testing and evaluation
according to the earlier defined evaluation criteria in
equations (5) to (11), 5-fold cross validation is employed.
Thus, 1600 samples (800 each of benign and malware) were
used in the training, while the remaining 400 (200 each of
benign and malware) were used for testing. Hence, the
experiments undertaken used 5 different training and testing
sets each containing a different testing portion with samples
outside of its own training portion. This strategy was chosen
to provide a wider range of samples for the testing of the
classifier.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
Figures 3 to 6 depict the results of the experiments
undertaken to evaluate the Bayesian classifier. Five different
sets of features were used containing 5, 10, 15 and 20
features respectively, to obtain the results depicted in Figs. 3
to 5 and Table III. 10f, 15f and 20f refer to the top 10, top 15
and top 20 ranked features respectively. 5fT refers to five top
features while 5fL refers to the five lowest ranked features
from the set of the selected 20 (i.e. 16th to 20th ranked).
Figure 3. Average error rates and accuracy values for different feature
From Figure 3, we observe increasing accuracy and
decreasing error rates when a larger number of features are
used to train the classifier. A very close performance
between 15f and 20f can be seen, which indicates that only
marginal improvement would accrue from employing a
larger number of features for training the model. An
interesting observation is the difference in 5fT and 5fL
performance, with 5fT achieving close to 85% average
accuracy compared to 65% with 5fL. This highlights the
effectiveness of the ranking by the feature selection function
of the analyzer, since the same number of features but of
different rankings were present in 5fL and 5fT.
Figure 4 depicts the true negative rate and the false
positive rates observed in the experiments. The results do not
follow the same trend observed with accuracy and error rate.
Instead, 5fL achieves the highest TNR of 0.954. The reason
for this is that when trained with a relatively small number of
features, there will be more occurences of feature vectors
with no detected features, i.e. zero vectors
. And since a larger number of these vectors
will come from benign apps, this has the effect of
strengthening the TNR. But in accordance with equations (5)
and (6), overall accuracy falls while error rate increases
because the false negatives
also goes up as a result.
This is because the classifier will have prior knowledge of
with higher probability of falling within
‘benign’ than ‘malicious’.
Figure 4. Average true negative rates and false positive rates for the
different feature sets.
Figure 5. Average true positive rates and false negative rates for the
various feature sets.
TABLE III.
SUMMARY OF EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS FROM THE
CLASSIFICATION MODEL FOR DIFFERENT FEATURE SETS .
Again, from Figure 4, there is not much to choose
between 15f and 20f for TNR and FPR results. Although the
false positive rates observed were relatively low (around
6%), FPR is not considered as critical as FNR since the latter
directly affects the proportion of malware that will be
‘missed’. On the other hand, a low FPR means that less
benign apps will need to be subject to further scrutiny; and it
then becomes more cost-effective or less time consuming to
do so when the FPR is low, given a massive amount of apps.
From Figure 5, it can be seen that 10f, 15f and 20f sets
yielded TPRs of 0.906, 0.904 and 0.906 respectively.
Correspondingly their FNR values are 0.094, 0.096 and
0.094. It is worth emphasizing that these TPRs indicate a
significantly higher malware detection rate than were
achieved by signature-based anti-virus scanners as reported
in , which were tested on the same malware sample set.
The study reported a best case of 0.796 detection rate while
0.202 was the worst case amongst four signature-based
mobile AVs. The paper stated that most of the undetected
malware were unknown samples whose signatures were
unavailable at the time of study. Nevertheless, the Bayesian
learning approach presented in this paper has demonstrated
capability of detecting unknown malware since the training
and testing sets are of unique samples.
Because FNR is critical in the context of our problem, the
results warrant further discussion. We observed that some of
false negatives that occurred resulted from ‘zero feature
vectors’. While increasing the number of features from 20
could reduce the zero feature vector occurrences, this will
not necessarily result in better classification accuracy (as
Figure 3 illustrates). One way to overcome this could be
through combining related features as matching criteria, for
example the .apk and .jar (secondary payload matching
features). This will allow new features to be introduced into
the classification model while keeping an optimum total
required to train the model.
We also note from Table III that precision and AUC also
mirror the TPR and accuracy results by generally improving
with higher number of features, with those of 10f, 15f, and
20f quite close to one another. Precision (expressed in
equation 11), reflects the precision of the model when
classifying samples as suspicious. AUC (Area Under Curve),
on the other hand, is the total area under the Receiver
Operation Characteristic (ROC) curve which is a plot of TPR
vs. FPR for every possible detection cut-off. An AUC of 1
implies perfect classification. Therefore, an AUC value
closer to 1 denotes better classifier predictive power.
In Figure 6 and Table IV, results obtained from
investigating the effect of varying numbers of training
samples on the performance metrics are presented. These are
from the 20 top feature set with 100, 250, 500, 1000 and
1600 training samples evaluated over the same testing sets
using 5-fold cross validation. Each training set had 50%
benign and 50% malware. Note from Figure 6 that while
increasing the number of training samples had a noticeable
effect on the TPR, it had much less impact on the TNR.
Increasing the number of training samples improved the TPR
and the accuracy also got better as a result. The reason for
this observation can be explained by the fact that there is
greater variability in the characteristics of the malware
samples with respect to the 20 selected features compared to
the benign samples. Hence, varying the number of training
samples has more marked effect on the metrics linked to the
malware class (i.e. TPR and FNR) than those related to the
benign class (i.e. TNR and FPR). This can be seen more
clearly from Table IV. We can therefore conclude that a
larger training sample set, especially with more malware
samples, will further improve the TPR, lower the FNR and in
turn improve the overall accuracy of the classifier.
Number of training samples (20 features)
Figure 6. Average true negative rates, accuracy, and true positive rates for
different training samples with 20 features.
SUMMARY OF RESULTS FOR DIFFERENT TRAINING SAMPLES
WITH 20 FEATURES.
0.107 0.893 0.943 0.057 0.844 0.156 0.937 0.95794
0.083 0.917 0.946 0.054 0.886 0.114 0.943 0.96877
0.084 0.916 0.943 0.057 0.890 0.110 0.940 0.97119
0.081 0.919 0.947 0.053 0.892 0.108 0.944 0.97177
0.079 0.921 0.937 0.063 0.906 0.094 0.935 0.97223
Precision is affected by both false positives and true
positives (see equation 11). Hence, the results are variable
with respect to changing number of training samples, as can
be seen from Table IV. AUC (i.e. classifier predictive power)
on the other hand, improves with the increase in number of
training samples.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper we proposed and evaluated a machine
learning-based approach for detecting Android malware. In
particular, a novel application of Bayesian classification is
applied to this problem. Through reverse engineering of the
Android applications using an APK analyzer implemented in
Java, a set of 58 properties were extracted to provide features
that are subsequently ranked by a feature selection function.
The properties are extracted from the applications by means
of detectors that search for patterns and references to API
calls, system commands, etc. frequently encountered with
Android malware.
1000 samples from 49 Android malware families
together with another 1000 benign applications across a
variety of categories have been used for feature extraction
and training of the Bayesian classifier. From the experiments
conducted, it is discovered that 15 to 20 features are
sufficient to provide optimum performance based on the
detected properties upon which the features are based and the
ranking by the feature selection function.
The results presented in the paper showed significantly
better detection rates than were achieved by popular
signature-based antivirus software tested previously on the
same set of malware samples used in our experiments. The
malware samples used in the experiments were from the
largest publicly available collection at the time of writing.
Future work could investigate the classifier performance
with larger sample sets as more malware samples are
discovered in the wild. Further studies could also investigate
performance improvement via prior incorporation of expert
knowledge within the Bayesian classification model.