Mach Learn 74: 281–313
DOI 10.1007/s10994-008-5093-3
Finding anomalous periodic time series
An application to catalogs of periodic variable stars
Umaa Rebbapragada · Pavlos Protopapas ·
Carla E. Brodley · Charles Alcock
Received: 20 March 2007 / Revised: 17 November 2008 / Accepted: 21 November 2008 /
Published online: 31 December 2008
Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2008
Abstract Catalogs of periodic variable stars contain large numbers of periodic light-curves
(photometric time series data from the astrophysics domain). Separating anomalous objects
from well-known classes is an important step towards the discovery of new classes of astronomical objects. Most anomaly detection methods for time series data assume either a single
continuous time series or a set of time series whose periods are aligned. Light-curve data
precludes the use of these methods as the periods of any given pair of light-curves may be out
of sync. One may use an existing anomaly detection method if, prior to similarity calculation, one performs the costly act of aligning two light-curves, an operation that scales poorly
to massive data sets. This paper presents PCAD, an unsupervised anomaly detection method
for large sets of unsynchronized periodic time-series data, that outputs a ranked list of both
global and local anomalies. It calculates its anomaly score for each light-curve in relation
to a set of centroids produced by a modiﬁed k-means clustering algorithm. Our method is
able to scale to large data sets through the use of sampling. We validate our method on both
light-curve data and other time series data sets. We demonstrate its effectiveness at ﬁnding
known anomalies, and discuss the effect of sample size and number of centroids on our results. We compare our method to naive solutions and existing time series anomaly detection
Editor: Tow Fawcett.
U. Rebbapragada () · C.E. Brodley
Department of Computer Science, Tufts University, 161 College Ave., Medford, MA 02155, USA
e-mail: 
C.E. Brodley
e-mail: 
P. Protopapas · C. Alcock
Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, 60 Garden Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
P. Protopapas
e-mail: 
e-mail: 
P. Protopapas
Initiative in Innovative Computing, Harvard University, 60 Oxford Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
Mach Learn 74: 281–313
methods for unphased data, and show that PCAD’s reported anomalies are comparable to or
better than all other methods. Finally, astrophysicists on our team have veriﬁed that PCAD
ﬁnds true anomalies that might be indicative of novel astrophysical phenomena.
Keywords Anomaly detection · Time series data
1 Introduction
Quasars , radio pulsars , and cosmic gamma-ray bursts
 were all discovered by alert scientists who, while examining data
for a primary purpose, encountered aberrant phenomena whose further study led to these
legendary discoveries. Such discoveries were possible in an era when scientists had a close
connection with their data. The advent of massive data sets renders unexpected discoveries
through manual inspection improbable if not impossible. Fortunately, automated anomaly
detection programs may resurrect this mode of discovery and identify atypical phenomena
indicative of novel astronomical objects.
Our research applies anomaly detection to photometric time series data, called lightcurve data. Our speciﬁc application is to ﬁnd anomalies in sets of light-curves of periodic
variable stars. Most stars, like our own Sun, are of almost constant luminosity, whereas
variable stars undergo signiﬁcant variations. There are over 350,000 cataloged variable stars
with more being discovered. The 2003 General Catalogue of Variable Stars lists known and suspected variable stars in our own galaxy, as well as 10,000 in other
galaxies. For periodic variable stars, the period of the star can be established. Common
types of periodic variable stars include Cepheid, Eclipsing Binaries and RR Lyrae, details
of which can be found in Petit , Sterken and Jaschek , Richter et al. .
The study of periodic variable stars is of great importance to astronomy. For example, the
study of Cepheids yielded the most valuable method for determining the Hubble constant,
and the study of binary stars enabled the discovery of a star’s true mass. Finding a new class
or subclass of variable stars will be of tremendous value.
Figure 1 shows a typical light-curve from each star class before and after we perform
our pre-processing techniques (described in Sect. 6). The y-axis measures the magnitude of
brightness of the star.1 Magnitude is inversely proportional to the brightness of the observation, thus, the y-axis is plotted with descending values. The x-axis measures folded time.
A folded light-curve is a light-curve where all periods are mapped onto a single period,
which is why there may be multiple points on the y-axis for a single time point. We describe
light-curves and the process of folding in more detail in Sect. 6.
Our research is motivated by the challenges inherent to performing anomaly detection
on large sets of periodic variable light-curves. Several of these challenges are common to
many time series data sets. There are a large number of time-points in each light-curve
(high dimensionality), low signal-to-noise ratio, and voluminous amounts of data. Indeed,
new surveys, such as the Panoramic Survey Telescope and Rapid Response System (Pan-
STARRS), have the capacity to produce light-curves for billions of stars.2 Any technique
developed for light-curves must scale to very large data sets.
A unique challenge of working with light-curve data is that the periods of the light-curves
are not synchronized because each is generated by a different source (star). To understand
1Magnitude refers to the logarithmic measure of the brightness of an object.
2 Panoramic survey telescope and rapid response system.
Mach Learn 74: 281–313
Fig. 1 Examples of typical folded light-curves before (left) and after (right) pre-processing. For purposes of
visual presentation, we align the maxima of each light-curve at approximately 0.25. This is also known as
universal phasing, which is discussed in Sect. 3
why phasing poses such a challenge for anomaly detection in this domain, consider Fig. 2,
which illustrates how two similar light-curves may appear dissimilar under a similarity measure like Euclidean distance if a phase adjustment is not performed. The top panel shows two
similar light-curves whose phases are not synchronized. The middle panel shows the square
of the correlation plotted as a function of the phase adjustment. The maximum similarity occurs at a phase shift of approximately 0.3. The bottom panel shows the two light-curves after
Mach Learn 74: 281–313
Fig. 2 The top panel shows two light-curves that are similar but whose phases are not synchronized. The
middle panel plots the square of the correlation as a function of the phase adjustment and shows that the
global maximum occurs at a phase shift of approximately 0.3. The bottom panel shows the light-curves after
shifting the dotted curve to the right by this amount
the dotted light-curve is shifted by this amount. We deﬁne the optimal phase shift between
two light-curves as the shift that yields the maximum similarity value.
This phasing problem presents a challenge to both general anomaly detection techniques,
and those developed speciﬁcally for time series. A general anomaly detection method, even
with a metric that works for unphased data, may not work out of the box. With regard to
time series anomaly detection techniques, our task of ﬁnding anomalies in n distinct time
series differs from most work which assumes a single contiguous time series (not necessarily
periodic) in which anomalous sub-regions are sought.
PCAD is our solution to the problem of anomaly detection on large sets of unsynchronized periodic time series. The heart of PCAD is a modiﬁed k-means clustering algorithm,
called Phased K-means (Pk-means), that runs on a sampling of the data. Pk-means differs
from k-means in that it re-phases each time series prior to similarity calculation and updates
centroids from these rephased curves. Because Pk-means is a modiﬁcation of k-means, we
provide a proof that Pk-means does not break k-means’s convergence properties.
The Pk-means subroutine runs ofﬂine on a sampling of the data. The use of sampling
enables PCAD to scale to large data sets. The online portion of PCAD is the calculation
Mach Learn 74: 281–313
of the anomaly score for each time series from the set of centroids produced ofﬂine by
Pk-means. This operation is linear in the size of the data set.
Another advantage of PCAD is its ﬂexibility to discover two types of anomalies: local
and global. We deﬁne the terms local and global anomaly and provide scoring methods
for both. Once each time series is assigned an anomaly score, PCAD ranks the time series
accordingly and outputs the top m for review. To our knowledge, PCAD is the only anomaly
detection method developed speciﬁcally for unsynchronized time series data that can output
both global and local anomalies.
Our paper presents empirical evidence on four data sets that PCAD effectively ﬁnds
known anomalies and produces a better ranking of anomalies when compared to naive solutions and other state-of-the-art anomaly detection methods for time series. We discuss
the effect of sample size and the parameter k (used by Pk-means) on the anomaly detection results, and show experimental results on light-curve data with an unknown number of
anomalies. Our paper concludes with an astrophysicists’s discussion of the signiﬁcance of
the anomalies found by PCAD.
2 Related work
PCAD is speciﬁcally developed to solve the problem of anomaly detection on unsynchronized periodic time series data. Because there are few other methods with this purpose, we
organize our related work into three categories. First, we brieﬂy review general anomaly detection methods for local and global outliers. We then provide an in-depth review of anomaly
detection methods for time series data. We conclude with a discussion of time series methods
designed for unsynchronized data.
2.1 Anomaly detection
Anomaly, or outlier, detection is a research area in both statistics and data mining. Statistical approaches focus on ﬁnding outliers with respect to a particular statistical model or
distribution, and employ hypothesis testing for the discovery of outliers . Knorr and Ng deﬁne distance-based outliers 
as a point that is greater than distance D away from at least p percent of the data set. The
authors show that one can choose D and p to be compatible with statistical deﬁnitions of
outliers. An advantage of the distance-based outlier deﬁnition is that it sidesteps the need to
assume a parametric form for the data. However, one must know or search for the appropriate values of D and p. Other variants of the distance-based outlier deﬁnition include the
distance of a point to its k-th nearest neigh or , or the sum of the
distances to its k-nearest neighbors .
The methods presented by Knorr and Ng include a simple brute-force comparison of
examples that avoids the use of indexing structures and is O(n2), and a faster cell-based
method that is O(n) but exponential in the number of features. Subsequent approaches improve on computational efﬁciency or scale to high-dimensional data sets. Ramaswamy et
al.’s method improves efﬁciency by partitioning the data into disjoint subsets and pruning calculations among subsets containing no outliers . Bay and
Schwabacher employ pruning and randomization to achieve near-linear time performance
 . Wu and Jermaine ﬁnd each example’s k-nearest neighbors
with respect to a random sample, rather than the entire data set .
The distance-based outlier deﬁnition does not correctly identify outliers in mixed variance data. Breunig et al. introduced the local outlier factor (LOF) as a solution 74: 281–313
al. 2000). Rather than setting a hard threshold D, LOF considers the density of an example’s
neighborhood to calculate an outlier score. Thus, density-based outlier detection algorithms
are able to discover local outliers, or points that are anomalous with respect to their nearest
neighbors or assigned cluster, as opposed to global outliers, points that are anomalous with
respect to the entire data set. Other density-based outlier detection research improves the
computational efﬁciency of LOF by summarizing the data and indexing
 .
Both the distance- and density-based outlier deﬁnitions do not work well in high dimensions due to the curse of dimensionality. Solutions to outlier detection on high dimensional
data include feature transformation , subspace
projections and sampling .
In theory, the methods above can generalize to any type of data, including time series
data, if one were able to apply an appropriate distance metric. In Sect. 3, we discuss why
these methods may not be appropriate for large sets of unsynchronized time series data.
Moreover, all of the methods described above output either distance-based global anomalies
or density-based local anomalies. In contrast, PCAD has the ﬂexibility to ﬁnd both distancebased local or global anomalies.
2.2 Time series anomaly detection
Methods for time series anomaly detection operate either on a single time series or on a time
series database. The goal of anomaly detection on a single time series is to ﬁnd an anomalous
subregion. The goal of anomaly detection on a time series database is to ﬁnd an anomalous
example. In some cases, a single time series is converted to a time series database through
the use of a sliding window.
Many time series methods supply their own deﬁnitions of anomaly, rather than use the
distance- and density-based deﬁnitions above. Some deﬁne anomalies with respect to a reference data set of “normal” time series. The anomalies discovered in this context are global
anomalies. Other techniques use only the input data set, which contains both normal examples and the unknown anomalies. Depending on the amount of data used to compute their
models, these techniques discover either global or local anomalies. For each technique, we
comment on whether the method makes use of a reference set. For techniques using only the
input data, we comment on whether global or local anomalies are sought.
In order to ﬁnd an anomalous subregion within a single time series, one may slide a window across the data either incrementally or in discrete steps according to a known period
 . Dasgupta and Forrest , and Keogh et al.’s methods
use sliding windows and discretization on a single continuous time series, and deﬁne anomalies with respect to a reference time series. They convert both their reference and input
time series into two time series databases by sliding a window of user-speciﬁed length and
discretizing the values in the window into a string. In Forrest and Dasgupta’s work, a set
of detectors is trained on the reference set such that no detector will match any member of
that reference set. The detectors are then applied to the input set. Any example that signals
an alarm is an anomaly. Keogh et al. encodes the set of discretized strings from both the
reference and input sets in sufﬁx trees. The surprise score of each string in the input set
is calculated by comparing its number of occurrences in the input set versus its expected
number of occurrences. These expectations are calculated using a Markov model built from
the reference set. If the actual number of occurrences differs from the expected number of
occurrences by more than a user-speciﬁed threshold, the string is ﬂagged as an anomaly.
Mach Learn 74: 281–313
Wei et al.’s method ﬁnds local anomalies without the aid of a reference set . The method discretizes the time series using the SAX algorithm and
then slides two windows, called a “lead” and “lag” window, both of user-speciﬁed length,
across the data. The lead window contains the sequence to be labeled as normal or anomalous. The lag window data acts a reference set. The lead window’s anomaly score is the
distance between the lead and lag windows, where the distance metric calculates the difference in frequency between all possible SAX subwords of a given size. A drawback of this
method is that a small cluster of anomalies in the lag window might cause an anomalous
pattern to be ﬂagged as normal.
Discretization is often used to reduce the computation time of operations on the sliding
window. In the three methods described above, comparisons are done in a discretized space.
A criticism of this approach is that discretization may hurt the anomaly detection process
because too few symbols may overly smooth the data, obfuscating some anomalies. The
degree of smoothing at which this happens is dataset speciﬁc and remains an open area of
Ma and Perkins’s method, also for a single continuous time series, uses a sliding window
of user-speciﬁed length but does not employ discretization . Rather, it
uses support vector regression to model all previously seen subsequences. For an incoming
time point, the sliding window shifts forward one point and the newest input subsequence is
evaluated with respect to the current model. If the input sequence differs from the model by
more than a user-speciﬁed tolerance, the sequence is anomalous. The model is continually
retrained with each incoming time point. Because the computation time of the method increases with each incoming data point, the authors propose dropping older samples in order
to keep the size of the training set constant. A drawback of their approach is that it requires
the user to specify six parameters, including sliding window size and kernel function. The
authors acknowledge having no guidance for ﬁnding the optimal set of parameter values and
declare this to be an area of future work.
Unlike methods that seek anomalies of a pre-speciﬁed length, Shahabi et al.’s method
looks for anomalies at varying levels of granularity (i.e., day, month, year) . The authors develop a tree structure called TSA-Tree that contains pre-computed
trend and anomaly information in each node. The tree grows to depth k where granularity
decreases as the tree-depth increases. The authors use feature extraction (wavelet ﬁlters) to
capture trend and surprise information at each granularity. However, the types of surprises
are limited to “sudden changes” in the data that are captured by “local maximums”.
Yang et al.’s InfoMiner technique detects “surprising” patterns on periodic event sequence data . Thus, the data are already discretized, and the known
period allows the authors to treat a single continuous time series as a set of smaller oneperiod time series. InfoMiner detects global anomalies by calculating information gain on
each sequence, and labeling that sequence as anomalous if its information gain exceeds a
certain threshold. Because this technique is for event sequence data, the use of this program
on real-valued time series data would require discretization of the data set, and comparisons
in discretized space.
The next two methods are developed for time series databases. Salvador et al.’s method
creates a ﬁnite automaton trained on a reference set of time series data . An input time series is anomalous if it does not conform to the model, thus ending
at an anomalous state. The state transition logic for the automaton is determined by a three
step process. First, each reference time series is segmented using a novel clustering algorithm called Gecko that determines the appropriate number of segments. Second, the slope
is extracted from each segment and then mapped to rules that are, in the third step, converted
Mach Learn 74: 281–313
into state-transition logic. Time does not ﬁgure into the features that are used to map segments to states. This meets the speciﬁc needs of their application (faulty valve detection),
but would not work for a domain in which the relationship of the signal to time must be
preserved.
Jagadish et al. ﬁnd “deviants” in a time series database by modeling the time series with
a set of minimum-bounding rectangles or “histograms” . Dynamic programming is used to ﬁnd the optimal number of rectangles and rectangle-width. The k most
deviant time points are ﬁrst identiﬁed. These are points whose removal best improves the
ﬁt between the histogram and the original time series. After identifying deviant points, the
method then identiﬁes anomalous subregions as those having a number of deviants that exceeds a user threshold. Jagadish et al.’s technique, which ﬁnds global anomalies, is quadratic
in the length of the time series and therefore too slow for light-curve and other voluminuous
time series data.
2.3 Time series methods for unphased data
The majority of time series methods that tackle the problem of unsynchronized data have
the goal of time series clustering . These methods are applied to a diverse set of applications including the
tracking of cyclone trajectories , gene expression , and botany .
Clearly, unsynchronized time series data sets exist in domains outside of astrophysics.
Of the methods cited above, only Gaffney and Smyth and Chudova et al. 
integrate data synchronization into their clustering methods. Both use the EM algorithm
 to estimate cluster membership as well as the amount of horizontal
shift that occurs in each time series. Gaffney and Smyth develop a fully Bayesian generative
model in “curve space”, which means they represent the curves using a regression mixture
model. Thus, the time series need not be of uniform length. Their joint clustering-alignment
model also assumes a normal regression model for the cluster labels, and Gaussian priors
on the (hidden) transformation variables, where transformations include shifting and scaling
on both the time axis and in measurement space. Chudova et al. develop a generative
model that assumes uniformly spaced time points, but also multi-dimensional curves. Their
model is formed in the time domain where the distribution of each curve minus its offset in
both time and measurement space is assumed to be multivariate Gaussian with a diagonal
covariance matrix. The authors employ conjugate priors on the model parameters, and use
Gibbs sampling to obtain point estimates of both parameters and hyperparameters. Note that
the goal of both methods is to produce the best clustering model. In contrast, PCAD uses
a much simpler clustering method (that makes no parametric assumptions) for the purpose
of anomaly detection. Their results show that applying EM to these Bayesian generative
models produces good clustering results on unsynchronized data. However, for our application, these computationally intensive methods are unnecessary for the purpose of anomaly
detection.
We discuss in detail the methods that do anomaly detection on unsynchronized time series data. Chan and Mahoney’s technique creates a model of minimum-bounding rectangles
from a reference set of n normal time series . Before computing this model, each time point in each time series is mapped to a
three-dimensional vector where the attributes are the smoothed time point plus its smoothed
ﬁrst and second derivatives. A box model is created for each reference time series using a
greedy algorithm that ﬁnds x boxes that minimize the volume over the three-dimensional
Mach Learn 74: 281–313
feature space. Given the n separate box models, the two closest boxes across the different
time series are repeatedly merged until only k remain. An anomaly score is calculated for
an input time series by transforming the series into the three-dimensional feature space and
summing each point’s distance to the nearest box in the model. Because this algorithm trains
a model on multiple time series, the authors also encounter the phasing issue, which they
acknowledge with the statement: “two time series with corresponding behavior might not
begin and end at the same time in the time series.” The authors handle phasing by allowing any two boxes to merge, regardless of their order in the original time series. It is our
opinion that this “order-independent” algorithm may be too lenient, because it is possible
to completely rearrange a time-series with this method. In contrast, the phase adjustment
done by PCAD shifts a time series horizontally but otherwise respects the order of points.
Also, Chan and Mahoney’s method requires a reference set containing only typical examples
from which a model of normality is calculated. PCAD does not use a reference set because
a comprehensive set of typical examples is a luxury our domain experts may not be able to
Wei et al.’s rotation-invariant discord discovery technique, which we refer to as RI-
DISCORD , is an anomaly detection methods that discovers global anomalies or discords in shape data. Discords, whose deﬁnition is reminiscent of the distancebased outlier deﬁnition, are the m most anomalous time series (or subregions if the input is
a single time series) with the farthest nearest neighbors . The deﬁnition
can also be extended to ﬁnd the top m examples with the farthest distance to their k-nearest
neighbors. RI-DISCORD takes a database of shape data as input, each of which is converted
to a time series. In order to ensure that different rotations of the same shape matches another,
Wei et al. use a rotation-invariant Euclidean distance measure that searches over all possible
rotations of the time series and outputs the minimum distance calculated.
The O(n2) brute-force version RI-DISCORD is identical to the brute-force version of
Keogh et. al’s discord detection method called HOT SAX . The only
difference is the use of the rotation-invariant distance measure in RI-DISCORD. Both have
faster versions that use heuristics to order the inner and outer loops of the search in a way
that ensures maximal pruning of distance calculations, but they differ in the heuristics used.
A drawback of both methods is that they do not identify small clusters of similar anomalies.
The RI-DISCORD method attempts to resolve this by extending the deﬁnition of discords
to be the top m examples with the largest distance to its kth nearest neighbor. However, this
requires one to know in advance the value of k that is inclusive of small anomalous clusters.
Because RI-DISCORD is the only anomaly detection method that is designed to handle
unphased data without the use of a reference set, we compare PCAD’s performance to RI-
DISCORD in Sect. 8. Note that RI-DISCORD is designed to ﬁnd global anomalies only. It
does not discover local anomalies.
3 The challenge of unphased data
One may reasonably ask whether any of the methods cited in Sect. 2 can be adapted or
applied to handle unsynchronized time series data. The answer is no for methods that perform feature transformations that do not respect the time domain . These methods would not work for time series data in general.
For methods that rely on spatial indexes , one would need to synchronize or universally phase the data before applying the anomaly detection method. We
discuss universal phasing at the end of this section.
Mach Learn 74: 281–313
The other way to adapt a general outlier detection method is to use cross correlation, a
distance metric for which there exists an efﬁcient method for computing the optimal phase
shift that maximizes the similarity between two time series. For time series x and y, cross
correlation is computed
x(t)y(t −τ),
where t is discrete time, d is the number of time points and τ is the phase shift. A phase shift
implies a rotation of the times series. If t −τ < 0, we wrap the time series around and let
y(t −τ) equal y(t −τ + d). Finding the max of r2
xy(τ) requires ﬁnding the value of τ that
maximizes cross correlation. The running time of a brute force search for the optimal τ is
O(d2). Fortunately, we can use the convolution theorem to ﬁnd the same value in O(d logd).
According to the convolution theorem, cross correlation can be written as
xy(τ) = F −1 
where X (ν) is the Fourier transform of x(t) and
Y (ν) is the complex conjugate of the
Fourier transform of y(t). One ﬁnds the maximum correlation by ﬁnding the maximum of
the inverse Fourier transform of the product of the Fourier transforms of the two time series.
For fast Fourier transforms (FFT), each Fourier transform requires 2d logd operations for
any value d. Thus, the calculation of cross correlation of a pair of time series is O(d logd).
Simply substituting cross correlation maximized over all possible phase shifts, or maximized cross correlation, as the distance metric into a general outlier detection method may
not yield desirable results for unsynchronized time series data. First, the use of maximized
cross correlation increases the computational expense of distance calculations from O(d) to
O(d logd), a non-trivial expense if repeated k-nearest neighbor calculations are performed
on high-dimensional data . This cost might
be absorbed by methods running on data sets where n ≫d. However, a method that aggregates the results of distance calculations (e.g., averaging) on a subset
of the data must contend with the set of unique phase shifts for every pair of time series in
that group, and possibly rephase individual time series before performing those calculations.
One may need to redesign the method to intelligently handle these issues.
Universal phasing is the global synchronization of the data set, after which, an out-ofthe-box anomaly detection method can be applied. The simplest universal phasing algorithm
aligns a set of times series by setting the maximum (or minimum) of each time series to
time t. Protopapas et al. developed a more robust version of this method that accounts for
noise . Rather than phase each time series to its maximum, the
method sorts the values of the time series and isolates the highest and lowest ten percent.
Those values are then separated into two clusters. Time t is set to the mean value of the
cluster containing the higher (or lower) values. For full details on how universal phasing is
performed, please refer to Protopapas et al. .
The drawback of universal phasing is that it does not work for all data sets. Speciﬁcally,
it will not work if the data set contains time series with multiple maxima (and minima) of
the same height (give or take noise). Under those circumstances, the phasing algorithm will
arbitrarily choose one peak and set that to time t. Similarity calculations will be incorrect if
performed on time series that do not universally phase well.
For some data sets, the general shape of the time series is known and universal phasing is
appropriate. However, for large sets of time series containing an unknown classes of objects,
the use of universal phasing poses a risk. The imminent release of the Pan-STARRS project
Mach Learn 74: 281–313
underscores this urgency. Billions of light-curves of unknown class are forthcoming. There
is no guarantee that the shape of all objects from this survey will meet the requirements
for universal phasing. Given the pending volume and diversity of this project, it is prudent
to use a method that makes no assumptions on the shape of the time series, and whose
computational expense already accounts for the cost of phasing.
PCAD, an acronym for Periodic Curve Anomaly Detection, is our anomaly detection technique for sets of unsynchronized periodic time series. PCAD does not use a reference data
set of normal examples. Instead, it uses unsupervised learning on a sampling of the data to
generate a set of centroids that are representative of the data. The local and global anomaly
scores for a time series is based on its similarity to this set of centroids.
We implement a modiﬁed k-means algorithm as our unsupervised technique. Our modi-
ﬁcation solves the phasing issue by rephasing each time series to its closest centroid before
recalculating the centroid at every iteration. Our algorithm, Pk-means, produces a set of k
centroids that are used to calculate the local and global anomaly scores. The end user may
sort the time series data according to his desired anomaly score and obtain a ranked set.
We ﬁrst review the k-means algorithm before describing the Pk-means algorithm indepth. We then discuss the computational expense of Pk-means and how sampling the data
improves the overall efﬁciency of PCAD. We then discuss the ﬁnal step of PCAD, outlier
score calculation, and provide scoring functions for both local and global outliers.
4.1 Review of k-means
Given a set of n data points, k-means begins by initializing the cluster centers to a set of k
points randomly selected from the data. It then calculates the similarity between each data
point and each centroid, (re)assigns each point to its closest centroid, and then calculates a
new centroid for each cluster by averaging the points in the cluster. The algorithm repeats
from the similarity calculation step until a convergence criterion is met (e.g., clusters no
longer change).
The time complexity of k-means in O(knrd) where n is the number of data points (or
time series, in our case), k is the number of centroids, r is the number of iterations until
convergence and d is the number of features, which in our case, is the number of points in
the time series. In order to run k-means, the user must either supply the value of parameter k,
or use a model selection criterion such as the Akaike Information Criterion or the Bayesian
Information Criterion to automatically determine an appropriate
value of k.
4.2 Pk-means
In Fig. 3 we show the pseudo-code for Pk-means. The initialization and cluster assembly
subtasks remain unchanged from k-means. Convergence is achieved when cluster composition does not change upon successive iterations. We discuss convergence in detail in Sect. 5.
Figure 4 shows the distance calculation subroutine used by Pk-means. For each time series x[i], we calculate maximized cross correlation between it and each of the k centroids.
We determine which centroid is most similar to x[i] and store the phase adjustment required to produce the maximum correlation. The centroid numbers are stored in the array
Mach Learn 74: 281–313
1: Pk-means(Time Series Set: x[], Number of centroids: k)
2: Initialize centroids[]
3: while ! AchievedConvergence do
best_centroids[] ←CalcDistance(x[], centroids[])
clusters[][] ←AssembleClusters(x[], best_centroids[])
centroids[] ←RecalcCentroids(clusters[][])
7: end while
8: return centroids[]
Fig. 3 Algorithm for Pk-means. Data structures followed by a [] denote list or array structures
1: CalcDistance(Time Series set: x[], Centroids: centroids[])
2: for i = 1 to n do
max_corr[i] ←0
for j = 1 to k do
(corr,phase) ←CalcCorrelationFFT(x[i], centroids[j])
if max_corr[i] < corr then
max_corr[i] ←corr
best_center ←j
best_phase ←phase
best_centroids[i] ←best_center
x[i] ←UpdatePhase(lc[i], best_phase)
14: end for
15: return best_centroids[]
Fig. 4 Algorithm for the distance calculation subroutine of Pk-means. Data structures followed by a [] denote
list or array structures
best_centroids[] and used for cluster assignment in the next step of Pk-means. However,
before exiting the distance calculation subroutine, x[i] is rephased according to the phase
adjustment needed to maximize its correlation to the centroid.
This last step is critical; upon each iteration, Pk-means adjusts the phase of each time
series. In k-means, the data points never change; centroid calculation is only affected by
cluster membership. In Pk-means, each centroid is determined by its cluster membership
and the phase adjustments of the time series in its cluster. Thus, Pk-means is not merely
k-means using cross correlation as a distance metric. Figure 5 shows examples of centroid
light-curves output by Pk-means.
As with k-means, the parameter k must be speciﬁed in advance. We search across multiple values of k and select the optimal k using the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC).
BIC is calculated according to the method outlined in Pelleg and Moore . The set of
centroids produced from this run of Pk-means is used to calculate the anomaly scores for all
light-curves in the data set.
4.3 Sampling and computation time
The time complexity of Pk-means is O(knrd logd) where n is the number of time series, k
is the number of centroids, r is the number of iterations until convergence, d is the number
Mach Learn 74: 281–313
Fig. 5 Centroid output of Pk-means. The number in parentheses is the percentage of the data assigned to
that cluster. The parameter k equals 3, 4 and 4 in these ﬁgures respectively. In our experiments, k is chosen
using the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC)
of points in a single time series, and d logd is the cost of computing cross correlation using
a FFT. Because d and k are independent of n, we can reduce the time complexity to O(nr).
Time series methods must be O(n) in order to scale to large data sets. At O(nr), Pkmeans does not meet this requirement. However, recall that the goal of Pk-means is to produce a set of centroids that is representative of the data. Given a large data set, it may be
possible to generate this representative set from a random sampling of size s where s ≪n.
This reduces the time complexity of Pk-means with respect to the overall data set size. Additionally, we can perform Pk-means (as well as the associated search for the optimal k)
ofﬂine. In Sect. 8.3, we present empirical results that support the intuition that sampling the
data to ﬁnd the centroids has little impact on the rankings of the anomalies.
The online portion of PCAD is simply the anomaly score calculation. A local and global
anomaly score can be simultaneously calculated for each time series in the data set. The
anomaly score calculation uses the FFT method of calculating maximized cross correlation
between each time series and the centroids output by Pk-means. Thus, the computation time
of the anomaly score calculation is O(knd logd) which reduces to O(n). Thus, the online
portion of PCAD is linear in the size of the data set.
Mach Learn 74: 281–313
4.4 Local and global anomaly scores
We calculate the anomaly score for a time series in relation to the k centroids returned by
Pk-means. If one seeks global anomalies, then the anomaly score for time series x[i] or xi
is calculated:
score(xi) =
where cj is a centroid, |cj| is the number of time series closest to cj, and n is the size of
the data set. The lower the score, the more anomalous the time series is with respect to the
entire data set. We use a weighted average to offset the inﬂuence of relatively small clusters.
To ﬁnd local anomalies, the anomaly score is the distance of a time series to its closest
centroid. This is computed as:
score(x) = min
After an anomaly score is calculated for each time series, the time series are sorted in
order of ascending scores. For global anomalies, the top m time series (where m is speciﬁed
by the user) are returned as the list of anomalies. For local anomalies, we isolate the top m
anomalies per cluster.
5 Pk-means convergence
In this section we prove that Pk-means, and its use of maximized cross correlation, does not
break the convergence properties of k-means. We ﬁrst review the proof of convergence for
k-means and then prove the convergence of Pk-means.
5.1 Review of proof of convergence of K-means
The following proof of k-means’ convergence has been adapted from Bottou and Bengio
 . Please note that we have slightly changed the notation.
If we review the steps of k-means, we see that each iteration begins with a set of centroids
W, which are either the k centroids k-means is initialized with, or the centroids calculated
during the previous iteration. Within each iteration of k-means, a new set of clusters C is
assembled based on each data point’s proximity to the centroids W. From C, a new set
of centroids W ′ is calculated, from which new cluster assignments, C′, are made. Thus,
k-means progresses from
W →C →W ′ →C′
We deﬁne the quantization error E(W,C) in relation to W and C as follows:
w∈W(xi −w)2
2(xi −wc(i))2
where xi is a data instance, w is the centroid in W, and c(i) is the cluster to which xi is
Mach Learn 74: 281–313
K-means converges if, at each iteration, the quantization error is non-increasing. To show
that the quantization error is non-increasing, we must prove E(W ′,C′) ≤E(W,C), or
2(xi −wc(i))2
To show that the error decreases between E(W,C) and E(W ′,C′), we demonstrate that
E(W ′,C′) ≤E(W ′,C) ≤E(W,C). This decreasing progression corresponds to the steps of
the k-means algorithm. The term E(W ′,C) corresponds to the decrease in error that results
after calculating the new centroids, while maintaining the old cluster assignments, where
E(W ′,C) =
The term E(W ′,C′) results after the cluster assignments are updated so that each point
is assigned to the cluster of its closest centroid under W ′.
In the k-means algorithm, the new centroids W ′ are calculated by averaging the points in
each of the clusters in C. This deﬁnition of W ′ is the one that minimizes E(W ′,C). We ﬁnd
the value for w′ ∈W ′ by computing δE/δw′, setting the resulting expression equal to 0, and
solving for w′:
where c ∈C. Since by deﬁnition W ′ are centroids that minimize the cluster assignments
based on the previous C, E(W ′,C) ≤E(W,C) holds.
Having calculated the new centroids W ′, new cluster assignments C′ are made with respect to W ′ to minimize the distance between each xi and its closest centroid w′
c(i), yielding
which means E(W ′,C′) ≤E(W ′,C). Thus, we’ve shown the quantization error decreases
at every iteration by E(W ′,C′) ≤E(W ′,C) ≤E(W,C). Finally, because there are a ﬁnite
number of data points and cluster assignments, k-means must converge.
5.2 Convergence of Pk-means using squared distance
We demonstrate that Pk-means converges using the squared distance metric. In Sect. 5.3,
we establish the relationship between cross correlation, the distance metric of Pk-means,
and squared distance.
Recall from Sect. 4.2 that Pk-means differs from k-means in two ways. First, Pk-means
searches across all phase shifts {τ}d−1
when calculating distance between a time series xi
and centroid w. Second, once Pk-means ﬁnds the centroid wc(i) and phase shift τi that
minimizes distance, Pk-means horizontally adjusts xi by τi and produces xτi
i . We refer to the
collective set of phase adjustments with respect to centroids W as T . If phase adjustments
are done with respect to W ′, we refer to these as T ′ and τ ′
In Fig. 3, distance calculation and cluster assembly are listed as separate steps since algorithmically they populate different data structures. However, distance calculation implies
Mach Learn 74: 281–313
cluster composition since ﬁnding the closest centroid to xi effectively assigns that time series
to a cluster. Thus, phase shifts T and cluster assignments C are determined simultaneously.
We represent this relationship as tuple (T,C). Thus, Pk-means progresses from:
W →(T,C) →W ′ →(T ′,C′)
In order for Pk-means to converge, its quantization error must also be non-increasing
at each iteration. To incorporate the effects of phase changes on the quantization error, we
deﬁne the quantization error for Pk-means as
E(W,(T,C)) =
i −wc(i))2
Thus, our goal is to prove that E(W ′,(T ′,C′)) ≤E(W,(T,C)). We do this by proving
that E(W ′,(T ′,C′) ≤E(W ′,(T,C)) ≤E(W,(T,C)). Before we prove both expressions,
we must derive the value of w′ ∈W ′ under Pk-means. This is the value that minimizes
E(W ′,(T,C)). Taking the ﬁrst derivative of this expression with respect to w′, setting it
equal to zero, and solving for w′, we get
The centroids W ′ that minimize E(W ′,(T,C)) are obtained by averaging the time series
belonging to clusters C but with the added constraint that the data are phased according
to T . This is exactly how Pk-means calculates the new centroids. Since by deﬁnition, W ′ are
the centroids that minimize the distance of the data with respect to (T,C), E(W ′,(T,C)) ≤
E(W,(T,C)).
After W ′ is calculated, we ﬁnd the T ′ and C′ that minimize the distance of each xi to its
closest centroid w′
c′(i). From this, E(W ′,(T ′,C′)) ≤E(W ′,(T,C)) follows. Thus, we have
shown that the quantization error is non-increasing under the phase changes of Pk-means.
5.3 Cross correlation versus squared distance
Having shown that Pk-means converges using squared distance, we show that Pk-means
converges using cross correlation by establishing the relationship between cross correlation
and squared distance. Recall the deﬁnition of cross correlation in (1). The following equation
demonstrates that, if the vectors are normalized, squared distance and cross correlation are
inversely related.
2(x −y)2 = 1
2(x · x −2x · y + y · y)
2(1 −2x · y + 1)
= 1 −x · y
Mach Learn 74: 281–313
We show that using cross correlation does not impact the calculation of the centroids W ′
by substituting the (negated) deﬁnition of cross correlation into expression E(W ′,(T,C)):
c(i)(t) · xi(t −τi)
−n = E(W ′,(T,C)) −n
Cross correlation changes the expression of E(W ′,(T,C)) only by the subtraction of n.
Thus, centroid calculation remains unchanged under cross correlation, and the convergence
of Pk-means using cross-correlation follows from the proof of Pk-means convergence using
squared distance.
Before moving to our experimental results, we describe the four time series data sets we
experimented with. Three are non-astrophysics data sets. The fourth data set is our motivating application: light-curve data from the astrophysics domain. We brieﬂy describe the three
non-astrophysics data sets, and discuss in-depth the source, generation and pre-processing
of our light-curve data.
6.1 Non-astrophysics time series data
The ﬁrst non-astrophysics time series data set, referred to as nose, was generated by the Walt
Laboratory at Tufts University. Each example was generated in the laboratory by passing a
vapor over a succession of sensors. The full data set contains eight classes (vapors) with
ﬁfteen examples each. The length of each time series is eighty time points.
The second data set, referred to as mallat, is a synthetic data set generated by Mallat
 for the study of wavelets in signal processing, and is available at the UCR time series
data archive . The full data set contains eight classes numbering
300 examples each. Each example is 1024 time points.
The third data set, referred to as landcover was donated by Dr. Mark Friedl of Boston
University. This data set consists of time series of satellite observations of the earth’s surface.
There are a total of 18 classes, with each example containing 135 time points. Note that the
class distribution is not uniform.
In the state provided to us, these data sets are perfectly synchronized. The reason they
were selected for experimentation is that they serve as examples of the shapes of time series
for which universal phasing does not work (see Sect. 3). We simulate the phasing problem by randomly rephasing (rotating) each time series. We then universally phase each
randomly-rephased curve to create the universally-phased version of those data sets. Thus,
our experiments are run on both randomly-phased and universally-phased data. The only
pre-processing performed on these data sets was z-score normalization, which was done
prior to the random- and universal-phasing.
Mach Learn 74: 281–313
6.2 Light-curve data
The source of the light-curve data is the Optical Gravitational Lensing Experiment Survey
 . We refer to this data as ogle. The telescopes used for this survey
capture CCD images of the night sky over time. Each digital image is carved into “tiles”
and the stars in each tile are identiﬁed by number. An astronomer converts the series of
image data for each star into a light-curve—a real-valued series measuring the magnitude
of light in each image and its associated observational error. In order to keep our algorithm
generic to univariate time series data, PCAD uses only the light magnitude measurement.
The result of not incorporating observational errors into PCAD is that an otherwise typical
light-curve with noisy measurements may appear anomalous. We take the observational
errors into account when the astronomers analyze the ranked output from PCAD. Because
this increases the time an astronomer must spend analyzing PCAD output, in future work
we will automate the handling of light-curves with high observational errors.
Because we work with periodic stars, we are able to transform the photometric time
series produced by the observing team of astronomers into a single light-curve in which
each period is mapped onto the same time axis as follows:
where T is the period, t0 is an arbitrary starting point and the symbol {} represents the
non-integer part of the fraction. This process produces a folded light-curve on an x-axis of
folded time that ranges from 0 to 1. In the ogle data sets, the lengths of the folded light-curves
range between 200 to 500 time points. The purpose of folding is to produce a stronger, more
consistent signal. Figure 6 shows an example of an Eclipsing Binary light-curve before and
after folding.
The data are pre-processed according to a technique developed by Protopapas et al.
 . We refer the reader to Protopapas et al. for an in-depth discussion of each
technique and its parameters. In brief, we conservatively pre-process the data using spike
removal, smoothing, interpolation and normalization. Spike removal and smoothing is used
to eliminate time points that are individually noisy, while preserving interesting features. We
use interpolation because PCAD uses a FFT, which requires the time points of each lightcurve to be uniformly spaced. Finally, we use z-score normalization to ensure similarity cal-
Fig. 6 An Eclipsing Binary light-curve before and after folding. Note that after folding the x-axis ranges
from 0 to 1 because only the non-integer part of the original time points are kept
Mach Learn 74: 281–313
culations are meaningful. The pre-processing done on the light-curves is domain-speciﬁc,
and not part of the PCAD technique. Whether time series from other domains must undergo
pre-processing is the decision of a domain expert for that data set.
The ogle data are folded light-curves, which we simply refer to as light-curves. Our data
sets consist of 1329 Cepheid (CEPH), 2580 Eclipsing Binary (EB) and 5327 RR Lyrae
(RRL) light-curves, with each data set containing an unknown number of anomalies.
There are some important characteristics of these data sets that have bearing on our experimental results. The ﬁrst is that the variance on the EB data set is eight times the variance of
either CEPH or RRL. The second is that despite CEPH and RRL being distinct star classes,
the shapes of their light-curves are very similar (refer to Fig. 1 for examples of both). Indeed, domain experts resort to other data sources to classify CEPH and RRL light-curves
correctly. Due to the similarity in the shape of the light-curves, time series anomaly detection
methods, including ours, have difﬁculty distinguishing between CEPH and RRL.
7 Experiments
Our main experimental goal is to justify the expense of PCAD by comparing it to a variety
of naive solutions. The second goal is to evaluate PCAD’s performance as an approximation of a published anomaly detection for light-curve data, and compare PCAD to other
approximations of this benchmark.
7.1 Alternatives to PCAD
Due to the lack of published alternatives to PCAD, we propose several anomaly detection
methods for handling large sets of unsynchronized data that are both simpler and cheaper
than PCAD. The ﬁrst method samples k examples uniformly from the data set to generate a
reference set of “centroids”, instead of running an expensive algorithm like k-means or Pkmeans. One can then calculate the outlier score using maximized cross correlation against
this randomly selected set. We call this method RAND-CC. Please note that for RAND-CC,
sample size and centroid size are the same.
Another alternative is to set k = 1 in Pk-means and generate a single centroid from which
the outlier scores are calculated. This solution, P1-MEAN, precludes ﬁnding local outliers,
but may be an acceptable solution for ﬁnding global outliers. P1-MEAN has a cost of O(n)
for both centroid and outlier score calculation.
Our ﬁnal naive alternatives to PCAD are KMEANS-ED and KMEANS-CC. K-means
is a viable alternative to PCAD when run on universally-phased data. K-means is clearly
cheaper than Pk-means because it lacks the logd factor required by the FFT. KMEANS-
ED uses k-means to generate centroids and uses Euclidean distance to calculate the outlier
scores. KMEANS-CC also uses k-means to generate centroids, and uses maximized cross
correlation to calculate the outlier scores.
As a ﬁnal point of comparison, we compare PCAD to the RI-DISCORD method described in Sect. 2. We implemented the brute-force version of RI-DISCORD, as we are
interested in comparing performance rather than computational speed. We also implement
RI-DISCORD using maximized cross correlation as the distance metric, which is equivalent
to the O(n2) measure of ﬁnding the minimum distance over all possible rotations. We deﬁne
discords to be the examples with the farthest nearest neighbor.
Mach Learn 74: 281–313
7.2 Benchmark and approximations
On the ogle data set we compare PCAD’s performance to a robust solution called PN-
MEANS . This is a method published in an astrophysics journal
for light-curve data speciﬁcally. It is also an exhaustive version of PCAD where k is set
to n (the number of light-curves in the data set) and no sampling is performed. The anomaly score calculated for each light-curve is the weighted average of its similarity to the
other n −1 light-curves. The weights are Gaussian, with the sample mean and standard deviation of the n −1 correlations plugged in as parameters. Note that PCAD differs from
PN-MEANS in the weights used for outlier score calculation. While PN-MEANS uses
Gaussian weights, PCAD uses proportional cluster sizes as weights. We decided against
using Gaussian weights for PCAD because PCAD calculates the outlier scores from a small
number of typical-looking centroids. Gaussian weighting is useful when the outlier score is
calculated from a larger, more diverse group of correlation scores.
By doing an exhaustive pair-wise comparison of the light-curves, PN-MEANS is the
most precise anomaly score that PCAD can calculate. Hence, we consider PN-MEANS to
be PCAD’s benchmark. However, because PN-MEANS sets k = n, it is O(n2). Thus, PCAD
is an improvement over PN-MEANS in terms of computational expense, rather than quality
of results.
We compare PCAD’s ability to approximate PN-MEANS to two others approximations
of PN-MEANS. The ﬁrst method, called Protopapas_n, is an O(n) approximation of PN-
MEANS that calculates the outlier score of each light-curve in relation to a single centroid,
calculated by averaging the examples in the data set . This is similar
to P1-MEAN except that correlation rather than maximized cross correlation is used as
a distance metric. The second method is RAND-CC, which can also be thought of as an
approximation of PN-MEANS. While PN-MEANS builds a n × n similarity matrix and
calculates the outlier score by doing a weighted Gaussian averaging the columns, RAND-
CC builds a r × n similarity matrix where r is the cardinality of a randomly-selected subset
of the data. The outlier score calculation for RAND-CC is identical to PCAD in that it is a
weighted average of a time series’ correlation to each of the randomly-selected centroids,
where the weights are the proportion of the n light-curves that are closest to each centroid.
We also created a second version of RAND-CC, called RAND-CC-GAUSS, which differs
from RAND-CC in that it uses Gaussian weighting to calculate the outlier score instead
of cluster proportions. We compare PCAD to Protopapas_n, RAND-CC, and RAND-CC-
GAUSS to show that PCAD is the better approximation of PN-MEANS.
7.3 Summary of experimental goals
Having described the methods to which we compare PCAD, we summarize our experimental
goals as follows:
• Evaluate PCAD’s effectiveness in comparison to the alternatives described above
(KMEANS-ED, KMEANS-CC, P1-MEAN, RAND-CC and RI-DISCORD) on randomlyphased data that contains a known number of anomalies.
• Evaluate the same methods on the universally-phased versions of the data.
• Determine whether PCAD is a better approximation of PN-MEANS than either Protopapas_n, RAND-CC, and RAND-CC-GAUSS on light-curve data containing an unknown
number of anomalies.
• Understand the effect of parameter k and sampling on PCAD’s rankings.
• Provide an astrophysicist’s analysis of the anomalies found by PCAD.
Mach Learn 74: 281–313
8.1 Data with known anomalies
We created data sets with known numbers of anomalies from each of the four data sets
we introduced in Sect. 6. To create data sets with global anomalies, we mixed examples
from three classes together. The ﬁrst two classes are the “normal” classes. They are similar
classes, and comprise 95% of the synthetically-mixed data set. The remaining 5% of the
data are instances from an “outlier” class, which is a class that is dissimilar to the other two.
We selected our class mixes either through domain expert advice or from visual inspection
of the data. For the nose data set, ‘hep’ and ‘tol’ were selected as the normal classes, and
‘decoh’ as the outlier class. For the landcover data set, we selected ‘Woody Savanna’, and
‘Cropland’ as the normal classes, and ‘Snow-Ice’ as the outlier class. For the mallat data
set, classes 3 and 6 are the normal classes, and class 7 is the outlier class. For the ogle data
set, CEPH and RRL are the normal classes, and EB is the outlier class. The sizes of the
synthetically-mixed global anomaly data sets are 32, 210, 1050 and 1050 for nose, mallat,
landcover and ogle respectively.
To create data sets with local outliers, we mixed examples from four classes. Two classes
are “normal” classes and comprise 95% of the data. However, these two classes are dissimilar and should not cluster together. The remaining two “outlier” classes comprise 5%
of the data. Each outlier class is similar to one of the normal classes, and dissimilar to the
other. Thus, each outlier class should be a local outlier with respect to one of the normal
classes only. For the nose data set, ‘tol’ is a local outlier with respect to ‘hep’, and ‘decoh’ is a local outlier with respect to ‘diesel’. For the mallat data set, classes 3 and 6 form
one normal/outlier pair, and classes 7 and 2 form another. For the landcover data set, Croplands/Woody Savanna form one pairing, and Open Shrubland/Snow-Ice another. Because
the ogle data set contains only three classes, it could not be used to create a syntheticallymixed data set for local outliers. The sizes of the synthetically-mixed local anomaly data
sets are 32, 210, and 1050 for nose, mallat, and landcover respectively.
Because we know that the true number of anomalies in each data set is m, we look at
the top m entries in each method’s output and measure precision. Because there are m true
anomalies and m reported anomalies in these experiments, precision and recall are equal.
Thus, we report only one number. We performed ten iterations of each experiment. In each
iteration, we created a data set in the proportions described above via random sampling. For
the global outlier experiments, we experimented with values of k between 1 and 7, and selected the optimal k values for k-means and Pk-means using BIC. For RAND-CC, we set the
reference set or “centroid” size to the value returned by BIC for Pk-means. For example, if,
for a given experimental iteration, PCAD calculated the outlier score against four centroids,
then RAND-CC will calculate its outlier score against four randomly-sampled light-curves.
For the local anomaly experiments, we set k = 2 to force the evaluation of local outliers
with respect to two clusters. P1-MEAN is omitted from the local outlier experiments because
it calculates only one centroid. RI-DISCORD is also omitted because it ﬁnds only global
We also demonstrate the effect of sample size on the results of KMEANS-ED,
KMEANS-CC, P1-MEAN, and PCAD by running both k-means and Pk-means with sample
sizes that are 5, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50 and 100% of the synthetically-mixed data sets. Because the
synthetically-mixed nose data set is too small to be sampled (32 examples), we ran Pk-means
on all thirty-two examples. We ensure that the same centers—in one case randomly-phased,
in the other universally-phased—initialize k-means and Pk-means for each experimental iteration. We performed the random-phasing by choosing an arbitrary time point in each time
Mach Learn 74: 281–313
Fig. 7 Precision vs. sample size for each data set synthetically-mixed to have global outliers. The x-axis
measure the percentage of the data set used in the sampling given to either k-means or Pk-means. The
left-hand column shows results for randomly-phased data. The right-hand column shows results for universally-phased data. Note that because RAND-CC and RI-DISCORD do not have a (P)k-means subroutine,
their results do not vary over the x-axis
series, and rotating the time series such that this chosen time point becomes the starting
point (time zero). The ogle data set is naturally unsynchronized, and has no need for random
phasing. Thus, experiments labeled ‘rand’ for ogle refer to the time series in their original
form. Universal phasing is performed according the method speciﬁed in Protopapas et al.
Figures 7, 8, and 9 plot the mean precision versus sample size on the randomly- and
universally-phased data sets of landcover, mallat and ogle. All results for nose are reported
Mach Learn 74: 281–313
Fig. 8 Precision vs. sample size for each data set synthetically-mixed to have local outliers. Results are
for local outliers with respect to centroid 1. The x-axis measure the percentage of the data set used in the
sampling given to either k-means or Pk-means. The left-hand column shows results for randomly-phased
data. The right-hand column shows results for universally-phased data. Note that because RAND-CC does
not have a (P)k-means subroutine, its results do not vary over the x-axis
in Table 1. Because RAND-CC and RI-DISCORD do not use k-means or Pk-means to generate centroids, we show their results as a straight line in each plot. Also, because RAND-CC
and RI-DISCORD use maximized cross correlation to calculate the outlier score, the results
for RAND-CC and RI-DISCORD are identical for randomly- and universally-phased data.
PCAD and P1-MEAN also use maximized cross correlation, but are not guaranteed to have
identical results between randomly- and universally-phased data because the intermediate
step of centroid calculation is done with differently-phased time series. Nevertheless, the
results are very similar. KMEANS-CC’s and KMEANS-ED’s results change more dramatically between randomly- and universally-phased data.
Our ﬁrst observation is that PCAD performs best overall. In global anomaly experiments,
it performs perfectly on the nose, mallat and ogle for both randomly- and universally-phased
data. On all other experiments, local and global, it is the best performing method with one
exception (the ‘lcl.1’ experiment on randomly-phased nose data).
The methods that perform most poorly are KMEANS-ED and RI-DISCORD. The poor
performance of KMEANS-ED is expected considering there is no attempt to phase the data
in either the centroid or outlier score calculation. Thus, its results are poor for both randomly and universally-phased data. Surprisingly, KMEANS-ED shows good results on the
synthetically-mixed ogle data set for global outliers. There are two reasons for this. The ﬁrst
is that it is very easy to distinguish EB, the minority light-curve in this data set, from both
Mach Learn 74: 281–313
Fig. 9 Precision vs. sample size for each data set synthetically-mixed to have local outliers. Results are
for local outliers with respect to centroid 2. The x-axis measure the percentage of the data set used in the
sampling given to either k-means or Pk-means. The left-hand column shows results for randomly-phased
data. The right-hand column shows results for universally-phased data. Note that because RAND-CC does
not have a (P)k-means subroutine, its results do not vary over the x-axis
Table 1 All precision results for the nose data set. ‘gbl’, ‘lcl.1’, and ‘lcl.2’ refer to results on global outliers,
and local outliers with respect to clusters 1 and 2
DATA GBL/LCL KMEANS-ED KMEANS-CC RAND-CC
RI-DISCORD
0.00 ± 0.00
0.45 ± 0.44
0.75 ± 0.26 1.00 ± 0.00 1.00 ± 0.00 0.45 ± 0.16
0.00 ± 0.00
0.50 ± 0.00
0.75 ± 0.26 0.95 ± 0.16 1.00 ± 0.00 0.45 ± 0.16
0.10 ± 0.32
0.33 ± 0.50
0.20 ± 0.42
0.20 ± 0.42
0.00 ± 0.00
0.00 ± 0.00
0.20 ± 0.42
0.40 ± 0.52
0.00 ± 0.00
0.60 ± 0.52
0.20 ± 0.42
0.70 ± 0.48
0.10 ± 0.32
0.10 ± 0.32
0.20 ± 0.42
0.60 ± 0.52
CEPH and RRL. This demonstrates that even a poorly-formed centroid may be good enough
for the task of anomaly detection. The second reason why KMEANS-ED has good results
on ogle is that the ogle data set universally-phases well. In Fig. 1, notice that a typical lightcurve from each star class has a global maximum. We hypothesize that KMEANS-ED has a
better performance on randomly-phased data at higher sample sizes because those centroids
tend towards a horizontal line. For global anomaly detection on this synthetically-mixed
Mach Learn 74: 281–313
ogle data set, a horizontal line is a sufﬁcient model for distinguishing EB from CEPH and
RI-DISCORD’s performance is not a reﬂection upon its ability to handle unphased data.
Its poor overall performance is due to the discord deﬁnition. These results demonstrate that
the farthest nearest neighbor deﬁnition is not sufﬁcient for ﬁnding the minority classes in
these data sets. The results may improve upon changing the discord deﬁnition to the farthest
distance to its k-th nearest neighbor, but one must know how to set k in advance.
The global anomaly results for KMEANS-CC on ogle also demonstrate that k-means’s
centroids may be good enough for anomaly detection. Those results are perfect for the same
reasons described for KMEANS-ED. However, for the data sets that do not universallyphase well, its precision results on randomly- and universally-phased data are similarly
weak. This is also true for local anomaly results on mallat, nose and landcover. The results for KMEANS-CC and KMEANS-ED show that bad centroids may be good enough
for some data sets, but the centroid generation of k-means is not robust in general. It is
certainly not sufﬁciently robust for local anomaly detection.
RAND-CC has perfect precision on global anomaly detection on the ogle and mallat (its
line is superimposed on top of PCAD’s and P1-MEANS’s in the ﬁgures), but performs below
PCAD on the landcover and nose data sets for global anomaly detection. It always performs
below PCAD for local anomaly detection. Also, RAND-CC always has a higher standard
deviation on its results compared to PCAD. RAND-CC’s random selection of centroids
averts the bad centroid problem of KMEANS-CC and KMEANS-ED, but leads to a higher
variation in the quality of anomalies found. Random centroids are clearly inferior to Pkmeans-generated centroids for local anomaly detection.
P1-MEAN is closest in performance to PCAD. Its global anomaly results are either perfect or nearly perfect on nose, mallat and ogle. However, PCAD has better performance on
landcover. The landcover data set is the hardest of the four synthetically-mixed sets. The
data have a high signal-to-noise ratio and there is a lot of variance within each class. Under these circumstances, PCAD’s multiple centroids model the data better than P1-MEAN’s
single centroid.
8.2 Light-curve data with unknown anomalies
In the next sections we move on to experiments with data sets CEPH, EB, and RRL. Because these data sets contain an unknown number of anomalies, it is not possible to report
precision. The reporting of precision would require our domain experts to examine the top
m list of outliers from each experimental iteration, an act which is too time-consuming. Our
experts examine a single set of results in Sect. 8.5.
We measure how well PCAD and Protopapas_n (described in Sect. 7.2) approximate PN-
MEANS by measuring the change in rank of PN-MEANS’s top m anomalies. Speciﬁcally,
we compare the rankings of PN-MEANS’s m most anomalous light-curves to the rankings
produced by either PCAD or Protopapas_n, seeking a minimal change in rank between the
two methods. For example, if m = 3 and PN-MEANS and PCAD rank the top three lightcurves at 1, 2, and 3, and 1, 6, and 7, respectively, then these light-curves have a rank change
of |1 −1| = 0, |2 −6| = 4, and |3 −7| = 4 respectively.
We ﬁrst show results for the detection of global anomalies on CEPH, EB, and RRL. We
experimented with values of k in and sample sizes at ten iterations each.
We then set PCAD to return a ranked list of 100 light-curves, and average the rankings of
the ten iterations with the highest BIC. Figure 10 shows our histograms of rank change that
compare PCAD and Protopapas_n to benchmark PN-MEANS on sample size 500 74: 281–313
Fig. 10 Histograms of rank change comparing the rankings of both PCAD and Protopapas_n to the benchmark PN-MEANS
arbitrarily). In all cases, PCAD’s anomaly rankings are much closer to those of PN-MEANS
than Protopapas_n’s rankings. Thus, PCAD is the better approximation of PN-MEANS.
Protopapas_n fares better on the EB data set because it is a higher variance data set whose
outliers are more discernible.
8.3 Effect of sample size
We also compare the quality of approximation among PCAD, RAND-CC, and RAND-CC-
GAUSS 74: 281–313
6.29 ± 1.67
69.50 ± 76.25
4.49 ± 1.12
20.86 ± 16.80
4.26 ± 0.57
14.26 ± 10.70
3.86 ± 0.51
7.82 ± 2.06
4.19 ± 1.86
4.54 ± 0.60
13.68 ± 6.37
2.22 ± 1.43
4.22 ± 0.43
8.37 ± 2.17
1.97 ± 1.11
4.05 ± 0.19
8.05 ± 0.95
1.20 ± 0.45
4.22 ± 0.16
8.82 ± 0.42
1.04 ± 0.25
4.22 ± 0.18
10.77 ± 0.72
0.78 ± 0.38
4.27 ± 0.10
14.72 ± 0.51
3.72 ± 0.80
8.96 ± 3.83
2.90 ± 0.53
8.33 ± 1.74
2.82 ± 0.41
7.63 ± 1.88
2.44 ± 0.27
6.42 ± 1.15
5.37 ± 1.01
2.73 ± 0.55
7.57 ± 2.31
4.46 ± 0.73
2.50 ± 0.22
8.04 ± 1.49
3.36 ± 1.27
2.28 ± 0.21
7.56 ± 1.22
2.35 ± 0.86
2.25 ± 0.17
7.64 ± 0.24
1.31 ± 0.35
2.31 ± 0.12
7.96 ± 0.70
1.29 ± 0.58
2.30 ± 0.09
8.34 ± 0.62
7.61 ± 1.17
10.62 ± 4.67
7.13 ± 0.85
7.05 ± 2.21
6.84 ± 0.66
6.26 ± 2.74
6.88 ± 0.53
8.03 ± 2.60
3.56 ± 0.75
6.87 ± 0.21
6.61 ± 1.28
2.80 ± 0.88
6.73 ± 0.36
5.30 ± 0.67
2.07 ± 0.33
6.72 ± 0.21
5.68 ± 0.57
1.55 ± 0.27
6.82 ± 0.19
5.65 ± 0.54
1.33 ± 0.40
6.78 ± 0.14
5.93 ± 0.63
0.99 ± 0.28
6.81 ± 0.13
5.88 ± 0.59
Fig. 11 Comparison of mean rank change of the top 100 light-curves of PCAD, RAND-CC and
RAND-CC-GAUSS on CEPH, EB and RRL using varying sample sizes (SS). For PCAD, sample size refers
to the size of the data set Pk-means is run on. Pk-means produces no more than ten centroids for outlier score
calculation. For RAND-CC and RAND-CC-GAUSS, sample sizes refers to the number of centroids that the
outlier scores was calculated with
sampled versions of PN-MEANS). In Fig. 11, we show the effects of sample size on both
PCAD, RAND-CC, and RAND-CC-GAUSS. For all methods, it is important to understand
how the term sample size is used. For PCAD, a sampling of the data is used by Pk-means
to generate a relatively small set of centroids. For both RAND-CC methods, the samplings
are used directly as the centroids for comparison. Thus, for the RAND-CC methods, sample
size and centroid size can be used interchangeably. For PCAD, sample size and centroid size
Mach Learn 74: 281–313
are distinct entities. The centroid size of PCAD is chosen by BIC. In our experiments, the
number of centroids that maximizes BIC is never more than ten.
We compare PCAD to both RAND-CC methods on a wide range of sample sizes (between 10 and 1000). The purpose of testing on smaller sample sizes is to compare PCAD
and the RAND-CC methods when they use a comparable number of centroids. We compare
performance at larger sample sizes to test the effect of directly converting the sampling intended for Pk-means into the reference set of centroids used by RAND-CC. Of course, at
larger sample sizes, the computational expense of both RAND-CC methods increases, approaching O(n2) as the sample size approach the size of the data set. Thus, it is not desirable
for RAND-CC to use too large a sample.
Figure 11 shows average change in rank between each method and PN-MEANS for the
top 100 anomalies. For PCAD, the results show that increasing the sample size used by
Pk-means improves PCAD’s ability to approximate PN-MEANS. At a sample size of 1000,
the average rank change of the top 100 anomalies is less than 1.30 for all star classes. Both
RAND-CC methods do not approach this level of approximation, even at sample sizes (really, centroid sizes) of 1000. RAND-CC-GAUSS, which differs from RAND-CC in using a
Gaussian-weighted outlier scoring function, shows extremely high variability at small sample sizes. This is because Gaussian weighting does not work well with small sample sizes.
Another observation is that the average rank change values do not decrease monotonically
for RAND-CC-GAUSS, though the trend is generally downward. But despite this downward
trend, RAND-CC-GAUSS never outperforms PCAD, even at sample size 1000. This is particularly surprising for the CEPH data set, where 1000 examples is approximately 75% of
the data. Independently, we veriﬁed that when the sample size approaches the actual size of
the data, the rank change does indeed converge to 0 for RAND-CC-GAUSS. So, even with
75% of the data set represented in the sample, the variability of the sample causes RAND-
CC-GAUSS to underperform PCAD as an approximation method. Our hypothesis for why
both RAND-CC methods underperform is that their outlier score calculations are exposed
to the effects of noise in the light-curves and variability in the sample. Meanwhile, PCAD is
effective despite using small numbers of centroids because Pk-means is able to effectively
mitigate both effects and produce a reliable set of centroids.
8.4 Effect of parameter k
We currently use BIC as a guideline for the selection of k. Figure 12 shows average change
in rank between each PCAD and PN-MEANS for the top 100 global anomalies over increasing values of k. The results show that a wide range of k does not greatly impact the rankings.
One might conclude from these results that the selection of k may be trivial, and one can
choose k = 1 and reduce the computational cost of Pk-means. However, our earlier experimental results comparing PCAD to P1-MEAN (Fig. 7) justiﬁed our multi-centroid approach.
Furthermore, a choice of k = 1 eliminates the possibility of ﬁnding local anomalies.
8.5 Astrophysicists’ review of anomalies
We conclude our experimental section with an analysis of the anomalies output by PCAD
by the astrophysicists on our project (Protopapas and Alcock). For the data sets CEPH,
EB and RRL, they reviewed PCAD’s ten most anomalous light-curves and categorized the
anomalies as follows: (a) noisy light-curves with high observational errors, (b) light-curves
that were misclassiﬁed (e.g., a light-curve in the CEPH data set that was not a Cepheid),
and (c) interesting examples worthy of further study. Figures 13 and 14 show some of the
Mach Learn 74: 281–313
Fig. 12 Effect of k on PCAD.
The y-axis measures average
change in rank from PN-MEAN
over PCAD’s top 100 anomalies
more interesting anomalies. Please note that we show the pre-processed version of each
light-curve for clarity’s sake, but our astrophysicists had the original folded light-curves as
well as other information at their disposal.
We ﬁnd that PCAD’s top anomalies from the CEPH data set have few true anomalies.
The light-curve in Fig. 13(a) is an example of a light-curve that lacks a strong period and has
high observational errors. As it stands, its slow rise and fast decline is atypical of Cepheids,
but its measurements are too noisy to deﬁnitively conclude it is an anomaly. The light-curves
in Figs. 13(b), 13(c) and 13(d) exhibit the wrong asymmetry and are most likely incorrectly
classiﬁed as Cepheids. The light-curve in Fig. 13(e) has a long plateau which is atypical of
Cepheid stars, and is most likely not a Cepheid. The light-curve in Fig. 13(f) is interesting.
The overall shape, period and color (which are information accessible to the astrophysicists)
are consistent with a Cepheid. However, its regularly spaced spikes cannot be dismissed as
noise, and may be indicative of an underlying dynamical process. A more careful study of
this light-curve is needed to understand its underlying physical process.
PCAD’s top EB anomalies all have eccentric orbits, and are justiﬁably ﬂagged as anomalies. Only the light-curve in Fig. 14(a) is not a typical Eclipsing Binary. There is either
a third body present in the system producing a second occultation or some form of atmospheric variation in one of the stars in the system. There also might be a large reﬂection
effect, which occurs when the side of the dimmer star that is facing the Earth is illuminated
by the brighter companion star, thus increasing the luminosity of the system . This light curve also warrants further investigation.
Among the RRL light-curves, PCAD identiﬁed two light curves that are most likely
misclassiﬁed. The light-curve in Fig. 14(b) has a quoted period and amplitude that does not
correspond to a typical RR Lyrae. Furthermore, it may not even be a periodic star. The lightcurve in Fig. 14(c) does not have a strong signal and has a long plateau which is atypical of
RRL. The rest of the anomalies are very faint objects that have the characteristic shape of a
RR Lyrae, but a low signal-to-noise ratio that causes them to appear different from the rest
of the data set.
Mach Learn 74: 281–313
Fig. 13 Selected anomalies (light-curve name and class appear below each ﬁgure). Note that the
pre-processed versions of these light-curves are shown for purposes of clarity
9 Conclusion and future work
This paper establishes PCAD as a method that discovers distance-based local and global
anomalies on unsynchronized periodic time series data. We use unsupervised learning to
generate a set of representative time series centroids from which the anomaly scores are
calculated. Our method is able to scale to large data sets through the use of sampling. The
online portion of our method is linear in the size of the data.
Mach Learn 74: 281–313
Fig. 14 Selected anomalies (continued). Note that the pre-processed versions of these light-curves are shown
for purposes of clarity
In future work, we wish to develop density-based anomaly scores and ranking methods
that are robust to variance within a data set. We also wish to validate our technique on
larger amounts of light-curve data. Speciﬁcally, our astrophysics collaborators will soon
have access to billions of light-curves through the Pan-STARRS survey. This data will be the
ultimate test of PCAD’s scalability. We also wish to incorporate the observational errors of
the light-curves into the PCAD algorithm, in order to fully automate the anomaly detection
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge Dr. Anselm Blumer and Dr. Roni Khardon of
Tufts University for their helpful guidance and comments. We also acknowledge Dr. Mark Friedl of Boston
University for the donation of the landcover data set, and Dr. David Walt and Matthew Aernecke of Tufts
University for the donation of the nose data set. This material is based upon work supported by NASA under
Grant No. NNX07AV75G, and the NSF under Grant No. IIS0713259.