BIOENGINEERING AND BIOTECHNOLOGY
PERSPECTIVE ARTICLE
published: 09 September 2013
doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2013.00006
A systems engineering perspective on homeostasis
and disease
Yoram Vodovotz 1,2, Gary An3 and Ioannis P. Androulakis 4,5,6*
1 Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
2 Center for Inﬂammation and Regenerative Modeling, McGowan Institute for Regenerative Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
3 Department of Surgery, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
4 Department of Biomedical Engineering, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, USA
5 Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, USA
6 Department of Surgery, Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick, NJ, USA
Edited by:
Xiaogang Wu, Indiana
University-Purdue University
Indianapolis, USA
Reviewed by:
Osbaldo Resendis-Antonio,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
México, Mexico
Zuxi Wang, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, China
Lifan Zeng, Indiana University, USA
*Correspondence:
Ioannis P. Androulakis, Department of
Biomedical Engineering, Rutgers
University, 599 Taylor Road,
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA
e-mail: 
Engineered systems are coupled networks of interacting sub-systems, whose dynamics
are constrained to requirements of robustness and ﬂexibility.They have evolved by design
to optimize function in a changing environment and maintain responses within ranges.
Analysis, synthesis, and design of complex supply chains aim to identify and explore the
laws governing optimally integrated systems. Optimality expresses balance between con-
ﬂicting objectives while resiliency results from dynamic interactions among elements. Our
increasing understanding of life’s multi-scale architecture suggests that living systems
share similar characteristics with much to be learned about biological complexity from
engineered systems. If health reﬂects a dynamically stable integration of molecules, cell,
tissues, and organs; disease indicates displacement compensated for and corrected by
activation and combination of feedback mechanisms through interconnected networks. In
this article, we draw analogies between concepts in systems engineering and conceptual
models of health and disease; establish connections between these concepts and physiologic modeling; and describe how these mirror onto the physiological counterparts of
engineered systems.
Keywords: systems biology, inﬂammation, trauma, systems engineering, humans
INTRODUCTION
Genome sequencing and high-throughput technologies have revolutionized our approach to addressing biological questions. The
advent of these methods has created the opportunity to perturb
biological systems and observe genome-scale cellular responses
 . Systems biology was
introduced as a means by which to describe scientiﬁc inquiries
through a global approach to elucidate, quantify, model, and
potentially reverse engineer biological processes and mechanisms
 . Systems biology has allowed us to address the question of how
cells behave as integrated systems rather than as mere sums
of their parts . Mathematical
formalisms have been developed that use mechanistic information and physiological knowledge to simulate behaviors at the
organism level and provide a mechanistic basis for pathophysiology . This development was, to a great extent,
driven by a desire to “. . . encourage [physicians] to make the
subtle but important distinction between [clinical] outcomes
and [biological] processes” . If health represents a living organism’s ability to maintain stability in the face
of changing internal and external environments, then illness can
be deﬁned as the failure to accommodate these changes . Systems-based research considers living organisms
as networks of dynamic components with identiﬁed boundaries
and rules that guide their response . Given the high
inter-dependence among the constituent parts of a living system and the non-intuitiveness of non-linear biological responses,
the living organism may be viewed as a structure sharing the
fundamental characteristics of “system of systems”: autonomy,
synergism, connectivity, diversity and resilience . This is not to say that biological systems are engineered
systems: biological systems are clearly distinct and different by
virtue of having resulting from evolution as opposed to design.
However, there are some similarities between their consequent
organization and that of engineered systems that can provide useful insights . For instance, engineered
systems can be perceived as coupled networks of interacting subsystems, whose dynamics are constrained to tight requirements of
robustness (to maintain safe operation) on one hand, and maintaining a certain degree of ﬂexibility to accommodate changeover
www.frontiersin.org
September 2013 | Volume 1 | Article 6 | 1
Vodovotz et al.
A systems engineering perspective on homeostasis and disease
on the other. The aim of analysis, synthesis, and design of complex supply chains is to identify the laws governing optimally
integrated systems. Optimality of operations is not a uniquely
deﬁned property and usually expresses the decision maker’s balance between alternative, often conﬂicting, objectives. Both biological and engineered complex constructs have evolved through
multiple iterations, the former by natural processes and the latter by design, to optimize function in a dynamically changing
environment by maintaining systemic responses within acceptable
ranges. Deviation from these limits leads to possibly irreversible
damage. Stability and resiliency of these constructs results from
dynamic interactions among constitutive elements. The precise
deﬁnition and prediction of complex outcomes dependent on
these traits is critical in the diagnosis and treatment of many disease processes, such as inﬂammatory diseases 
 . These units exchange mass and energy,
among themselves and with the environment, so as to maintain
proper function by appropriate physico-chemical transformations
of mass while producing and consuming energy. Around the
same time period, Cannon was beginning to lay the foundations,
based on the earlier work of Bernard, of the concept of homeostasis . This is a word of Greek
origin: ‘óµoιoς, hómoios, similar, and στ´ασις, stásis, standing still,
nowadays deﬁned as the “relatively stable condition of extracellular ﬂuids that results from regulatory systems actions .” Homeostasis posits that living organisms are composed of an intricate web of “alive” parts that exist in and are
surrounded by an internal (to the organism) environment. The
ﬁxity, or constancy, of this milieu intérieur (internal environment,
referred to the extra-cellular ﬂuids that provide stability to the
organs), and was thought to be necessary for a free and independentlife.Cannonpostulatedthatitistheregulationof homeostasis
that endows living organisms with the ability to evolve, adapt,
and survive. The importance of the homeostasis hypothesis was
the realization that “(. . .) the ﬁxity of the milieu supposes a perfection of the organism such that the external variations are at
each instant compensated for and equilibrated. . .. All of the vital
mechanisms however varied they may be, have always one goal, to
maintain the uniformity of the conditions of life in the internal
environment. . .. The stability of the internal environment is the
condition for the free and independent life.” These fundamental
concepts are still being studied and analyzed as we have recently
gained the ability to assess globally the nature of the “factors”
and “controls” at a cellular and molecular level. The terminology that is now used has evolved from the time of Bernard and
Cannon, and we now talk about the concept that the “mechanismsfor maintainingthisstability [of themilieuintérieur]require
sensors to recognize discrepancies between the sensed and set
of acceptable values and require effectors that reduce those discrepancies – i.e., negative feedback systems to imply the existence of control architectures
that dissipate disturbances so as to maintain“good health”(homeostasis). By extension, therefore, if good health reﬂects a dynamically stable and harmonic integration of molecules, cell, tissues,
and organs, then disease indicates displacement which is compensated for and corrected by the appropriate activation and combination of feedback mechanisms through interconnected networks
 .
SYSTEMS ENGINEERING PRINCIPLES IN THE CONTEXT OF
PHYSIOLOGICAL MODELING
In the setting of engineered systems, modeling and simulation
complements theory and experimentation since, with advances in
computational power, mathematical models enhance the ability
of engineers to manage complexity, to explore new solutions efﬁciently and effectively, and, potentially, to increase the speed of
innovation . This approach has had, arguably,
signiﬁcant impact in (operational or process) systems engineering, a speciﬁc ﬁeld of engineering that looks beyond individual
(sub-)structures and focuses on the design and management of
integrated supply chains and cycles composed of intricate networks of interacting components . Mathematical modeling has been used extensively in
physiology in the context of modeling speciﬁc functional structures such as organs and organ systems .
However, the principles and tools associated with the analysis,
design, and control of complex engineered systems (complex
supply chains) have only recently been utilized to investigate integrated physiological systems at the whole organism level , as the use of engineering concepts is becoming more
familiar to clinicians . Engineers have
used mathematical models to derive novel processes, to gain efﬁciency in existing processes, and to analyze trade-offs. In a similar
vein, clinicians have begun to appreciate the potential advantages
of model-based approaches for describing the true roles of individual components within complex biological systems, raising the
possibility of rational manipulation aimed at improve diagnosis
and care of patients. The sections that follow aim at discussing how
key concepts deﬁning the analysis of engineered supply chains
and demonstrate how these are slowly beginning to make their
appearance in the context of our efforts to better analyze health
and disease.
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | Systems Biology
September 2013 | Volume 1 | Article 6 | 2
Vodovotz et al.
A systems engineering perspective on homeostasis and disease
OPERABILITY AND FLEXIBILITY
Evolution has selected for living organisms with adaptive mechanisms to maintain constancy of the milieu intérieur in the face
of a changing external environment : physiological parameters are expected to remain within “reasonable
limits.”Exceeding these limits would imply either a response compensating for a deviation from the normal range of values, or
a need to activate a compensatory response .
If conditioning the milieu intérieur within its reasonable limits
corresponds to the normal operation, then deviations from that
(steady) state would result in, or reveal, a disease. Initial interpretations of this concept were qualitative in nature, since no exact
measures of stability were available. However, much as advances
in technology and computation have enabled a more accurate
spatiotemporal characterization of processes and plants, parallel
technological developments have enabled physicians to improve
their quantiﬁcation of “deviation from norm” .
The need to handle operational trade-offs often implies a need
for feedback control mechanisms that balance appropriate functions. This notional picture, characteristic of control architectures
in a plant , is equivalent to the mental picture Cannon had created in describing his homeostatic control
mechanisms. Flexibility also manifests itself in the ability of the
system to activate alternative routes to satisfy changing demands.
Flexible manufacturing systems allow engineered supply chains to
react to change by switching “machines” or “routes” (sequence of
machines). The timely bioenergetics switch from mitochondrial
ATP production to glycolysis is an example of the ﬂexibility in
the metabolic cellular supply chain in living systems . Therefore,“fast and smooth changeover”becomes a crucial
property of engineered and natural supply chains for maintenance
of homeostasis.
The idea of balancing objectives is a pervasive characteristic
of biological systems . In Chandra et al. , it
was demonstrated, in a manner that could not have been accomplished without the use of mechanistic mathematical modeling,
how glycolytic oscillations express an equivalent to the chemical
plant’s interplay between robustness and efﬁciency. The response to
stress is an excellent example of ﬁnding the right balance between
detrimental extremes: enough to eliminate the stressor but not
too much to damage the host . In the context of
adaptive immunity , expressed the need
for balancing between the beneﬁcial and detrimental effects of
noxious chemicals produced to eliminate an invading pathogen.
In a recent study on malaria, the authors suggested that the mosquito vector for the malaria parasite, which uses many of the same
immune/inﬂammatory mechanisms as the mammalian host to
control parasite growth and hence transmission, likely balances
efﬁcient killing with self-damage in a manner that also results
in oscillations in key immune mechanisms .
Indeed, the inﬂammatory response itself is a tradeoff between
over-activated response to an initiating stimulus (and attendant
self-damage) vs. inadequate response . This balancing
act often expresses competition among various objectives in terms
of resource utilization or potential damage to the engineered system. For biological systems, evolution provides a meta-framework
in which these trade-offs balance the relationship between longterm costs and short-term beneﬁts and manifest in the resulting
organismal control architecture that is“not designed by an engineer
but shaped by a process of tiny tinkering changes (i.e., evolution)”
 .
ABNORMAL EVENT DETECTION AND MANAGEMENT IN
ENGINEERED SYSTEMS AND IN HUMAN DISEASE
Timely detection, diagnosis, and correction of abnormal deviations from the steady state operation of an engineered plant are
all critical tasks, particularly if catastrophic deviations can be foreseen while the plant is still operating normally. The overall process
of Abnormal Event Management (AEM) has been the focal point
of active research in the process engineering community. AEM
involves a number of critical steps , namely: detection on an abnormal event; Identiﬁcation of
its causal origins; selection of appropriate control decision; and
implementation of said decision.
Notionally, two major approaches have been proposed for
addressing this classical ill-posed inverse problem: model-based
methods (quantitative and/or qualitative), which presume the
existence of logical links between state, observable, and control
variables; and knowledge-based methods, which do not presume
causal relations, but rather attempt to infer them based on prior
historical process data .
While diagnosis of a disease may not typically be described
using terms such as abnormal event and the corresponding treatment may not be considered an event management, the reality
is that physicians recognize illness by observing changes, or lack
thereof, in patterns of vital signs . However, a
problem with bedside monitoring is that observing the current
state of the patient is equivalent to recording points in a highdimensional space attainable from myriad different initial conditions (past history). Furthermore, the critical concerns from the
point of view of intervention are (a) at what state will the patient
end up in the future; and (b) what kind of interventions would
restore the patient’s condition or avoid undesirable excursions.
In an interesting analog to AEM, not only is the problem deﬁnition equivalent, but also the approaches utilized for monitoring
and treatment are similar. Emerging methodologies in the clinical
setting involve either an attempt to deﬁne, and solve, the inverse
problem using model-based approaches or an
attempt to reconcile the patient’s prior history and identify trends
in historical data, i.e., knowledge-based . The
importance of steps (ii) and (iii) above really deﬁnes the essence
of a physician’s dilemma, which aims at distinguishing processes
(causal origin) from outcomes (event manifestation) . Thus, early prediction of abrupt transitions, before noticeable changes in the
state variables, would be of signiﬁcant translational interest. In
that sense, we have explored the application of stability metrics
to studying homeostatic and acute response dynamics, including
how stability of the system changes with circadian rhythms. This
analysis represents a ﬁrst step toward identifying how the dynamical components of the inﬂammatory network can be leveraged
to predict forthcoming inﬂammatory “tipping points” as well as to understand system stability
properties more broadly.
DECENTRALIZED DECISION MAKING
Driven by increased complexity, tighter operational constraints
and technological advances, the control structures of modern
supply chains, deployed to ensure ﬂexibility, and operability, are
becoming more elaborate and are adopting plant-wide distributed characteristics. These developments have presented both
opportunities for a better overall management as well as challenges to the existing control theories and structures . At an even higher level, the process community has realized the need for integration beyond the plant,
thus introducing the concept of the “smart plant” . In such smart plants, the process, the plant, and
the corporation all participate in establishing operating procedures that properly balance the required trade-offs . Therefore, disturbances of any kind in an integrated
supply (including supply and demand, machine breakdown, policy decisions etc.) chain are detected and handled in both local
and integrated manners. The inherently distributed nature of the
way processes are monitored in real time introduced new requirements necessitating handling of asynchronous information ﬂow
 which, in
complex supply chains, implies the lack of a central (master) controller, and by extension the lack of a unique guiding goal (or
objective).
In an analogous manner, a living organism deals with threats
to its homeostasis via means of a multi-hierarchical system combining centralized and decentralized controllers . A number of interesting questions emerge
related to how the host senses a local deviation from homeostasis,
how the host measures performance toward restoring homeostasis,what objective function is used,how the magnitude of response
is controlled, and which of the various effectors are activated, to
name a few. When the host is faced with an infection or injury,
a complex inﬂammatory response is initiated with localized cellular and molecular responses aiming at locating the invading
pathogen and destroying or at least compartmentalizing it. These
pro-inﬂammatory responses are kept in check through the actions
of anti-inﬂammatory cytokines and hormones , as
well as fast-acting, centrally controlled neural-based mechanisms
 . Regional neural mechanisms
(so-calledcholinergicanti-inﬂammatorypathways) 
possibly providing direct local regulation of the inﬂammatory
response. Through the analysis of computational models encompassing multiple different pathways of anti-inﬂammatory activity, ranging from the local transcriptional response in peripheral
blood leukocytes to the more general central hormonal response
to inﬂammation, along with crosstalk among these pathways, the
relative contributions of these pathways can be assessed quantitatively and the potential for speciﬁc therapeutic interventions
can be evaluated . The
existence of a variety of levels of control has led us to hypothesize that loss of stability across any of these distributed levels
leads to failure of containment, and that multiple feedback loops
propagate the response peripherally and centrally; thus, host deterioration becomes a diffusible ailment .
VARIABILITY: FRIEND OR FOE?
The concept of constancy of the internal environment is not meant
to imply invariability, as one may have considered it to be in the
context of Kahn’s equivalent chemical plant. Rather, constancy
implies speciﬁc dynamic characteristics,manifesting themselves in
the form of “homeostatic rhythms”rather than a“homeostatic ﬂat
line” . The most recognizable rhythms are circadian,
which refers to biological processes exhibiting inherent oscillations
of approximately 24 h periods. Loss of rhythmicity is a key contributing factor to, as well as manifestation of, disease . Physiologic and biochemical homeostatic
rhythmicity induces a temporal predictability of endogenous controls which is “presumed to confer acute adaptive advantages that
likely extend to modulating systemic illness and solid organ function” . This is important in
that the dynamic characteristics of the communication channels –
that is, the characteristics of the milieu intérieur, – play a central
role in maintaining overall network stability. Thus, illness, either
organ-speciﬁc or systemic, might result in loss of signal variability
which in turn may further compromise adaptability , leading researchers to hypothesize that unnatural
patterns (i.e., ones that have lost rhythmicity), such as continuous
feeding , could adversely affect the host. In the
broader context of stress (any perceived threat to homeostasis),
optimal basal activity of the stress system may be necessary for a
sense of well-being, whereas either excessive or inadequate stress
activity can lead to pathological conditions . The
variability inherent in physiological systems is often driven by the
presence of negative feedback control systems which are critical in determining stability and responsiveness . Thus stability, movement among steady
states, responsiveness, and robustness are all intertwined.
In a series of theoretical papers, Chauvet argue
that the increased association among functional biological groups,
through communication via the ﬂuids in the extracellular internal environment, enables increases in the domain of stability
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | Systems Biology
September 2013 | Volume 1 | Article 6 | 4
Vodovotz et al.
A systems engineering perspective on homeostasis and disease
of a biological system. Expanding further on this idea, it was
subsequently hypothesized that disruption of inter-organ communication which results in uncoupling and isolation, ultimately
progresses to irreversible damage .
Theoretical analyses demonstrated such long range connectivity
could improve recovery . It has been
hypothesized that changes in the dynamic characteristics of physiological signals are reﬂective of the internal environment and also
of communication among organs, and therefore these dynamic
changes either induce host dysfunction or are themselves manifestations of host dysfunction . Thus,
illness,either organ-speciﬁc or systemic,might result in loss of signal variability which in turn may further compromise adaptability
 .
If the industriepalast is now considered to be an integrated
system which operates under the inﬂuences of a periodically varying internal environment in order to improve the stability and
operability of its homeostasis, it is worth noting that the idea
of operating chemical reactors under time varying conditions, in
order to explore intrinsic non-linearities, has been argued for a
long time. Ray recognized the implications of periodically
varying monomer concentration in producing less dispersed molecular weight distributions for the same average polymer chain
length. Renken discussed theoretical models of increased
selectivity in chemical reactors through periodic operation. Bailey
 nicely summarized these early theoretical results exploring
the hypothesis that (cylic) ﬂuctuations could in fact be considered
desirable operating policy and not necessarily disturbances which
ought to be eliminated through appropriate control actions. It was
later reported that better performance in continuous reactors is the result of operating under fast switching of
process variables vs. operating them at the optimum steady state.
At the heart of all this early work was the fact that non-linearities
induce dynamics that may beneﬁt from the presence of internal
dynamics. In the context of modeling components of the inﬂammatory response, we recently analyzed a coupled model of the
HPA axis and the glucocorticoid signaling pathway which, under
certain parameter regimes, exhibits ultradian rhythms in glucocorticoid levels propagating through to the pulsatile transcription
of glucocorticoid-responsive genes . Due to
the non-linear binding kinetics involved in glucocorticoid signal
transduction, oscillatory HPA axis output allows for the maintenance of low levels of homeostatic responses to glucocorticoids
while retaining acute responsiveness to stress, and furthermore
the level of peak stress responsiveness correlates with the amplitude of ultradian oscillations. It was hypothesized in Mavroudis
et al. that the circadian rhythmicity in cortisol secretion
plays an important role in maintaining synchronicity of clock gene
expression, thus establishing robust rhythms in the dynamics of
peripheral clock genes. In the context of a surrogate model of systemic inﬂammation we hypothesized that diurnal rhythms entrained by the cyclic production of the hormones cortisol and melatonin express the interplay
between inﬂammation and circadian rhythms. The mathematical
models reproduced diverse sets of experimental data and clinical
observations concerning the temporal sensitivity of the inﬂammatory response . This concept of a positive
association between rhythmicity, variability, and performance is
exempliﬁed in the context of heart rate variability (HRV), which
refers to the quantiﬁcation of variability in the beat-to-beat functioning of the heart. It was furthermore demonstrated that internal
rhythmicity does manifest itself at the systemic level through HRV,
while its loss is an indication of stress perturbing the host away
from homeostasis .
CONCLUDING REMARKS
Both physicians and engineers attempt to propose technical solutions to practical problems . In a physician’s
case, the problems are biological, and manifest at the clinically
relevant organismal level (i.e., a person is “sick”). A critical goal
of systems-based biological research is to convert novel insights
from basic science into clinically relevant actions related to disease
prevention and diagnosis, eventually enabling physicians to identify and evaluate treatment strategies . Integrated initiatives are valuable
in uncovering the mechanisms underpinning the progression of
human diseases. The advent of high-throughput technologies has
enabled the generation of massive amounts of biological data at an
unprecedentedrate,facilitatingadramaticincreaseinthedegreeof
quantiﬁcation applied to modern biological research . Despite the explosion of such high-dimensional datasets,
the complex, non-linear organization and regulation of biological systems too often defy intuitive predictions, and require the
development of computational models in order to gain an understanding of the systems’ functions .
Central to this integrative systems-based approach is the identiﬁcation of the critical components and interactions that give
rise to the emergent host response. Such computational models
are not, however, intrinsically useful in a clinical context, and
therefore they must be structured in manners that allow them
to both leverage clinically obtainable data and ultimately produce clinically useful predictions . In this perspective article, we have attempted to establish conceptual links between fundamentals principles in systems
engineering science and their potential links to theoretical models of health and disease. We hypothesize that these principles in
the context of the analysis, synthesis, design, control, and operation of complex engineered systems (and supply chains) mirror
themselves onto critical aspects of their notional physiological
counterparts.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Androulakis
acknowledges
GM082974. Yoram Vodovotz acknowledges support from NIH
R01GM67240,
P50GM53789,
R33HL089082,
R01HL080926,
R01AI080799, R01HL76157, R01DC008290, and UO1DK072146;
as well as National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation
Research grant H133E070024. Gary An acknowledges support
from NIH P50GM53789 and National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research grant H133E070024. Ioannis P.
Androulakis respectfully acknowledges motivation and guidance
from the late Dr. Stephen F. Lowry, MD, in whose memory this
article is dedicated.
www.frontiersin.org
September 2013 | Volume 1 | Article 6 | 5
Vodovotz et al.
A systems engineering perspective on homeostasis and disease