Neurovascular coupling to D2/D3 dopamine receptor
occupancy using simultaneous PET/functional MRI
Christin Y. Sandera,b,1, Jacob M. Hookera, Ciprian Catanaa, Marc D. Normandinc, Nathaniel M. Alpertc,
Gitte M. Knudsend, Wim Vanduffela,e, Bruce R. Rosena,f, and Joseph B. Mandevillea
aAthinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA 02129; bDepartment of
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139; cDivision of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular
Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114; dNeurobiology Research Unit and Cimbi, Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, DK-2100
Copenhagen, Denmark; eLaboratory of Neuro- and Psychophysiology, Medical School, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium; and fDivision
of Health Sciences and Technology, Harvard-Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139
Edited† by Joanna S. Fowler, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY, and approved April 30, 2013 
This study employed simultaneous neuroimaging with positron
emission tomography (PET) and functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) to demonstrate the relationship between changes
in receptor occupancy measured by PET and changes in brain
activity inferred by fMRI. By administering the D2/D3 dopamine
receptor antagonist [11C]raclopride at varying speciﬁc activities to
anesthetized nonhuman primates, we mapped associations between changes in receptor occupancy and hemodynamics [cerebral
blood volume (CBV)] in the domains of space, time, and dose. Mass
doses of raclopride above tracer levels caused increases in CBV
and reductions in binding potential that were localized to the
dopamine-rich striatum. Moreover, similar temporal proﬁles were
observed for speciﬁc binding estimates and changes in CBV. Injection of graded raclopride mass doses revealed a monotonic
coupling between neurovascular responses and receptor occupancies. The distinct CBV magnitudes between putamen and caudate at matched occupancies approximately matched literature
differences in basal dopamine levels, suggesting that the relative
fMRI measurements reﬂect basal D2/D3 dopamine receptor occupancy. These results can provide a basis for models that relate
dopaminergic occupancies to hemodynamic changes in the basal
ganglia. Overall, these data demonstrate the utility of simultaneous
PET/fMRI for investigations of neurovascular coupling that correlate
neurochemistry with hemodynamic changes in vivo for any receptor
system with an available PET tracer.
dynamic binding potential | displacement | monkey | NHP
he neural basis of functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) signals has been a topic of extensive investigation.
Experimental correlations of fMRI signals or cerebral blood ﬂow
with relative changes in glucose or oxygen utilization (1–3) have
been performed to determine whether hemodynamic responses
reﬂect a coupling with metabolism—a hypothesis with a long
history (4). To relate hemodynamic responses more directly to
neural circuitry, fMRI or optical imaging signals have been
correlated with electrophysiology, using graded levels of stimulation in preclinical models (5–7). These results generally demonstrate a monotonic coupling between electrical activity and
evoked cortical hemodynamic responses, using sensory stimuli.
However, the methodology is not readily extensible to human
subjects, and the implications of such studies are difﬁcult to
generalize to pharmacotherapies or other drug stimuli that target
speciﬁc neurotransmitter systems.
Recent technological advances in multimodal imaging have
enabled the simultaneous acquisition of MRI and positron emission tomography (PET) data (8). One of the motivations for
conjoining these modalities was the potential for new insights
into neural function based upon the complementary natures of
PET and fMRI. In activation paradigms, fMRI provides excellent spatio-temporal resolution for localizing changes in brain
activity but offers little insight into the underlying neurotransmission. Conversely, although PET has more limited temporal
and spatial resolution for functional measurements, it offers high
sensitivity and neurochemical speciﬁcity. Together, PET and MRI
measures have the potential to help clarify the neurochemical
basis of changes in fMRI signal induced by selective exogenous
ligands or endogenous neurotransmitter. Perhaps because combined PET/MRI systems have become available only recently,
there have been no reports to date that have dynamically compared the functional output reported by fMRI with in vivo occupancy for any neuroreceptor system targeted by a selective ligand.
The dopamine (DA) system has been a primary target of PET
studies due to its role in numerous diseases, including Parkinson
disease, schizophrenia, and behaviors related to natural rewards
and drug abuse. The basal ganglia present an ideal target system
for initial PET/fMRI studies of neurovascular coupling, because
this system has been studied widely in humans and nonhuman
primates (NHPs), using PET radiotracers that have been thoroughly characterized (9). fMRI signals strongly correlate with
evoked DA in rodents under some circumstances (10), suggesting that DA is driving the fMRI response. Stimulation of D2/D3
dopamine receptors (D2/D3R) produces inhibition of basal ganglia
in fMRI studies in rodents (11, 12). This ﬁnding is consistent with
G-protein–coupled pathways leading to D2/D3R-mediated inhibition of adenylate cyclase and cyclic AMP, a second messenger
in the ATP pathway leading to energy production (13).
In this study, responses of the dopaminergic system in NHPs
were assessed with PET/fMRI to characterize the dynamic relationship between hemodynamic responses and changes in neurochemistry. The PET ligand [11C]raclopride (RAC), a selective
D2/D3R antagonist, was administered at decreasing speciﬁc activities (i.e., increasing total mass doses) to evoke fMRI responses.
The latter were compared to receptor occupancy measures from
PET in the domains of time, space, and dose. Thereby, we test the
hypothesis that fMRI signal changes are correlated with DA
displacement in each of these domains. This study initiates a new
methodology for investigating neurovascular/neurochemical coupling in health and disease, using simultaneous PET/fMRI.
Fig. 1 demonstrates the basic paradigm and hypothesis employed
in this study. With a very low mass of [11C]RAC, the PET signal
is sensitive to available D2/D3R in the baseline state (Fig. 1A).
Due to much higher density of D2R relative to D3R in caudate
and putamen (14), [11C]RAC-speciﬁc binding is highly weighted
by D2R density in these regions. We hypothesize that increasing
Author contributions: C.Y.S., J.M.H., W.V., B.R.R., and J.B.M. designed research; C.Y.S.,
J.M.H., C.C., M.D.N., and J.B.M. performed research; C.C. and J.B.M. contributed new
reagents/analytic tools; C.Y.S. and J.B.M. analyzed data; and C.Y.S., J.M.H., C.C., M.D.N.,
N.M.A., G.M.K., B.R.R., and J.B.M. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
†This Direct Submission article had a prearranged editor.
See Commentary on page 10888.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: .
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1220512110/-/DCSupplemental.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1220512110
July 2, 2013
11169–11174
NEUROSCIENCE
SEE COMMENTARY
masses of nonradioactive RAC (decreasing speciﬁc activities)
displace progressively more DA, reducing PET binding at D2/
D3R, while invoking an fMRI signal (Fig. 1B). This is illustrated
in the temporal domain by simulations of a two-tissue compartmental model (Fig 1C): The wash in/wash out of RAC causes
a time-dependent displacement of basal DA from D2/D3R and
a reduction of available D2/D3R. However, pharmacokinetics
largely dictate the shape of time-dependent changes in speciﬁc
binding, which differs only subtly vs. mass until high occupancies
in simulations (Fig. S1 and Table S1).
Experimental PET time-activity curves (TACs) from ﬁve
injections of [11C]RAC with different speciﬁc activities in one
NHP [male rhesus macaque 1 (M1)] are shown in Fig. 1D for
whole putamen and normalized to peak activity, together with the
low-mass cerebellum TAC as a reference. As the total injected
mass of RAC increases, unlabeled RAC occupies progressively
more binding sites and thus reduces speciﬁc binding by labeled
RAC, so that putamen TACs start to resemble the shape of the
nonspeciﬁc (cerebellum) TAC.
Kinetic Modeling Results. We hypothesized that changes in RACspeciﬁc binding are related to fMRI responses under the assumption
that DA displacement drives the fMRI signal. Hence, we employed
two analyses within the simpliﬁed reference tissue model (SRTM)
framework (15): (i) a conventional steady-state binding potential
[binding potential (nondisplaceable) (BPND)] analysis and (ii) an
analysis based upon “dynamic binding potentials”, DBPND(t), as
deﬁned in Eq. 3 in Materials and Methods, to compare peak
changes in PET binding with peak changes in fMRI signal.
Kinetic model ﬁts are illustrated in Fig. 2 for three different
RAC mass doses in M1. Dynamic analyses (Fig. 2 B and C)
reduced the chi-square per degree of freedom ( χ2/DOF) and
Akaike information criterion measures for all ﬁts. Representative curve ﬁts comparing the SRTM and dynamic analysis are
shown in Fig. S2. Moreover, dynamic analyses of forward-model
simulations determined that DBPpeak
consistently produced
good agreement with true peak occupancies (Fig. S3), whereas
analyses based upon BPND did not consistently reﬂect peak
or average occupancies across all mass doses. For the low-mass
RAC dose, DBPpeak
values from both animals averaged 4.2 ±
1.3 in putamen and 3.8 ± 1.3 in caudate, while BPND values
averaged 4.3 ± 1.8 in putamen and 4.1 ± 1.9 in caudate. Average
2 parameters from the DBPND analysis were 0.93 ± 0.08
and 0.27 ± 0.30, respectively.
Temporal Correlation. Temporal responses from fMRI for whole
putamen are shown in Fig. 3 A and B for the two highest-injected
masses of RAC in one animal and are overlaid with approximations of speciﬁc binding (^S = CT −R1CREF), derived directly
from PET TACs. Using this speciﬁc binding estimate allowed
a direct temporal comparison of responses derived from PET
and fMRI data. ^S provides a reasonably accurate index of speciﬁc binding as modeled with a two-tissue compartmental model
(Fig. S4). The time courses of PET-speciﬁc binding estimates
and fMRI responses resembled each other, as time-to-peak
measures and durations were similar.
Fits to the fMRI temporal response and DBPND(t) were determined by varying the time-to-peak (τ) of gamma-variate regressors (t/τ · e−t/τ) to optimize the goodness of ﬁt to the data within the
general linear model (GLM). For both fMRI and PET data, χ2/DOF
values were slowly varying functions of the time to peak. All χ2/DOF
values increased by less than 10% across a 4-min window centered
upon the optimal value. Optimal time-to-peak values from fMRI
and PET analyses differed by less than 4 min for each animal at
the two highest doses, for which the fMRI signal was robust.
Spatial Correlation. Fig. 4, Upper shows parametric DBPpeak
from PET for four mass doses, and Fig. 4, Lower shows the
corresponding fMRI maps in units of percentage of cerebral
blood volume (%CBV). A P-value threshold of P<0.03, computed with a mixed-effects model (16) across two animals, was
applied to all CBV maps. For the lowest RAC mass, the DBPpeak
maps exhibited high speciﬁc binding and a high binding potential
in the striatum, but hardly any detectable fMRI signal. In
the voxelwise maps, 49% of voxels within the putamen were
above a value of DBPpeak
ND and 23% within the putamen exceeded
a value of DBPpeak
ND . Results were reversed for the highest RAC
mass dose, for which binding potential was very small, whereas
fMRI reported a large positive change in CBV. The peak CBV
response relative to baseline CBV averaged 9.8% ± 3.5% across
whole putamen and 4.3% ± 1.7% across caudate. Voxelwise
analysis showed that 45% of voxels within the putamen show
CBV>8% and 19% of voxels in putamen recorded CBV>12%.
The high-binding regions of the striatum and the neurovascular responses were remarkably similar on the voxel-wise
maps (Fig. 4). As mass dose increased, the speciﬁc binding signal
in the striatum decreased visibly in the parametric DBPpeak
images, whereas CBV increased from no detectable signal to a
prominent signal within the striatum.
Occupancies and Relationship to fMRI. Table 1 lists values for BPND,
ND , steady-state RAC occupancies ^θRAC, and peak occupancies ^θ
RAC (Eq. 4) for whole putamen from the SRTM and
the dynamic binding analysis, together with peak changes in
Schematic illustrating the basic PET/fMRI paradigm. (A) [11C]RAC
binds speciﬁcally to available D2/D3R in the baseline state. (B) Antagonism at
D2/D3R causes a positive fMRI signal, whereas unlabeled RAC competes with
[11C]RAC, decreasing the PET signal. (C) Simulations show the dynamics of
RAC and DA occupancy at D2/D3R, together with available D2/D3R, all
expressed as a percentage of total D2/D3R. (D) Experimental results show
changes in the shape of PET TACs for whole putamen, normalized to peak,
in order of increasing RAC mass dose (solid line to lines with light shading)
and a low-mass cerebellum TAC (dashed line).
time (min)
Radioactivity (kBq/cc)
time (min)
time (min)
(A–C) PET TAC for whole putamen in M1 (dots) for the lowest-mass
dose (A) and the two highest masses (B and C) with ﬁt to the data (solid
lines). DBPNDs (Eq. 3) (shaded lines), together with SRTM estimates of nonspeciﬁc (NS = R1CREF) or speciﬁc binding (^S = CT – R1CREF) are displayed over
time. Dynamic binding analyses demonstrated an improved ﬁt to data.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1220512110
Sander et al.
CBV for each RAC mass dose for both animals. BPNDs extrapolated to true zero occupancy for whole putamen were 3.3
and 5.0 for NHPs M1 and M2, respectively. These were computed from ﬁve (M1) or four (M2) RAC mass doses with the
Hanes–Woolf plot, in which 1/BPND is plotted vs. free ligand
concentration in tissue. The latter was estimated from speciﬁc
activity values and the ﬁrst 60 min of data from the cerebellum
TAC. On the basis of these extrapolated baseline binding
potentials, occupancies for whole putamen ranged from ∼7%
to 91% for M1 and from <1% to 82% for M2. The average RAC
dissociation constant KD across animals was 1.9 ± 0.6 nM [assuming a RAC free fraction, fND = 0.12 (17)], which is within the
range of literature values (18).
Fig. 5 A and B shows the relationship between peak RAC
occupancies and peak %CBV changes for whole putamen and
caudate in each animal. Data points were described by regression with a power law with two parameters: ða · ð^θ
RACÞbÞ. For
M1, the exponent b was 1.7 and 1.4 in putamen and caudate, respectively, with R2 values of 0.97 and 0.39. For M2, the corresponding exponents were 1.4 and 1.6, with R2 values of 0.99 and
0.88. The regression with a power ﬁt is concordant with a model
describing the relationship between DA and RAC occupancy
(Eqs. S1 and S2). If we assume a twofold increase in extracellular
DA due to RAC injection, model calculations and a corresponding power law ﬁt predict an exponent of b = 1.6 (Fig. S5), which
agrees with our experimental data.
From a regional analysis, we found that CBVpeak responses
from the putamen region of interest (ROI) were much larger
compared to caudate in both animals (Fig. 5). The putamen/
caudate ratio of the CBVpeak response at 80% occupancy, estimated from the experimental data ﬁt, was 2.2 ± 0.2. Including
the ﬁtted CBVpeak values for all occupancies between 50% and
100%, the average putamen/caudate ratio was 2.2 ± 1.7. Regional differences in receptor densities were 9% ± 2% less in
caudate, as determined by baseline BPND values. These density
differences alone do not provide an explanation for the much
smaller functional response in caudate.
We conclude that there is a monotonically increasing relationship between RAC occupancy and changes in %CBV that
showed a good ﬁt to a superlinear function. Moreover, the magnitude of the CBV response for all RAC masses exhibited a regional dependence within the striatum.
Discussion
In this study, we investigated the relationship between neurovascular responses and receptor occupancies, using simultaneous
PET/fMRI and variable mass doses of the D2/D3R antagonist
RAC. As injected RAC mass dose was increased, the reduction
in [11C]RAC-speciﬁc binding correlated with CBV increases in
the striatum spatially and temporally and with RAC mass dose.
These data suggest that vascular responses to D2R-like antagonists are coupled to changes in neuroreceptor occupancy.
By directly comparing changes in neuroreceptor occupancy
with a simultaneously induced functional response, we demonstrated an approach that can be employed widely using both
antagonists and agonists. This opens up the possibility of probing
mechanisms of neurovascular coupling or investigating brain
circuitry by relating selective neuroreceptor binding to local and
distant functional responses. Studies of this design can be used to
develop multireceptor models that describe the fMRI response
to endogenous neurotransmitter (19) to clarify the neurochemical basis of behaviors like reward (20, 21). Finally, simultaneous
PET/fMRI studies using targeted PET ligands may provide information about basal receptor occupancy, a quantity that is not
routinely measured by PET alone.
Regional Dose Response. The maps of DBPND and %CBV in Fig.
4 each showed localized signals in striatal regions that exhibited
a strong dependence on injected RAC mass. At low injected
masses, DBPND maps showed high speciﬁc binding indicative of a
large number of available receptors in basal ganglia, as expected. At
high RAC masses, speciﬁc binding of [11C]RAC was decreased by
competition with unlabeled RAC. However, fMRI showed progressively larger increases in CBV at higher-mass doses that presumably reﬂect transient decreases of DA basal occupancy at D2/
D3R. Because DA produces an inhibitory effect at D2/D3R, an
explanation for the increase in CBV is that RAC blocks the inhibitory effect of DA upon D2/D3R. Thus, fMRI responses were
observed predominantly in regions with high D2/D3R density.
Temporal Comparisons. The temporal response of the fMRI signal
closely matched the kinetics of [11C]RAC-speciﬁc binding estimates (Fig. 3). The temporal correlation is intriguing given the
numerous physiological mechanisms that could cause temporal
responses from the two modalities to diverge. For instance,
a large dose of an agonist might promote receptor internalization.
This mechanism has been suggested to explain the prolonged
decrease in raclopride displacement following infusion of a large
dose of amphetamine (22). With internalization, fMRI signal
should be shortened in time, so that divergent temporal responses
could offer insight into dynamic physiological adaptations like
agonist-induced receptor internalization. However, our data show
that a D2/D3 antagonist produces changes in binding potentials
and fMRI signals that are well matched in time, which is consistent with a classical competition model (22) between RAC and
DA for synaptic binding sites.
Neurovascular Coupling Mediated by D2/D3R Antagonism. In this
study, data showed a monotonically increasing relationship between changes in CBV and RAC occupancies in subregions of
basal ganglia. A postulate of linearity between tissue function
and receptor occupancy was proposed as early as 1937 (23). For
%Inj.Act./cc
time (min)
%Inj.Act./cc
time (min)
(A and B) Temporal responses from PET-speciﬁc binding estimate
(^S = CT – R1CREF, solid line), derived from experimental TACs, overlaid with
CBV changes (1-min bins, shaded circles) for putamen for two high RAC
masses. Time courses from CBV and ^S resemble each other.
Increasing raclopride mass dose
(Upper) DBPpeak
parameter maps from PET data, overlaid on an
anatomical MR atlas. (Lower) Maps of %CBVpeak change from fMRI data,
windowed by a P-value map with P<0.03. All maps are created from data
from two animals with a mixed-effects model. Similarities in the spatial
distribution of PET/fMRI signals and the dose dependencies support the idea
that antagonism of RAC at D2/D3R is elicited by the CBV changes.
Sander et al.
July 2, 2013
NEUROSCIENCE
SEE COMMENTARY
pharmacological stimuli, receptor occupancy is an important
synaptic quantity that underlies the genesis of a functional response. Moreover, correlations between hemodynamics and
electrophysiology have shown that vascular responses are monotonically related to integrative synaptic quantities like local ﬁeld
potentials and multiunit activity (5–7, 24).
As a basis for discussion of the observed CBV-occupancy relationship, we propose a model for the fMRI response: CBV
changes (ΔCBV) are driven by relative changes in receptor occupancies (Δθ) and are scaled by ligand efﬁcacies («), the local
density of receptors (Bmax), and excitatory/inhibitory neurovascular coupling constants (N). In a general framework, CBV
changes due to exogenous or endogenous agonists reﬂect the
sum of inﬂuences mediated by multiple receptor subtypes:
i=receptors
Ni«i;jBmax;iΔθi;j:
Antagonists like RAC have afﬁnity but no efﬁcacy at target receptors. However, RAC produces a physiological response by displacing DA. As a ﬁrst step, we adopt a ﬁrst-order (linear) approximation for our results that ignores any additional DA release
(ΔθDA =   −θRACθð0Þ
DA; Eq. S3 and Fig. S5) and Eq. 1 simpliﬁes to
ΔCBV = −N2Bmax;2θð0Þ
This description relates a positive ΔCBV to RAC occupancy,
basal DA occupancy, and Bmax via an inhibitory N2.
The precise nature of the relationship between θRAC and the
change in DA occupancy should be dependent on the magnitude
of additional DA release induced by the binding of RAC to
presynaptic autoreceptors (25). A classical competition model
predicts that changes in fMRI signal are insensitive to DA
release at very high RAC occupancies. At moderate occupancies,
increased synaptic DA will more effectively compete with RAC,
causing the relationship between DA and RAC occupancies to
become superlinear (Fig. S5). This effect may explain the superlinear correlation between RAC occupancy and CBV in Fig. 5.
Basal Dopamine Occupancy. As observed from the CBV-occupancy
plot (Fig. 5), caudate exhibited a remarkably smaller CBV increase than putamen with pharmacologic doses of RAC. The
proposed coupling model from the previous section provides
a potential explanation for this difference by showing that both
receptor density and basal D2/D3R occupancy affect the CBV
response. We can apply Eq. 2 to calculate the ratio of basal D2/
D3R occupancy between putamen and caudate on the basis of our
study data: Taking into account a small difference in receptor
densities from our PET measurements (9% fewer receptors in
caudate), this ratio is 2.0. Several studies have measured higher
levels of basal DA in putamen compared to caudate, using
microdialysis in NHPs in vivo (26, 27), with basal DA levels up to
2-fold higher in the putamen. Further evidence of higher basal
D2/D3R occupancy in putamen is provided by human postmortem (28) and PET studies with basal DA depletion (29); both
methods showed a 1.3- to 1.5-fold difference. Conversely, some
studies indicate similar levels of basal DA or basal D2/D3R occupancy in putamen/caudate (30–32). Our results suggest that
PET/fMRI measurements of this type offer the potential to
noninvasively assess relative differences in basal neurotransmitter
occupancy across regions or ultimately across subject groups.
Study Limitations. There are a number of limitations with this
animal model. Studies were performed in isoﬂurane-anesthetized
NHPs to facilitate the use of pharmacological challenges that
achieved very high occupancies. Hence, changes in basal DA induced by anesthesia could potentially affect the magnitude of
fMRI signal changes in this paradigm. Very high levels of iso-
ﬂurane (3%) increase basal DA in rats, but effects are not signiﬁcant at 1% isoﬂurane (33), as used in this study. In some
experiments, we observed large, transient, and repetitive changes
in fMRI signal that were consistent with isoﬂurane-induced burst
suppression, a noise source that would not be present in human
studies. Additionally, we employed an MRI contrast agent that
increases the magnitude of fMRI signal changes. With endogenous
contrast techniques, it may be difﬁcult to detect small signal changes
due to pharmacological stimuli. The MR contrast agent now has
been used for fMRI in human subjects (34), although repeated
within-subject measurements presumably would be restricted.
There are also limitations to our interpretation of D2/D3Rmediated neurovascular coupling. Our results and proposed
model are consistent with a neurovascular coupling mechanism
that is driven by occupancy as one aspect of synaptic processes.
However, we cannot exclude direct actions of DA on the vasculature that are uncoupled with neural activity. Our model
excludes other factors (e.g., neurotransmitter release) that also
Summary of parameters and outcomes of the PET/fMRI paradigm for putamen in two
animals (M1 and M2)
Study parameters and outcomes
Study parameters*
Injected RAC mass, μg/kg
Speciﬁc activity, μCi/nmol
Study outcomes
RAC occupancies† ^θRAC, %
Peak RAC occupancies† ^θ
Peak ΔCBV, %
0.5‡ ± 0.3
−1.1‡ ± 0.4
*Average values from studies in two animals.
†Occupancies are computed relative to dose 1.
‡Average CBV from repeated studies.
%Occupancy (θRAC
putamen=0.97, b=1.7
caudate=0.39, b=1.4
%Occupancy (θRAC
putamen=0.99, b=1.4
caudate=0.88, b=1.6
(A and B) %CBVpeak vs. occupancy can be approximated by a powerlaw ﬁt (with exponent b) for putamen and caudate ROIs for M1 and M2.
Data show a monotonically increasing relationship, with putamen exhibiting
approximately twice the CBV magnitude compared to caudate. Error bars
show within-session uncertainty from the GLM analysis and SEM for repeated fMRI studies with the lowest RAC mass dose.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1220512110
Sander et al.
could contribute to neural activity and changes in fMRI signal.
Moreover, neural pathways that project to a region of interest
may produce functional contributions that are not directly related
to local occupancy, although such situations can provide useful
information about neural connectivity.
Within the framework of an occupancy-based model like Eq. 1,
there are potential contributions to the fMRI response other than
changes in D2/D3R occupancy. We assumed a linear relationship
between DA occupancy and fMRI signal, together with a superlinear relationship between RAC and DA occupancies. Although
this model produces good agreement with data, there is no routine way to measure DA occupancy directly to verify the linear
assumption of Eq. 1. Additionally, RAC-mediated DA release
can cause a positive fMRI signal contribution due to stimulation
of D1-like excitatory receptors. To address this issue quantitatively, further studies will be needed to clarify the magnitude of
fMRI signal changes associated with changes in D1 occupancy.
Potential Clinical Applications. Clinically, simultaneous PET/fMRI
appears to have broad roles for diagnosis and monitoring of
therapy (35). On the basis of this study, one potential application
is the estimation of basal receptor occupancies, which are coupled to basal neurotransmitter levels. Basal occupancies are not
routinely measurable by PET alone unless neurotransmitter is
fully depleted from the brain. DA depletion studies have
employed PET to assess differences in basal D2/D3R occupancy
in patient and control populations (36). Although such studies
have helped clarify important aspects of basal DA function, depletion can produce motor dysfunction and “a whole spectrum of
psychiatric symptoms” (ref. 37, p. 1755). Other methodological
concerns include incomplete depletion and receptor externalization or up-regulation (38). More tolerable methods for assessing
basal occupancy might facilitate the identiﬁcation of therapeutic
correlates of basal occupancy, following paths established for
D2/D3R occupancy by antipsychotics (39).
In this PET/fMRI study, the DA-bound receptor population
was unmasked transiently by antagonist displacement rather than
by depletion. If studies demonstrate sufﬁcient reproducibility/
speciﬁcity, a single injection of an antagonist could in principle
provide a relative index of basal occupancy for use in crosssectional studies. D2/D3R antagonist doses would need to produce measurable fMRI signals in humans while avoiding the
noxious side effects that accompany occupancies above the
“therapeutic window” of 70–80% for antipsychotics (40).
Conclusions
We demonstrated an imaging methodology in which a PET antagonist can be administered at pharmacologic doses to measure
neurovascular responses simultaneously with receptor occupancy.
By measuring cerebral responses using different speciﬁc activities
of [11C]raclopride with PET/fMRI, we observed that the signals
from both modalities correlated in anatomical and temporal
domains. Our results suggest a monotonic coupling relationship
between neurovascular responses and dopamine D2/D3R occupancy in basal ganglia across a wide dynamic range. We observed
distinct relative CBV magnitudes between putamen and caudate,
consistent with higher basal dopamine levels in putamen. These
results demonstrate that the concurrent assessment of hemodynamics and receptor-speciﬁc neurotransmission with simultaneous PET/fMRI offers unique possibilities for performing
dynamic neurotransmitter mapping and understanding distributed functions of the brain in preclinical and clinical studies.
Materials and Methods
Animal Studies. Two male rhesus macaques, M1 (7 y) and M2 (5 y) with mean
weight of 11.7 kg and 7.5 kg underwent imaging. Anesthesia was induced
with ketamine (20 mg/kg ketamine with 0.4 mg/kg diazepam or 10 mg/kg
ketamine with 0.5 mg/kg xylazene), and a catheter for injections was placed
in the saphenous vein. During scans, anesthesia was maintained by isoﬂurane
(0.8–1.5%, mixed with pure oxygen) through an intubation tube without
ventilation. Physiological changes (blood pressure, pulse, end-tidal CO2, and
breathing rate) were monitored continuously throughout the experiment.
The procedures complied with the regulations of the Subcommittee on
Research Animal Care at Massachusetts General Hospital.
Study Design. Four different RAC mass doses were administered by bolus
injection to two animals (Table 1). Injections of high-mass doses of RAC were
separated by at least 2 wk. Additionally, ﬁve low-mass dose studies (three
with M1 and two with M2) were acquired to compute average low-dose
fMRI signals. An additional mass dose of RAC (1.4 μg/kg) was administered to
M1 during a PET-only scan and used in the KD computation for M1. For each
scan, 4.6–6.6 mCi of [11C]RAC was administered intravenously over ∼30 s.
[11C]RAC was synthesized from the O-desmethyl RAC precursor and [11C]
methyl iodide. The synthesis and subsequent puriﬁcation by high-performance liquid chromatography were performed according to ref. 41 with
minor modiﬁcations. To vary the speciﬁc activity and total mass for the ﬁve
studies, unlabeled RAC was added after synthesis to the saline formulation
to obtain the speciﬁc activities in Table 1.
PET/fMRI Image Acquisition. Simultaneous dynamic PET/fMRI scans were acquired on a research-dedicated human PET/MR scanner, which consists of a 3 T
MRI scanner (MAGNETOM Trio, Tim system; Siemens AG, Healthcare Sector)
and an MR-compatible PET insert (BrainPET; Siemens AG, Healthcare Sector).
A vendor-supplied circularly polarized local transmit birdcage coil with an
eight-channel receive array was used for MR imaging in animal M1. A smaller,
more sensitive custom-built eight-channel NHP receive array was used for
imaging animal M2. The phased-array receivers enabled a twofold acceleration with GRAPPA (42) in the anterior–posterior direction to reduce the
echo time (TE) (TE = 23 ms) and image distortions during fMRI. We employed
multislice echo-planar imaging with whole-brain coverage and an isotropic
resolution of 1.3 mm (MR ﬁeld of view = 110 × 72.8 mm2, bandwidth = 1,350
Hz/pixel) with a temporal resolution (TR) of 3 s. Prior to fMRI, ferumoxytol
(Feraheme; AMAG Pharmaceuticals) (43) was administered intravenously at
10 mg/kg to improve fMRI detection power (44). Dynamic acquisition of fMRI
images started ∼20 min before RAC injection and lasted ∼90 min in total.
PET emission data were acquired in list-mode format for 90 min starting
with ligand injection and sorted in the line-of-response space. Images were
reconstructed with the ordinary Poisson expectation maximization algorithm
with 32 iterations. With the PET camera used in this study, the highest image
resolution was on the order of 2–3 mm (45). Corrections for scatter and
attenuation of the head and the radiofrequency coil were applied during
reconstruction as described in ref. 46. The ﬁnal reconstructed volume consisted of 76 slices with 128 × 128 pixels (2.5-mm isotropic voxels), with
framing intervals of 10 × 30 s, followed by 85 × 1 min.
fMRI Data Analysis. fMRI (and PET) data were registered to the Saleem–Logothetis stereotaxic space (47), using a population-averaged MRI-based template for rhesus monkey brain (48). Prior to statistical analysis using the GLM,
fMRI data were spatially smoothed with a 2.5-mm Gaussian kernel to correspond approximately to the PET resolution. A gamma-variate function modeled the fMRI temporal response to RAC infusion. The time-to-peak response
of the gamma function was adjusted to minimize the χ2/DOF of the GLM ﬁt to
data for mass doses 2–4 (Table 1). The speciﬁc binding signal from PET deﬁned
the time to peak for the lowest-mass dose, which did not produce observable
changes in fMRI signal. Maximum changes in fMRI signal were deﬁned as peak
magnitudes of the gamma-variate regressor scaled by the GLM. These values
were converted to changes in %CBV, using standard methods (49).
PET Data Analysis. By convention, BPND is deﬁned at steady-state concentration (50) under the assumption that speciﬁc binding has no time dependence. However, binding is not constant in time in this (Fig. 1) or other
challenge protocols, so that it is unclear how BPND relates to dynamic fMRI
measures. Nevertheless, we report BPND values, using a conventional analysis
to facilitate literature comparisons. Additionally, we employed an alternative analysis that explicitly incorporates time dependence into occupancy
estimates and allows the comparison of peak occupancy with peak CBV
measures. We thus deﬁned a related binding-dependent quantity, the dynamic binding potential, DBPND(t):
DBPNDðtÞ ≡R1 · k′2
k2aðtÞ −1:
DBPND(t) was determined using a time-dependent parameter k2aðtÞ =
k2a + k2aγðt=τ · eð1−t=τÞÞ from the SRTM (51, 52). This enabled computation of
peak occupancies:
Sander et al.
July 2, 2013
NEUROSCIENCE
SEE COMMENTARY
The term DBPpeak
(e.g., Table 1) is the DBPND value that corresponds to the
peak occupancy as deﬁned in Eq. 4.
PET data were analyzed using the cerebellum ROI as a reference region,
where D2/D3R concentration has been reported to be 103 times smaller than
in putamen (53). Although nonnegligible speciﬁc binding to D2/D3R may be
detectable with other ultrahigh-afﬁnity ligands, [11C]RAC has negligible
speciﬁc binding in the cerebellum (54). BPND values were obtained with the
multilinear reference tissue model (MRTM) (55), using the standard three
independent parameters R1, k2a, and k′
2. Alternatively, we employed the
two-parameter MRTM2 (55) and included the time-varying parameter k2a(t),
following existing methods (51, 52). This dynamic analysis was applied to
determine peak RAC occupancy ^θ
RAC from Eq. 4, using the maximum value
of the k2a(t) curve. Simulations demonstrated that MRTM2 with a timedependent k2a(t) provides a more accurate determination of peak occupancy
than the conventional three-parameter implementation of SRTM for large
doses of RAC (Fig. S3). Speciﬁc binding estimates were derived by subtracting
cerebellum TACs from other ROIs after inclusion of the R1 term from SRTM:
^S = CT −R1CREF. Parametric images were generated using voxel-wise modeling
based upon publicly available software (www.nitrc.org/projects/jip).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Helen Deng, Steve Carlin, Chris Moseley,
Grae Arabasz, and Shirley Hsu for their help with animal preparation and
monitoring, [11C]RAC synthesis, and PET/MR scanning. National Institutes
of Health Grants R90DA023427, P41RR14075, P30DA28800, S10RR026666,
S10RR017208, S10RR022976, and S10RR019933 supported this research.
1. Fox PT, Raichle ME, Mintun MA, Dence C Nonoxidative glucose consumption
during focal physiologic neural activity. Science 241(4864):462–464.
2. Davis TL, Kwong KK, Weisskoff RM, Rosen BR Calibrated functional MRI: Mapping
the dynamics of oxidative metabolism. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95(4):1834–1839.
3. Hoge RD, et al. Linear coupling between cerebral blood ﬂow and oxygen
consumption in activated human cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96(16):9403–9408.
4. Roy CS, Sherrington CS (1890) On the regulation of the blood-supply of the brain.
J Physiol 11(1–2):85–158.17.
5. Logothetis NK, Pauls J, Augath M, Trinath T, Oeltermann A Neurophysiological
investigation of the basis of the fMRI signal. Nature 412(6843):150–157.
6. Devor A, et al. Coupling of total hemoglobin concentration, oxygenation, and
neural activity in rat somatosensory cortex. Neuron 39(2):353–359.
7. Sheth SA, et al. Linear and nonlinear relationships between neuronal activity,
oxygen metabolism, and hemodynamic responses. Neuron 42(2):347–355.
8. Judenhofer MS, et al. Simultaneous PET-MRI: A new approach for functional
and morphological imaging. Nat Med 14(4):459–465.
9. Elsinga PH, Hatano K, Ishiwata K PET tracers for imaging of the dopaminergic
system. Curr Med Chem 13(18):2139–2153.
10. Chen YI, et al. Detection of dopaminergic cell loss and neural transplantation using
pharmacological MRI, PET and behavioral assessment. Neuroreport 10(14):2881–2886.
11. Chen Y-C, Choi J-K, Andersen SL, Rosen BR, Jenkins BG Mapping dopamine
D2/D3 receptor function using pharmacological magnetic resonance imaging. Psychopharmacology 180(4):705–715.
12. Choi J-K, Chen YI, Hamel E, Jenkins BG Brain hemodynamic changes mediated
by dopamine receptors: Role of the cerebral microvasculature in dopamine-mediated
neurovascular coupling. Neuroimage 30(3):700–712.
13. Traynor JR, Neubig RR Regulators of G protein signaling & drugs of abuse. Mol
Interv 5(1):30–41.
14. Rabiner EA, et al. In vivo quantiﬁcation of regional dopamine-D3 receptor
binding potential of (+)-PHNO: Studies in non-human primates and transgenic mice.
Synapse 63(9):782–793.
15. Lammertsma AA, Hume SP Simpliﬁed reference tissue model for PET receptor
studies. Neuroimage 4(3 Pt 1):153–158.
16. Worsley KJ, et al. A general statistical analysis for fMRI data. Neuroimage 15(1):1–15.
17. Carson RE, et al. Quantiﬁcation of amphetamine-induced changes in [11C]raclopride binding with continuous infusion. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 17(4):437–447.
18. Narendran R, et al. Measurement of the proportion of D2 receptors conﬁgured
in state of high afﬁnity for agonists in vivo: A positron emission tomography study
using [11C]N-propyl-norapomorphine and [11C]raclopride in baboons. J Pharmacol
Exp Ther 315(1):80–90.
19. Mandeville JB, et al. A receptor-based model for dopamine-induced fMRI
signal. Neuroimage 75C:46–57.
20. Urban NBL, et al. Imaging human reward processing with positron emission tomography and functional magnetic resonance imaging. Psychopharmacology 221(1):
21. Schott BH, et al. Mesolimbic functional magnetic resonance imaging activations during reward anticipation correlate with reward-related ventral striatal dopamine release. J Neurosci 28(52):14311–14319.
22. Laruelle M Imaging synaptic neurotransmission with in vivo binding competition techniques: A critical review. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 20(3):423–451.
23. Clark AJ General Pharmacology (Springer, Berlin), pp 61–98, 176–206, and 215–217.
24. Ekstrom A How and when the fMRI BOLD signal relates to underlying neural
activity: The danger in dissociation. Brain Res Brain Res Rev 62(2):233–244.
25. Hertel P, Fagerquist MV, Svensson TH Enhanced cortical dopamine output and
antipsychotic-like effects of raclopride by alpha2 adrenoceptor blockade. Science
286(5437):105–107.
26. Skirboll S, Wang J, Mefford I, Hsiao J, Bankiewicz KS In vivo changes of catecholamines in hemiparkinsonian monkeys measured by microdialysis. Exp Neurol
110(2):187–193.
27. PiﬂC, Hornykiewicz O Dopamine turnover is upregulated in the caudate/
putamen of asymptomatic MPTP-treated rhesus monkeys. Neurochem Int 49(5):519–524.
28. Goldstein DS, et al. Catechols in post-mortem brain of patients with Parkinson
disease. Eur J Neurol 18(5):703–710.
29. Riccardi P, et al. Estimation of baseline dopamine D2 receptor occupancy in
striatum and extrastriatal regions in humans with positron emission tomography with
[18F] fallypride. Biol Psychiatry 63(2):241–244.
30. Kegeles LS, et al. Increased synaptic dopamine function in associative regions
of the striatum in schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry 67(3):231–239.
31. Martinez D, et al. Lower level of endogenous dopamine in patients with cocaine dependence: Findings from PET imaging of D(2)/D(3) receptors following acute
dopamine depletion. Am J Psychiatry 166(10):1170–1177.
32. Morissette M, Di Paolo T Effect of estradiol on striatal dopamine activity of
female hemiparkinsonian monkeys. J Neurosci Res 87(7):1634–1644.
33. Adachi YU, et al. Isoﬂurane anesthesia induces biphasic effect on dopamine
release in the rat striatum. Brain Res Bull 67(3):176–181.
34. Qiu D, Zaharchuk G, Christen T, Ni WW, Moseley ME Contrast-enhanced
functional blood volume imaging (CE-fBVI): Enhanced sensitivity for brain activation
in humans using the ultrasmall superparamagnetic iron oxide agent ferumoxytol.
Neuroimage 62(3):1726–1731.
35. Catana C, Drzezga A, Heiss W-D, Rosen BR PET/MRI for neurologic applications.
J Nucl Med 53(12):1916–1925.
36. Booij L, Van der Does AJ, Riedel WJ Monoamine depletion in psychiatric and
healthy populations: Review. Mol Psychiatry 8(12):951–973.
37. de Haan L, Booij J, Lavalye J, van Amelsvoort T, Linszen D Subjective experiences during dopamine depletion. Am J Psychiatry 162(9):1755.
38. Guo N, et al. Dopamine depletion and in vivo binding of PET D1 receptor radioligands: Implications for imaging studies in schizophrenia. Neuropsychopharmacology
28(9):1703–1711.
39. Uchida H, et al. Dopamine D2 receptor occupancy and clinical effects: A systematic review and pooled analysis. J Clin Psychopharmacol 31(4):497–502.
40. Nord M, Farde L Antipsychotic occupancy of dopamine receptors in schizophrenia. CNS Neurosci Ther 17(2):97–103.
41. Farde L, et al. Substituted benzamides as ligands for visualization of dopamine
receptor binding in the human brain by positron emission tomography. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 82(11):3863–3867.
42. Griswold MA, et al. Generalized autocalibrating partially parallel acquisitions
(GRAPPA). Magn Reson Med 47(6):1202–1210.
43. Bernd H, De Kerviler E, Gaillard S, Bonnemain B Safety and tolerability of ultrasmall superparamagnetic iron oxide contrast agent: Comprehensive analysis of
a clinical development program. Invest Radiol 44(6):336–342.
44. Mandeville JB IRON fMRI measurements of CBV and implications for BOLD
signal. Neuroimage 62(2):1000–1008.
45. Kolb A, et al. Technical performance evaluation of a human brain PET/MRI
system. Eur Radiol 22(8):1776–1788.
46. Catana C, et al. Toward implementing an MRI-based PET attenuation-correction
method for neurologic studies on the MR-PET brain prototype. J Nucl Med 51(9):1431–1438.
47. Saleem KS, Logothetis NK A Combined MRI and Histology Atlas of the Rhesus
Monkey Brain (Elsevier, Burlington, MA). Available at 
PublicView.do?ptiID=283976.
48. McLaren DG, et al. A population-average MRI-based atlas collection of the
rhesus macaque. Neuroimage 45(1):52–59.
49. Mandeville JB, et al. Dynamic functional imaging of relative cerebral blood
volume during rat forepaw stimulation. Magn Reson Med 39(4):615–624.
50. Innis RB, et al. Consensus nomenclature for in vivo imaging of reversibly
binding radioligands. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 27(9):1533–1539.
51. Normandin MD, Schiffer WK, Morris ED A linear model for estimation of neurotransmitter response proﬁles from dynamic PET data. Neuroimage 59(3):2689–2699.
52. Alpert NM, Badgaiyan RD, Livni E, Fischman AJ A novel method for noninvasive
detection of neuromodulatory changes in speciﬁc neurotransmitter systems. Neuroimage 19(3):1049–1060.
53. Hall H, et al. Autoradiographic localization of extrastriatal D2-dopamine receptors in the human brain using [125I]epidepride. Synapse 23(2):115–123.
54. Pinborg LH, et al. [123I]epidepride binding to cerebellar dopamine D2/D3 receptors is displaceable: Implications for the use of cerebellum as a reference region.
Neuroimage 34(4):1450–1453.
55. Ichise M, et al. Linearized reference tissue parametric imaging methods: Application to [11C]DASB positron emission tomography studies of the serotonin
transporter in human brain. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 23(9):1096–1112.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1220512110
Sander et al.