VQA: Visual Question Answering
www.visualqa.org
Aishwarya Agrawal∗, Jiasen Lu∗, Stanislaw Antol∗,
Margaret Mitchell, C. Lawrence Zitnick, Dhruv Batra, Devi Parikh
Abstract—We propose the task of free-form and open-ended Visual Question Answering (VQA). Given an image and a natural
language question about the image, the task is to provide an accurate natural language answer. Mirroring real-world scenarios, such
as helping the visually impaired, both the questions and answers are open-ended. Visual questions selectively target different areas
of an image, including background details and underlying context. As a result, a system that succeeds at VQA typically needs a
more detailed understanding of the image and complex reasoning than a system producing generic image captions. Moreover, VQA
is amenable to automatic evaluation, since many open-ended answers contain only a few words or a closed set of answers that can
be provided in a multiple-choice format. We provide a dataset containing ∼0.25M images, ∼0.76M questions, and ∼10M answers
(www.visualqa.org), and discuss the information it provides. Numerous baselines and methods for VQA are provided and compared
with human performance. Our VQA demo is available on CloudCV ( 
INTRODUCTION
We are witnessing a renewed excitement in multi-discipline
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) research problems. In particular,
research in image and video captioning that combines Computer Vision (CV), Natural Language Processing (NLP), and
Knowledge Representation & Reasoning (KR) has dramatically increased in the past year , , , , ,
 , . Part of this excitement stems from a belief that
multi-discipline tasks like image captioning are a step towards
solving AI. However, the current state of the art demonstrates
that a coarse scene-level understanding of an image paired
with word n-gram statistics sufﬁces to generate reasonable
image captions, which suggests image captioning may not be
as “AI-complete” as desired.
What makes for a compelling “AI-complete” task? We believe
that in order to spawn the next generation of AI algorithms, an
ideal task should (i) require multi-modal knowledge beyond a
single sub-domain (such as CV) and (ii) have a well-deﬁned
quantitative evaluation metric to track progress. For some
tasks, such as image captioning, automatic evaluation is still
a difﬁcult and open research problem , , .
In this paper, we introduce the task of free-form and openended Visual Question Answering (VQA). A VQA system
takes as input an image and a free-form, open-ended, naturallanguage question about the image and produces a naturallanguage answer as the output. This goal-driven task is
applicable to scenarios encountered when visually-impaired
users or intelligence analysts actively elicit visual information. Example questions are shown in Fig. 1.
Open-ended questions require a potentially vast set of AI
capabilities to answer – ﬁne-grained recognition (e.g., “What
kind of cheese is on the pizza?”), object detection (e.g., “How
∗The ﬁrst three authors contributed equally.
• A. Agrawal, J. Lu and S. Antol are with Virginia Tech.
• M. Mitchell is with Microsoft Research, Redmond.
• C. L. Zitnick is with Facebook AI Research.
• D. Batra and D. Parikh are with Georgia Institute of Technology.
Does it appear to be rainy?
Does this person have 20/20 vision?
Is this person expecting company?
What is just under the tree?
How many slices of pizza are there?
Is this a vegetarian pizza?
What color are her eyes?
What is the mustache made of?
Fig. 1: Examples of free-form, open-ended questions collected for
images via Amazon Mechanical Turk. Note that commonsense
knowledge is needed along with a visual understanding of the scene
to answer many questions.
many bikes are there?”), activity recognition (e.g., “Is this man
crying?”), knowledge base reasoning (e.g., “Is this a vegetarian
pizza?”), and commonsense reasoning (e.g., “Does this person
have 20/20 vision?”, “Is this person expecting company?”).
VQA , , , is also amenable to automatic
quantitative evaluation, making it possible to effectively track
progress on this task. While the answer to many questions is
simply “yes” or “no”, the process for determining a correct
answer is typically far from trivial (e.g. in Fig. 1, “Does this
person have 20/20 vision?”). Moreover, since questions about
images often tend to seek speciﬁc information, simple oneto-three word answers are sufﬁcient for many questions. In
such scenarios, we can easily evaluate a proposed algorithm
by the number of questions it answers correctly. In this paper,
we present both an open-ended answering task and a multiplechoice task , . Unlike the open-ended task that requires
a free-form response, the multiple-choice task only requires an
 
algorithm to pick from a predeﬁned list of possible answers.
We present a large dataset that contains 204,721 images from
the MS COCO dataset and a newly created abstract
scene dataset , that contains 50,000 scenes. The MS
COCO dataset has images depicting diverse and complex
scenes that are effective at eliciting compelling and diverse
questions. We collected a new dataset of “realistic” abstract
scenes to enable research focused only on the high-level
reasoning required for VQA by removing the need to parse
real images. Three questions were collected for each image or
scene. Each question was answered by ten subjects along with
their conﬁdence. The dataset contains over 760K questions
with around 10M answers.
While the use of open-ended questions offers many beneﬁts,
it is still useful to understand the types of questions that are
being asked and which types various algorithms may be good
at answering. To this end, we analyze the types of questions
asked and the types of answers provided. Through several
visualizations, we demonstrate the astonishing diversity of the
questions asked. We also explore how the information content
of questions and their answers differs from image captions. For
baselines, we offer several approaches that use a combination
of both text and state-of-the-art visual features . As part
of the VQA initiative, we will organize an annual challenge
and associated workshop to discuss state-of-the-art methods
and best practices.
VQA poses a rich set of challenges, many of which have been
viewed as the holy grail of automatic image understanding and
AI in general. However, it includes as building blocks several
components that the CV, NLP, and KR , , , ,
 communities have made signiﬁcant progress on during the
past few decades. VQA provides an attractive balance between
pushing the state of the art, while being accessible enough for
the communities to start making progress on the task.
RELATED WORK
VQA Efforts. Several recent papers have begun to study visual
question answering , , , . However, unlike our
work, these are fairly restricted (sometimes synthetic) settings
with small datasets. For instance, only considers questions
whose answers come from a predeﬁned closed world of 16
basic colors or 894 object categories. also considers
questions generated from templates from a ﬁxed vocabulary
of objects, attributes, relationships between objects, etc. In
contrast, our proposed task involves open-ended, free-form
questions and answers provided by humans. Our goal is to
increase the diversity of knowledge and kinds of reasoning needed to provide correct answers. Critical to achieving
success on this more difﬁcult and unconstrained task, our
VQA dataset is two orders of magnitude larger than ,
 (>250,000 vs. 2,591 and 1,449 images respectively). The
proposed VQA task has connections to other related work:
 has studied joint parsing of videos and corresponding text
to answer queries on two datasets containing 15 video clips
 uses crowdsourced workers to answer questions
about visual content asked by visually-impaired users. In
concurrent work, proposed combining an LSTM for the
question with a CNN for the image to generate an answer. In
their model, the LSTM question representation is conditioned
on the CNN image features at each time step, and the ﬁnal
LSTM hidden state is used to sequentially decode the answer
phrase. In contrast, the model developed in this paper explores
“late fusion” – i.e., the LSTM question representation and the
CNN image features are computed independently, fused via
an element-wise multiplication, and then passed through fullyconnected layers to generate a softmax distribution over output
answer classes. generates abstract scenes to capture visual
common sense relevant to answering (purely textual) ﬁll-inthe-blank and visual paraphrasing questions. and 
use visual information to assess the plausibility of common
sense assertions. introduced a dataset of 10k images and
prompted captions that describe speciﬁc aspects of a scene
(e.g., individual objects, what will happen next). Concurrent
with our work, collected questions & answers in Chinese
(later translated to English by humans) for COCO images. 
automatically generated four types of questions (object, count,
color, location) using COCO captions.
Text-based Q&A is a well studied problem in the NLP
and text processing communities (recent examples being ,
 , , ). Other related textual tasks include sentence
completion (e.g., with multiple-choice answers). These
approaches provide inspiration for VQA techniques. One key
concern in text is the grounding of questions. For instance,
 synthesized textual descriptions and QA-pairs grounded
in a simulation of actors and objects in a ﬁxed set of locations. VQA is naturally grounded in images – requiring the
understanding of both text (questions) and vision (images).
Our questions are generated by humans, making the need
for commonsense knowledge and complex reasoning more
essential.
Describing Visual Content. Related to VQA are the tasks
of image tagging , , image captioning , , ,
 , , , , , , and video captioning ,
 , where words or sentences are generated to describe visual
content. While these tasks require both visual and semantic
knowledge, captions can often be non-speciﬁc (e.g., observed
by ). The questions in VQA require detailed speciﬁc
information about the image for which generic image captions
are of little use .
Other Vision+Language Tasks. Several recent papers have
explored tasks at the intersection of vision and language
that are easier to evaluate than image captioning, such as
coreference resolution , or generating referring expressions , for a particular object in an image that
would allow a human to identify which object is being referred
to (e.g., “the one in a red shirt”, “the dog on the left”). While
task-driven and concrete, a limited set of visual concepts (e.g.,
color, location) tend to be captured by referring expressions.
As we demonstrate, a richer variety of visual concepts emerge
from visual questions and their answers.
VQA DATASET COLLECTION
We now describe the Visual Question Answering (VQA)
dataset. We begin by describing the real images and abstract
Is something under
the sink broken?
What number do
Does this man have
Is this man crying?
Has the pizza been
What kind of cheese is
topped on this pizza?
mozzarella
mozzarella
mozzarella
Do you think the
boy on the ground
has broken legs?
Why is the boy
on the right
freaking out?
his friend is hurt
other boy fell down
someone fell
sprayed by hose
How many pickles
are on the plate?
What is the shape
of the plate?
What kind of store is
art supplies
Is the display case as
full as it could be?
How many bikes
are there?
What number is
the sign say?
What shape is
this sign?
Can you park
What color is
the hydrant?
white and orange
white and orange
white and orange
How many glasses
are on the table?
What is the woman
reaching for?
door handle
Are the kids in the room
the grandchildren of the
What is on the
bookshelf?
How many balls
are there?
What side of the
teeter totter is
on the ground?
right side
right side
Fig. 2: Examples of questions (black), (a subset of the) answers given when looking at the image (green), and answers given when not
looking at the image (blue) for numerous representative examples of the dataset. See the appendix for more examples.
scenes used to collect the questions. Next, we describe our
process of collecting questions and their corresponding answers. Analysis of the questions and answers gathered as well
as baselines’ & methods’ results are provided in following
Real Images. We use the 123,287 training and validation images and 81,434 test images from the newly-released Microsoft
Common Objects in Context (MS COCO) dataset. The
MS COCO dataset was gathered to ﬁnd images containing
multiple objects and rich contextual information. Given the
visual complexity of these images, they are well-suited for
our VQA task. The more diverse our collection of images, the
more diverse, comprehensive, and interesting the resultant set
of questions and their answers.
Abstract Scenes. The VQA task with real images requires the
use of complex and often noisy visual recognizers. To attract
researchers interested in exploring the high-level reasoning
required for VQA, but not the low-level vision tasks, we
create a new abstract scenes dataset , , , 
containing 50K scenes. The dataset contains 20 “paperdoll”
human models spanning genders, races, and ages with 8
different expressions. The limbs are adjustable to allow for
continuous pose variations. The clipart may be used to depict
both indoor and outdoor scenes. The set contains over 100
objects and 31 animals in various poses. The use of this clipart
enables the creation of more realistic scenes (see bottom row
of Fig. 2) that more closely mirror real images than previous
papers , , . See the appendix for the user interface,
additional details, and examples.
Splits. For real images, we follow the same train/val/test
split strategy as the MC COCO dataset (including testdev, test-standard, test-challenge, test-reserve). For the VQA
challenge (see section 6), test-dev is used for debugging and
validation experiments and allows for unlimited submission to
the evaluation server. Test-standard is the ‘default’ test data for
the VQA competition. When comparing to the state of the art
(e.g., in papers), results should be reported on test-standard.
Test-standard is also used to maintain a public leaderboard that
is updated upon submission. Test-reserve is used to protect
against possible overﬁtting. If there are substantial differences
between a method’s scores on test-standard and test-reserve,
this raises a red-ﬂag and prompts further investigation. Results
on test-reserve are not publicly revealed. Finally, test-challenge
is used to determine the winners of the challenge.
For abstract scenes, we created splits for standardization, separating the scenes into 20K/10K/20K for train/val/test splits,
respectively. There are no subsplits (test-dev, test-standard,
test-challenge, test-reserve) for abstract scenes.
Captions. The MS COCO dataset , already contains
ﬁve single-sentence captions for all images. We also collected
ﬁve single-captions for all abstract scenes using the same user
interface1 for collection.
Questions. Collecting interesting, diverse, and well-posed
questions is a signiﬁcant challenge. Many simple questions
1. 
may only require low-level computer vision knowledge, such
as “What color is the cat?” or “How many chairs are present
in the scene?”. However, we also want questions that require
commonsense knowledge about the scene, such as “What
sound does the pictured animal make?”. Importantly, questions
should also require the image to correctly answer and not
be answerable using just commonsense information, e.g.,
in Fig. 1, “What is the mustache made of?”. By having a
wide variety of question types and difﬁculty, we may be able
to measure the continual progress of both visual understanding
and commonsense reasoning.
We tested and evaluated a number of user interfaces for
collecting such “interesting” questions. Speciﬁcally, we ran
pilot studies asking human subjects to ask questions about a
given image that they believe a “toddler”, “alien”, or “smart
robot” would have trouble answering. We found the “smart
robot” interface to elicit the most interesting and diverse
questions. As shown in the appendix, our ﬁnal interface stated:
“We have built a smart robot. It understands a lot about
images. It can recognize and name all the objects, it
knows where the objects are, it can recognize the scene
(e.g., kitchen, beach), people’s expressions and poses, and
properties of objects (e.g., color of objects, their texture).
Your task is to stump this smart robot!
Ask a question about this scene that this smart robot
probably can not answer, but any human can easily
answer while looking at the scene in the image.”
To bias against generic image-independent questions, subjects
were instructed to ask questions that require the image to
The same user interface was used for both the real images and
abstract scenes. In total, three questions from unique workers
were gathered for each image/scene. When writing a question,
the subjects were shown the previous questions already asked
for that image to increase the question diversity. In total, the
dataset contains over ∼0.76M questions.
Answers. Open-ended questions result in a diverse set of
possible answers. For many questions, a simple “yes” or “no”
response is sufﬁcient. However, other questions may require a
short phrase. Multiple different answers may also be correct.
For instance, the answers “white”, “tan”, or “off-white” may
all be correct answers to the same question. Human subjects
may also disagree on the “correct” answer, e.g., some saying
“yes” while others say “no”. To handle these discrepancies,
we gather 10 answers for each question from unique workers,
while also ensuring that the worker answering a question did
not ask it. We ask the subjects to provide answers that are “a
brief phrase and not a complete sentence. Respond matter-offactly and avoid using conversational language or inserting
your opinion.” In addition to answering the questions, the
subjects were asked “Do you think you were able to answer the
question correctly?” and given the choices of “no”, “maybe”,
and “yes”. See the appendix for more details about the user
interface to collect answers. See Section 4 for an analysis of
the answers provided.
For testing, we offer two modalities for answering the questions: (i) open-ended and (ii) multiple-choice.
For the open-ended task, the generated answers are evaluated
using the following accuracy metric:
accuracy = min(# humans that provided that answer
i.e., an answer is deemed 100% accurate if at least 3 workers
provided that exact answer.2 Before comparison, all responses
are made lowercase, numbers converted to digits, and punctuation & articles removed. We avoid using soft metrics such
as Word2Vec , since they often group together words
that we wish to distinguish, such as “left” and “right”. We
also avoid using evaluation metrics from machine translation
such as BLEU and ROUGE because such metrics are typically applicable and reliable for sentences containing multiple
words. In VQA, most answers (89.32%) are single word;
thus there no high-order n-gram matches between predicted
answers and ground-truth answers, and low-order n-gram
matches degenerate to exact-string matching. Moreover, these
automatic metrics such as BLEU and ROUGE have been found
to poorly correlate with human judgement for tasks such as
image caption evaluation .
For multiple-choice task, 18 candidate answers are created
for each question. As with the open-ended task, the accuracy
of a chosen option is computed based on the number of
human subjects who provided that answer (divided by 3 and
clipped at 1). We generate a candidate set of correct and
incorrect answers from four sets of answers: Correct: The
most common (out of ten) correct answer. Plausible: To
generate incorrect, but still plausible answers we ask three
subjects to answer the questions without seeing the image.
See the appendix for more details about the user interface to
collect these answers. If three unique answers are not found,
we gather additional answers from nearest neighbor questions
using a bag-of-words model. The use of these answers helps
ensure the image, and not just commonsense knowledge, is
necessary to answer the question. Popular: These are the 10
most popular answers. For instance, these are “yes”, “no”,
“2”, “1”, “white”, “3”, “red”, “blue”, “4”, “green” for real
images. The inclusion of the most popular answers makes it
more difﬁcult for algorithms to infer the type of question from
the set of answers provided, i.e., learning that it is a “yes or
no” question just because “yes” and “no” are present in the
answers. Random: Correct answers from random questions
in the dataset. To generate a total of 18 candidate answers,
we ﬁrst ﬁnd the union of the correct, plausible, and popular
answers. We include random answers until 18 unique answers
are found. The order of the answers is randomized. Example
multiple choice questions are in the appendix.
Note that all 18 candidate answers are unique. But since
10 different subjects answered every question, it is possible
that more than one of those 10 answers be present in the
18 choices. In such cases, according to the accuracy metric,
multiple options could have a non-zero accuracy.
Real Images
Abstract Scenes
Fig. 3: Distribution of questions by their ﬁrst four words for a random sample of 60K questions for real images (left) and all questions
for abstract scenes (right). The ordering of the words starts towards the center and radiates outwards. The arc length is proportional to the
number of questions containing the word. White areas are words with contributions too small to show.
VQA DATASET ANALYSIS
In this section, we provide an analysis of the questions and
answers in the VQA train dataset. To gain an understanding
of the types of questions asked and answers provided, we
visualize the distribution of question types and answers. We
also explore how often the questions may be answered without
the image using just commonsense information. Finally, we
analyze whether the information contained in an image caption
is sufﬁcient to answer the questions.
The dataset includes 614,163 questions and 7,984,119 answers
(including answers provided by workers with and without
looking at the image) for 204,721 images from the MS COCO
dataset and 150,000 questions with 1,950,000 answers for
50, 000 abstract scenes.
Types of Question. Given the structure of questions generated
in the English language, we can cluster questions into different
types based on the words that start the question. Fig. 3 shows
the distribution of questions based on the ﬁrst four words of
the questions for both the real images (left) and abstract scenes
(right). Interestingly, the distribution of questions is quite
similar for both real images and abstract scenes. This helps
demonstrate that the type of questions elicited by the abstract
scenes is similar to those elicited by the real images. There
exists a surprising variety of question types, including “What
is. . .”, “Is there. . .”, “How many. . .”, and “Does the. . .”.
Quantitatively, the percentage of questions for different types
is shown in Table 3. Several example questions and answers
are shown in Fig. 2. A particularly interesting type of question
is the “What is. . .” questions, since they have a diverse set
2. In order to be consistent with ‘human accuracies’ reported in Section 4,
machine accuracies are averaged over all
sets of human annotators
Percentage of Questions
# of Words in Question
Distribution of Question Lengths
Real Images
Abstract Scenes
Fig. 4: Percentage of questions with different word lengths for real
images and abstract scenes.
of possible answers. See the appendix for visualizations for
“What is. . .” questions.
Lengths. Fig. 4 shows the distribution of question lengths. We
see that most questions range from four to ten words.
Typical Answers. Fig. 5 (top) shows the distribution of
answers for several question types. We can see that a number
of question types, such as “Is the...”, “Are...”, and “Does...”
are typically answered using “yes” and “no” as answers. Other
questions such as “What is...” and “What type...” have a rich
diversity of responses. Other question types such as “What
color...” or “Which...” have more specialized responses,
such as colors, or “left” and “right”. See the appendix for
a list of the most popular answers.
Lengths. Most answers consist of a single word, with the
distribution of answers containing one, two, or three words,
respectively being 89.32%, 6.91%, and 2.74% for real images
and 90.51%, 5.89%, and 2.49% for abstract scenes. The
brevity of answers is not surprising, since the questions tend to
elicit speciﬁc information from the images. This is in contrast
Answers with Images
Answers without Images
Fig. 5: Distribution of answers per question type for a random sample of 60K questions for real images when subjects provide answers when
given the image (top) and when not given the image (bottom).
with image captions that generically describe the entire image
and hence tend to be longer. The brevity of our answers makes
automatic evaluation feasible. While it may be tempting to
believe the brevity of the answers makes the problem easier,
recall that they are human-provided open-ended answers to
open-ended questions. The questions typically require complex
reasoning to arrive at these deceptively simple answers (see
Fig. 2). There are currently 23,234 unique one-word answers
in our dataset for real images and 3,770 for abstract scenes.
‘Yes/No’ and ‘Number’ Answers. Many questions are answered using either “yes” or “no” (or sometimes “maybe”)
– 38.37% and 40.66% of the questions on real images and
abstract scenes respectively. Among these ‘yes/no’ questions,
there is a bias towards “yes” – 58.83% and 55.86% of
‘yes/no’ answers are “yes” for real images and abstract scenes.
Question types such as “How many...” are answered using
numbers – 12.31% and 14.48% of the questions on real images
and abstract scenes are ‘number’ questions. “2” is the most
popular answer among the ‘number’ questions, making up
26.04% of the ‘number’ answers for real images and 39.85%
for abstract scenes.
Subject Conﬁdence. When the subjects answered the questions, we asked “Do you think you were able to answer
the question correctly?”. Fig. 6 shows the distribution of
responses. A majority of the answers were labeled as conﬁdent
for both real images and abstract scenes.
Inter-human Agreement. Does the self-judgment of conﬁdence correspond to the answer agreement between subjects?
Fig. 6 shows the percentage of questions in which (i) 7 or
more, (ii) 3−7, or (iii) less than 3 subjects agree on the answers
given their average conﬁdence score (0 = not conﬁdent, 1
= conﬁdent). As expected, the agreement between subjects
7 or more same
less than 3 same
# of Questions
Fig. 6: Number of questions per average conﬁdence score (0 = not
conﬁdent, 1 = conﬁdent) for real images and abstract scenes (black
lines). Percentage of questions where 7 or more answers are same,
3-7 are same, less than 3 are same (color bars).
increases with conﬁdence. However, even if all of the subjects
are conﬁdent the answers may still vary. This is not surprising
since some answers may vary, yet have very similar meaning,
such as “happy” and “joyful”.
As shown in Table 1 (Question + Image), there is signiﬁcant
inter-human agreement in the answers for both real images
(83.30%) and abstract scenes (87.49%). Note that on average
each question has 2.70 unique answers for real images and
2.39 for abstract scenes. The agreement is signiﬁcantly higher
(> 95%) for “yes/no” questions and lower for other questions
(< 76%), possibly due to the fact that we perform exact string
matching and do not account for synonyms, plurality, etc. Note
that the automatic determination of synonyms is a difﬁcult
problem, since the level of answer granularity can vary across
questions.
Commonsense Knowledge
Is the Image Necessary? Clearly, some questions can sometimes be answered correctly using commonsense knowledge
alone without the need for an image, e.g., “What is the color
of the ﬁre hydrant?”. We explore this issue by asking three
subjects to answer the questions without seeing the image (see
the examples in blue in Fig. 2). In Table 1 (Question), we
show the percentage of questions for which the correct answer
is provided over all questions, “yes/no” questions, and the
other questions that are not “yes/no”. For “yes/no” questions,
the human subjects respond better than chance. For other
questions, humans are only correct about 21% of the time.
This demonstrates that understanding the visual information
is critical to VQA and that commonsense information alone
is not sufﬁcient.
To show the qualitative difference in answers provided with
and without images, we show the distribution of answers for
various question types in Fig. 5 (bottom). The distribution of
colors, numbers, and even “yes/no” responses is surprisingly
different for answers with and without images.
Which Questions Require Common Sense? In order to identify questions that require commonsense reasoning to answer,
we conducted two AMT studies (on a subset 10K questions
from the real images of VQA trainval) asking subjects –
1) Whether or not they believed a question required commonsense to answer the question, and
Yes/No Number Other
Question + Caption* 57.47
Question + Image
Abstract Question + Caption* 54.34
Question + Image
TABLE 1: Test-standard accuracy of human subjects when asked to
answer the question without seeing the image (Question), seeing just
a caption of the image and not the image itself (Question + Caption),
and seeing the image (Question + Image). Results are shown for all
questions, “yes/no” & “number” questions, and other questions that
are neither answered “yes/no” nor number. All answers are free-form
and not multiple-choice. *These accuracies are evaluated on a subset
of 3K train questions (1K images).
2) The youngest age group that they believe a person must
be in order to be able to correctly answer the question
– toddler (3-4), younger child (5-8), older child (9-12),
teenager (13-17), adult (18+).
Each question was shown to 10 subjects. We found that for
47.43% of questions 3 or more subjects voted ‘yes’ to commonsense, (18.14%: 6 or more). In the ‘perceived human age
required to answer question’ study, we found the following distribution of responses: toddler: 15.3%, younger child: 39.7%,
older child: 28.4%, teenager: 11.2%, adult: 5.5%. In Figure 7
we show several questions for which a majority of subjects
picked the speciﬁed age range. Surprisingly the perceived
age needed to answer the questions is fairly well distributed
across the different age ranges. As expected the questions
that were judged answerable by an adult (18+) generally need
specialized knowledge, whereas those answerable by a toddler
(3-4) are more generic.
We measure the degree of commonsense required to answer a
question as the percentage of subjects (out of 10) who voted
“yes” in our “whether or not a question requires commonsense” study. A ﬁne-grained breakdown of average age and
average degree of common sense (on a scale of 0 −100)
required to answer a question is shown in Table 3. The
average age and the average degree of commonsense across
all questions is 8.92 and 31.01% respectively.
It is important to distinguish between:
1) How old someone needs to be to be able to answer a
question correctly, and
2) How old people think someone needs to be to be able to
answer a question correctly.
Our age annotations capture the latter – perceptions of MTurk
workers in an uncontrolled environment. As such, the relative
ordering of question types in Table 3 is more important than
absolute age numbers. The two rankings of questions in terms
of common sense required according to the two studies were
largely correlated (Pearson’s rank correlation: 0.58).
Captions vs. Questions
Do generic image captions provide enough information to
answer the questions? Table 1 (Question + Caption) shows
the percentage of questions answered correctly when human
3-4 (15.3%)
5-8 (39.7%)
9-12 (28.4%)
13-17 (11.2%)
18+ (5.5%)
Is that a bird in the sky?
How many pizzas are shown?
Where was this picture taken?
Is he likely to get mugged if he walked
down a dark alleyway like this?
What type of architecture is this?
What color is the shoe?
What are the sheep eating?
What ceremony does the cake
commemorate?
Is this a vegetarian meal?
Is this a Flemish bricklaying
How many zebras are there?
What color is his hair?
Are these boats too tall to fit
under the bridge?
What type of beverage is in the glass?
How many calories are in this
Is there food on the table?
What sport is being played?
What is the name of the white
shape under the batter?
Can you name the performer in the
purple costume?
What government document is
needed to partake in this activity?
Is this man wearing shoes?
Name one ingredient in the skillet.
Is this at the stadium?
Besides these humans, what other
animals eat here?
What is the make and model of
this vehicle?
Fig. 7: Example questions judged by Mturk workers to be answerable by different age groups. The percentage of questions falling into each
age group is shown in parentheses.
subjects are given the question and a human-provided caption
describing the image, but not the image. As expected, the
results are better than when humans are shown the questions
alone. However, the accuracies are signiﬁcantly lower than
when subjects are shown the actual image. This demonstrates
that in order to answer the questions correctly, deeper image
understanding (beyond what image captions typically capture)
is necessary. In fact, we ﬁnd that the distributions of nouns,
verbs, and adjectives mentioned in captions is statistically
signiﬁcantly different from those mentioned in our questions
+ answers (Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, p < .001) for both real
images and abstract scenes. See the appendix for details.
VQA BASELINES AND METHODS
In this section, we explore the difﬁculty of the VQA dataset
for the MS COCO images using several baselines and novel
methods. We train on VQA train+val. Unless stated otherwise,
all human accuracies are on test-standard, machine accuracies
are on test-dev, and results involving human captions (in gray
font) are trained on train and tested on val (because captions
are not available for test).
We implemented the following baselines:
1) random: We randomly choose an answer from the top
1K answers of the VQA train/val dataset.
2) prior (“yes”): We always select the most popular answer
(“yes”) for both the open-ended and multiple-choice
tasks. Note that “yes” is always one of the choices for
the multiple-choice questions.
3) per Q-type prior: For the open-ended task, we pick the
most popular answer per question type (see the appendix
for details). For the multiple-choice task, we pick the
answer (from the provided choices) that is most similar
to the picked answer for the open-ended task using cosine
similarity in Word2Vec feature space.
4) nearest neighbor: Given a test image, question pair, we
ﬁrst ﬁnd the K nearest neighbor questions and associated
images from the training set. See appendix for details on
how neighbors are found. Next, for the open-ended task,
we pick the most frequent ground truth answer from this
set of nearest neighbor question, image pairs. Similar to
the “per Q-type prior” baseline, for the multiple-choice
task, we pick the answer (from the provided choices) that
is most similar to the picked answer for the open-ended
task using cosine similarity in
Word2Vec feature space.
For our methods, we develop a 2-channel vision (image) +
language (question) model that culminates with a softmax
over K possible outputs. We choose the top K = 1000 most
frequent answers as possible outputs. This set of answers
covers 82.67% of the train+val answers. We describe the
different components of our model below:
Image Channel: This channel provides an embedding for the
image. We experiment with two embeddings –
1) I: The activations from the last hidden layer of VG-
GNet are used as 4096-dim image embedding.
2) norm I: These are ℓ2 normalized activations from the
last hidden layer of VGGNet .
Question Channel: This channel provides an embedding for
the question. We experiment with three embeddings –
1) Bag-of-Words Question (BoW Q): The top 1,000 words
in the questions are used to create a bag-of-words representation. Since there is a strong correlation between the
words that start a question and the answer (see Fig. 5),
we ﬁnd the top 10 ﬁrst, second, and third words of
the questions and create a 30 dimensional bag-of-words
representation. These features are concatenated to get a
1,030-dim embedding for the question.
2) LSTM Q: An LSTM with one hidden layer is used
to obtain 1024-dim embedding for the question. The
embedding obtained from the LSTM is a concatenation
of last cell state and last hidden state representations
(each being 512-dim) from the hidden layer of the LSTM.
Each question word is encoded with 300-dim embedding
by a fully-connected layer + tanh non-linearity which
is then fed to the LSTM. The input vocabulary to the
embedding layer consists of all the question words seen
in the training dataset.
3) deeper LSTM Q: An LSTM with two hidden layers is
used to obtain 2048-dim embedding for the question. The
embedding obtained from the LSTM is a concatenation of
last cell state and last hidden state representations (each
Convolution Layer
+ Non-Linearity
Pooling Layer
Convolution Layer
+ Non-Linearity Pooling Layer
Fully-Connected MLP
4096 output units from last hidden layer
(VGGNet, Normalized)
“How many horses are
this image?”
2×2×512 LSTM
Fully-Connected
Point-wise
multiplicationFully-Connected
Fully-Connected
Fig. 8: Our best performing model (deeper LSTM Q + norm I). This model uses a two layer LSTM to encode the questions and the last
hidden layer of VGGNet to encode the images. The image features are then ℓ2 normalized. Both the question and image features are
transformed to a common space and fused via element-wise multiplication, which is then passed through a fully connected layer followed
by a softmax layer to obtain a distribution over answers.
being 512-dim) from each of the two hidden layers of the
LSTM. Hence 2 (hidden layers) x 2 (cell state and hidden
state) x 512 (dimensionality of each of the cell states, as
well as hidden states) in Fig. 8. This is followed by a
fully-connected layer + tanh non-linearity to transform
2048-dim embedding to 1024-dim. The question words
are encoded in the same way as in LSTM Q.
Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP): The image and question
embeddings are combined to obtain a single embedding.
1) For BoW Q + I method, we simply concatenate the BoW
Q and I embeddings.
2) For LSTM Q + I, and deeper LSTM Q + norm I (Fig. 8)
methods, the image embedding is ﬁrst transformed to
1024-dim by a fully-connected layer + tanh non-linearity
to match the LSTM embedding of the question. The
transformed image and LSTM embeddings (being in a
common space) are then fused via element-wise multiplication.
This combined image + question embedding is then passed to
an MLP – a fully connected neural network classiﬁer with 2
hidden layers and 1000 hidden units (dropout 0.5) in each layer
with tanh non-linearity, followed by a softmax layer to obtain
a distribution over K answers. The entire model is learned
end-to-end with a cross-entropy loss. VGGNet parameters are
frozen to those learned for ImageNet classiﬁcation and not
ﬁne-tuned in the image channel.
We also experimented with providing captions as input to our
model. Similar to Table 1, we assume that a human-generated
caption is given as input. We use a bag-of-words representation
containing the 1,000 most popular words in the captions as the
caption embedding (Caption). For BoW Question + Caption
(BoW Q + C) method, we simply concatenate the BoW Q and
C embeddings.
For testing, we report the result on two different tasks: openended selects the answer with highest activation from all
Open-Ended
Multiple-Choice
Yes/No Number Other
Yes/No Number Other
prior (“yes”)
01.15 29.66
per Q-type prior
09.38 39.45
nearest neighbor
21.94 48.49
27.14 53.68
03.77 30.53
37.37 58.97
26.59 54.75
LSTM Q + I
36.42 57.17
deeper LSTM Q
30.03 55.88
deeper LSTM Q + norm I 57.75
43.08 62.70
03.86 28.29
42.56 59.85
TABLE 2: Accuracy of our methods for the open-ended and multiplechoice tasks on the VQA test-dev for real images. Q = Question, I
= Image, C = Caption. (Caption and BoW Q + C results are on val).
See text for details.
possible K answers and multiple-choice picks the answer that
has the highest activation from the potential answers.
Table 2 shows the accuracy of our baselines and methods for
both the open-ended and multiple-choice tasks on the VQA
test-dev for real images.
As expected, the vision-alone model (I) that completely
ignores the question performs rather poorly (open-ended:
28.13% / multiple-choice: 30.53%). In fact, on open-ended
task, the vision-alone model (I) performs worse than the prior
(“yes”) baseline, which ignores both the image and question
(responding to every question with a “yes”).
Interestingly, the language-alone methods (per Q-type prior,
BoW Q, LSTM Q) that ignore the image perform surprisingly
well, with BoW Q achieving 48.09% on open-ended (53.68%
on multiple-choice) and LSTM Q achieving 48.76% on openended (54.75% on multiple-choice); both outperforming the
nearest neighbor baseline (open-ended: 42.70%, multiple-
choice: 48.49%). Our quantitative results and analyses suggest
that this might be due to the language-model exploiting subtle
statistical priors about the question types (e.g. “What color is
the banana?” can be answered with “yellow” without looking
at the image). For a detailed discussion of the subtle biases in
the questions, please see .
The accuracy of our best model (deeper LSTM Q + norm I
(Fig. 8), selected using VQA test-dev accuracies) on VQA teststandard is 58.16% (open-ended) / 63.09% (multiple-choice).
We can see that our model is able to signiﬁcantly outperform both the vision-alone and language-alone baselines. As
a general trend, results on multiple-choice are better than
open-ended. All methods are signiﬁcantly worse than human
performance.
Our VQA demo is available on CloudCV – 
org/vqa. This will be updated with newer models as we
develop them.
To gain further insights into these results, we computed
accuracies by question type in Table 3. Interestingly, for
question types that require more reasoning, such as “Is the” or
“How many”, the scene-level image features do not provide
any additional information. However, for questions that can
be answered using scene-level information, such as “What
sport,” we do see an improvement. Similarly, for questions
whose answer may be contained in a generic caption we see
improvement, such as “What animal”. For all question types,
the results are worse than human accuracies.
We also analyzed the accuracies of our best model (deeper
LSTM Q + norm I) on a subset of questions with certain
speciﬁc (ground truth) answers. In Fig. 9, we show the average
accuracy of the model on questions with 50 most frequent
ground truth answers on the VQA validation set (plot is
sorted by accuracy, not frequency). We can see that the model
performs well for answers that are common visual objects
such as “wii”, “tennis”, “bathroom” while the performance
is somewhat underwhelming for counts (e.g., “2”, “1”, “3”),
and particularly poor for higher counts (e.g., “5”, “6”, “10”,
“8”, “7”).
In Fig. 10, we show the distribution of 50 most frequently
predicted answers when the system is correct on the VQA
validation set (plot is sorted by prediction frequency, not
accuracy). In this analysis, “system is correct” implies that
it has VQA accuracy 1.0 (see section 3 for accuracy metric).
We can see that the frequent ground truth answers (e.g., “yes”,
“no”, “2”, “white”, “red”, “blue”, “1”, “green”) are more
frequently predicted than others when the model is correct.
Finally, evaluating our best model (deeper LSTM Q + norm
I) on the validation questions for which we have age annotations (how old a human needs to be to answer the question
correctly), we estimate that our model performs as well as
a 4.74 year old child! The average age required on the
same set of questions is 8.98. Evaluating the same model
on the validation questions for which we have commonsense
annotations (whether the question requires commonsense to
answer it), we estimate that it has degree of commonsense
of 17.35%. The average degree of commonsense required on
same set of questions is 31.23%. Again, these estimates reﬂect
Open-Ended
Human Age Commonsense
To Be Able
To Be Able
Q + I Q + C
To Answer (%)
what is (13.84)
23.57 34.28
43.88 16.86 73.68
what color (08.98)
33.37 43.53
48.61 28.71 86.06
what kind (02.49)
27.78 42.72
43.88 19.10 70.11
what are (02.32)
25.47 39.10
47.27 17.72 69.49
what type (01.78)
27.68 42.62
44.32 19.53 70.65
is the (10.16)
70.76 69.87
70.50 65.24 95.67
is this (08.26)
70.34 70.79
71.54 63.35 95.43
how many (10.28)
43.78 40.33
47.52 30.45 86.32
are (07.57)
73.96 73.58
72.43 67.10 95.24
does (02.75)
76.81 75.81
75.88 69.96 95.70
where (02.90)
16.21 23.49
29.47 11.09 43.56
is there (03.60)
86.50 86.37
85.88 72.48 96.43
why (01.20)
16.24 13.94
14.54 11.80 21.50
which (01.21)
29.50 34.83
40.84 25.64 67.44
do (01.15)
77.73 79.31
74.63 71.33 95.44
what does (01.12)
19.58 20.00
23.19 11.12 75.88
what time (00.67)
18.28 07.64 58.98
who (00.77)
19.75 20.43
27.28 14.69 56.93
what sport (00.81)
37.96 81.12
93.87 17.86 95.59
what animal (00.53) 23.12 59.70
71.02 17.67 92.51
what brand (00.36)
40.13 36.84
32.19 25.34 80.95
TABLE 3: Open-ended test-dev results for different question types
on real images (Q+C is reported on val). Machine performance
is reported using the bag-of-words representation for questions.
Questions types are determined by the one or two words that start
the question. The percentage of questions for each type is shown
in parentheses. Last and second last columns respectively show the
average human age and average degree of commonsense required to
answer the questions (as reported by AMT workers), respectively.
See text for details.
the age and commonsense perceived by MTurk workers that
would be required to answer the question. See the appendix
for details.
We further analyzed the performance of the model for different
age groups on the validation questions for which we have age
annotations. In Fig. 11, we computed the average accuracy of
the predictions made by the model for questions belonging to
different age groups. Perhaps as expected, the accuracy of the
model decreases as the age of the question increases (from
61.07% at 3 −4 age group to 47.83% at 18+ age group).
In Fig. 12, we show the distribution of age of questions for
different levels of accuracies achieved by our system on the
validation questions for which we have age annotations. It is
interesting to see that the relative proportions of different age
groups is consistent across all accuracy bins with questions
belonging to the age group 5-8 comprising the majority of the
predictions which is expected because 5-8 is the most common
age group in the dataset (see Fig. 7).
Table 4 shows the accuracy of different ablated versions of
our best model (deeper LSTM Q + norm I) for both the openended and multiple-choice tasks on the VQA test-dev for real
images. The different ablated versions are as follows –
1) Without I Norm: In this model, the activations from the
last hidden layer of VGGNet are not ℓ2-normalized.
Comparing the accuracies in Table 4 and Table 2, we
can see that ℓ2-normalization of image features boosts
the performance by 0.16% for open-ended task and by
0.24% for multiple-choice task.
2) Concatenation: In this model, the transformed image and
LSTM embeddings are concatenated (instead of elementwise multiplied), resulting in doubling the number of
Average Accuracy
Fig. 9: Pr (system is correct | answer) for 50 most frequent ground truth answers on the VQA validation set (plot is sorted by accuracy, not
frequency). System refers to our best model (deeper LSTM Q + norm I).
Percentage of correct
Fig. 10: Pr (answer | system is correct) for 50 most frequently predicted answers on the VQA validation set (plot is sorted by prediction
frequency, not accuracy). System refers to our best model (deeper LSTM Q + norm I).
Average Accuracy
Fig. 11: Pr (system is correct | age of question) on the VQA validation set. System refers to our best model (deeper LSTM Q + norm
Distribution of age of questions per
accuracy bin
Fig. 12: Pr (age of question | system is correct) on the VQA validation set. System refers to our best model (deeper LSTM Q + norm
parameters in the following fully-connected layer. Comparing the accuracies in Table 4 and Table 2, we can see
that element-wise fusion performs better by 0.95% for
open-ended task and by 1.24% for multiple-choice task.
3) K = 500: In this model, we use K = 500 most frequent
answers as possible outputs. Comparing the accuracies in
Table 4 and Table 2, we can see that K = 1000 performs
better than K = 500 by 0.82% for open-ended task and
by 1.92% for multiple-choice task.
4) K = 2000: In this model, we use K = 2000 most frequent
answers as possible outputs. Comparing the accuracies in
Table 4 and Table 2, we can see that K = 2000 performs
better then K = 1000 by 0.40% for open-ended task and
by 1.16% for multiple-choice task.
5) Truncated Q Vocab @ 5: In this model, the input
vocabulary to the embedding layer (which encodes the
question words) consists of only those question words
which occur atleast 5 times in the training dataset, thus reducing the vocabulary size from 14770 (when all question
words are used) to 5134 (65.24% reduction). Remaining
question words are replaced with UNK (unknown) tokens.
Comparing the accuracies in Table 4 and Table 2, we can
see that truncating the question vocabulary @ 5 performs
better than using all questions words by 0.24% for openended task and by 0.17% for multiple-choice task.
6) Truncated Q Vocab @ 11: In this model, the input
vocabulary to the embedding layer (which encodes the
question words) consists of only those question words
which occur atleast 11 times in the training dataset,
thus reducing the vocabulary size from 14770 (when all
question words are used) to 3561 (75.89% reduction).
Remaining question words are replaced with UNK (unknown) tokens. Comparing the accuracies in Table 4
and Table 2, we can see that truncating the question
vocabulary @ 11 performs better than using all questions
words by 0.06% for open-ended task and by 0.02% for
multiple-choice task.
7) Filtered Dataset: We created a ﬁltered version of the
VQA train + val dataset in which we only keep the
answers with subject conﬁdence “yes”. Also, we keep
only those questions for which at least 50% (5 out of 10)
answers are annotated with subject conﬁdence “yes”. The
resulting ﬁltered dataset consists of 344600 questions,
Open-Ended
Multiple-Choice
Yes/No Number Other
Yes/No Number Other
Without I Norm
42.84 62.46
Concatenation
43.19 61.46
41.39 60.78
43.79 63.86
Truncated Q Vocab @ 5
43.38 62.87
Truncated Q Vocab @ 11 57.81
43.22 62.72
Filtered Dataset
40.95 60.82
TABLE 4: Accuracy of ablated versions of our best model (deeper
LSTM Q + norm I) for the open-ended and multiple-choice tasks on
the VQA test-dev for real images. Q = Question, I = Image. See text
for details.
compared to 369861 questions in the original dataset, thus
leading to only 6.83% reduction in the size of the dataset.
The ﬁltered dataset has 8.77 answers per question on
average. We did not ﬁlter the test set so that accuracies of
the model trained on the ﬁltered dataset can be compared
with that of the model trained on the original dataset. The
row “Filtered Dataset” in Table 4 shows the performance
of the deeper LSTM Q + norm I model when trained
on the ﬁltered dataset. Comparing these accuracies with
the corresponding accuracies in Table 2, we can see that
the model trained on ﬁltered version performs worse by
1.13% for open-ended task and by 1.88% for multiplechoice task.
VQA CHALLENGE AND WORKSHOP
We have set up an evaluation server3 where results may be
uploaded for the test set and it returns an accuracy breakdown.
We are organizing an annual challenge and workshop to
facilitate systematic progress in this area; the ﬁrst instance
of the workshop will be held at CVPR 20164. We suggest that
papers reporting results on the VQA dataset –
1) Report test-standard accuracies, which can be calculated
using either of the non-test-dev phases, i.e., “test2015”
or “Challenge test2015” on the following links: [oe-real
| oe-abstract | mc-real | mc-abstract].
2) Compare their test-standard accuracies with those on the
corresponding test2015 leaderboards [oe-real-leaderboard
| oe-abstract-leaderboard | mc-real-leaderboard | mcabstract-leaderboard].
For more details, please see the challenge page5. Screenshots
of leaderboards for open-ended-real and multiple-choice-real
are shown in Fig. 13. We also compare the test-standard
accuracies of our best model (deeper LSTM Q + norm I) for
both open-ended and multiple-choice tasks (real images) with
other entries on the corresponding
leaderboards in Table 5.
CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
In conclusion, we introduce the task of Visual Question
Answering (VQA). Given an image and an open-ended, natural
3. 
4. 
5. 
Open-Ended
Multiple-Choice
Yes/No Number Other
Yes/No Number Other
snubi-naverlabs
46.99 64.95
MM PaloAlto
46.10 64.18
ACVT Adelaide
global vision
deeper LSTM Q + norm I 58.16
43.73 63.09
TABLE 5: Test-standard accuracy of our best model (deeper LSTM
Q + norm I) compared to test-standard accuracies of other entries
for the open-ended and multiple-choice tasks in the respective VQA
Real Image Challenge leaderboards .
language question about the image, the task is to provide
an accurate natural language answer. We provide a dataset
containing over 250K images, 760K questions, and around
10M answers. We demonstrate the wide variety of questions
and answers in our dataset, as well as the diverse set of AI
capabilities in computer vision, natural language processing,
and commonsense reasoning required to answer these questions accurately.
The questions we solicited from our human subjects were
open-ended and not task-speciﬁc. For some application domains, it would be useful to collect task-speciﬁc questions.
For instance, questions may be gathered from subjects who
are visually impaired , or the questions could focused on
one speciﬁc domain (say sports). Bigham et al. created an
application that allows the visually impaired to capture images
and ask open-ended questions that are answered by human
subjects. Interestingly, these questions can rarely be answered
using generic captions. Training on task-speciﬁc datasets may
help enable practical VQA applications.
We believe VQA has the distinctive advantage of pushing the
frontiers on “AI-complete” problems, while being amenable
to automatic evaluation. Given the recent progress in the
community, we believe the time is ripe to take on such an
Acknowledgements. We would like to acknowledge the
countless hours of effort provided by the workers on Amazon
Mechanical Turk. This work was supported in part by the The
Paul G. Allen Family Foundation via an award to D.P., ICTAS
at Virginia Tech via awards to D.B. and D.P., Google Faculty
Research Awards to D.P. and D.B., the National Science
Foundation CAREER award to D.B., the Army Research
Ofﬁce YIP Award to D.B., and a Ofﬁce of Naval Research
grant to D.B.
APPENDIX OVERVIEW
In the appendix, we provide:
I - Additional analysis comparing captions and Q&A data
II - Qualitative visualizations for “What is” questions
III - Human accuracy on multiple-choice questions
IV - Details on VQA baselines
V - “Age” and “Commonsense” of our model
VI - Details on the abstract scene dataset
VII - User interfaces used to collect the dataset
VIII - List of the top answers in the dataset
Fig. 13: Leaderboard showing test-standard accuracies for VQA Real Image Challenge (Open-Ended) on left and leaderboard showing
test-standard accuracies for VQA Real Image Challenge (Multiple-Choice) on right .
IX - Additional examples from the VQA dataset
APPENDIX I: CAPTIONS vs. QUESTIONS
Do questions and answers provide further information about
the visual world beyond that captured by captions? One
method for determining whether the information captured by
questions & answers is different from the information captured
by captions is to measure some of the differences in the word
distributions from the two datasets. We cast this comparison
in terms of nouns, verbs, and adjectives by extracting all
words from the caption data (MS COCO captions for real
images and captions collected by us for abstract scenes) using
the Stanford part-of-speech (POS)6 tagger . We normalize
the word frequencies from captions, questions, and answers
per image, and compare captions vs. questions and answers
combined. Using a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test to determine
whether the underlying distributions of the two datasets differ,
we ﬁnd a signiﬁcant difference for all three parts of speech (p
< .001) for both real images and abstract scenes. This helps
motivate the VQA task as a way to learn information about
visual scenes; although both captions and questions & answers
provide information about the visual world, they do it from
different perspectives, with different underlying biases ,
and can function as complementary to one another.
6. Noun tags begin with NN, verb tags begin with VB, adjective tags begin
with JJ, and prepositions are tagged as IN.
We illustrate the similarities and differences between the word
distributions in captions vs. questions & answers as Venn-style
word clouds with size indicating the normalized count –
Fig. 15 (nouns), Fig. 16 (verbs), and Fig. 17 (adjectives) for
real images and Fig. 18 (nouns), Fig. 19 (verbs), and Fig. 20
(adjectives) for abstract scenes.7 The left side shows the top
words in questions & answers, the right the top words in
captions, and the center the words common to both, with size
indicating the harmonic mean of the counts.
We see that adjectives in captions capture some clearly visual
properties discussed in previous work on vision to language
 , such as material and pattern, while the questions &
answers have more adjectives that capture what is usual
(e.g., “dominant”, “approximate”, “higher”) and other kinds of
commonsense properties (e.g., “edible”, “possible”, “unsafe”,
“acceptable”). Interestingly, we see that question & answer
nouns capture information about “ethnicity” and “hairstyle”,
while caption nouns capture information about pluralized visible objects (e.g., “cellphones”, “daughters”) and groups (e.g.,
“trio”, “some”), among other differences. “Man” and “people”
are common in both captions and questions & answers.
One key piece to understanding the visual world is understanding spatial relationships, and so we additionally extract spatial
prepositions and plot their proportions in the captions vs. the
questions & answers data in Fig. 14 (left) for real images and
Fig. 14 (right) for abstract scenes. We see that questions &
7. Visualization created using 
answers have a higher proportion of speciﬁc spatial relations
(i.e., “in”, “on”) compared to captions, which have a higher
proportion of general spatial relations (i.e., “with”, “near”).
Fig. 14: Proportions of spatial prepositions in the captions and question & answers for real images (left) and abstract scenes (right).
Fig. 15: Venn-style word clouds for nouns with size indicating the normalized count for real images.
Fig. 16: Venn-style word clouds for verbs with size indicating the normalized count for real images.
Fig. 17: Venn-style word clouds for adjectives with size indicating the normalized count for real images.
Fig. 18: Venn-style word clouds for nouns with size indicating the normalized count for abstract scenes.
Fig. 19: Venn-style word clouds for verbs with size indicating the normalized count for abstract scenes.
Fig. 20: Venn-style word clouds for adjectives with size indicating the normalized count for abstract scenes.
Accuracy Metric
Yes/No Number Other
MC majority vote 91.54
MC average
Open-Ended
MC majority vote 93.57
Abstract MC average
Open-Ended
TABLE 6: For each of the two datasets, real and abstract, ﬁrst two
rows are the human accuracies for multiple-choice questions when
subjects were shown both the image and the question. Majority
vote means we consider the answer picked by majority of the three
subjects to be the predicted answer by humans and compute accuracy
of that answer for each question. Average means we compute the
accuracy of each of the answers picked by the subjects and record
their average for each question. The last row is the inter-human
agreement for open-ended answers task when subjects were shown
both the image and the question. All accuracies are evaluated on a
random subset of 3000 questions.
APPENDIX II: “WHAT IS” ANALYSIS
In Fig. 21, we show the distribution of questions starting
with “What is” by their ﬁrst ﬁve words for both real images
and abstract scenes. Note the diversity of objects referenced
in the questions, as well as, the relations between objects,
such as “holding” and “sitting on”. In Fig. 22, we show
the distribution of answers for “What is” questions ending
in different words. For instance, questions ending in “eating”
have answers such as “pizza”, “watermelon” and “hot dog”.
Notice the diversity in answers for some questions, such as
those that end with “for?” or “picture?”. Other questions result
in intuitive responses, such as “holding?” and the response
“umbrella”.
APPENDIX III: MULTIPLE-CHOICE HUMAN AC-
To compute human accuracy for multiple-choice questions,
we collected three human answers per question on a random
subset of 3,000 questions for both real images and abstract
scenes. In Table 6, we show the human accuracies for multiple choice questions. Table 6 also shows the inter-human
agreement for open-ended answer task. In comparison to openended answer, the multiple-choice accuracies are more or less
same for “yes/no” questions and signiﬁcantly better (≈15%
increase for real images and ≈11% increase for abstract
scenes) for “other” questions. Since “other” questions may
be ambiguous, the increase in accuracy using multiple choice
is not surprising.
APPENDIX IV: DETAILS ON VQA BASELINES
“per Q-type prior” baseline. We decide on different question
types based on ﬁrst few words of questions in the real images
training set and ensure that each question type has at least 30
questions in the training dataset. The most popular answer for
each question type is also computed on real images training
“nearest neighbor” baseline. For every question in the VQA
test-standard set, we ﬁnd its k nearest neighbor questions
in the training set using cosine similarity in Skip-Thought
 feature space. We also experimented with bag of words
and Word2Vec feature spaces but we obtained the best
performance with Skip-Thought. In this set of k questions
and their associated images, we ﬁnd the image which is most
similar to the query image using cosine similarity in fc7 feature
space. We use the fc7 features from the caffenet model in
BVLC Caffe . The most common ground truth answer
of this most similar image and question pair is the predicted
answer for the query image and question pair. We pick k = 4
on the test-dev set.
APPENDIX V: “AGE” AND “COMMONSENSE”
OF OUR MODEL
We estimate the age and degree of commonsense of our best
model (deeper LSTM Q + norm I), selected using VQA testdev accuracies). To estimate the age, we compute a weighted
average of the average age per question, weighted by the
accuracy of the model’s predicted answer for that question,
on the subset of questions in the VQA validation set for
which we have age annotations (how old a human needs to
be to answer the question correctly). To estimate the degree
of commonsense, we compute a weighted average of the
average degree of commonsense per question, weighted by the
accuracy of the model’s predicted answer for that question, on
the subset of questions in the VQA validation set for which we
have commonsense annotations (whether the question requires
commonsense to answer it).
APPENDIX VI: ABSTRACT SCENES DATASET
In Fig. 23 (left), we show a subset of the objects that are
present in the abstract scenes dataset. For more examples of the
scenes generated, please see Fig. 28. The user interface used
to create the scenes is shown in Fig. 23 (right). Subjects used
a drag-and-drop interface to create the scenes. Each object
could be ﬂipped horizontally and scaled. The scale of the
object determined the rendering order of the objects. Many
objects have different attributes corresponding to different
poses or types. Most animals have ﬁve different discrete poses.
Humans have eight discrete expressions and their poses may
be continuously adjusted using a “paperdoll” model .
APPENDIX VII: USER INTERFACES
In Fig. 24, we show the AMT interface that we used to
collect questions for images. Note that we tell the workers that
the robot already knows the answer to the previously asked
question(s), inspiring them to ask different kinds of questions,
thereby increasing the diversity of our dataset.
Fig. 25 shows the AMT interface used for collecting answers
to the previously collected questions when subjects were
shown the corresponding images. Fig. 26 shows the interface
that was used to collect answers to questions when subjects
were not shown the corresponding image (i.e., to help in
gathering incorrect, but plausible, answers for the multiplechoice task and to assess how accurately the questions can be
answered using common sense knowledge alone).
Real Images
Abstract Scenes
Fig. 21: Distribution of questions starting with “What is” by their ﬁrst ﬁve words for a random sample of 60K questions for real images
(left) and all questions for abstract scenes (right). The ordering of the words starts towards the center and radiates outwards. The arc length
is proportional to the number of questions containing the word. White areas are words with contributions too small to show.
Real Images
Abstract Scenes
Fig. 22: Distribution of answers for questions starting with “What is” for a random sample of 60K questions for real images (top) and all
questions for abstract scenes (bottom). Each column corresponds to questions ending in different words, such as “doing?”, “on?”, etc.
Fig. 23: Left: A small subset of the objects present in the abstract scene dataset. Right: The AMT interface for collecting abstract scenes.
The light green circles indicate where users can select to manipulate a person’s pose. Different objects may be added to the scene using the
folders to the right.
Fig. 24: Our AMT interface for collecting the third question for an image, when subjects were shown previous questions that were collected
and were asked to ask a question different from previous questions.
Fig. 25: The AMT interface used to collect answers to a question when subjects were shown the image while answering the question.
Fig. 26: The AMT interface used to collect answers to a question when subjects were not shown the image while answering the question
using only commonsense to collect the plausible, but incorrect, multiple-choice answers.
APPENDIX VIII: ANSWER DISTRIBUTION
The top 250 answers in our real images dataset along with
their counts and percentage counts are given below. The
answers have been presented in different colors to show the
different Part-of-Speech (POS) tagging of the answers with the
following color code: yes/no, noun, verb, adjective, adverb,
and numeral.
“yes” (566613, 22.82%), “no” (381307, 15.35%), “2” (80031,
3.22%), “1” (46537, 1.87%), “white” (41753, 1.68%), “3”
(41334, 1.66%), “red” (33834, 1.36%), “blue” (28881, 1.16%),
“4” (27174, 1.09%), “green” (22453, 0.9%), “black” (21852,
0.88%), “yellow” (17312, 0.7%), “brown” (14488, 0.58%), “5”
(14373, 0.58%), “tennis” (10941, 0.44%),“baseball” (10299,
0.41%), “6” (10103, 0.41%), “orange” (9136, 0.37%), “0”
(8812, 0.35%), “bathroom” (8473, 0.34%), “wood” (8219,
0.33%), “right” (8209, 0.33%), “left” (8058, 0.32%), “frisbee”
(7671, 0.31%), “pink” (7519, 0.3%), “gray” (7385, 0.3%),
“pizza” (6892, 0.28%), “7” (6005, 0.24%), “kitchen” (5926,
0.24%), “8” (5592, 0.23%), “cat” (5514, 0.22%), “skiing”
(5189, 0.21%), “skateboarding” (5122, 0.21%), “dog” (5092,
0.21%), “snow” (4867, 0.2%), “black and white” (4852, 0.2%),
“skateboard” (4697, 0.19%), “surﬁng” (4544, 0.18%), “water” (4513, 0.18%), “giraffe” (4027, 0.16%), “grass” (3979,
0.16%), “surfboard” (3934, 0.16%), “wii” (3898, 0.16%),
“kite” (3852, 0.16%), “10” (3756, 0.15%), “purple” (3722,
0.15%), “elephant” (3646, 0.15%), “broccoli” (3604, 0.15%),
“man” (3590, 0.14%), “winter” (3490, 0.14%), “stop” (3413,
0.14%), “train” (3226, 0.13%), “9” (3217, 0.13%), “apple”
(3189, 0.13%), “silver” (3186, 0.13%), “horse” (3159, 0.13%),
“banana” (3151, 0.13%), “umbrella” (3139, 0.13%), “eating” (3117, 0.13%), “sheep” (2927, 0.12%), “bear” (2803,
0.11%), “phone” (2772, 0.11%), “12” (2633, 0.11%), “motorcycle” (2608, 0.11%), “cake” (2602, 0.1%), “wine” (2574,
0.1%), “beach” (2536, 0.1%), “soccer” (2504, 0.1%), “sunny”
(2475, 0.1%), “zebra” (2403, 0.1%), “tan” (2402, 0.1%),
“brick” (2395, 0.1%), “female” (2372, 0.1%), “bananas”
(2350, 0.09%), “table” (2331, 0.09%), “laptop” (2316, 0.09%),
“hat” (2277, 0.09%), “bench” (2259, 0.09%), “ﬂowers” (2219,
0.09%), “woman” (2197, 0.09%), “male” (2170, 0.09%),
“cow” , “food” , “living room”
 , “bus” , “snowboarding” , “kites” , “cell phone” ,
“helmet” (1885, 0.08%), “maybe” (1853, 0.07%), “outside”
(1846, 0.07%), “hot dog” (1809, 0.07%), “night” (1805,
0.07%), “trees” (1785, 0.07%), “11” (1753, 0.07%), “bird”
(1739, 0.07%), “down” (1732, 0.07%), “bed” (1587, 0.06%),
“camera” (1560, 0.06%), “tree” (1547, 0.06%), “christmas”
(1544, 0.06%), “fence” (1543, 0.06%), “nothing” (1538,
0.06%), “unknown” (1532, 0.06%), “tennis racket” (1525,
0.06%), “red and white” (1518, 0.06%), “bedroom” (1500,
0.06%), “bat” (1494, 0.06%), “glasses” (1491, 0.06%), “tile”
(1487, 0.06%), “metal” (1470, 0.06%), “blue and white”
(1440, 0.06%), “fork” (1439, 0.06%), “plane” (1439, 0.06%),
“airport” (1422, 0.06%), “cloudy” (1413, 0.06%), “15” (1407,
0.06%), “up” (1399, 0.06%), “blonde” (1398, 0.06%), “day”
(1396, 0.06%), “teddy bear” (1386, 0.06%), “glass” (1379,
0.06%), “20” (1365, 0.05%), “beer” (1345, 0.05%), “car”
(1331, 0.05%), “sitting” (1328, 0.05%), “boat” (1326, 0.05%),
“standing” (1326, 0.05%), “clear” (1318, 0.05%), “13” (1318,
0.05%), “nike” (1293, 0.05%), “sand” (1282, 0.05%), “open”
(1279, 0.05%), “cows” (1271, 0.05%), “bike” (1267, 0.05%),
“chocolate” (1266, 0.05%), “donut” (1263, 0.05%), “airplane” (1247, 0.05%), “birthday” (1241, 0.05%), “carrots”
(1239, 0.05%), “skis” (1220, 0.05%), “girl” (1220, 0.05%),
“many” (1211, 0.05%), “zoo” (1204, 0.05%), “suitcase”
(1199, 0.05%), “old” (1180, 0.05%), “chair” (1174, 0.05%),
“beige” (1170, 0.05%), “ball” (1169, 0.05%), “ocean” (1168,
0.05%), “sandwich” (1168, 0.05%), “tie” (1166, 0.05%),
“horses” (1163, 0.05%), “palm” (1163, 0.05%), “stripes”
(1155, 0.05%), “fall” (1146, 0.05%), “cheese” (1142, 0.05%),
“scissors” (1134, 0.05%), “round” (1125, 0.05%), “chinese”
(1123, 0.05%), “knife” (1120, 0.05%), “14” (1110, 0.04%),
“toilet” (1099, 0.04%), “don’t know” (1085, 0.04%), “snowboard” (1083, 0.04%), “truck” (1076, 0.04%), “boy” (1070,
0.04%), “coffee” (1070, 0.04%), “cold” (1064, 0.04%), “fruit”
(1064, 0.04%), “walking” (1053, 0.04%), “wedding” (1051,
0.04%), “lot” (1050, 0.04%), “sunglasses” (1047, 0.04%),
“mountains” (1030, 0.04%), “wall” (1009, 0.04%), “elephants” (1006, 0.04%), “wetsuit” (998, 0.04%), “square” (994,
0.04%), “toothbrush” (989, 0.04%), “sleeping” (986, 0.04%),
“ﬁre hydrant” (977, 0.04%), “bicycle” (973, 0.04%), “overcast” (968, 0.04%), “donuts” (961, 0.04%), “plastic” (961,
0.04%), “breakfast” (955, 0.04%), “tv” (953, 0.04%), “paper”
(952, 0.04%), “ground” (949, 0.04%), “asian” (938, 0.04%),
“plaid” (936, 0.04%), “dirt” (933, 0.04%), “mirror” (928,
0.04%), “usa” (928, 0.04%), “chicken” (925, 0.04%), “plate”
(920, 0.04%), “clock” (912, 0.04%), “luggage” (908, 0.04%),
“none” (908, 0.04%), “street” (905, 0.04%), “on table” (904,
0.04%), “spoon” (899, 0.04%), “cooking” (898, 0.04%), “daytime” (896, 0.04%), “16” (893, 0.04%), “africa” (890, 0.04%),
“stone” (884, 0.04%), “not sure” (873, 0.04%), “window”
(868, 0.03%), “sun” (865, 0.03%), “gold” (860, 0.03%),
“people” (856, 0.03%), “racket” (847, 0.03%), “zebras” (845,
0.03%), “carrot” (841, 0.03%), “person” (835, 0.03%), “ﬁsh”
(835, 0.03%), “happy” (824, 0.03%), “circle” (822, 0.03%),
“oranges” (817, 0.03%), “backpack” (812, 0.03%), “25” (810,
0.03%), “leaves” (809, 0.03%), “watch” (804, 0.03%), “mountain” (800, 0.03%), “no one” (798, 0.03%), “ski poles”
(792, 0.03%), “city” (791, 0.03%), “couch” (790, 0.03%),
“afternoon” (782, 0.03%), “jeans” (781, 0.03%), “brown and
white” (779, 0.03%), “summer” (774, 0.03%), “giraffes” (772,
0.03%), “computer” (771, 0.03%), “refrigerator” (768, 0.03%),
“birds” (762, 0.03%), “child” (761, 0.03%), “park” (759,
0.03%), “ﬂying kite” (756, 0.03%), “restaurant” (747, 0.03%),
“evening” (738, 0.03%), “grafﬁti” (736, 0.03%), “30” (730,
0.03%), “grazing” (727, 0.03%), “ﬂower” (723, 0.03%), “remote” (720, 0.03%), “hay” (719, 0.03%), “50” (716, 0.03%).
APPENDIX IX: ADDITIONAL EXAMPLES
To provide insight into the dataset, we provide additional
examples. In Fig. 27, Fig. 28, and Fig. 29, we show a random
selection of the VQA dataset for the MS COCO images,
abstract scenes, and multiple-choice questions, respectively.
What part of the body
are these worn around?
How many ties are
Does this look like a
group of nerds?
What are the
people throwing?
Which player on the field
head-butted the ball?
player on left
1 in front of goal
What number is on the girl
How many people are
wearing an orange shirt?
Is this a trained
What is the type of meat
under the bread?
roast beef
roast beef
How much fluid is in the
bottom of the bowl?
How many stories is this
Is the table large enough for
10 average people to eat at?
How many boats are
How many umbrellas are
in the image?
Why does this male
have his arms in this
for balance
for balance
he’s carrying bags
Are the clouds
high in the sky?
Is it raining?
Are there any people
sitting on the bench?
What is the woman
What is the most
colorful object in
the picture?
What is in the child’s
it’s thumg
What is the child
harnessed to?
high chair
child seat
What color are
the shoe laces?
Light blue
What is he
sitting on?
Skateboard
Skateboard
Skateboard
What is the horse
missing to be able
to ride it?
What shape is the
building on the
rectangular
What red objects in
front are almost
covered by snow?
parking meters
parking meters
Is it winter?
Does the car have a
license plate?
Could the truck have a
Is the picture hanging
How many cabinets are
on the piece of
furniture?
Is this person trying
to hit a ball?
What is the person
hitting the ball with?
round paddle
What type of trees
Is the skateboard
What is the animal in
the water?
How many people are
What is on the
Does the man
have a backpack?
What is the guy
doing as he sits
on the bench?
taking picture
taking picture with phone
What color are
his shoes?
Is this photo taken
in Antarctica?
Overcast or sunny?
Is the woman on the back
of the bicycle pedaling?
Why is the woman
holding an umbrella?
to block sun
it’s raining
it’s raining
to stay dry
Is it sunny in
this picture?
How many bikes
on the floor?
Fig. 27: Random examples of questions (black), (a subset of the) answers given when looking at the image (green), and answers given when
not looking at the image (blue) for numerous representative examples of the real image dataset.
Who is holding the
How is the weather?
cool and sunny
mostly sunny
partly cloudy
What is the dog
looking at?
soccerball
Will the boy play
with the dog?
What is the little girl playing
teddy bear
What is in the pond?
What part of the chair is
the lady sitting on?
Is the woman sad?
her cat died
What color is the book
the woman is reading?
Is the lady reading?
What are the boy
and girl sitting on?
teeter-totter
What geometric
shape is the base of
the seesaw?
What color is the bike?
Is the man injured?
What color is the
How many turtles?
What is the woman
watching tv
Who is having tea?
Are there leaves in
What is under the
mans left foot?
soccer ball
tablecloth
Is the sun shining?
What is in the pond?
How many bushes are
in the background?
What is the girl
talking on phone
How many cats are
sleeping on the rug?
What color is the
dog on the left?
brown and white
tan and white
How many different
kinds of fruits are
available?
Which objects needs 2
people in order to
teeter-totter
bandsaw, firehose
Is the cat chasing the
Is the man sad?
Is the woman standing?
What is beside the
How many books are
in the shelf?
What is the person
What color is the
plant on the left?
Why is the woman
eating a salad rather
than pizza?
she likes salad
overweight
she’s losing weight
Does the man have a good
How many rabbits are there?
Is it a warm night?
Is the man happy?
my best guess is happy
Is the man happy?
Is there an animal
in the picture?
How many windows
are in this room?
Is she waiting on
Is the man young or old?
Which grill is the man
What is the girl
sitting on?
What is the girl
sitting on floor
Fig. 28: Random examples of questions (black), (a subset of the) answers given when looking at the image (green), and answers given when
not looking at the image (blue) for numerous representative examples of the abstract scene dataset.
Q: What is the color of freebee?
(n) vitamin c
(p) christleton
(q) bonsai tree
Q: How old is the child?
(n) mechanics
(p) wait here
(r) recording studio
Q: Where is the kid pointing?
(g) white (h) red
(m) floor mat
(n) so people don't get wet
(o) down (p) mom (q) pharos
(r) ketchup pickle relish mustard
Q: How many people are in the picture on side of refrigerator?
(g) white (h) red
(k) 108 mph (l) banana, apple (m) 7
(n) 10 many
(o) fruit salad (p) full swing (q) 5
(r) vattenfall strom fur gewinner
Q: How many of the deer are sleeping?
(e) 3 (f) 4
(j) yellow
(l) left of pond
(m) 13 (n) plants and cat
(o) tree base
(p) cement
(r) green, blue and yellow
Q: What type of wildlife is this park overrun with?
(j) yellow
(k) eating
(m) mosquitoes
(q) girl’s
(r) woman on right
Q: Is the girl standing?
(j) yellow
(l) standing
(m) hiding
(n) sitting
(o) to sleep
(p) bird nest
(r) park ranger
Q: Does the girl have a lot of toys?
(j) yellow
(p) yes 3 of them (q) no image
(r) children and toys
Q: What sport are they playing?
(k) tennis
(l) bodily functions (m) scissors
(n) mississippi and meade
(o) baseball
(p) frisbee
(q) soccer
(r) its advertising object
Q: What is the man in gray pant's job?
(l) umpire
(m) snowflake
(n) banker
(p) speedboat
(q) 10: 32
Q: Is this person's face painted?
(m) camera film (n) keyboard, mouse, booklet
(o) stairs
(p) n200 (q) public storage (r) pasta, sauce, meat
Q: How many umbrellas are in the photo?
(m) max payne
(p) dresses
(q) 3 to 5
(r) two way traffic
Q: Where is the blanket?
(j) yellow
(l) lying down
(n) utensils
(o) on bed
(q) ground
(r) watching child
Q: What is for dessert?
(j) yellow
(n) doll and dollhouse
(o) ice cream
(p) yellow book (q) cheesecake
(r) there are no fish
Q: Why does the little girl not look happy?
(g) white (h) red
(j) yellow
(k) indian
(m) dog left
(n) smiling at it
(o) corner (p) to be pet
(q) she fell
(r) boy is playing with her toys
Q: Why is the boy playing with his sister's toys?
(j) yellow
(k) he likes them
(l) parking it
(o) he feeds them
(p) lonely
(r) likes them
Q: Why are they standing?
(j) yellow
(k) playing game (l) sheepskin
(m) waiting
(n) no where to sit
(o) firestone
(q) forks (r) waiting for train
Q: Is the TV on?
(j) yellow
(l) jeopardy
(m) sports
(n) between big elephants
(o) edinburgh
(p) strawberries (q) tv show
(r) white streak on face
Q: How many legs does the dog have?
(g) white (h) red
(j) yellow
(k) outdoors (l) hiding
(n) sitting in grass
(o) owls (p) 8
(r) arm of sofa
Q: Is the boy at the top of the ladder?
(j) yellow
(k) not sure
(l) yellow dog
(m) bottom
(n) behind trees
(p) girl on right
(r) she's in middle
Fig. 29: Random examples of multiple-choice questions for numerous representative examples of the real and abstract scene dataset.