Machine Learning, 45, 5–32, 2001
c⃝2001 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Manufactured in The Netherlands.
Random Forests
LEO BREIMAN
Statistics Department, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720
Editor: Robert E. Schapire
Random forests are a combination of tree predictors such that each tree depends on the values of a
random vector sampled independently and with the same distribution for all trees in the forest. The generalization
error for forests converges a.s. to a limit as the number of trees in the forest becomes large. The generalization
error of a forest of tree classiﬁers depends on the strength of the individual trees in the forest and the correlation between them. Using a random selection of features to split each node yields error rates that compare
favorably to Adaboost (Y. Freund & R. Schapire, Machine Learning: Proceedings of the Thirteenth International conference, ∗∗∗, 148–156), but are more robust with respect to noise. Internal estimates monitor error,
strength, and correlation and these are used to show the response to increasing the number of features used in
the splitting. Internal estimates are also used to measure variable importance. These ideas are also applicable to
regression.
classiﬁcation, regression, ensemble
Random forests
Introduction
Signiﬁcantimprovementsinclassiﬁcationaccuracyhaveresultedfromgrowinganensemble
of trees and letting them vote for the most popular class. In order to grow these ensembles,
often random vectors are generated that govern the growth of each tree in the ensemble.
An early example is bagging , where to grow each tree a random selection
(without replacement) is made from the examples in the training set.
Another example is random split selection where at each node the split
is selected at random from among the K best splits. Breiman generates new training
sets by randomizing the outputs in the original training set. Another approach is to select
the training set from a random set of weights on the examples in the training set. Ho 
has written a number of papers on “the random subspace” method which does a random
selection of a subset of features to use to grow each tree.
In an important paper on written character recognition, Amit and Geman deﬁne
a large number of geometric features and search over a random selection of these for the
best split at each node. This latter paper has been inﬂuential in my thinking.
The common element in all of these procedures is that for the kth tree, a random vector
k is generated, independent of the past random vectors 1,...,k−1 but with the same
distribution; and a tree is grown using the training set and k, resulting in a classiﬁer
h(x, k) where x is an input vector. For instance, in bagging the random vector  is
L. BREIMAN
generated as the counts in N boxes resulting from N darts thrown at random at the boxes,
where N is number of examples in the training set. In random split selection  consists of
a number of independent random integers between 1 and K. The nature and dimensionality
of  depends on its use in tree construction.
After a large number of trees is generated, they vote for the most popular class. We call
these procedures random forests.
Deﬁnition 1.1.
A random forest is a classiﬁer consisting of a collection of tree-structured
classiﬁers {h(x, k), k = 1, . . .} where the {k} are independent identically distributed
random vectors and each tree casts a unit vote for the most popular class at input x.
Outline of paper
Section 2 gives some theoretical background for random forests. Use of the Strong Law
of Large Numbers shows that they always converge so that overﬁtting is not a problem.
We give a simpliﬁed and extended version of the Amit and Geman analysis
to show that the accuracy of a random forest depends on the strength of the individual tree classiﬁers and a measure of the dependence between them (see Section 2 for
deﬁnitions).
Section 3 introduces forests using the random selection of features at each node to
determine the split. An important question is how many features to select at each node. For
guidance, internal estimates of the generalization error, classiﬁer strength and dependence
are computed. These are called out-of-bag estimates and are reviewed in Section 4. Section
5 and 6 give empirical results for two different forms of random features. The ﬁrst uses
random selection from the original inputs; the second uses random linear combinations of
inputs. The results compare favorably to Adaboost.
The results turn out to be insensitive to the number of features selected to split each node.
Usually, selecting one or two features gives near optimum results. To explore this and relate
it to strength and correlation, an empirical study is carried out in Section 7.
Adaboosthasnorandomelementsandgrowsanensembleoftreesbysuccessivereweightings of the training set where the current weights depend on the past history of the ensemble
formation. But just as a deterministic random number generator can give a good imitation
of randomness, my belief is that in its later stages Adaboost is emulating a random forest.
Evidence for this conjecture is given in Section 8.
Important recent problems, i.e., medical diagnosis and document retrieval, often have the
property that there are many input variables, often in the hundreds or thousands, with each
one containing only a small amount of information. A single tree classiﬁer will then have
accuracy only slightly better than a random choice of class. But combining trees grown
using random features can produce improved accuracy. In Section 9 we experiment on a
simulated data set with 1,000 input variables, 1,000 examples in the training set and a 4,000
example test set. Accuracy comparable to the Bayes rate is achieved.
In many applications, understanding of the mechanism of the random forest “black box”
is needed. Section 10 makes a start on this by computing internal estimates of variable
importance and binding these together by reuse runs.
RANDOM FORESTS
Section 11 looks at random forests for regression. A bound for the mean squared generalization error is derived that shows that the decrease in error from the individual trees in
the forest depends on the correlation between residuals and the mean squared error of the
individual trees. Empirical results for regression are in Section 12. Concluding remarks are
given in Section 13.
Characterizing the accuracy of random forests
Random forests converge
Given an ensemble of classiﬁers h1(x), h2(x), . . . , hK(x), and with the training set drawn
at random from the distribution of the random vector Y, X, deﬁne the margin function as
mg(X, Y) = avk I (hk(X) = Y) −max
j̸=Y avk I (hk(X) = j).
where I (·) is the indicator function. The margin measures the extent to which the average
number of votes at X, Y for the right class exceeds the average vote for any other class.
The larger the margin, the more conﬁdence in the classiﬁcation. The generalization error is
PE∗= PX,Y(mg(X, Y) < 0)
where the subscripts X, Y indicate that the probability is over the X, Y space.
In random forests, hk(X) = h(X, k). For a large number of trees, it follows from the
Strong Law of Large Numbers and the tree structure that:
Theorem 1.2.
As the number of trees increases, for almost surely all sequences 1,...PE∗
converges to
PX,Y(P(h(X, ) = Y) −max
j̸=Y P(h(X, ) = j) < 0).
see Appendix I.
This result explains why random forests do not overﬁt as more trees are added, but
produce a limiting value of the generalization error.
Strength and correlation
For random forests, an upper bound can be derived for the generalization error in terms
of two parameters that are measures of how accurate the individual classiﬁers are and of
the dependence between them. The interplay between these two gives the foundation for
understanding the workings of random forests. We build on the analysis in Amit and Geman
L. BREIMAN
Deﬁnition 2.1.
The margin function for a random forest is
mr(X, Y) = P(h(X, ) = Y) −max
j̸=Y P(h(X, ) = j)
and the strength of the set of classiﬁers {h(x, )} is
s = EX,Ymr(X, Y).
Assuming s ≥0, Chebychev’s inequality gives
PE∗≤var(mr)/s2
A more revealing expression for the variance of mr is derived in the following: Let
ˆj(X, Y) = arg max
j̸=Y P(h(X, ) = j)
mr(X, Y) = P(h(X, ) = Y) −P(h(X, ) = ˆj(X, Y))
= E[I (h(X, ) = Y) −I (h(X, ) = ˆj(X, Y)].
Deﬁnition 2.2.
The raw margin function is
rmg(, X, Y) = I (h(X, ) = Y) −I (h(X, ) = ˆj(X, Y)).
Thus, mr(X, Y) is the expectation of rmg(, X, Y) with respect to . For any function f
the identity
[E f ()]2 = E,′ f () f (′)
holds where , ′ are independent with the same distribution, implying that
mr(X, Y)2 = E,′rmg(, X, Y)rmg(′, X, Y)
Using (5) gives
var(mr) = E,′(covX,Yrmg(, X, Y)rmg(′, X, Y))
= E,′(ρ(, ′)sd()sd(′))
where ρ(, ′) is the correlation betweenrmg(, X, Y) andrmg(′, X, Y) holding , ′
ﬁxed and sd() is the standard deviation of rmg(, X, Y) holding  ﬁxed. Then,
var(mr) = ¯ρ(Esd())2
≤¯ρEvar()
RANDOM FORESTS
where ¯ρ is the mean value of the correlation; that is,
¯ρ = E,′(ρ(, ′)sd()sd(′))/E,′(sd()sd(′))
Evar() ≤E(EX,Yrmg(, X, Y))2 −s2
Putting (4), (7), and (8) together yields:
Theorem 2.3.
An upper bound for the generalization error is given by
PE∗≤¯ρ(1 −s2)/s2.
Although the bound is likely to be loose, it fulﬁlls the same suggestive function for random
forests as VC-type bounds do for other types of classiﬁers. It shows that the two ingredients
involved in the generalization error for random forests are the strength of the individual
classiﬁers in the forest, and the correlation between them in terms of the raw margin functions. The c/s2 ratio is the correlation divided by the square of the strength. In understanding
the functioning of random forests, this ratio will be a helpful guide—the smaller it is, the
Deﬁnition 2.4.
The c/s2 ratio for a random forest is deﬁned as
c/s2 = ¯ρ/s2.
There are simpliﬁcations in the two class situation. The margin function is
mr(X, Y) = 2P(h(X, ) = Y) −1
The requirement that the strength is positive (see (4)) becomes similar to the familiar weak
learning condition EX,Y P(h(X, ) = Y)>.5. The raw margin function is 2I (h(X, ) =
Y)−1 and the correlation ¯ρ is between I (h(X, ) = Y) and I (h(X, ′) = Y). In particular,
if the values for Y are taken to be +1 and −1, then
¯ρ = E,′[ρ(h(·, ), h(·, ′)]
so that ¯ρ is the correlation between two different members of the forest averaged over the
, ′ distribution.
For more than two classes, the measure of strength deﬁned in (3) depends on the forest as
well as the individual trees since it is the forest that determines ˆj(X, Y). Another approach
L. BREIMAN
is possible. Write
PE∗= PX,Y(P(h(X, ) = Y) −max
j̸=Y P(h(X, ) = j) < 0)
PX,Y(P(h(X, ) = Y) −P(h(X, ) = j) < 0).
s j = EX,Y(P(h(X, ) = Y) −P(h(X, ) = j))
to be the strength of the set of classiﬁers {h(x, )} relative to class j. Note that this deﬁnition
of strength does not depend on the forest. Using Chebyshev’s inequality, assuming all s j>0
var(P(h(X, ) = Y) −P(h(X, ) = j))s2
and using identities similar to those used in deriving (7), the variances in (9) can be expressed
intermsofaveragecorrelations.Ididnotuseestimatesofthequantitiesin(9)inourempirical
study but think they would be interesting in a multiple class problem.
Using random features
Some random forests reported in the literature have consistently lower generalization error
than others. For instance, random split selection does better than bagging.
Breiman’s introduction of random noise into the outputs also does better.
But none of these these three forests do as well as Adaboost or
other algorithms that work by adaptive reweighting (arcing) of the training set .
To improve accuracy, the randomness injected has to minimize the correlation ¯ρ while
maintaining strength. The forests studied here consist of using randomly selected inputs or
combinations of inputs at each node to grow each tree. The resulting forests give accuracy
thatcomparefavorablywithAdaboost.Thisclassofprocedureshasdesirablecharacteristics:
i Its accuracy is as good as Adaboost and sometimes better.
ii It’s relatively robust to outliers and noise.
iii It’s faster than bagging or boosting.
iv It gives useful internal estimates of error, strength, correlation and variable importance.
v It’s simple and easily parallelized.
Amit and Geman grew shallow trees for handwritten character recognition using
random selection from a large number of geometrically deﬁned features to deﬁne the split
at each node. Although my implementation is different and not problem speciﬁc, it was
their work that provided the start for my ideas.
RANDOM FORESTS
Using out-of-bag estimates to monitor error, strength, and correlation
In my experiments with random forests, bagging is used in tandem with random feature
selection. Each new training set is drawn, with replacement, from the original training set.
Then a tree is grown on the new training set using random feature selection. The trees grown
are not pruned.
There are two reasons for using bagging. The ﬁrst is that the use of bagging seems to
enhance accuracy when random features are used. The second is that bagging can be used to
give ongoing estimates of the generalization error (PE∗) of the combined ensemble of trees,
as well as estimates for the strength and correlation. These estimates are done out-of-bag,
which is explained as follows.
Assume a method for constructing a classiﬁer from any training set. Given a speciﬁc
training set T , form boostrap training sets Tk, construct classiﬁers h(x, Tk) and let these
vote to form the bagged predictor. For each y, x in the training set, aggregate the votes
only over those classiﬁers for which Tk does not containing y, x. Call this the out-of-bag
classiﬁer. Then the out-of-bag estimate for the generalization error is the error rate of the
out-of-bag classiﬁer on the training set.
Tibshirani and Wolpert and Macready , proposed using out-of-bag estimates as an ingredient in estimates of generalization error. Wolpert and Macready worked
on regression type problems and proposed a number of methods for estimating the generalization error of bagged predictors. Tibshirani used out-of-bag estimates of variance
to estimate generalization error for arbitrary classiﬁers. The study of error estimates for
bagged classiﬁers in Breiman , gives empirical evidence to show that the outof-bag estimate is as accurate as using a test set of the same size as the training set.
Therefore, using the out-of-bag error estimate removes the need for a set aside test
In each bootstrap training set, about one-third of the instances are left out. Therefore, the
out-of-bag estimates are based on combining only about one-third as many classiﬁers as in
the ongoing main combination. Since the error rate decreases as the number of combinations
increases, the out-of-bag estimates will tend to overestimate the current error rate. To get
unbiased out-of-bag estimates, it is necessary to run past the point where the test set error
converges. But unlike cross-validation, where bias is present but its extent unknown, the
out-of-bag estimates are unbiased.
Strength and correlation can also be estimated using out-of-bag methods. This gives
internal estimates that are helpful in understanding classiﬁcation accuracy and how to
improve it. The details are given in Appendix II. Another application is to the measures of
variable importance (see Section 10).
Random forests using random input selection
The simplest random forest with random features is formed by selecting at random, at each
node, a small group of input variables to split on. Grow the tree using CART methodology
to maximum size and do not prune. Denote this procedure by Forest-RI. The size F of
the group is ﬁxed. Two values of F were tried. The ﬁrst used only one randomly selected
L. BREIMAN
Data set summary.
Train size
Breast cancer
Ionosphere
German credit
Sat-images
variable, i.e., F = 1. The second took F to be the ﬁrst integer less than log2 M + 1, where
M is the number of inputs.
My experiments use 13 smaller sized data sets from the UCI repository, 3 larger sets
separated into training and test sets and 4 synthetic data sets. The ﬁrst 10 sets were selected
because I had used them in past research. Table 1 gives a brief summary.
On each of the 13 smaller sized data sets, the following procedure was used: a random
10% of the data was set aside. On the remaining data, random forest was run twice, growing
and combining 100 trees—once with F = 1, and the second time with F = int(log2 M +1).
The set aside 10% was then put down each forest to get a test set error for both. The test
set error selected corresponded to the lower value of the out-of-bag estimate in the two
runs. This was repeated 100 times and the test set errors averaged. The same procedure was
followed for the Adaboost runs which are based on combining 50 trees.
The use for 100 trees in random forests and 50 for Adaboost comes from two sources.
The out-of-bag estimates are based on only about a third as many trees as are in the forest.
To get reliable estimates I opted for 100 trees. The second consideration is that growing
random forests is many times faster than growing the trees based on all inputs needed in
Adaboost. Growing the 100 trees in random forests was considerably quicker than the 50
trees for Adaboost.
RANDOM FORESTS
Test set errors (%).
Forest-RI single input
Breast cancer
Ionosphere
German credit
Sat-images
In the runs on the larger data sets, the random forest results for the ﬁrst two data sets
were based on combining 100 trees; the zip-code procedure combined 200. For Adaboost,
50 trees were combined for the ﬁrst three data sets and 100 for zip-code. The synthetic data
was described in Breiman and also used in Schapire et al. . There were 50
runs. In each run, a new training set of size 300 and test set of size 3000 were generated. In
random forests 100 trees were combined in each run—50 in Adaboost. The results of these
runs are given in Table 2.
The second column are the results selected from the two group sizes by means of lowest
out-of-bag error. The third column is the test set error using just one random feature to grow
the trees. The fourth column contains the out-of-bag estimates of the generalization error
of the individual trees in the forest computed for the best setting (single or selection). This
estimate is computed by using the left-out instances as a test set in each tree grown and
averaging the result over all trees in the forest.
The error rates using random input selection compare favorably with Adaboost. The
comparison might be even more favorable if the search is over more values of F instead
of the preset two. But the procedure is not overly sensitive to the value of F. The average
absolute difference between the error rate using F = 1 and the higher value of F is less
than 1%. The difference is most pronounced on the three large data sets.
L. BREIMAN
The single variable test set results were included because in some of the data sets, using
a single random input variable did better than using several. In the others, results were only
slightly better than use of a single variable. It was surprising that using a single randomly
chosen input variable to split on at each node could produce good accuracy.
Random input selection can be much faster than either Adaboost or Bagging. A simple
analysis shows that the ratio of RI compute time to the compute time of unpruned tree
construction using all variables is F∗log2(N)/M where F is the number of variables used
in Forest-RI, N is the number of instances, and M the number of input variables. For zipcode data, using F = 1, the ratio is .025, implying that Forest-RI is 40 times faster. An
empirical check conﬁrmed this difference. A Forest-RI run (F = 1) on the zip-code data
takes 4.0 minutes on a 250 Mhz Macintosh to generate 100 trees compared to almost three
hours for Adaboost. For data sets with many variables, the compute time difference may be
signiﬁcant.
Random forests using linear combinations of inputs
If there are only a few inputs, say M, taking F an appreciable fraction of M might lead
an increase in strength but higher correlation. Another approach consists of deﬁning more
features by taking random linear combinations of a number of the input variables. That
is, a feature is generated by specifying L, the number of variables to be combined. At a
given node, L variables are randomly selected and added together with coefﬁcients that
are uniform random numbers on [−1, 1]. F linear combinations are generated, and then a
search is made over these for the best split. This procedure is called Forest-RC.
We use L = 3 and F = 2, 8 with the choice for F being decided on by the out-ofbag estimate. We selected L = 3 because with O(M3) different combinations of the input
variables, larger values of F should not cause much of a rise in correlation while increasing
strength. If the input variables in a data set are incommensurable, they are normalized
by subtracting means and dividing by standard deviations, where the means and standard
deviations are determined from the training set. The test set results are given in Table 3
where the third column contains the results for F = 2. The fourth column contains the
results for individual trees computed as for Table 2.
Except for the three larger data sets, use of F = 8 is superﬂous; F = 2 achieves close to the
minimum. On the larger data sets, F = 8 gives better results. Forest-RC does exceptionally
well on the synthetic data sets. Overall, it compares more favorably to Adaboost than
Forest-RI.
In Tables 2 and 3 there are some entries for which the selected entry is less than the one
input value or with Forest-RC, less than the two-feature value. The reason this happens is
that when the error rates corresponding to the two values of F are close together, then the
out-of-bag estimates will select a value of F almost at random.
A small investigation was carried out to see if performance on the three larger data sets
could be improved. Based on the runs with the satellite data in Section 6, we conjectured that
the strength keeps rising in the larger data sets while the correlation reaches an asymptote
more quickly. Therefore we did some runs with F = 100 on the larger data sets using 100,
100 and 200 trees in the three forests respectively. On the satellite data, the error dropped to
RANDOM FORESTS
Test set errors (%).
Two features
Breast cancer
Ionosphere
German credit
Sat-images
8.5%, on the letters data to 3.0%, but the zip-code test set error did not decrease. Acting on an
informed hunch, I tried Forest-RI with F = 25. The zip-code test set error dropped to 5.8%.
These are the lowest test set errors so far achieved on these three data sets by tree ensembles.
Categorical variables
Some or all of the input variables may be categoricals and since we want to deﬁne additive
combinations of variables, we need to deﬁne how categoricals will be treated so they can
be combined with numerical variables. My approach is that each time a categorical variable
is selected to split on at a node, to select a random subset of the categories of the variable,
and deﬁne a substitute variable that is one when the categorical value of the variable is in
the subset and zero outside.
Since a categorical variable with I values can be coded into I −1 dummy 0−1 variables,
we make the variable I −1 times as probable as a numeric variable to be selected in
node splitting. When many of the variables are categorical, using a low value of F results
in low correlation, but also low strength. F must be increased to about two-three times
int(log2 M + 1) to get enough strength to provide good test set accuracy.
L. BREIMAN
For instance, on the DNA data set having 60 four-valued categorical values, 2,000 examples in the training set and 1,186 in the test set, using Forest-RI with F = 20 gave a test set
error rate of 3.6% (4.2% for Adaboost). The soybean data has 685 examples, 35 variables,
19 classes, and 15 categorical variables. Using Forest-RI with F = 12 gives a test set error
of 5.3% (5.8% for Adaboost). Using Forest-RC with combinations of 3 and F = 8 gives
an error of 5.5%.
One advantage of this approach is that it gets around the difﬁculty of what to do with
categoricals that have many values. In the two-class problem, this can be avoided by using
the device proposed in Breiman et al. which reduces the search for the best categorical
split to an O(I) computation. For more classes, the search for the best categorical split is
an O(2I−1) computation. In the random forest implementation, the computation for any
categorical variable involves only the selection of a random subset of the categories.
Empirical results on strength and correlation
The purpose of this section is to look at the effect of strength and correlation on the generalization error. Another aspect that we wanted to get more understanding of was the lack of
sensitivity in the generalization error to the group size F. To conduct an empirical study of
the effects of strength and correlation in a variety of data sets, out-of-bag estimates of the
strength and correlation, as described in Section 3.1, were used.
We begin by running Forest-RI on the sonar data (60 inputs, 208 examples) using from 1
to 50 inputs. In each iteration, 10% of the data was split off as a test set. Then F, the number
of random inputs selected at each node, was varied from 1 to 50. For each value of F, 100
trees were grown to form a random forest and the terminal values of test set error, strength,
correlation, etc. recorded. Eighty iterations were done, each time removing a random 10%
of the data for use as a test set, and all results averaged over the 80 repetitions. Altogether,
400,000 trees were grown in this experiment.
The top graph of ﬁgure 1, plots the values of strength and correlation vs. F. The result is
fascinating. Past about F = 4 the strength remains constant; adding more inputs does not
help. But the correlation continues to increase. The second graph plots the test set errors
and the out-of-bag estimates of the generalization error against F. The out-of-bag estimates
are more stable. Both show the same behavior—a small drop from F = 1 out to F about
4–8, and then a general, gradual increase. This increase in error tallies with the beginning
of the constancy region for the strength.
Figure 2 has plots for similar runs on the breast data set where features consisting of
random combinations of three inputs are used. The number of these features was varied
from 1 to 25. Again, the correlation shows a slow rise, while the strength stays virtually
constant, so that the minimum error is at F = 1. The surprise in these two ﬁgures is the
relative constancy of the strength. Since the correlations are slowly but steadily increasing,
the lowest error occurs when only a few inputs or features are used.
Since the larger data sets seemed to have a different behavior than the smaller, we ran
a similar experiment on the satellite data set. The number of features, each consisting of
a random sum of two inputs, was varied from 1 to 25, and for each, 100 classiﬁers were
combined. The results are shown in ﬁgure 3. The results differ from those on the smaller
RANDOM FORESTS
Effect of number of inputs on sonar data.
L. BREIMAN
Effect of the number of features on the breast data set.
RANDOM FORESTS
Effect of number of features on satellite data.
L. BREIMAN
data sets. Both the correlation and strength show a small but steady increase. The error
rates show a slight decrease. We conjecture that with larger and more complex data sets,
the strength continues to increase longer before it plateaus out.
Our results indicate that better (lower generalization error) random forests have lower correlation between classiﬁers and higher strength. The randomness used in tree construction
has to aim for low correlation ¯ρ while maintaining reasonable strength. This conclusion has
been hinted at in previous work. Dietterich has measures of dispersion of an ensemble
and notes that more accurate ensembles have larger dispersion. Freund (personal communication) believes that one reason why Adaboost works so well is that at each step it tries to
decouple the next classiﬁer from the current one. Amit et al. give an analysis to show
that the Adaboost algorithm is aimed at keeping the covariance between classiﬁers small.
Conjecture: Adaboost is a random forest
Various classiﬁers can be modiﬁed to use both a training set and a set of weights on the
training set. Consider the following random forest: a large collection of K different sets
of non-negative sum-one weights on the training set is deﬁned. Denote these weights by
w(1), w(2), . . . , w(K). Corresponding to these weights are probabilities p(1), p(2), . . . ,
p(K) whose sum is one. Draw from the integers 1, . . . , K according to these probabilities.
The outcome is . If  = k grow the classiﬁer h(x, ) using the training set with weights
In its original version, Adaboost is a deterministic algorithm
that selects the weights on the training set for input to the next classiﬁer based on the misclassiﬁcations in the previous classiﬁers. In our experiment, random forests were produced
as follows: Adaboost was run 75 times on a data set producing sets of non-negative sum-one
weights w(1), w(2), . . . , w(50) (the ﬁrst 25 were discarded). The probability for the kth set
of weights is set proportional to Q(wk) = log[(1 −error(k))/error(k)] where error(k) is
the w(k) weighted training set error of the kth classiﬁer. Then the forest is run 250 times.
This was repeated 100 times on a few data sets, each time leaving out 10% as a test set and
then averaging the test set errors. On each data set, the Adaboost error rate was very close to
the random forest error rate. A typical result is on the Wisconsin Breast Cancer data where
Adaboost produced an average of 2.91% error and the random forest produced 2.94%.
In the Adaboost algorithm, w(k + 1) = φ(w(k)) where φ is a function determined by
the base classiﬁer. Denote the kth classiﬁer by h(x, wk). The vote of the kth classiﬁer is
weighted by Q(wk) so the normalized vote for class j at x equals
I (h(x, wk) = j)Q(wk)
For any function f deﬁned on the weight space, deﬁne the operator T f (w) = f (φ(w)).
We conjecture that T is ergodic with invariant measure π(dw). Then (10) will converge to
EQπ[I (h(x, w) = j)] where the distribution Qπ(dw) = Q(w)π(dw)/
Q(v)π(dv). If
this conjecture is true, then Adaboost is equivalent to a random forest where the weights on
the training set are selected at random from the distribution Qπ.
RANDOM FORESTS
Its truth would also explain why Adaboost does not overﬁt as more trees are added to
the ensemble—an experimental fact that has been puzzling. There is some experimental
evidence that Adaboost may overﬁt if run thousands of times ,
but these runs were done using a very simple base classiﬁer and may not carry over to the
use of trees as the base classiﬁers. My experience running Adaboost out to 1,0000 trees on
a number of data sets is that the test set error converges to an asymptotic value.
The truth of this conjecture does not solve the problem of how Adaboost selects the
favorable distributions on the weight space that it does. Note that the distribution of the
weights will depend on the training set. In the usual random forest, the distribution of
the random vectors does not depend on the training set.
The effects of output noise
Dietterich showed that when a fraction of the output labels in the training set are
randomly altered, the accuracy of Adaboost degenerates, while bagging and random split
selection are more immune to the noise. Since some noise in the outputs is often present,
robustness with respect to noise is a desirable property. Following Dietterich the
following experiment was done which changed about one in twenty class labels (injecting
5% noise).
For each data set in the experiment, 10% at random is split off as a test set. Two runs are
made on the remaining training set. The ﬁrst run is on the training set as is. The second run
is on a noisy version of the training set. The noisy version is gotten by changing, at random,
5% of the class labels into an alternate class label chosen uniformly from the other labels.
This is repeated 50 times using Adaboost (deterministic version), Forest-RI and Forest-
RC. The test set results are averaged over the 50 repetitions and the percent increase due to
the noise computed. In both random forests, we used the number of features giving the lowest
test set error in the Section 5 and 6 experiments. Because of the lengths of the runs, only
the 9 smallest data sets are used. Table 4 gives the increases in error rates due to the noise.
Increases in error rates due to noise (%).
Breast cancer
Ionosphere
L. BREIMAN
Adaboost deteriorates markedly with 5% noise, while the random forest procedures
generally show small changes. The effect on Adaboost is curiously data set dependent, with
the two multiclass data sets, glass and ecoli, along with diabetes, least effected by the noise.
The Adaboost algorithm iteratively increases the weights on the instances most recently
misclassiﬁed. Instances having incorrect class labels will persist in being misclassiﬁed.
Then, Adaboost will concentrate increasing weight on these noisy instances and become
warped. The random forest procedures do not concentrate weight on any subset of the
instances and the noise effect is smaller.
Data with many weak inputs
Data sets with many weak inputs are becoming more common, i.e. in medical diagnosis,
document retrieval, etc. The common characteristics is no single input or small group
of inputs can distinguish between the classes. This type of data is difﬁcult for the usual
classiﬁers—neural nets and trees.
To see if there is a possibility that Forest-RI methods can work, the following 10 class,
1,000 binary input data, was generated: (rnd is a uniform random number, selected anew
each time it appears)
do k=1,1000
p(j,k)=.2∗rnd+.01
do i=1, nint(400∗rnd)
!nint=nearest integer
k=nint(1000∗rnd)
p(j,k)=p(j,k)+.4∗rnd
j=nint(10∗rnd)
do m=1,1000
if (rnd<p(j,m) )then
! y(n) is the class label of the nth example
RANDOM FORESTS
This code generates a set of probabilities {p(j, m)} where j is the class label and m is the
input number. Then the inputs for a class j example are a string of M binary variables with
the mth variable having probability p(j, m) of being one.
For the training set, N = 1,000. A 4,000 example test set was also constructed using
the same {p (j, k)}. Examination of the code shows that each class has higher underlying
probability at certain locations. But the total over all classes of these locations is about
2,000, so there is signiﬁcant overlap. Assuming one knows all of the {p (j, k)}, the Bayes
error rate for the particular {p (j, m)} computed in our run is 1.0%.
Since the inputs are independent of each other, the Naive Bayes classiﬁer, which estimates
the {p (j,k)} from the training data is supposedly optimal and has an error rate of 6.2%. This is
not an endorsement of Naive Bayes, since it would be easy to create a dependence between
the inputs which would increase the Naive Bayes error rate. I stayed with this example
because the Bayes error rate and the Naive Bayes error rate are easy to compute.
I started with a run of Forest-RI with F = 1. It converged very slowly and by 2,500
iterations, when it was stopped, it had still not converged. The test set error was 10.7%.
The strength was .069 and the correlation .012 with a c/s2 ratio of 2.5. Even though the
strength was low, the almost zero correlation meant that we were adding small increments
of accuracy as the iterations proceeded.
Clearly, what was desired was an increase in strength while keeping the correlation low.
Forest-RI was run again using F = int(log2 M + 1) = 10. The results were encouraging.
It converged after 2,000 iterations. The test set error was 3.0%. The strength was .22, the
correlation .045 and c/s2 = .91. Going with the trend, Forest-RI was run with F = 25 and
stopped after 2,000 iterations. The test set error was 2.8%. Strength was .28, correlation
.065 and c/s2 = .83.
It’s interesting that Forest-RI could produce error rates not far above the Bayes error
rate. The individual classiﬁers are weak. For F = 1, the average tree error rate is 80%; for
F = 10, it is 65%; and for F = 25, it is 60%. Forests seem to have the ability to work
with very weak classiﬁers as long as their correlation is low. A comparison using Adaboost
was tried, but I can’t get Adaboost to run on this data because the base classiﬁers are too
Exploring the random forest mechanism
A forest of trees is impenetrable as far as simple interpretations of its mechanism go. In some
applications, analysis of medical experiments for example, it is critical to understand the
interaction of variables that is providing the predictive accuracy. A start on this problem is
made by using internal out-of-bag estimates, and veriﬁcation by reruns using only selected
variables.
Suppose there are M input variables. After each tree is constructed, the values of the mth
variable in the out-of-bag examples are randomly permuted and the out-of-bag data is run
down the corresponding tree. The classiﬁcation given for each xn that is out of bag is saved.
This is repeated for m = 1, 2, . . . , M. At the end of the run, the plurality of out-of-bag
class votes for xn with the mth variable noised up is compared with the true class label of
xn to give a misclassiﬁcation rate.
L. BREIMAN
Measure of variable importance—diabetes data.
The output is the percent increase in misclassiﬁcation rate as compared to the out-of-bag
rate (with all variables intact). We get these estimates by using a single run of a forest with
1,000 trees and no test set. The procedure is illustrated by examples.
In the diabetes data set, using only single variables with F = 1, the rise in error due to
the noising of variables is given in ﬁgure 4
The second variable appears by far the most important followed by variable 8 and variable
6. Running the random forest in 100 repetitions using only variable 2 and leaving out 10%
each time to measure test set error gave an error of 29.7%, compared with 23.1% using all
variables. But when variable 8 is added, the error falls only to 29.4%. When variable 6 is
added to variable 2, the error falls to 26.4%.
The reason that variable 6 seems important, yet is no help once variable 2 is entered
is a characteristic of how dependent variables affect prediction error in random forests.
Say there are two variables x1 and x2 which are identical and carry signiﬁcant predictive
information. Because each gets picked with about the same frequency in a random forest,
noising each separately will result in the same increase in error rate. But once x1 is entered
as a predictive variable, using x2 in addition will not produce any decrease in error rate. In
the diabetes data set, the 8th variable carries some of the same information as the second.
So it does not add predictive accuracy when combined with the second.
The relative magnitudes of rises in error rates are fairly stable with respect to the input
features used. The experiment above was repeated using combinations of three inputs with
F = 2. The results are in ﬁgure 5.
Another interesting example is the voting data. This has 435 examples corresponding
to 435 Congressmen and 16 variables reﬂecting their yes-no votes on 16 issues. The class
variable is Republican or Democrat. To see which issues were most important, we again ran
the noising variables program generating 1,000 trees. The lowest error rate on the original
data was gotten using single inputs with F = 5, so these parameters were used in the run.
The results in ﬁgure 6.
Variable 4 stands out—the error triples if variable 4 is noised. We reran this data set using
only variable 4. The test set error is 4.3%, about the same as if all variables were used. The
RANDOM FORESTS
Measure of variable importance-diabetes data.
Measure of variable importance–votes data.
vote on 4 separates Republicans from Democrats almost as well as the vote on 4 combined
with the votes on all other 15 issues.
The approach given in this section is only a beginning. More research will be necessary
to understand how to give a more complete picture.
Random forests for regression
Random forests for regression are formed by growing trees depending on a random vector
 such that the tree predictor h(x, ) takes on numerical values as opposed to class labels.
The output values are numerical and we assume that the training set is independently drawn
from the distribution of the random vector Y, X. The mean-squared generalization error for
any numerical predictor h(x) is
EX,Y(Y −h(X))2
L. BREIMAN
The random forest predictor is formed by taking the average over k of the trees {h(x, k)}.
Similarly to the classiﬁcation case, the following holds:
Theorem 11.1.
As the number of trees in the forest goes to inﬁnity, almost surrely,
EX,Y(Y −avkh(X, k))2 →EX,Y(Y −Eh(X, ))2.
see Appendix I.
Denote the right hand side of (12) as PE∗(forest)—the generalization error of the forest.
Deﬁne the average generalization error of a tree as:
PE∗(tree) = E EX,Y(Y −h(X, ))2
Theorem 11.2.
Assume that for all , EY = EXh(X, ). Then
PE∗( forest) ≤¯ρPE∗(tree)
where ¯ρ is the weighted correlation between the residuals Y −h(X, ) and Y −h(X, ′)
where , ′ are independent.
PE∗( forest) = EX,Y[E(Y −h(X, )]2
= EE′ EX,Y(Y −h(X, ))(Y −h(X, ′))
The term on the right in (13) is a covariance and can be written as:
EE′(ρ(, ′)sd()sd(′))
where sd() =
EX,Y(Y −h(X, ))2. Deﬁne the weighted correlation as:
¯ρ = EE′(ρ(, ′)sd()sd(′))/(Esd())2
PE∗( forest) = ¯ρ(Esd())2 ≤¯ρPE∗(tree).
Theorem (11.2) pinpoints the requirements for accurate regression forests—low correlation between residuals and low error trees. The random forest decreases the average error
of the trees employed by the factor ¯ρ. The randomization employed needs to aim at low
correlation.
RANDOM FORESTS
Empirical results in regression
In regression forests we use random feature selection on top of bagging. Therefore, we
can use the monitoring provided by out-of-bag estimation to give estimates of PE∗(forest),
PE∗(tree) and ¯ρ. These are derived similarly to the estimates in classiﬁcation. Throughout,
features formed by a random linear sum of two inputs are used. We comment later on how
many of these features to use to determine the split at each node. The more features used,
the lower PE∗(tree) but the higher ¯ρ. In our empirical study the following data sets are used,
see Table 5.
Of these data sets, the Boston Housing, Abalone and Servo are available at the UCI
repository. The Robot Arm data was provided by Michael Jordan. The last three data
sets are synthetic. They originated in Friedman and are also described in Breiman
 . These are the same data sets used to compare adaptive bagging to bagging , except that one synthetic data set (Peak20), which was found anomalous
both by other researchers and myself, is eliminated.
The ﬁrst three data sets listed are moderate in size and test set error was estimated by
leaving out a random 10% of the instances, running on the remaining 90% and using the
left-out 10% as a test set. This was repeated 100 times and the test set errors averaged.
The abalone data set is larger with 4,177 instances and 8 input variables. It originally
came with 25% of the instances set aside as a test set. We ran this data set leaving out
a randomly selected 25% of the instances to use as a test set, repeated this 10 times and
Table 6 gives the test set mean-squared error for bagging, adaptive bagging and the
random forest. These were all run using 25 features, each a random linear combination of
two randomly selected inputs, to split each node, each feature a random combination of two
inputs. All runs with all data sets, combined 100 trees. In all data sets, the rule “don’t split
if the node size is <5” was enforced.
An interesting difference between regression and classiﬁcation is that the correlation
increases quite slowly as the number of features used increases. The major effect is the
decrease in PE∗(tree). Therefore, a relatively large number of features are required to reduce
PE∗(tree) and get near optimal testset error.
Data set summary.
Nr. inputs
Boston Housing
Friedman#1
Friedman#2
Friedman#3
L. BREIMAN
Mean-squared test set error.
Adapt. bag
Boston Housing
Servo × 10 −2
Robot Arm × 10 −2
Friedman #1
Friedman #2 × 10 + 3
Friedman #3 × 10 −3
The results shown in Table 6 are mixed. Random forest-random features is always better
than bagging. In data sets for which adaptive bagging gives sharp decreases in error, the
decreases produced by forests are not as pronounced. In data sets in which adaptive bagging
gives no improvements over bagging, forests produce improvements.
For the same number of inputs combined, over a wide range, the error does not change
much with the number of features. If the number used is too small, PE∗(tree) becomes too
large and the error goes up. If the number used is too large, the correlation goes up and the
error again increases. The in-between range is usually large. In this range, as the number of
features goes up, the correlation increases, but PE∗(tree) compensates by decreasing.
Table 7 gives the test set errors, the out-of-bag error estimates, and the OB estimates for
PE∗(tree) and the correlation.
As expected, the OB Error estimates are consistently high. It is low in the robot arm data,
but I believe that this is an artifact caused by separate training and test sets, where the test
set may have a slightly higher error rate than the training set.
As an experiment, I turned off the bagging and replaced it by randomizing outputs
 . In this procedure, mean-zero Gaussian noise is added to each of the
outputs. The standard deviation of the noise is set equal to the standard deviation of the
Error and OB estimates.
Test error
Boston Housing
Servo ×10 −2
Robot Arm ×10 −2
Friedman #1
Friedman #2 × 10 + 3
Friedman #3 × 10 −3
RANDOM FORESTS
Mean-squared test set error.
With bagging
With Noise
Boston Housing
Servo ×10 −2
Robot Arm ×10 −2
Friedman #1
Friedman #2 × 10 + 3
Friedman #3 × 10 −3
outputs. Similar to the bagging experiments, tree construction was done using 25 features,
each a random linear combination of two randomly selected inputs, to split each node. The
results are given in Table 8.
The error rates on the ﬁrst two data sets are the lowest to date. Overall, adding output
noise works with random feature selection better than bagging. This is illustrative of the
ﬂexibility of the random forest setting—various combinations of randomness can be added
to see what works the best.
Remarks and conclusions
Random forests are an effective tool in prediction. Because of the Law of Large Numbers
they do not overﬁt. Injecting the right kind of randomness makes them accurate classiﬁers
and regressors. Furthermore, the framework in terms of strength of the individual predictors and their correlations gives insight into the ability of the random forest to predict.
Using out-of-bag estimation makes concrete the otherwise theoretical values of strength
and correlation.
For a while, the conventional thinking was that forests could not compete with arcing
type algorithms in terms of accuracy. Our results dispel this belief, but lead to interesting
questions. Boosting and arcing algorithms have the ability to reduce bias as well as variance
 . The adaptive bagging algorithm in regression was
designed to reduce bias and operates effectively in classiﬁcation as well as in regression.
But, like arcing, it also changes the training set as it progresses.
Forests give results competitive with boosting and adaptive bagging, yet do not progressively change the training set. Their accuracy indicates that they act to reduce bias. The
mechanism for this is not obvious. Random forests may also be viewed as a Bayesian procedure. Although I doubt that this is a fruitful line of exploration, if it could explain the bias
reduction, I might become more of a Bayesian.
Random inputs and random features produce good results in classiﬁcation—less so in
regression. The only types of randomness used in this study is bagging and random features.
It may well be that other types of injected randomness give better results. For instance, one
of the referees has suggested use of random Boolean combinations of features.
L. BREIMAN
An almost obvious question is whether gains in accuracy can be gotten by combining
random features with boosting. For the larger data sets, it seems that signiﬁcantly lower
error rates are possible. On some runs, we got errors as low as 5.1% on the zip-code data,
2.2% on the letters data and 7.9% on the satellite data. The improvement was less on the
smaller data sets. More work is needed on this; but it does suggest that different injections
of randomness can produce better results.
A recent paper shows that in distribution space for two class problems,
random forests are equivalent to a kernel acting on the true margin. Arguments are given that
randomness (low correlation) enforces the symmetry of the kernel while strength enhances
a desirable skewness at abrupt curved boundaries. Hopefully, this sheds light on the dual
role of correlation and strength. The theoretical framework given by Kleinberg for
Stochastic Discrimination may also help understanding.
Appendix I: Almost sure convergence
Proof of theorem 1.2:
It sufﬁces to show that there is a set of probability zero C on the
sequence space 1, 2, . . . such that outside of C, for all x,
I (h(n, x) = j) →P(h(, x) = j).
For a ﬁxed training set and ﬁxed , the set of all x such that h(, x) = j is a union of
hyper-rectangles. For all h(, x) there is only a ﬁnite number K of such unions of hyperrectangles, denoted by S1, . . . , SK. Deﬁne ϕ() = k if {x : h(, x) = j} = Sk. Let Nk be
the number of times that ϕ(n) = k in the ﬁrst N trials. Then
I (h(n, x) = j) = 1
Nk I (x ∈Sk)
By the Law of Large Numbers,
I (ϕ(n) = k)
converges a.s. to P(ϕ() = k). Taking unions of all the sets on which convergence does
not occur for some value of k gives a set C of zero probability such that outside of C,
I (h(n, x) = j) →
P(ϕ() = k)I (x ∈Sk).
The right hand side is P(h(, x) = j.
RANDOM FORESTS
Proof of theorem 9.1:
There are a ﬁnite set of hyper-rectangles R1, . . . , RK, such that
if ¯yk is the average of the training sets y-values for all training input vectors in Rk then
h(, x) has one of the values I (x ∈Sk) ¯yk. The rest of the proof parallels that of Theorem
Appendix II: Out-of bag estimates for strength and correlation
At the end of a combination run, let
I (h(x, k) = j; (y, x) /∈Tk,B)
I ((y, x) /∈Tk,B).
Thus, Q(x, j) is the out-of-bag proportion of votes cast at x for class j, and is an estimate
for P(h(x, ) = j). From Deﬁnition 2.1 the strength is the expectation of
P(h(x, ) = y) −max
j̸=y P(h(x, ) = j)
Substituting Q(x, j), Q(x, y) for P(h(x, ) = j), P(h(x, ) = y) in this latter expression and taking the average over the training set gives the strength estimate.
From Eq. (7),
¯ρ = var(mr)/(Esd())2.
The variance of mr is
EX,Y[P(h(x, ) = y) −max
j̸=y P(h(x, ) = j)]2 −s2
where s is the strength. Replacing the ﬁrst term in (A1) by the average over the training set
(Q(x, y) −max
j̸=y Q(x, j))2
and s by the out-of-bag estimate of s gives the estimate of var(mr). The standard deviation
is given by
sd() = [p1 + p2 + (p1 −p2)2]1/2
p1 = EX,Y(h(X, ) = Y)
p2 = EX,Y(h(X, ) = ˆj(X, Y))
L. BREIMAN
After the kth classiﬁer is constructed, Q(x, j) is computed, and used to compute ˆj(x, y) for
every example in the training set. Then, let p1 be the average over all (y, x) in the training
set but not in the kth bagged training set of I (h(x, k) = y). Then p2 is the similar average
of I (h(x, k) = ˆj(x, y)). Substitute these estimates into (A2) to get an estimate of sd(k).
Average the sd(k) over all k to get the ﬁnal estimate of sd().