ANNALS OF FAMILY MEDICINE ✦ WWW.ANNFAMMED.ORG ✦ VOL. 12, NO. 6 ✦ NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2014
REFLECTION
From Triple to Quadruple Aim: Care of the Patient
Requires Care of the Provider
The Triple Aim—enhancing patient experience, improving population health, and
reducing costs—is widely accepted as a compass to optimize health system performance. Yet physicians and other members of the health care workforce report
widespread burnout and dissatisfaction. Burnout is associated with lower patient
satisfaction, reduced health outcomes, and it may increase costs. Burnout thus
imperils the Triple Aim. This article recommends that the Triple Aim be expanded
to a Quadruple Aim, adding the goal of improving the work life of health care
providers, including clinicians and staff.
Ann Fam Med 2014;12:573-576. doi: 10.1370/afm.1713.
INTRODUCTION
ince Don Berwick and colleagues introduced the Triple Aim into the
health care lexicon, this concept has spread to all corners of the health
care system. The Triple Aim is an approach to optimizing health
system performance, proposing that health care institutions simultaneously
pursue 3 dimensions of performance: improving the health of populations,
enhancing the patient experience of care, and reducing the per capita cost
of health care.1 The primary Triple Aim goal is to improve the health of
the population, with 2 secondary goals—improving patient experience and
reducing costs—contributing to the achievement of the primary goal.
In visiting primary care practices around the country,2 the authors
have repeatedly heard statements such as, “We have adopted the Triple
Aim as our framework, but the stressful work life of our clinicians and
staff impacts our ability to achieve the 3 aims.” These sentiments made us
wonder, might there be a fourth aim—improving the work life of health
care clinicians and staff—that, like the patient experience and cost reduction aims, must be achieved in order to succeed in improving population
health? Should the Triple Aim become the Quadruple Aim?
RISING EXPECTATIONS OF PHYSICIANS AND PRACTICES
Society expects more and more of physicians and practices, particularly
in primary care. Patients want their health to be better, to be seen in a
timely fashion with empathy, and to enjoy a continuous relationship with a
high-quality clinician whom they choose.3 A patient-centered practice has
been described as, “They give me exactly the help I need and want exactly
when I need and want it.”4 Yet for primary care, society has not provided
the resources to meet these lofty benchmarks.
PHYSICIAN BURNOUT
The wide gap between societal expectations and professional reality
has set the stage for 46% of US physicians to experience symptoms of
Thomas Bodenheimer, MD1
Christine Sinsky, MD2,3
1Center for Excellence in Primary Care,
Department of Family and Community
Medicine, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, California
2Medical Associates Clinic and Health Plan,
Dubuque, Iowa
3American Medical Association, Chicago,
Conflicts of interest: authors report none.
CORRESPONDING AUTHOR
Thomas Bodenheimer, MD
Center for Excellence in Primary Care
Department of Family and Community
University of California at San Francisco
Bldg 80-83, SF General Hospital
995 Potrero Ave. San Francisco, CA 94110
 or tbodie@
earthlink.net
FROM TRIPLE TO QUADRUPLE AIM
ANNALS OF FAMILY MEDICINE ✦ WWW.ANNFAMMED.ORG ✦ VOL. 12, NO. 6 ✦ NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2014
burnout. Widespread across specialties, burnout is
especially prevalent among emergency department
physicians, general internists, neurologists, and family
physicians.5 In a 2014 survey, 68% of family physicians
and 73% of general internists would not choose the
same specialty if they could start their careers anew.6
Professional burnout is characterized by loss of enthusiasm for work, feelings of cynicism, and a low sense
of personal accomplishment and is associated with
early retirement, alcohol use, and suicidal ideation.5,7
According to a recent RAND Corporation survey, the
principal driver of physician satisfaction is the ability to provide quality care.7 Physician dissatisfaction,
therefore, is an early warning sign of a health care system creating barriers to high-quality practice.
We have heard physicians making such statements as:
“The joy of practicing medicine is gone.”
“I hate being a doctor…I can’t wait to get out.”
“I can’t tell you how defeated I feel…The feeling of being
punished for delivering good care is nerve-racking.”
“I am no longer a physician but the data manager, data entry
clerk and steno girl… I became a doctor to take care of
patients. I have become the typist.”
In a 2011 national survey, 87% of physicians named
the leading cause of work-related stress and burnout
as paperwork and administration, with 63% indicating that stress is increasing.8 Forty-three percent of
physicians surveyed in 2014 reported spending over
30% of their day on administrative tasks.9 Physicians
spend more time on non–face-to-face activities (eg,
letters, in-box management, and medication refills)
than with patients.10 Even when in the exam room with
patients, primary care physicians spend from 25% to
50% of the time attending to the computer.11 Between
2009 and 2010, primary care physicians at a Veterans
Affairs facility spent 49 minutes per day responding to
inbox-type alerts in addition to documentation of care
provided. One-half of such alerts have little clinical
significance or could be handled by other team members; 80% of the text in the alerts is unnecessary. The
volume of alerts and texts overshadows important information that requires action. Moreover, the alerts create
interruptions known to adversely affect patient care.12,13
A 2013 survey of 30 physician practices found that
electronic health record (EHR) technology has worsened professional satisfaction through time-consuming
data entry and interference with patient care.7 Emergency medicine physicians spend 44% of their day
doing data entry, with 4,000 EHR clicks per day; only
28% of the day is spent with patients.14 In a 2011 survey, over three-quarters of physicians reported that the
EHR increases the time it takes to plan, review, order,
and document care.15
STAFF BURNOUT
Burnout affects not only physicians, but also other
members of the health care workforce. Thirty-four
percent of hospital nurses and 37% of nursing home
nurses report burnout, compared with 22% of nurses
working in other settings.16 On the front lines of
practice, receptionists have a stressful job, with 68%
experiencing verbal abuse from patients.17 Most receptionists feel that physicians fail to appreciate the complexity of their work. Sources of stress include finding
appointments for patients and feeling caught between
doctors’ and patients’ demands.18 A 2013 survey of
508 employees working for 243 health care employers
found that 60% reported job burnout and 34% planned
to look for a different job. Complaints included heavy
patient loads, small staffs, and high stress levels.19
Physician and staff dissatisfaction feed on each
other. “It’s really rough to be around a burned-out
doctor. They’re cynical, sarcastic, and wonder, ‘what’s
the use anymore?’” It can go the other way, too. A
burned-out staff member may not be doing his or her
job, resulting in more stress for the already overworked
doctor.20 Adequate numbers of well-trained, trusted,
and capable support staff with low turnover predict
greater physician satisfaction.7
CARE TEAM WELL-BEING AS A
PREREQUISITE FOR THE TRIPLE AIM
Burnout among the health care workforce threatens
patient-centeredness and the Triple Aim. Dissatisfied
physicians and nurses are associated with lower patient
satisfaction.16,21 Physician and care team burnout
may contribute to overuse of resources and thereby
increased costs of care.22-24 Unhappy physicians are
more likely to leave their practice; the cost of family
physician turnover approaches $250,000 per physician.25 Dissatisfied physicians are more likely to prescribe inappropriate medications which can result in
expensive complications.26
Physician burnout is associated with reduced
adherence to treatment plans, resulting in negatively
affected clinical outcomes.27 Burnout also leads to
lower levels of empathy, which is associated with worsened clinical outcomes for patients with diabetes.28
Patient safety is threatened by nurse dissatisfaction;
many nurses report that their workload causes them to
miss important changes in their patients’ condition.16
Dissatisfied physicians are 2 to 3 times more likely to
FROM TRIPLE TO QUADRUPLE AIM
ANNALS OF FAMILY MEDICINE ✦ WWW.ANNFAMMED.ORG ✦ VOL. 12, NO. 6 ✦ NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2014
leave practice, thereby exacerbating the growing shortage of primary care physicians and complicating the
achievement of a healthy population.29
Practices working toward the Triple Aim may
increase physician burnout and thereby reduce their
chances of success. Higher scores on a patientcentered medical home assessment may be associated
with greater clinician burnout in safety-net clinics.30
More EHR functionalities—email with patients, physician order entry, alerts and reminders—intended to
promote the Triple Aim are associated with more burnout and intent to leave practice.31
Group Health Cooperative implemented primary
care reforms in the early 2000s aimed at improving
Triple Aim performance. The unintended consequence
was increased physician burnout and resultant quality
reductions and cost increases. In 2006, Group Health
changed direction, focusing first on clinician work
life by increasing visit length and reducing panel size.
Burnout dropped substantially with significant gains in
clinical quality, patient experience, and cost reduction.
The Group Health story demonstrates that without
addressing the work life of those providing care, Triple
Aim measures are likely to worsen.32
ADDRESSING THE FOURTH AIM
How can health care organizations work toward the
fourth aim, improving the work life of clinicians and
staff? For primary care physicians the following list
suggests some practical steps:
• Implement team documentation: nurses, medical
assistants, or other staff, present during the patient
visit, entering some or all documentation into the
EHR, assisting with order entry, prescription processing, and charge capture. Team documentation
has been associated with greater physician and staff
satisfaction, improved revenues, and the capacity of
the team to manage a larger panel of patients while
going home earlier.33,34
• Use pre-visit planning and pre-appointment laboratory testing to reduce time wasted on the review and
follow-up of laboratory results35
• Expand roles allowing nurses and medical assistants
to assume responsibility for preventive care and
chronic care health coaching under physician-written
standing orders33,36
• Standardize and synchronize workflows for prescription refills, an approach which can save physicians 5
hours per week while providing better care37
• Co-locate teams so that physicians work in the same
space as their team members; this has been shown to
increase efficiency and save 30 minutes of physician
time per day38
• To avoid shifting burnout from physicians to practice staff, ensure that staff who assume new responsibilities are well-trained and understand that they
are contributing to the health of their patients and
that unnecessary work is reengineered out of the
practice2,39
In the longer run, to address the chasm between
society’s expectations and primary care’s capacity,
more financial and personnel resources should be dedicated to primary care. One study estimates that a 59%
increase in staffing, to 4.25 FTE staff per physician, is
needed to achieve the patient-centered medical home.40
Patient-centeredness and the Fourth Aim
The barriers to achieving the Triple Aim include
improving population health in a society experiencing
obesity and diabetes epidemics and growing income
disparities, rising health care costs, and a dispirited and
disengaged health care workforce. If the gap continues
to widen between society’s expectations for primary
care and primary care’s available resources, the feelings
of betrayal and the wearing down from daily stress
voiced by primary care practitioners will grow. The
negative impact on patient-centered care will be deep
and long lasting. On the other hand, if an emphasis on
the workforce comes at the expense of patients’ needs,
this focus could have negative consequences. Health
care is a relationship between those who provide care
and those who seek care, a relationship that can only
thrive if it is symbiotic, benefiting both parties.
CONCLUSION
The Triple Aim has provided society with a compass,
pointing the way forward for our health care system.
The positive engagement, rather than the negative
frustration, of the health care workforce is of paramount importance in achieving the primary goal of
the Triple Aim—improving population health. Leaders
and providers of health care should consider adding a
fourth dimension—improving the work life of those
who deliver care—to the compass points of better
care, better health, and lower costs.
To read or post commentaries in response to this article, see it
online at 
Key words: primary health care; patient-centered care; health care
Submitted May 10, 2014 ; submitted, revised August 15, 2014;
accepted September 2, 2014.