A Neural Stochastic Volatility Model
Rui Luo,† Weinan Zhang,‡ Xiaojun Xu,‡ Jun Wang†
†University College London
‡Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{r.luo,j.wang}@cs.ucl.ac.uk, {wnzhang,xuxj}@apex.sjtu.edu.cn
In this paper, we show that the recent integration of statistical
models with deep recurrent neural networks provides a new
way of formulating volatility (the degree of variation of time
series) models that have been widely used in time series analysis and prediction in ﬁnance. The model comprises a pair of
complementary stochastic recurrent neural networks: the generative network models the joint distribution of the stochastic volatility process; the inference network approximates the
conditional distribution of the latent variables given the observables. Our focus here is on the formulation of temporal
dynamics of volatility over time under a stochastic recurrent
neural network framework. Experiments on real-world stock
price datasets demonstrate that the proposed model generates a better volatility estimation and prediction that outperforms mainstream methods, e.g., deterministic models such
as GARCH and its variants, and stochastic models namely
the MCMC-based stochvol as well as the Gaussian-processbased, on average negative log-likelihood.
Introduction
The volatility of the price movements reﬂects the ubiquitous uncertainty within ﬁnancial markets. It is critical
that the level of risk (aka, the degree of variation), indicated by volatility, is taken into consideration before investment decisions are made and portfolio are optimised ; volatility is substantially a key variable in the pricing
of derivative securities. Hence, estimating and forecasting
volatility is of great importance in branches of ﬁnancial studies, including investment, risk management, security valuation and monetary policy making .
Volatility is measured typically by employing the standard
deviation of price change in a ﬁxed time interval, such as
a day, a month or a year. The higher the volatility is, the
riskier the asset should be. One of the primary challenges
in designing volatility models is to identify the existence
of latent stochastic processes and to characterise the underlying dependences or interactions between variables within
a certain time span. A classic approach has been to handcraft the characteristic features of volatility models by imposing assumptions and constraints, given prior knowledge
and observations. Notable examples include autoregressive
Copyright c⃝2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
conditional heteroscedasticity (ARCH) model 
and the extension, generalised ARCH (GARCH) , which makes use of autoregression to capture the
properties of time-varying volatility within many time series. As an alternative to the GARCH model family, the class
of stochastic volatility (SV) models specify the variance
to follow some latent stochastic process . Heston proposed a continuous-time
model with the volatility following an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck
process and derived a closed-form solution for options pricing. Since the temporal discretisation of continuous-time dynamics sometimes leads to a deviation from the original trajectory of system, those continuous-time models are seldom
applied in forecasting. For practical purposes of forecasting, the canonical model formulated in a discretetime fashion for regularly spaced data such as daily prices of
stocks is of great interest. While theoretically sound, those
approaches require strong assumptions which might involve
detailed insight of the target sequences and are difﬁcult to
determine without a thorough inspection.
In this paper, we take a fully data driven approach and determine the conﬁgurations with as few exogenous input as
possible, or even purely from the historical data. We propose a neural network re-formulation of stochastic volatility
by leveraging stochastic models and recurrent neural networks (RNNs). In inspired by the work from Chung et al.
 and Fraccaro et al. ,
the proposed model is rooted in variational inference and
equipped with the latest advances of stochastic neural networks. The model inherits the fundamentals of SV model
and provides a general framework for volatility modelling;
it extends previous sequential frameworks with autoregressive and bidirectional architecture and provide with a more
systematic and volatility-speciﬁc formulation on stochastic
volatility modelling for ﬁnancial time series. We presume
that the latent variables follow a Gaussian autoregressive
process, which is then utilised to model the variance process. Our neural network formulation is essentially a general
framework for volatility modelling, which covers two major
classes of volatility models in ﬁnancial study as the special
cases with speciﬁc weights and activations on neurons.
Experiments with real-world stock price datasets are performed. The result shows that the proposed model produces
The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)
more accurate estimation and prediction, outperforming various widely-used deterministic models in the GARCH family and several recently proposed stochastic models on average negative log-likelihood; the high ﬂexibility and rich
expressive power are validated.
Related Work
A notable framework for volatility is autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity (ARCH) model : it
can accurately identify the characteristics of time-varying
volatility within many types of time series. Inspired by
ARCH model, a large body of diverse work based on
stochastic process for volatility modelling has emerged
 . Bollerslev generalised ARCH model to the generalised autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity (GARCH) model in a
manner analogous to the extension from autoregressive (AR)
model to autoregressive moving average (ARMA) model by
introducing the past conditional variances in the current conditional variance estimation. Engle and Kroner presented theoretical results on the formulation and estimation of multivariate GARCH model within
simultaneous equations systems. The extension to multivariate model allows the covariance to present and depend
on the historical information, which are particularly useful
in multivariate ﬁnancial models. An alternative to the conditionally deterministic GARCH model family is the class
of stochastic volatility (SV) models, which ﬁrst appeared
in the theoretical ﬁnance literature on option pricing . The SV models specify the variance to
follow some latent stochastic process such that the current
volatility is no longer a deterministic function even if the
historical information is provided. As an example, Heston’s
model characterises the variance process as a
Cox-Ingersoll-Ross process driven by a latent Wiener process. While theoretically sound, those approaches require
strong assumptions which might involve complex probability distributions and non-linear dynamics that drive the
process. Nevertheless, empirical evidences have conﬁrmed
that volatility models provide accurate prediction and models such as ARCH and
its descendants/variants have become indispensable tools in
asset pricing and risk evaluation. Notably, several models
have been recently proposed for practical forecasting tasks:
Kastner et al. implemented the MCMC-based framework stochvol where the
ancillarity-sufﬁciency interweaving strategy (ASIS) is applied for boosting MCMC estimation of stochastic volatility;
Wu et al. 
designed the GP-Vol, a non-parametric model which utilises
Gaussian processes to characterise the dynamics and jointly
learns the process and hidden states via online inference algorithm. Despite the fact that it provides us with a practical approach towards stochastic volatility forecasting, both
models require a relatively large volume of samples to ensure the accuracy, which involves very expensive sampling
routine at each time step. Another drawback is that those
models are incapable to handle the forecasting task for multivariate time series.
On the other hand, deep learning that utilises nonlinear
structures known as deep neural networks, powers various
applications. It has triumph over pattern recognition challenges, such as image recognition , speech recognition , machine translation to name a few.
Time-dependent neural networks models include RNNs
with neuron structures such as long short-term memory
(LSTM) , bidirectional
RNN (BRNN) , gated recurrent unit (GRU) and attention mechanism . Recent results show that RNNs excel
for sequence modelling and generation in various applications . However, despite its capability as non-linear universal approximator, one of the
drawbacks of neural networks is its deterministic nature.
Adding latent variables and their processes into neural networks would easily make the posteriori computationally intractable. Recent work shows that efﬁcient inference can
be found by variational inference when hidden continuous
variables are embedded into the neural networks structure
 . Some early work has started to explore the use
of variational inference to make RNNs stochastic: Chung
et al. deﬁned a sequential framework
with complex interacting dynamics of coupling observable
and latent variables whereas Fraccaro et al. utilised heterogeneous backward propagating layers
in inference network according to its Markovian properties.
In this paper, we apply the stochastic neural networks to
solve the volatility modelling problem. In other words, we
model the dynamics and stochastic nature of the degree of
variation, not only the mean itself. Our neural network treatment of volatility modelling is a general one and existing
volatility models (e.g., the Heston and GARCH models) are
special cases in our formulation.
Preliminaries: Volatility Models
Volatility models characterise the dynamics of volatility processes, and help estimate and forecast the ﬂuctuation within
time series. As it is often the case that one seeks for prediction on quantity of interest with a collection of historical
information at hand, we presume the conditional variance
to have dependency – either deterministic or stochastic – on
history, which results in two categories of volatility models.
Deterministic Volatility Models: the GARCH
Model Family
The GARCH model family comprises various linear models that formulate the conditional variance at present as a
linear function of observations and variances from the past.
Bollerslev’s extension of Engle’s primitive ARCH model , referred as generalised
ARCH (GARCH) model, is one of the most well-studied
and widely-used volatility models:
xt ∼N (0, σ2
where Eq. (2) represents the assumption that the observation xt follows from the Gaussian distribution with mean 0
and variance σ2
t ; the (conditional) variance σ2
t is fully determined by a linear function (Eq. (1)) of previous observations
{x<t} and variances {σ2
<t}. Note that if q = 0 in Eq. (1),
GARCH model degenerates to ARCH model.
Various variants have been proposed ever since. Glosten,
Jagannathan and Runkle extended GARCH model with additional terms
to account for asymmetries in the volatility and proposed
GJR-GARCH model; Zakoian replaced the
quadratic operators with absolute values, leading to threshold ARCH/GARCH (TARCH) models. The general functional form is formulated as
αi|xt−i|d +
γk|xt−k|dI{xt−k < 0},
where I{xt−k
0} denotes the indicator function:
I{xt−k < 0} = 1 if xt−k < 0, and 0 otherwise, which
allows for asymmetric reactions of volatility in terms of the
sign of previous observations.
Many variants of the GARCH model can be expressed by
assigning values to parameters p, o, q, d in Eq. (3):
1. ARCH(p): p ∈N+; q ≡0; o ≡0; d ≡2
2. GARCH(p, q): p ∈N+; q ≡0; o ≡0; d ≡2
3. GJR-GARCH(p, o, q): p ∈N+; q ∈N+; o ∈N+; d ≡2
4. AVARCH(p): p ∈N+; q ≡0; o ≡0; d ≡2
5. AVGARCH(p, q): p ∈N+; q ∈N+; o ≡0; d ≡2
6. TARCH(p, o, q): p ∈N+; q ∈N+; o ∈N+; d ≡1
Another fruitful speciﬁcation shall be Nelson’s exponential GARCH (EGARCH) model , which instead formulates the dependencies in log-variance log(σ2
t ) = α0 +
αig(xt−i) +
g(xt) = θxt + γ(|xt| −E[|xt|]),
where g(xt) (Eq. (5)) accommodates the asymmetric relation between observations and volatility changes. If we set
q ≡0 in Eq. (4), the EGARCH(p, q) model degenerates to
EARCH(p) model.
Stochastic Volatility Models
An alternative to the (conditionally) deterministic volatility
models is the class of stochastic volatility (SV) models. First
introduced in the theoretical ﬁnance literature, earliest SV
models such as Hull and White’s 
as well as Heston model are formulated by
stochastic differential equations in a continuous-time fashion for analysis convenience. In particular, Heston model instantiates a continuous-time stochastic volatility model for
univariate processes:
dσ(t) = −βσ(t) dt + δ dwσ(t),
dx(t) = (μ −0.5σ2(t)) dt + σ(t) dwx(t).
where x(t) = log s(t) is the logarithm of stock price st at
time t, wx(t) and wσ(t) represent two correlated Wiener
processes and the correlation between dwx(t) and dwσ(t)
is expressed as E[dwx(t) · dwσ(t)] = ρ dt.
For practical use, empirical versions of the SV model,
typically formulated in a discrete-time fashion, are of great
interest. The canonical model for regularly spaced
data is formulated as
t ) = η + φ(log(σ2
t−1) −η) + zt,
zt ∼N (0, σ2
xt ∼N (0, σ2
Equation (8) indicates that the (conditional) log-variance
t ) depends on not only the historical log-variances
t )} but a latent stochastic process {zt}. The latent
process {zt} is, according to Eq. (9), white noise process
with i.i.d. Gaussian variables.
Notably, the volatility σ2
t is no longer conditionally deterministic (i.e. deterministic given the complete history
<t}) but to some extent stochastic in the setting of SV
models: Heston model involves two correlated continuoustime Wiener processes while the canonical model is driven
by a discrete-time Gaussian white-noise process.
Volatility Models in a General Form
Hereafter we denote the sequence of observations as {xt}
and the latent stochastic process as {zt}. As seen in previous sections, the dynamics of volatility process {σ2
t } can be
abstracted as
<t, x<t, z≤t) = Σx(x<t, z≤t).
The latter equality follows as we recursively substitute
τ with f(σ2
<τ, x<τ, z≤τ) for all τ < t. For models in
the GARCH family, we discard z≤t in the speciﬁcation of
Σx(x<t, z≤t) (Eq. (10)); on the other hand, for the SV
model, x<t is ignored instead. We can loosen the constraint
that xt is zero-mean to a time-varying mean μx(x<t, z≤t)
for more ﬂexibility.
Recall that the latent stochastic process {zt} (Eq. (9)) in
the SV model is an i.i.d. Gaussian white noise process. We
may extend the white noise process to a more ﬂexible one
with inherent autoregressive dynamics: the mean μz(z<t)
and variance Σz(z<t) are functions of an autoregressive
form on the historical values. Thus, the generalised model
can be formulated as
zt|z<t ∼N (μz(z<t), Σz(z<t)),
xt|x<t, z≤t ∼N (μx(x<t, z≤t), Σx(x<t, z≤t)),
where we have presumed that both the observation xt and
the latent variable zt are normally distributed. Note that the
autoregressive process degenerates to i.i.d. white noise process when μz(z<t) ≡0 and Σz(z<t) ≡σ2
z. It should be
emphasised that the purpose of reinforcing an autoregressive structure (11) of the latent variable zt is that we believe
such formulation ﬁts better to real scenarios from ﬁnancial
aspect compared with the i.i.d. convention: the price ﬂuctuation of a certain stock is the consequence of not only its own
history but also the inﬂuence from the environment, e.g. its
competitors, up/downstream industries, relevant companies
in the market, etc. Such external inﬂuence is ever-changing
and may preserve memory and hence hard to characterise if
restricted to i.i.d. noise. The latent variable zt with an autoregressive structure provides a possibility of decoupling
the internal inﬂuential factors from the external ones, which
we believe is the essence of introducing zt.
Neural Stochastic Volatility Models
In this section, we establish the neural stochastic volatility
model (NSVM) for volatility estimation and prediction.
Generating Observable Sequence
Recall that the observable variable xt (Eq. (12)) and the latent variable zt (Eq. (11)) are described by autoregressive
models (as xt also involves an exogenous input z≤t). Let
pΦ(xt|x<t, z≤t) and pΦ(zt|z<t) denote the probability distributions of xt and zt at time t. The factorisation on the joint
distributions of sequences {xt} and {zt} applies as follow:
pΦ(zt|z<t)
Φ(z<t), Σz
pΦ(xt|x<t, z≤t)
Φ(x<t, z≤t), Σx
Φ(x<t, z≤t)),
where X = {xt}1:T and Z = {zt}1:T represents the
sequences of observable and latent variables, respectively,
whereas Φ stands for the collection of parameters of generative model. The unconditional generative model is deﬁned
as the joint distribution:
pΦ(X, Z) =
pΦ(xt|x<t, z≤t)pΦ(zt|z<t).
It can be observed that the mean and variance are conditionally deterministic: given the historical information
{z<t}, the current mean μz
Φ(z<t) and variance
Φ(z<t) of zt is obtained and hence the distribution N (zt; μz
t ) of zt is speciﬁed; after sampling zt from
the speciﬁed distribution, we incorporate {x<t} and calculate the current mean μx
Φ(x<t, z≤t) and variance
Φ(x<t, z≤t) of xt and determine its distribution
t ) of xt. It is natural and convenient to present
such a procedure in a recurrent fashion because of its autoregressive nature. Since RNNs can essentially approximate arbitrary function of recurrent form, the means and variances,
which may be driven by complex non-linear dynamics, can
be efﬁciently computed using RNNs.
The unconditional generative model consists of two
pairs of RNN and multi-layer perceptron (MLP), namely
G for the latent variable and RNNx
the observable. We stack those two RNN/MLP pairs together
according to the causal dependency between variables. The
unconditional generative model is implemented as the generative network:
t } = MLPz
t−1, zt−1; Φ),
t } = MLPx
t−1, xt−1, zt; Φ),
t denote the hidden states of the corresponding RNNs. The MLPs map the hidden states of RNNs into
the means and deviations of variables of interest. The collection of parameters Φ is comprised of the weights of RNNs
and MLPs. NSVM relaxes the conventional constraint that
the latent variable zt is N (0, 1) in a way that zt is no longer
i.i.d noise but a time-varying signal from external process
with self-evolving nature. As discussed above, this relaxation will beneﬁt the effectiveness in real scenarios.
One should notice that when the latent variable zt is obtained, e.g. by inference (see details in the next subsection),
the conditional distribution pΦ(X|Z) (Eq. (14)) will be involved in generating the observable xt instead of the joint
distribution pΦ(X, Z) (Eq. (15)). This is essentially the scenario of predicting future values of the observable variable
given its history. We will use the term “generative model”
and will not discriminate the unconditional generative model
or the conditional one as it can be inferred in context.
Inferencing the Latent Process
As the generative model involves the latent variable zt, of
which the true values are inaccessible even we have observed xt, the marginal distribution pΦ(X) becomes the key
that bridges the model and the data. However, the calculation of pΦ(X) itself or its complement, the posterior distribution pΦ(Z|X), is often intractable as complex integrals
are involved. We are unable to learn the parameters by differentiating the marginal log-likelihood log pΦ(X) or to infer
the latent variables through the true posterior. Therefore, we
consider instead a restricted family of tractable distributions
qΨ(Z|X), referred to as the approximate posterior family,
as approximations to the true posterior pΦ(Z|X) such that
the family is sufﬁciently rich and of high capacity to provide
good approximations.
It is straightforward to verify that given a sequence of observations X = {x1:T }, for any 1 ≤t ≤T, zt is dependent
on the entire observation sequences. Hence, we deﬁne the
inference model with the spirit of mean-ﬁeld approximation
where the approximate posterior is Gaussian and the follow-
ing factorisation applies:
qΨ(zt|z<t, x1:T )
N (zt; ˜μz
Ψ(z<t, x1:T ), ˜Σz
Ψ(z<t, x1:T )),
Ψ(zt−1, x1:T ) and ˜Σz
Ψ(zt−1, x1:T ) are functions of
the given observation sequence {x1:T }, representing the approximated mean and variance of the latent variable zt; Ψ
denotes the collection of parameters of inference model.
The neural network implementation of the model, referred
to as the inference network, is designed to equip a cascaded
architecture with an autoregressive RNN and a bidirectional
RNN, where the bidirectional RNN incorporates both the
forward and backward dependencies on the entire observations whereas the autoregressive RNN models the temporal
dependencies on the latent variables:
t } = MLPz
t−1, zt−1, [˜h→
t−1, xt−1; Ψ),
t+1, xt+1; Ψ),
zt ∼N (˜μz
t represent the hidden states of the forward
and backward directions of the bidirectional RNN. The autoregressive RNN with hidden state ˜hz
t takes the joint state
t ] of the bidirectional RNN and the previous value
of zt−1 as input. The inference mean ˜μz
t and variance ˜Σz
is computed by an MLP from the hidden state ˜hz
t of the autoregressive RNN. We use the subscript I instead of G to
distinguish the architecture used in inference model in contrast to that of the generative model. It should be emphasised
that the inference network will collaborates with the generative network on conditional generating procedure.
Algorithm 1 Recursive Forecasting
1:t } ←draw S paths from q(z1:t|x1:t)
1:t+1} ←extend {z⟨s⟩
1:t } for 1 step via p(zt+1|z1:t)
ˆp(xτ+1|x1:τ) ←1/S × 
s p(xτ+1|z⟨s⟩
1:τ+1, x1:τ)
t+1 ←var{ˆx1:S
t+1}, {ˆx1:S
t+1} ∼ˆp(xτ+1|x1:τ)
{x1:t+1} ←[{x1:t}, xt+1] with new xt+1
t ←t + 1, (optionally) retrain the model
Forecasting Observations in Future
For a volatility model to be practically applicable in forecasting, the generating procedure conditioning on the history
is of essential interest. We start with 1-step-ahead prediction,
which serves as building block of multi-step forecasting.
Given the historical observations {x1:T } up to time step
T, 1-step-ahead prediction of either Σx
T +1 or xT +1 is fully
depicted by the conditional predictive distribution:
p(xT +1|x1:T ) =
p(xT +1|z1:T +1, x1:T )
· p(zT +1|z1:T )p(z1:T |x1:T ) dz,
where the distributions on the right-hand side refer to those
in the generative model with the generative parameters Φ
omitted. As the true posterior p(z1:T |x1:T ) involved in Eq.
(28) is intractable, the exact evaluation of conditional predictive distribution p(xT +1|x1:T ) is difﬁcult.
A straightforward solution is that we substitute the true
posterior p(z1:T |x1:T ) with the approximation q(z1:T |x1:T )
(see Eq. (22)) and leverage q(z1:T |x1:T ) to inference S sample paths {z⟨1:S⟩
1:T } of the latent variables according to the historical observations {x1:T }. The approximate posterior from
a well-trained model is presumed to be a good approximation to the truth; hence the sample paths shall be mimics of
the true but unobservable path. We then extend the sample
paths one step further from T to T + 1 using the autoregressive generative distribution p(zT +1|z1:T ) (see Eq. (13)). The
conditional predictive distribution is thus approximated as
ˆp(xT +1|x1:T ) ≈1
p(xT +1|z⟨s⟩
1:T +1, x1:T ),
which is essentially a mixture of S Gaussians. In the case
of multi-step forecasting, a common solution in practice is
to perform a recursive 1-step-ahead forecasting routine with
model updated as new observation comes in; the very same
procedure can be applied except that more sample paths
should be evaluated due to the accumulation of uncertainty.
Algorithm 1 gives the detailed rolling scheme.
Experiment
In this section, we present the experiment on real-world
stock price time series to validate the effectiveness and to
evaluate the performance of the prosed model.
Dataset and Pre-processing
The raw dataset comprises 162 univariate time series of the
daily closing stock price, chosen from China’s A-shares and
collected from 3 institutions. The choice is made by selecting those with earlier listing date of trading and fewer suspension days (at most 50 suspension
days within the entire period of observation), such that the
undesired noises introduced by insufﬁcient observation or
missing values – highly inﬂuential on the performance but
essentially irrelevant to the purpose of volatility modelling
– can be reduced to the minimum. The raw price series is
cleaned by aligning and removing abnormalities: we manually aligned the mismatched part and interpolated the missing value by stochastic regression imputation where the imputed value is drawn from a Gaussian
distribution with mean and variance calculated by regression
on the empirical value within a short interval of 20 recent
days. The series is then transformed from actual prices st
into log-returns xt = log(st/st−1) and normalised. Moreover, we combinatorically choose a predeﬁned number d out
of 162 univariate log-return series and aggregate the selected
series at each time step to form a d-dimensional multivariate
time series, the choice of d is in accordance with the rank of
correlation, e.g. d = 6 in our experiments. Theoretically, it
leads to a much larger volume of data as
> 2 × 1010.
Speciﬁcally, the actual dataset for training and evaluation
comprises a collection of 2000 series of d-dimensional normalised log-return vectors of length 2570 (∼7 years) with
no missing values. We divide the whole dataset into two subsets for training and testing along the time axis: the ﬁrst 2000
time steps of each series have been used as training samples
whereas the rest 570 steps of each series as the test samples.
We select several deterministic volatility models from the
GARCH family as baselines:
1. Quadratic models
• ARCH(1); GARCH(1,1); GJR-GARCH(1,1,1);
2. Absolute value models
• AVARCH(1); AVGARCH(1,1); TARCH(1,1,1);
3. Exponential models.
• EARCH(1); EGARCH(1,1);
Moreover, two stochastic volatility models are compared:
1. MCMC volatility model: stochvol;
2. Gaussian process volatility model GP-Vol.
For the listed models, we retrieve the authors’ implementations or tools: stochvol1, GP-Vol2 ) and implement the models, such as
GARCH, EGARCH, GJR-GARCH, etc., based on several
widely-used packages345 for time series analysis. All baselines are evaluated in terms of the negative log-likelihood on
the test samples, where 1-step-ahead forecasting is carried
out in a recursive fashion similar to Algorithm 1.
Model Implementation
In our experiments, we predeﬁne the dimensions of observable variables to be dim xt = 6 and the latent variables
dim zt = 4. Note that the dimension of the latent variable
is smaller than that of the observable, which allows us to
extract a compact representation. The NSVM implementation in our experiments is composed of two neural networks,
namely the generative network (see Eq. (16)-(21)) and inference network (see Eq. (23)-(27)). Each RNN module contains one hidden layer of size 10 with GRU cells; MLP modules are 2-layered fully-connected feedforward networks,
where the hidden layer is also of size 10 whereas the output layer splits into two equal-sized sublayers with different activation functions: one applies exponential function to
ensure the non-negativity for variance while the other uses
1 
2 
3 
4 Toolbox
5 
linear function to calculate mean estimates. Thus MLPz
output layer is of size 4 + 4 for {˜μz, ˜Σz} whereas the
size of MLPx
G’s output layer is 6 + 6 for {μx, Σx}. During the training phase, the inference network is connected
with the conditional generative network (see, Eq. (16)-(18))
to establish a bottleneck structure, the latent variable zt inferred by variational inference follows a Gaussian approximate posterior; the size of sample paths is set
to S = 100. The parameters of both networks are jointly
learned, including those for the prior. We introduce Dropout
 into each RNN modules and impose
L2-norm on the weights of MLP modules as regularistion
to prevent overshooting; Adam optimiser is exploited for fast convergence; exponential learning rate decay is adopted to anneal the variations of convergence as time goes. Two covariance conﬁgurations are
adopted: 1. we stick with diagonal covariance matrices con-
ﬁgurations; 2. we start with diagonal covariance and then apply rank-1 perturbation during ﬁne-tuning until training is ﬁnished. The recursive 1-step-ahead forecasting routine illustrated as Algorithm 1 is applied in the experiment for both training and test
phase: during the training phase, a single NSVM is trained,
at each time step, on the entire training samples to learn a
holistic dynamics, where the latent shall reﬂect the evolution of environment; in the test phase, on the other hand, the
model is optionally retrained, at every 20 time steps, on each
particular input series of the test samples to keep track on
the speciﬁc trend of that series. In other words, the trained
NSVM predicts 20 consecutive steps before it is retrained
using all historical time steps of the input series at present.
Correspondingly, all baselines are trained and tested at every
time step of each univariate series using standard calibration procedures. The negative log-likelihood on test samples
has been collected for performance assessment. We train the
model on a single-GPU (Titan X Pascal) server for roughly
two hours before it converges to a certain degree of accuracy
on the training samples. Empirically, the training phase can
be processed on CPU in reasonable time, as the complexity
of the model as well as the size of parameters is moderate.
Result and Discussion
The performance of NSVM and baselines is listed for comparison in Table 1: the performance on the ﬁrst 10 individual stocks (chosen in alphacetical order but anonymised
here) and the average score on all 162 stocks are reported in
terms of negative log-likelihood (NLL) measure. The result
shows that NSVM has achieved higher accuracy over the
baselines on the task of volatility modelling and forecasting on NLL, which validates the high ﬂexibility and rich expressive power of NSVM for volatility modelling and forecasting. In particular, NSVM with rank-1 perturbation (referred to as NSVM-corr in Table 1) beats all other models
in terms of NLL, while NSVM with diagonal covariance
matrix (i.e. NSVM-diag) outperforms GARCH(1,1) on 142
out of 162 stocks. Although the improvement comes at the
cost of longer training time before convergence, it can be
mitigated by applying parallel computing techniques as well
Table 1: The performance of the proposed model and the baselines in terms of negative log-likelihood (NLL) evaluated on the
test samples of real-world stock price time series: each row from 1 to 10 lists the average NLL for a speciﬁc individual stock;
the last row summarises the average NLL of the entire test samples of all 162 stocks.
Stock NSVM-corr NSVM-diag
ARCH GARCH
GJR AVARCH AVGCH TARCH
EARCH EGARCH stochvol
1.42816 1.36733
1.60087 1.60262
1.57115 1.58156
1.53651 1.39638 1.56260
1.28639 1.35682
1.63586 1.59978
1.46016 1.45951
1.52856 1.37080 1.47025
1.32285 1.37576
1.44640 1.45826
1.44437 1.45838
1.41331 1.25928 1.48203
1.32964 1.38872
1.45215 1.43133
1.44565 1.44371
1.40754 1.36199 1.32451
1.22451 1.39470
1.31141 1.30394
1.28204 1.27847
1.28191 1.16348 1.41417
1.23537 1.44126
1.55520 1.57794
1.47442 1.47438
1.48209 1.15107 1.24458
1.43244 1.36829
1.65549 1.71652
1.50407 1.50899
1.64631 1.42043 1.19983
1.26901 1.39010
1.47522 1.51466
1.44956 1.45029
1.42528 1.26289 1.47421
1.15896 1.42636
1.32367 1.24404
1.35427 1.34465
1.32895 1.12615 1.35478
1.13143 1.36919
1.55220 1.29989
1.06932 1.04675 23.35983
1.20704 1.32947 1.18123
1.23521 1.27062
1.27051 1.28809
1.27754 1.29010
1.36465 1.27098 1.34751
(a) The volatility forecasting for Stock 37
(b) The volatility forecasting for Stock 82
Figure 1: Case studies of volatility forecasting.
as more advanced network architecture or training methods.
Apart from the higher accuracy NSVM obtained, it provides
us with a rather general framework to generalise univariate
time series models of any speciﬁc functional form to the
corresponding multivariate cases by extending network dimensions and manipulating the covariance matrices. A case
study on real-world ﬁnancial datasets is illustrated in Fig. 1.
NSVM shows higher sensibility on drastic changes and
better stability on moderate ﬂuctuations: the response of
NSVM in Fig. 1a is more stable in t ∈ , the
period of moderate price ﬂuctuation; while for drastic price
change at t = 2250, the model responds with a sharper
spike compared with the quadratic GARCH model. Furthermore, NSVM demonstrates the inherent non-linearity
in both Fig. 1a and 1b: at each time step within t ∈
 , the model quickly adapts to the current ﬂuctuation level whereas GARCH suffers from a relatively slower
decay from the previous inﬂuences. The cyan vertical line at
t = 2000 splits the training samples and test samples. We
show only one instance within our dataset due to the limitation of pages, the performance of other instances are similar.
Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed a new volatility model, referred
to as NSVM, for volatility estimation and prediction. We integrated statistical models with deep neural networks, leveraged the characteristics of each model, organised the dependences between random variables in the form of graphical
models, implemented the mappings among variables and parameters through RNNs and MLPs, and ﬁnally established a
powerful stochastic recurrent model with universal approximation capability. The proposed architecture comprises a
pair of complementary stochastic neural networks: the generative network and inference network. The former models the joint distribution of the stochastic volatility process
with both observable and latent variables of interest; the latter provides with the approximate posterior i.e. an analytical approximation to the (intractable) conditional distribution of the latent variables given the observable ones. The
parameters (and consequently the underlying distributions)
are learned (and inferred) via variational inference, which
maximises the lower bound for the marginal log-likelihood
of the observable variables. NSVM has presented higher
accuracy on the task of volatility modelling and forecasting on real-world ﬁnancial datasets, compared with various widely-used models, such as GARCH, EGARCH, GJR-
GARCH, TARCH in the GARCH family, MCMC-based
stochvol model as well as Gaussian process volatility model
GP-Vol. Future work on NSVM would be to investigate the
modelling of time series with non-Gaussian residual distributions, in particular the heavy-tailed distributions e.g. Log-
Normal log N and Student’s t-distribution.