Predicting Elections with Twitter:
What 140 Characters Reveal about Political Sentiment
Andranik Tumasjan, Timm O. Sprenger, Philipp G. Sandner, Isabell M. Welpe
Technische Universität München
Lehrstuhl für Betriebswirtschaftslehre Strategie und Organisation
Leopoldstraße 139, 80804 Munich, Germany
Twitter is a microblogging website where users read and
write millions of short messages on a variety of topics every
day. This study uses the context of the German federal
election to investigate whether Twitter is used as a forum
for political deliberation and whether online messages on
Twitter validly mirror offline political sentiment. Using
LIWC text analysis software, we conducted a content
analysis of over 100,000 messages containing a reference to
either a political party or a politician. Our results show that
Twitter is indeed used extensively for political deliberation.
We find that the mere number of messages mentioning a
party reflects the election result. Moreover, joint mentions
of two parties are in line with real world political ties and
coalitions. An analysis of the tweets’ political sentiment
demonstrates close correspondence to the parties' and
politicians’ political positions indicating that the content of
Twitter messages plausibly reflects the offline political
landscape. We discuss the use of microblogging message
content as a valid indicator of political sentiment and derive
suggestions for further research.
Introduction
The successful use of social media in the US presidential
campaign of Barack Obama has established Twitter,
Facebook, MySpace, and other social media as integral
parts of the political campaign toolbox. Some analysts
attribute Obama's victory to a large extent to his online
social-networking
mybarackobama.com, known as MyBO, helped him set
records in terms of donations and grassroot mobilization
 . Shortly after his victory,
Obama used Twitter to let the web community know how
he felt: "This is history". As this example demonstrates,
after the rise of candidate websites in 1996, e-mail in 1998
(the Jesse Ventura campaign), online fund-raising in 2000
(the John McCain campaign), and blogs in 2004 , Twitter has
become a legitimate communication channel in the
political arena as a result of the 2008 campaign.
Copyright © 2010, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Twitter is a novel microblogging service launched in 2006
with more than 20 million unique monthly visitors. On
Twitter, every user can publish short messages with up to
140 characters, so-called “tweets”, which are visible on a
public message board of the website or through third-party
applications. The public timeline conveying the tweets of
all users worldwide is an extensive real-time information
stream of more than one million messages per hour. The
original idea behind microblogging was to provide
personal status updates. However, these days, postings
cover every imaginable topic, ranging from political news
to product information in a variety of formats, e.g., short
sentences, links to websites, and direct messages to other
users. Especially in the weeks leading up to elections,
political issues are clearly on the minds of many users. In
addition, politicians are communicating with the electorate
and trying to mobilize supporters. While some political
analysts are already turning to the "Twittersphere" as an
indicator of political opinion , others
have suggested that the majority of the messages are
"pointless babble" . As a result, we
aim at answering the question whether microblogging
messages can actually inform us about the political
landscape in the offline world.
The aim of this study is threefold. First, we examine
whether Twitter is a vehicle for online political
deliberation by looking at how people use microblogging
to exchange information about political issues. Second, we
evaluate whether Twitter messages reflect the current
offline political sentiment in a meaningful way. Third, we
analyze whether the activity on Twitter can be used to
predict the popularity of parties or coalitions in the real
Background on the German election
In our study, we use 104,003 tweets published in the weeks
leading up to the federal election of the national parliament
in Germany which took place on September 27th, 2009.
After 4 years in a grand coalition with the social democrats
(SPD), Chancellor Angela Merkel
member of the
conservatives (CDU) - was running for reelection, but
favoring a coalition with the liberals (FDP).
Many commentators have called the parties' campaigns
uninspiring due to the unwillingness of the main candidates
to attack their then-coalition partners. The left side of the
Proceedings of the Fourth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media
political spectrum was fragmented by the rise of the
socialist party (Die Linke). The SPD candidate for
Chancellor, Frank-Walter Steinmeier, publicly rejected Die
Linke as a possible coalition partner, thus limiting his
options to build a governing coalition. The potential
coalition of CDU and FDP was leading by a slight majority
in most polls and was ultimately able to form a center-right
government after the election.
Related work and research questions
Recently, the exponential growth of Twitter has started to
draw the attention of researchers from various disciplines.
There are several streams of research investigating the role
of Twitter in social media, product marketing, and project
management. One stream of research concentrates on
understanding microblogging usage and community
structures . In sum, this
research demonstrates that the intensity of Twitter usage
varies considerably. Market researchers have reported that
in June 2009 (only a couple of weeks before the German
federal election) 71% of all 1.8 million German users had
visited Twitter only once and 15% of them at least 3 times
 . Honeycutt and Herring
 showed that Twitter is used not only for one-way
communication but often serves as a means of
conversation. In their study exploring conversation via
Twitter, they find that 31% of a random sample of tweets
contain an “@”-sign and that the vast majority (91%) of
those were used to direct a tweet to a specific addressee.
While these findings have provided us with a general
understanding of why and how people use microblogging
services, they have not explored the use of this new
communication device in specific contexts such as, for
instance, corporate public relations or the political debate
Another stream of research focuses on corporate
applications of microblogging such as the companyinternal use for project management or the analysis of Twitter as electronic word
of mouth in the area of product marketing . In their study, Jansen et al. have found
that 19% of a random sample of tweets contained mentions
of a brand or product and that an automated classification
was able to extract statistically significant differences of
customer sentiment (i.e., the attitude of a writer towards a
brand). While this study provides reason to believe that
sentiment may also be embedded in tweets covering other
topics besides branding, Twitter sentiment analysis has not
yet been applied to the research regarding the political
debate online.
Scholars have debated the potential of weblogs as a
forum for democratic debate. In a comparison with
traditional media, Woodley highlights the dialogic
quality of political blogs, whereas Sunstein is more
pessimistic and questions the ability of blogs to aggregate
dispersed bits of information. Alongside these theoretical
works, "empirical research on deliberative democracy has
lagged significantly behind theory" . A few researchers have
empirically examined internet discussion boards as a
vehicle for political deliberation1 . Koop and Jansen have
defined the exchange of substantive issues as an indicator
of deliberation and the equality of participation as a
measure of the deliberative quality of blog-based
discussion. While they have found discussion boards and
blogs to be dominated by a relatively small number of
users, it is unclear whether their findings also apply to the
political debate on Twitter.
Recent scholarly work on political blogs has focused
on their effect on real world politics, such as
complementing the watchdog function of the mainstream
media and mobilizing supporters, but largely ignored the
reflection of offline politics in the digitally enhanced
public sphere . However, there
are some studies exploring the reflection of the political
landscape in "traditional" weblogs and social media sites.
For instance, Williams and Gulati have found that
the number of Facebook supporters can be considered a
valid indicator of electoral success. Even more simple
measures have produced surprising results. For example,
Véronis has shown that the simple count of
candidate mentions in the press can be a better predictor of
electoral success than election polls. Adamic and Glance
 have found that linkage patterns among bloggers
reflect the blogosphere along party lines. Albrecht et al.
 have examined the use of weblogs during the 2005
federal election in Germany including the distribution of
blogs along party preference.
Despite the fact, that previous research provides
evidence that “traditional” social media content can be
used to validly predict political outcomes, we know very
little about the predictive power of Twitter for political
debates and outcomes. Previous scholarly examinations of
social media may not be easily transferrable to Twitter for
the following reasons: First, tweets are much shorter and
contain much less content than, for instance, news articles
and traditional blogs. Hence, their informational value is
less clear-cut. One marketing consultancy has even
suggested that up to 40% of all Twitter messages are
"pointless babble" . Second, only part
of the information conveyed is found in the words
themselves because 19% of all messages contain links to
other websites . Thus, a basic question is
whether 140-character-messages can contain differentiated
information regarding the electorate's political sentiment.
With respect to the reflection of politics on Twitter,
Meckel and Stanoevska-Slabeva analyzed the
interconnections between 577 political Twitter accounts
(i.e., official accounts of parties and politicians) prior to the
German federal election. They conclude that German
politicians have not managed to mobilize the electorate
1 In line with Delli Carpini, Cook, and Jacobs we use the words
deliberation, debate and discussion interchangeably.
online. The connections between Twitter accounts were by
no means a reflection of the political ties along party lines:
while there was significant overlap among followers of the
Green party and Die Linke, the users of the two leftist
parties SPD and Die Linke were less connected. However,
this research focused solely on associations between
Twitter accounts and did not analyze the content of
political Twitter messages.
To summarize, studies analyzing the political debate
online have focused on traditional weblogs and social
media websites, such as Facebook, MySpace, and
YouTube. Previous research has shown that social media is
widely used for political deliberation and that this
deliberation reflects the political landscape of the offline
Although the reference to tweets in some political
commentaries shows that analysts are
already turning to the Twittersphere as an indicator of
political opinion, to the best of our knowledge, there are no
scientific studies systematically investigating the political
sentiment in microblogs. As a result, some research has
posed the question whether we can even "use the word
public opinion and blogging in the same sentence"
 . Therefore the goal of the present
explorative study is to address the following research
questions:
deliberation online?
• How accurately can Twitter inform us about the
electorate's political sentiment?
• Can Twitter serve as a predictor of the election result?
Data set and methodology
We examined 104,003 political tweets, which were
published on Twitter's public message board between
August 13th and September 19th, 2009, prior to the
German national election, with volume increasing as the
election drew nearer. We collected all tweets that contained
the names of either the 6 parties represented in the German
parliament (CDU/CSU, SPD, FDP, B90/Die Grünen, and
Die Linke) or selected prominent politicians of these
parties who are regularly included in a weekly survey on
the popularity of politicians conducted by the research
institute "Forschungsgruppe Wahlen". CDU and CSU,
often referred to as the “Union”, are sister parties which
form one faction in the German parliament.
Our query resulted in roughly 70,000 tweets mentioning
one of the 6 major parties and 35,000 tweets referring to
their politicians.
To extract the sentiment of these tweets automatically,
we used LIWC2007 , a text analysis
software developed to assess emotional, cognitive, and
structural
components
psychometrically validated internal dictionary. This
software calculates the degree to which a text sample
empirically
psychological and structural categories. Specifically, it
determines the rate at which certain cognitions and
emotions (e.g., future orientation, positive or negative
emotions) are present in the text. For each psychological
dimension the software calculates the relative frequency
with which words related to that dimension occur in a
given text sample (e.g., the words "maybe", "perhaps", or
"guess" are counted as representatives of the construct
“tentativeness”). LIWC has been used widely in
psychology and linguistics . For example, Yu, Kaufmann, and Diermeier 
have used LIWC to measure the sentiment levels in US
Senatorial speeches.
We focus on 12 dimensions in order to profile political
sentiment: Future orientation, past orientation, positive
emotions, negative emotions, sadness, anxiety, anger,
tentativeness, certainty, work, achievement, and money.
Following the methodology used by Yu, Kaufmann, and
Diermeier we concatenated all tweets published
over the relevant timeframe into one text sample to be
evaluated by LIWC. Tweets were downloaded in German
and automatically translated into English to be processed
by the LIWC English dictionary.
Twitter as a platform for political deliberation
In this section, we will evaluate our sample along two
widely accepted indicators of blog-based deliberation, the
exchange of substantive issues and the equality of
participation .
Table 1 shows the number of mentions and a random
sample of tweets for all parties in our sample. While this is
only a small selection of the information stream in our
sample, these messages illustrate that tweets can contain a
lot of relevant information. So despite their brevity
substantive issues can be expressed in 140 characters or
Table 1: Tweets by party
Next, we analyze the level of addressivity and retweets in
the messages as an indication regarding the exchange of
 
 ! "
'  (
,    -$ +
,'0 "
' 7
$199&3:;<
ideas on Twitter. About one third of all tweets in our
sample (30.8%) contain an "@"-sign which is in line with
previous research that has also suggested that the vast
majority of "@"-signs are used to direct a tweet to a
specific addressee .
However, some users also employ the "@"-sign to label
the mere mention of another person. A more conservative
measure of direct communication are direct messages to
another user starting with an "@"-sign. Roughly 10% of
the messages in our sample are direct messages indicating
that people are not just using Twitter to post their opinions,
but also engage in interactive discussions.
Many users on Twitter forward messages to their
followership. These so-called retweets often contain
information that the sender finds noteworthy such as links
to other websites. While only 19% of all Twitter messages
contain a hyperlink, that number is much higher (57%) for
retweets . Consequently, the rate at which
messages are retweeted indicates whether information is
considered being interesting. According to Zarrella
 , only 1.44% of all tweets are retweets. In our
sample, however, that share is significantly higher: 19.1%
of all messages were retweets with no significant variation
across user groups. This relatively high share is in line with
McKenna and Pole who found that 87% of political
bloggers provide links to news articles and other blogs.
Summarizing, our results indicate that people are finding
interesting political information on Twitter which they
share with their network of followers.
We now turn to the analysis of the equality of
participation. While we find evidence of a lively political
debate on Twitter, it is unclear whether this deliberation is
lead by a few "political junkies" rather than the wider
general public. Jansen and Koop found less than 3%
of all users on the political message board BC Votes to be
responsible for almost a third of all posted messages. Table
2 shows the share of users and the share of messages
across various user groups for our sample according to the
frequency with which a user posts messages. We adopted
the categorization from Jansen and Koop .
While the distribution of users across user groups is almost
identical with the one found by Jansen and Koop ,
we find even less equality of participation for the political
debate on Twitter. There is a high concentration of
messages in the groups of heavy (23.1%) and very heavy
users (21.2%).
In sum, it becomes clear that, while Twitter is used as a
forum for political deliberation, this forum is dominated by
a small number of heavy users.
Table 2: Equality of participation
Twitter as a reflection of political sentiment
The fact that users are discussing political issues online
does not mean that we can necessarily extract meaningful
information from this debate. To explore this question we
aggregated the information stream about parties and
politicians and compared the resulting profiles with
anecdotal evidence from election programs and the press.
In order to analyze the political sentiment of the tweets, we
generated multi-dimensional profiles of the politicians in
our sample using the relative frequencies of LIWC
category word counts.
Figure 1 shows these profiles for the leading candidates
of the 5 main parties: Angela Merkel (CDU), Frank-Walter
Steinmeier (SPD), Guido Westerwelle (FDP), Jürgen
Trittin (Grüne), and Oskar Lafontaine (Linke). Overall,
positive emotions clearly outweigh negative emotions.
This is in line with Yu, Kaufmann, and Diermeier 
who find that positive emotions outweigh negative
emotions by more than 2 to 1 in an LIWC-based analysis
of 18 years of congressional debates.
Only liberal party leader Westerwelle and socialist party
leader Lafontaine show more distinctive deviations from
this profile on some dimensions. The dimension of
perceived anger, for example, is most prominent in the
case of these two politicians who, as free-market advocate
and socialist leader, represent two contrasting political
programs in the political spectrum. Messages regarding
Steinmeier, who at the time of our recording was sending
mixed signals regarding potential coalition partners for his
party after the election, reflect more tentativeness than
those of other politicians.
Figure 1: Profiles of leading candidates
Figure 2 shows the profiles of other prominent politicians:
Karl-Theodor zu Guttenberg (CSU, economics minister),
Horst Seehofer (CSU chairman), Peer Steinbrück (SPD,
finance minister), and Gregor Gysi (leader of Die Linke in
the German parliament). Their profiles show some distinct
differences from those of the leading candidates. Again,
positive outweigh negative emotions with the exception
of Seehofer who in addition is most frequently associated
with anger. This might reflect the fact that Seehofer
irritated many voters and party members by attacking the
  
   
1+)@', 0A
D)$+)@=A
(#
!(( +(#
 !
%&$
*(+(*!
"#$#
 #( '()'
3 $ #(
3 $ #(
 ) #(
 !
%&$
 ) #(
#$# ((
 !
%&$
 ./
coalition partner desired by sister party CDU for much of
the election campaign. Especially for Steinbrück and zu
Guttenberg, the issues money and work are probably
reflecting their roles as finance and economics ministers.
As can be seen, while small in absolute terms, the
sentiment embedded in tweets does reflect nuanced
differences between the politicians in our sample.
Figure 2: Profiles of other candidates
Since it is not easy to spot differences in the profiles from
the radar charts, we computed a distance measure for
various combinations of politicians and parties (Table 3). If
di,p is the value of the i-th dimension for politician p, then
the following equation represents the average distance
from the mean profile per category of all politicians across
the 12 dimensions:
The lower the values of d, the more similar are the profiles.
As can be seen in Table 3, the differences between
politicians are generally higher than those between
political parties.
The distance measures confirm the high convergence of
the leading candidates from all parties (d = 0.1) and
particularly for the two candidates running for chancellor
(d = 0.02). There is more divergence among politicians of
the governing grand coalition (d = 0.23) than among those
of a potential right-wing coalition (d = 0.16).
Table 3: Distance of profiles
Apart from Merkel and Steinmeier, the highest fit emerges
between politicians of a potential left-wing coalition.
With respect to the parties, the fit of a potential rightwing coalition is almost as good as the fit in the governing
coalition (d = 0.08), but much higher than the similarity of
parties on the left side of the political spectrum (d = 0.14).
The similarity measure confirms the tight fit between the
Union faction of sister parties CDU and CSU (d = 0.01).
Overall, the similarity of profiles is a plausible reflection
of the political proximity between the parties in the weeks
before the federal election.
Twitter as a predictor of the election result
In order to understand whether the activity on Twitter can
serve as a predictor of the election outcome we examine
two aspects. First, we compare the share of attention the
political parties receive on Twitter with the election result.
Second, we analyze whether tweets can inform us about
the ideological ties between parties and potential political
coalitions after the election.
Table 4 shows the number of tweets mentioning a
particular party. As can be seen, the ranking by tweet
volume (i.e., the number of tweets) and the ranking by
share of vote in the election results are identical. In fact,
the relative volume of tweets mirrors the results of the
federal election closely. If we consider the number of
tweets to be a predictor of the election result, the mean
absolute error (MAE) of this prediction is 1.65%. The
MAE is a measure of forecast accuracy and has been
widely used to compare the accuracy of political
information markets relative to election polls .
To understand how the above-mentioned prediction
based on message volume compares with traditional
methods to collect this data, we compared Twitter with a
number of election polls. Table 5 shows the MAE for
Twitter and the last poll prior to the election for 6 research
institutes which published election polls in our sample
period. As can be seen, Twitter comes close to these
accepted benchmarks. This is in line with the findings
reported by Véronis who has shown that, in the case
of the 2007 French presidential election, the simple count
of candidate mentions in the press was a better predictor of
electoral success than many election polls.
  
8  9 
 9#&
Table 4: Share of tweets and election results
In conclusion, the mere number of tweets mentioning a
political party can be considered a plausible reflection of
the vote share and its predictive power even comes close to
traditional election polls.
Table 5: Forecast accuracy of various election polls
After extracting the absolute strength of each party from
the message volume, we now turn to the relationships
between parties. This is all the more relevant, as all parties
were far from an absolute majority in the weeks preceding
the federal election and a coalition government was on the
As many tweets mention more than one political party,
we investigate whether joint mentions reflect prevailing or
even upcoming political ties. To make the comparison
easier, we focus on tweets mentioning only two parties.
Based on the overall probability that any one party is
mentioned in these tweets, a conditional probability that
two parties are mentioned together can be computed. If all
combinations were equally likely, this conditional
probability should equal the observed share of tweets
mentioning these two parties. Due to different base rates,
we divide the observed share of joint mentions by the
conditional probability to derive a comparative measure. If
share(CDU, CSU) represents the share of observed joint
mentions of these two parties, the relative frequency (f), is
calculated as follows:
The relative frequency illustrates how often two parties are
mentioned together relative to the random probability
based on the overall "share of voice" of the individual
parties. If f equals 1.5 the share of observed joint mentions
is 50% higher than pure chance would suggest.
Table 6 shows the relative frequency for all
combinations of two parties based on all tweets mentioning
more than on party (n = 61.700). Not surprisingly, the
combined mentioning of sister parties CDU and CSU was
the most frequent (f = 1.25), whereas CSU and the left-ofcenter parties (SPD, Green party, and Linke) were
mentioned together the least.
While the governing coalition of CDU and SPD are
naturally mentioned jointly quite frequently, the Union
parties (CDU and CSU) are associated most closely with
its desired coalition partner at that time, the FDP. The
parties of the left side of the political spectrum are
associated with each other more often than with the rightof-center parties (CDU, CSU, and FDP). In sum, the joint
mentions of political parties accurately reflect the political
ties between the parties.
We conclude that despite the fact that the Twittersphere
is no representative sample of the German electorate, the
activity prior to the election seems to validly reflect the
election outcome.
Table 6: Relative frequency of joint mentions
Conclusion and further research
We analyzed over 100,000 Twitter messages mentioning
parties or politicians prior to the German federal election
2009. Overall, we found that Twitter is indeed used as a
platform for political deliberation. The mere number of
tweets reflects voter preferences and comes close to
traditional election polls, while the sentiment of Twitter
messages closely corresponds to political programs,
candidate profiles, and evidence from the media coverage
of the campaign trail.
With respect to our first research question, we found
more than one third of all messages to be part of a
conversation indicating that Twitter is not just used to
spread political opinions, but also to discuss these opinions
with other users. While we find evidence of a lively
political debate on Twitter, this discussion is still
dominated by a small number of users: only 4% of all users
accounted for more than 40% of the messages.
With respect to our second research question, we found
the sentiment profiles of politicians and parties to plausibly
reflect many nuances of the election campaign. For
example, the similar profiles of Angela Merkel und Frank-
Walter Steinmeier, mirror the consensus-oriented political
! . In a study on internet
message boards by Jansen and Koop even the
positions of the two largest parties were reversed and the
party winning an absolute majority attributed only 27.2%
of the party mentions. The authors attributed this
phenomenon to the dominance of a few users who
"determined the overall ideological 'feel' of the discussion
board" Given that there
was even less equality of participation in our sample, it is
all the more surprising that heavy users were unable to
impose their political sentiment on the discussion. This
may be a result of the large number of participants on
Twitter who make the information stream as a whole more
representative of the electorate. Our results suggest that
Twitter may complement traditional methods of political
forecasting (e.g., polls or surveys).
In sum, our results demonstrate that Twitter can be
considered a valid indicator of political opinion.
This study has several limitations. First, research on
political bloggers and similar
demographics of Twitter users 
suggest that our sample may not have been representative
of the German electorate. However, the fact that these
well-educated users "influence important actors within
mainstream media who in turn frame issues for a wider
public" warrants special
attention to Twitter as a source of opinion leadership.
Second, our data were limited to the tweets containing
the names of parties and politicians that we defined as
search terms. Therefore, we may have missed some replies
belonging to a discussion thread because respondents do
not necessarily repeat these names in every message. In
their study of political discussion boards, Jansen and Koop
 have found that only 60% of all messages
mentioned a political party by name. However, since
Twitter users are aware of the unstructured nature of
microblogging communication and therefore include
searchable keywords, so-called hashtags, in many
messages (e.g., "#CDU"), we believe the share of relevant
replies to be small. In addition, parts of the information
relayed through Twitter are embedded in links. Including
these missing pieces of information may change our results
participation.
Therefore, future research should try to capture the context
of a particular statement more comprehensively either by
following embedded links or by searching for replies to an
Third, our investigation was based on one particular text
analysis software and used an existing dictionary not
specifically tailored to classify such short messages as
tweets. There are many specifics of communication
through microblogging services, including the use of a
special syntax and conventions (e.g., the use of emoticons)
which are not reflected in our default LIWC dictionary.
Since we translated the German language messages into
English some meaning may have been lost in the
translation. However, we believe this effect to be
negligible since LIWC is based on word count only and
therefore should not be affected by grammatical errors.
Fourth, we treated all messages published in a given time
frame as one document. Further research should refine the
text analysis to the political discussion and investigate
sentiment one tweet at a time.
Finally, while we have examined overall political
sentiment, voters' attitudes and opinions may vary
depending on specific political issues. Future sentiment
analysis could address this issue by conducting a more
detailed classification of content.
Summarizing, our results demonstrate that Twitter can be
seen as a valid real-time indicator of political sentiment.
Little research has yet been conducted in this area leaving
many questions unresolved. Further research should test
whether text analysis procedures which are more closely
tailored to the political debate reflecting both the specifics
of microblogging and the political issues can produce even
more meaningful results. Researchers should also try to
capture the context of a particular statement in a more
comprehensive manner including threads of conversation
and links to information beyond the tweet.
In contrast to Sunstein , who argues that the
blogosphere cannot serve as a marketplace for information
because it lacks a pricing system, we find that information
on Twitter can be aggregated in a meaningful way. The
size of the followership and the rate of retweets may
represent the Twittersphere's “currency” and provide it
with its own kind of a pricing mechanism. The fact, that
even the fairly simple methodology used in our study was
able to generate plausible results is encouraging and points
to additional possibilities to leverage Twitter as an
information market.