Extracting Interactions between Proteins from the
Literature
Deyu Zhou and Yulan He
Informatics Research Centre, The University of Reading,
Reading, RG6 6BX, UK
Email: , 
During the last decade, biomedicine has witnessed a tremendous development.
Large amounts of experimental and computational biomedical data have been generated along with new discoveries, which are accompanied by an exponential increase in the number of biomedical publications describing these discoveries. In
the meantime, there has been a great interest with scientiﬁc communities in text
mining tools to ﬁnd knowledge such as protein-protein interactions, which is most
relevant and useful for speciﬁc analysis tasks. This paper provides a outline of the
various information extraction methods in biomedical domain, especially for discovery of protein-protein interactions. It surveys methodologies involved in plain
texts analyzing and processing, categorizes current work in biomedical information
extraction, and provides examples of these methods. Challenges in the ﬁeld are
also presented and possible solutions are discussed.
Keywords: information extraction, biomedicine, computational linguistics, machine
learning, text mining, protein-protein interactions
Introduction
In post genomic science, proteins are recognized as elements in complex protein interaction networks. Hence protein-protein interactions play a key role in various aspects of
the structural and functional organization of the cell. Knowledge about them unveils the
molecular mechanisms of biological processes. However, most of this knowledge hides in
published articles, scientiﬁc journals, books and technical reports. To date, more than 16
million citations of such articles are available in the MEDLINE database . In parallel
with these plain text information sources, many databases, such as DIP , BIND ,
IntAct and STRING , have been built to store various types of information about
protein-protein interactions. Nevertheless, data in these databases were mainly handcurated to ensure their correctness and thus limited the speed in transferring textual
information into searchable structure data. Retrieving and mining such information from
the literature is very complex due to the lack of formal structure in the natural-language
narrative in these documents. Thus, automatically extracting information from biomedical text holds the promise of easily discovering large amounts of biological knowledge in
computer-accessible forms.
Figure 1: A general architecture of an information extraction system for protein-protein
interactions.
Many systems , such as EDGAR , BioRAT , GeneWays and so on,
have been developed to accomplish this goal, but with limited success. Table 1 lists some
popular online databases, systems, and tools relating to the extraction of protein-protein
interactions.
In general, to automatically extract protein-protein interactions, a system needs to
consist of three to four major modules , which is illustrated in Figure 1.
• Zoning module. It splits documents into basic building blocks for later analysis.
Typical building blocks are phrases, sentences, and paragraphs. In special cases,
higher-level building blocks such as sections or chapters may be chosen. Ding et
al. compared the results of employing diﬀerent text units such as phrases,
sentences, and abstracts from MEDLINE to mine interactions between biochemical entities based on co-occurrences. Experimental results showed that abstracts,
sentences, and phases all can produce comparative extraction results. However,
with respect to eﬀectiveness, sentences are signiﬁcantly better than phrases and are
about the same as abstracts.
• Protein name recognition module. Before the extraction of protein-protein interactions, it is crucial to facilitate the identiﬁcation of protein names, which still
remains a challenging problem . Although experimental results of high recall
and precision rates have been reported, several obstacles to further development
are encountered while tagging protein names for the conjunctive natural of the
names . Chen et al. and Leser et al. provided a quantitative overview
of the cause of gene-name ambiguity, and suggested what researchers can do to
minimize this problem.
• Protein-protein interaction extraction module. As the retrieval of protein-protein
interactions has attracted much attention in the ﬁeld of biomedical information
extraction, plenty of approaches have been proposed. The solutions range from
simple statistical methods relying on co-occurrences of genes or proteins to methods
employing a deep syntactical or semantical analysis.
• Visualization module. This module is not as crucial as the aforementioned three
modules, but it provides a friendly interface for users to delve into the generated
knowledge . Moreover, it allows users to interact with the system for ease of
updating the system’s knowledge base and eventually improve its performance.
Table 1: Online databases, systems, tools relating to the extraction of protein-protein
interactions.
Description
Online databases storing protein-protein interactions
Biomolecular Interaction Network Database contains over 200,000 human-curated interactions.
www.bind.ca
Database of Interacting Proteins catalogs experimentally determined interactions between proteins. Until now, it contains 56,186 interactions, combining information from various sources
to construct a single, stable set of protein-protein interactions.
dip.doe-mbi.ucla.edu
The Human Protein Reference Database contains interaction networks for each protein
in the human proteome. All the information in HPRD has been manually extracted from the
literature by expert biologists who read, interpret and analyze the published articles.
www.hprd.org
Human Protein Interaction Database integrates the protein interactions in BIND, DIP and
www.hpid.org
IntAct consists of an open source database and several analysis tools for protein interaction
data. It now contains more than 150,000 curated binary molecular interactions.
www.ebi.ac.uk/intact
Molecular INTeraction database is a database storing interactions between biological
molecules. It focuses on experimentally veriﬁed protein interactions with special emphasis
on proteomes from mammalian organisms.
mint.bio.uniroma2.it/mint
STRING, a database consisting of known and predicted protein-protein interactions, quantitatively integrates interaction data from several sources for a large number of organisms. It
currently contains 1,513,782 proteins in 373 species.
string.embl.de
Online protein-protein interaction information extraction systems
BioRAT is a search engine and information extraction tool for biological research.
bioinf.cs.ucl.ac.uk/biorat
GeneWays is a system for automatically extracting, analyzing, visualizing and integrating
molecular pathway data from the literature.
It focuses on interactions between molecular
substances and actions, providing a graphical consensus view on these collected information.
geneways.genomecenter.
columbia.edu
MedScan is a commercial system based on natural language processing technology for automatic extraction of biological facts from scientiﬁc literature such as MEDLINE abstracts, and
internal text documents.
www.ariadnegenomics.com/
products/medscan.html
Online tools for biomedical literature mining
Collaborative Bio Curation uses automated text extraction as a starting point to initialize the interaction database. After that, researchers in biomedical domain contribute to the
curation process by subsequent edits.
cbioc.eas.asu.edu
Chilibot is a search software for MEDLINE literature database to rapidly identify relationships between genes, proteins, or any keywords that the user might be interested.
www.chilibot.net
GoPubMed is a search engineer that allows users to explore PubMed search results with
the Gene Ontology (GO), a hierarchically structured vocabulary for molecular biology.
www.gopubmed.org
Information Hyperlinked over Proteins constructs a gene network by converting the information in MEDLINE into one navigable resource using genes and proteins as hyperlinks
between sentences and abstracts.
www.ihopnet.org/UniPub/iHOP
iProLINK is a resource to facilitate text mining in the area of literature-based database curation, named entity recognition, and protein ontology development. It can be utilized by
computational and biomedical researchers to explore literature information on proteins and
their features or properties.
pir.georgetown.edu/iprolink
PreBIND is a tool helping researchers locate biomolecular interaction information in the scientiﬁc literature. It identiﬁes papers describing interactions using a support vector machine.
prebind.bind.ca
PubGene is constructed to identify the relationships between genes and proteins, diseases, cell
processes, and so on based on their co-occurrences in the abstracts of scientiﬁc papers, their
sequence homology, and statistical probability of their co-occurrences.
www.pubgene.org
Whatizit is a text processing tool that can identify molecular biology terms and linking them to
publicly available databases. Identiﬁed terms are wrapped with XML tags that carry additional
information, such as the primary keys to the databases where all the relevant information is
kept. It is also a MEDLINE abstracts search engine.
www.ebi.ac.uk/webservices/
whatizit/info.jsf
To evaluate the performance of an information extraction system, normally recall and
precision values are measured. Suppose a test dataset has T positive information (for
example, protein-protein interactions), and an information extraction system can extract
I “positive” information. In I, only some information is really positive which we denote
as B and the remaining information is negative, however the system falsely extracts as
positive which we denote as C. In T, some information is not extracted by the system
which we denote as A. The relationships of A, B, and C are illustrated in Figure 2.
B is the positive information in test
data which need
to be extracted
C is the extracted results including
positive and negative information
Figure 2: Venn Diagram of information extraction results.
Based on the above deﬁnitions, recall and precision can be deﬁned as:
For example, a test dataset has 10 protein-protein interactions (∥T∥= 10). An information extracting system extracts 11 protein-protein interactions (∥I∥= 11). In I, only 6
protein-protein interactions (B) can be found in T, which are considered as true positive
(TP). The remaining 5 protein-protein interaction (C) can not be found in T, which
are considered as false positive (FP). In T, 4 protein-protein interactions (A) are not
extracted by the system, which are considered as false negative (FN). Thus, the recall of
the system is 6/(6 + 4) = 60% and the precision is 6/(6 + 5) = 54.5%.
Obviously, an ideal information extracting system should fulﬁl ∥A∥−→0, ∥C∥−→0.
To reﬂect these two conditions, F-measure is deﬁned by the harmonic (weighted) average
of precision and recall as :
(1 + β2) · Precision · Recall
β2 · Precision + Recall
(1 + β2)∥B∥
(1 + β2)∥B∥+ β2∥A∥+ ∥C∥
where β indicates a relative weight of precision. For further details of the state of the
science in text mining evaluations, please refer to Hersh .
In this paper, we focus on the protein-protein interaction extraction module and
provide a brief survey and classiﬁcation on the developed methodologies. In general, the
methods proposed so far rely on the techniques from one or more areas including
Information Retrieval (IR) , Machine Learning (ML) , Natural Language
Processing (NLP) , Information Extraction (IE) and Text Mining .
Earlier work focused on limited linguistic context and relied on word co-occurrences and
pattern matching. Later computational linguistic techniques that could handle relations
in complex sentences were employed. The surveyed work illustrates the progress of the
ﬁeld and shows the increasing complexity of the proposed methodologies.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section presents a survey of
various methods applied in automatical extraction of protein-protein interactions from
literature. In succession, challenges are identiﬁed and possible solutions are suggested.
Methodologies
This section presents a brief discussion on the existing techniques and methods for extracting protein-protein interactions. In general, current approaches can be divided into
three categories:
• Computational linguistics-based methods. To discover knowledge from unstructured
text, it is natural to employ computational linguistics and philosophy, such as syntactic parsing or semantic parsing to analyze sentence structures. Methods of this
category deﬁne grammars to describe sentence structures and use parsers to extract
syntactic information and internal dependencies within individual sentences. Approaches in this category can be applied to diﬀerent knowledge domains after being
carefully tuned to the speciﬁc problems. But, there is still no guarantee that the
performance in the ﬁeld of biomedicine can achieve comparable performance after
tuning. Until recently, methods based on computational linguistics still could not
generate satisfactory results.
• Rule-based methods. Rule-based approaches deﬁne a set of rules for possible textual relationships, called patterns, which encode similar structures in expressing
relationships. When combined with statistical methods, scoring schemes depending on the occurrences of patterns to describe the conﬁdence of the relationship are
normally used. Similar to computational linguistics methods, rule-based approaches
can make use of syntactic information to achieve better performance, although it
can also work without prior parsing and tagging of the text.
• Machine learning and statistical methods. Machine learning refers to the ability of
a machine to learn from experience to extract knowledge from data corpora. As
opposed to the aforementioned two categories that need laborious eﬀort to deﬁne a
set of rules or grammars, machine learning techniques are able to extract proteinprotein interaction patterns without human intervention.
Statistical approaches are based on word occurrences in a large text corpus. Signiﬁcant features or patterns are detected and used to classify the abstracts or sentences
containing protein-protein interactions, and characterize the corresponding relations
among genes or proteins.
It has to be mentioned that many existing systems in fact adopt a hybrid approach
for better performance by combining methods from two or more of the aforementioned
categories.
Figure 3 illustrates the process of information extraction on an example sentence by
employing the typical methods in the above three categories.
unlike another tumor suppressor protein
Rb did not have any significant effect on basal levels of
transcription
suggesting that Rb specifically interacts with IE
IN another
NN suppressor
NN protein
DT significant
IN transcription
suggesting
specifically
RB interacts
Statistical approaches
Corpus level statistic
Sentence level statistic
Occurrence
Occurrence
Confidence
Predefined threshold
dentification
Computational Linguistics based approaches
Rb interact
Semantic rules
specifically interacts with
based approaches
Rb interact IE
interact IE
with protein
protein RB VBZ
WITH protein
Rb interact IE
Figure 3: General dataﬂow of information extraction system employing diﬀerent methodologies.
Computational Linguistics-Based Methods
In general, computational linguistics-based methods employ linguistic technology to grasp
syntactic structures or semantic meanings from sentences.
Techniques for analyzing a sentence and determining its structure in computational
linguistics are called parsing techniques. Parsing the corpus ﬁrstly to obtain the morphological and syntactic information for each sentence is extremely important, and probably
only after that, it would be possible to fulﬁll sophisticated tasks such as identifying the
relationship between proteins and gene products in a fully automatic way. However, it
is well known that parsing unrestricted texts, such as those in the biomedical domain, is
extremely diﬃcult.
The methods in this category can be further divided into two types, based on the
complexity of the linguistics methods, as shallow (or partial) parsing or deep (or full)
parsing. Shallow parsing techniques aim to recover syntactic information eﬃciently and
reliably from unrestricted text, by sacriﬁcing completeness and depth of analysis, while
deep parsing techniques analyze the entire sentence structure, which normally achieve
better performance but with increased computational complexity.
Shallow Parsing Approaches
Shallow parsers perform partial decomposition of a sentence structure. They ﬁrst
break sentences into none-overlapping chunks, then extract local dependencies among
chunks without reconstructing the structure of an entire sentence. Sekimizu et al. used
shallow parser, EngCG, to generate three kinds of tags, such as syntactic, morphological,
and boundary tags . Based on the tagging results, subjects and objects were recognized for the most frequently used verbs in a collection of abstracts which were believed
to express the interactions between proteins, genes. Thomas et al. modiﬁed a preexisting parser based on the cascaded ﬁnite state automata (FSA). Predeﬁned templates
were then ﬁlled with information about protein interactions based on the parsing results
for three verbs: interact with, associate with, bind to. Pustejovsky et al. targeted
“inhibit” relations in the text and also built an FSA to recognize these relations. Leroy
et al. used a shallow parser to automatically capture the relationships between noun
phrases in free text. The shallow parser is based on four FSAs to structure the relations
between individual entities and model generic relations not limited to speciﬁc words. By
elaborate design, the parser can also recognize coordinating conjunctions and capture
negation in texts, a feature usually ignored by others. The precision and recall rates reported for shallow parsing approaches are estimated at 50-80% and 30-70%, respectively.
An Example
To delve into the mechanism of shallow parsing, the method reported in is used
to illustrate the process of detecting relations from free text.
Consider that prepositions indicate diﬀerent types of relations between phases and can
be distinguished based on their operative classes, the parser is based on four cascaded
FSAs with one FSA for basic sentences and the other three FSAs dealing with the three
top highly occurred prepositions (by, of, in). Figure 4 depicts an overview of the four
The FSA for Basic Sentences (BS-FSA) is used to model short basic sentence containing minimally two nouns or noun phrases and a verb. The structure of BS-FSA and
Common states
Common States
Common States
Common States
Common States
Common States
Common States
These results suggest that p
gene mutations may not cccur
frequently in rat bladder
carcinogenesis
Determiner
Determiner
frequently
Conjunction
carcinogenesis
FSA for basic
FSA for the preposition
FSA for the preposition
FSA for the preposition
Conjunction
Proper noun
stimulated
Conjunction
Conjunction
Given that E
activity is
stimulated by p
acetylase and
Proper noun
Conjunction
Determiner
Conjunction
Determiner
Conjunction
Conjunction
gerund or present participle
acts as a specific
signal for the induction of
apoptosis by affecting
Determiner
cytoplasmic
sequestration
Conjunction
Determiner
deficiency does
not accelerate tumor growth
Proper noun
deficiency
rd person sing
accelerate
the cytoplasmic sequestration
domain of the p
Figure 4: Four ﬁnite-state automata describing sentence structures. (Nom., nominalization; Mod, modiﬁer; Neg., negation; NP, noun phraser or noun; Adj., adjective)
an example is given in Figure 4 (a).
The FSA for the preposition “of” (OF-FSA) deals with structures surrounding one
or two “of’s”.
It can handle two subtypes of patterns.
The simple pattern involves
noun phrases only, such as the example 1) shown in Figure 4 (b1). The complex pattern
contains nominalizations (turning a verb or an adjective into a noun), such as the example
2) shown in Figure 4 (b2).
The FSA dealing with the preposition “by” (BY-FSA) can stand alone or can be
cascaded with the OF-FSA. When on its own, the FSA requires the presence of a verb
and two noun phrase or nominalizations, such as the example shown in Figure 4 (c).
The FSA dealing with the preposition “in” (IN-FSA) can stand alone when there is
a verb available, or it can be combined with the OF- or BY-FSA. The structure of the
IN-FSA and an example is given in Figure 4 (d).
When the parser reaches an end state successfully, the original relation is extracted
to ﬁll in the parser relation template which contains up to ﬁve elements, such as relation
negation, left-hand side elements, connector modiﬁer, connector, and right-hand side
elements. For example, the relation extracted from the abstract title “Regulation of E2F1
activity by acetylation”, is “acetylation (left-hand side elements), regulates (connector), E2F1
(right-hand side elements)”.
Obviously, shallow parsers perform well for capturing relatively simple binary relationships between entities in a sentence, but fail to recognize more complex relationships
expressed in various coordinating and relational clauses. For sentences containing complex relations between three or more entities, such approaches usually yield erroneous
results. Approaches based on full-sentence parsing tend to be more precise.
Deep Parsing Approaches
Systems based on deep parsing deal with the structure of an entire sentence and therefore
are potentially more accurate.
Variations of the deep parsing-based approaches have
been proposed . Based on the way of constructing grammars, deep parsingbased approaches can be divided into two types: rationalist methods and empiricist
methods. Rational methods deﬁne grammars by manual eﬀorts, while empiricist methods
automatically generate the grammar by some observations.
Rationalist Methods
Yakushiji et al. used a general full parser with grammar for biomedical domain to
extract interaction events by ﬁlling sentences into slots of semantic frames. Information
extraction itself is done using pattern matching on the canonical structure. Park et al. 
proposed bidirectional incremental parsing with combinatory categorial grammar (CCG).
This method ﬁrst localized target verbs, and then scanned the left and right neighborhood
of the verb respectively. The lexical and grammatical rules of CCG are more complicated
than those of a general context-free grammar (CFG)1. The recall and precision rate of the
system were reported to be 48% and 80%. Temkin and Gilder introduced a lexical
analyzer and a CFG to extract protein, gene and small molecule interactions with a recall
1In linguistics and computer science, a CFG is a formal grammar in which every production rule is of
the form V →w where V is a non-terminal symbol and w is a string consisting of terminals and/or nonterminals. The term “context-free” comes from the fact that the non-terminal V can always be replaced
by w, regardless of the context in which it occurs. Context-free grammars are powerful to describe the
structure of sentences, and also simple enough to allow the construction of eﬃcient parsing.
rate of 63.9% and precision rate of 70.2%. Ding et al. investigated link grammar
parsing for extracting biochemical interactions. It can handle many syntactic structures
and is computationally relatively eﬃcient. A better overall performance was achieved
compared to those biomedical term co-occurrence based methods. Ahmed et al. split
complex sentences into simple clausal structures made up of syntactic roles based on a link
grammar. Complete interactions were then extracted by analyzing the matching contents
of syntactic roles and their linguistically signiﬁcant combinations. In GENIES , a
parser and a semantic grammar consisting of a large set of nested semantic patterns
(incorporating some syntactic knowledge) are used. Unlike other systems, GENIES is
capable of extracting a wide variety of diﬀerent relations between biological molecules as
well as nested chains of relations. However, the downside of the semantic grammar-based
systems such as GENIES is that they may require complete redesign of the grammar in
order to be tuned for used in diﬀerent domain.
An Example
The process of using deep parsing based on rationalist methods to detect proteinprotein interactions can be illustrated by the method proposed in , which employs a
predeﬁned context-free grammar (CFG).
To develop a concise set of grammar production of rules allowing for the detection of
protein, gene, and small molecule (PGSM) interactions, a large corpus of 500 non-topic
speciﬁc scientiﬁc abstracts pulled from PubMed containing various representations
of interaction data in unstructured text is manually analyzed.
Biochemists read and
highlighted the abstracts for relevant sentences describing interactions that were then
used to derive the production rules. Figure 5 shows the parsing process using the deﬁned
Empiricist Methods
Many empiricist methods have been proposed to automatically generate the
language model to mimic the features of unstructured sentences. For example, Seymore
et al. used Hidden Markov Model (HMM) for extracting important ﬁelds from the
headers of computer science research papers. Following the trend, Ray and Craven 
applied HMM to the biomedical domain to describe the structure of sentences.
Skounakis et al. proposed an approach that is based on hierarchical HMMs to represent
the grammatical structure of the sentences being processed. Firstly, shallow parser to
construct a multi-level representation of each sentence being processed was used. Then
hierarchical HMMs to capture the regularities of the parses for both positive and negative sentences were trained. In , a broad-coverage probabilistic dependency parser
was used to identify sentence level syntactic relations between the heads of the chunks.
The parser used a hand-written grammar combined with a statistical language model
that calculates lexicalized attachment probabilities. Recently, Katrin et al. proposed
RelEx based on dependency parse trees to extract relations in biomedical texts. It was
applied on one million MEDLINE abstracts to extract gene and protein relations. About
150,000 relations was extracted with an estimated performance of both 80% precision and
80% recall. Rinaldi et al. also employed a probabilistic dependency parser, Pro3Gres,
to output functional dependency structures. Based on these structures, functional relations (e.g. interactions between proteins and genes) were extracted. Experiments were
Interactions
Interactions
Interactions
Assignment
Relationshiop
Assignment
Relationshiop
TRANSITIVE
ARF binds directly to MDM
and prevents MDM
targeting p
for degradation by inhibiting the E
activity of MDM
and preventing nuclear export of MDM
directly to MDM
prevents MDM
from targeting
for degradation by inhibiting
ligase activity of
and preventing nuclear export of MDM
Discription
Entity names with their associated
abbreviated names
Entity name with long form
Entity name with abbreviated form
Words negating sentences
Words for interactions
Interactions
Assignment
Relationshiop
TRANSITIVE KEY
ARF Interact MDM
Interactions
Figure 5: A parsing example using CFG.
conducted on tow diﬀerent corpora, the GENIA corpus and the ATCR corpus. Precision
values range from 52% to 90% and recall values range from 40% to 60% based on diﬀerent
evaluation methods.
An Example
To show the way of using empiricist deep parsing to extract protein-protein interactions, the method proposed in is used, which employs the Standford Lexicalized
Parser 2 to generate dependency parse trees. The parser is based on the unlexicalized
probabilistic context-free grammars (PCFGs) . Usually, two data sets are employed
to train the parser, one is the standard LDC Penn Treebank WSJ secs 2-21 and the other
is an augmented one, better for questions, commands, and text from diﬀerent genres.
The whole process can be divided into three steps, preprocessing, extracting and
postprocessing. In the preprocessing step, a dependency parse tree is generated for each
sentence by the Standford lexicalized parser.
Also, gene and protein names are recognized based a synonym dictionary. Moreover, noun-phase chunks are identiﬁed and
combined with the dependency parse trees to generate chunk dependency parse trees.
Based on the chunk dependency parse trees, pathes connecting pairs of proteins are identiﬁed in the extracting step based on three predeﬁned rules. These rules describe the most
frequently used constructs for depicting relations, such as eﬀector-relation-eﬀectee (e.g.
“IL-4 suppressed IL-2 and IFN-gamma mRNA levels in primary human T cells, and addition of anti-CD28 antibodies relieved this suppression.”), relation-of-eﬀectee-by-eﬀector
(e.g. “Taken together, these results indicate that IL-6 and IL-8 release by protein I/IIactivated FLSs is regulated by FAK independently of Tyr-397 phosphorylation.”), and
relation-between-eﬀector-and-eﬀectee (e.g. “In human AM, Pc promoted direct interaction of MR and TLR2, IL-8 release was reduced markedly upon...” ). Candidate relations
are created for each sentence base on these extracted pathes. These candidate relations
are ﬁltered in the postprocessing step. The ﬁltration consists of negation check (excluding negated relations) and restricting to focus domain (excluding the relations which do
not contain any word in a set of predeﬁned relation restriction terms). After ﬁltration,
eﬀector and eﬀectee detection and enumeration resolution are performed. For a given
sentence, Figure 6 shows the internal results in each step. It can be observed that this
method depends highly on the precision of dependency parse tree generated by Stanford
lexicalized parser.
Full-parsing methods analyze the structure of an entire sentence in order to achieve
higher accuracy. However, they still cannot handle all kinds of sentences, especially those
with complex structures. Moreover, analyzing the whole sentence structure incurs higher
computational and time complexity.
Rule-Based Approaches
In rule-based approaches , a set of rules need to be deﬁned which may be
expressed in forms of regular expressions over words or part-of-speech (POS) tags. Based
on the rules, relations between entities that are relevant to tasks such as proteins, can be
recognized.
Ng and Wong deﬁned ﬁve rules based on the word form, such as <A> ... <fn> ...
<B> in which the symbols A, B refer to protein names while the symbol fn refers to the
2 
Chunk dependency parse tree
we define a Nab
p sequence that binds to Kap
p and that functions as an NLS in both human and yeast cells despite
lacking any evident similarity to basic or M
similarity
Dependency parse tree
Candidate relations
p sequence binds
based on rule
Output relations
p sequence binds
Figure 6: a sentence and its corresponding dependency parse tree and chunk dependency
parse tree
verb which describes the interaction relationship. Obviously, such rules are too simple
to produce satisfactory results. Ono et al. manually deﬁned a set of rules based on
syntactic features to preprocess complex sentences, with negation structures considered
as well. It achieves good performance with a recall rate of 85% and precision rate of
84% for Saccharomyces cerevisiae (yeast) and Escherichia coli. Blaschke and Valencia 
induced a probability score to each predeﬁned rule depending on its reliability and used
it as a clue to score the interaction events. Sentence negations and the distance between
two protein names were also considered. In , gene-gene interactions were extracted by
scenarios of patterns which were constructed manually. For example, “gene product acts
as a modiﬁer of gene” is a scenario of the predicate act, which can cover a sentence such as:
“Egl protein acts as a repressor of BicD”. Egl and BicD can be extracted as an argument of
an event for the predicate acts. Leroy and Chen employed preposition-based parsing
to generate templates. It achieved a template precision of 70% when processing literature
abstracts.
Using predeﬁned rules can generate nice results. It is however not feasible in practical
applications as it requires heavy manual processing to deﬁne patterns when shifting to
another domain.
Huang et al. tried to automatically construct the protein-protein interaction patterns. At ﬁrst, part-of-speech tagging was employed. Then dynamic programming to automatically extract similar patterns from sentences based on POS tags was used. Based
on the automatically constructed patterns, protein-protein interactions can be identiﬁed.
Their results gave precision of 80.5% and recall of 80.0%. Phuong et al. used some
sample sentences, which were parsed by a link grammar parser, to learn extraction rules
automatically. By incorporating heuristic rules based on morphological clues and domain
speciﬁc knowledge, the method can remove the interactions that are not between proteins.
An Example
In this section, we illustrate the process of employing the rule-based method proposed
in to detect protein-protein interactions. The whole process can be divided into three
1. Identiﬁcation of protein names. Protein names were ﬁrst identiﬁed from sentences
based on a predeﬁned biomedical entity dictionary.
2. Preprocessing compound or complex sentences.
Sentences were ﬁrstly parsed by
employing POS tagging. Then predeﬁned rules based on the generated POS tags
were applied to split those complex sentences. For example, the sentence “The gap1
mutant blocked stable association of Ste4p with the plasma membrane, and the ste18
mutant blocked stable association of Ste4p with both plasma membranes and internal
membranes” is split into two parts, one is “The gap1 mutant blocked stable association
of Ste4p with the plasma membrane”, the other is “the ste18 mutant blocked stable
association of Ste4p with both plasma membranes and internal membranes”, when
applying the rule below:
If a sentence matches the pattern P1 [(, CC DT)|(,IN)|: | ;] P2, where CC denotes
coordinating conjunction and DT denotes determiner, then the sentence can be
split into P1 and P2.
3. Recognition of the protein-protein interaction. A set of word patterns was deﬁned
for the recognition of protein-protein interactions. For example, the deﬁned word
patterns could be “A interact with B”, “interaction of A (with|and) B”, “interaction (between|among) A and B” and so on. A and B here indicate protein names.
For the sentence “We deﬁne a Nab2p sequence that binds to Kap104p,” the interaction “bind: Nab2p, Kap104p” can be extracted using the predeﬁned rule A
bind to B. To process negative sentences, which describe a lack of interaction,
several pattern of regular expression were constructed, such as PROTEIN1.* not
(interact|associate|bind|complex).*PROTEIN2.
Discussion
Rule-based approaches have been found to be overall limiting in the set of interactions
that can be extracted by the extent of the recognition rules that were implemented,
and also by the complexity of sentences being processed. Speciﬁcally, complicated cases
such as interaction descriptions that span several sentences of text are often missed by
these approaches.
The shortcoming of such approaches is their inability to correctly
process anything other than short, straightforward statements, which are quite rare in
information-saturated biomedical literature. They also ignore many important aspects
of sentence construction such as mood, modality, and sometimes negation, which can
signiﬁcantly alter or even reverse the meaning of the sentence.
Machine-Learning and Statistical Approaches
Many machine-learning (ML) methods have been proposed ranging from simple methods
such as deducing relationship between two terms based on their co-occurrences to complicated methods which employ NLP technologies. Approaches combing machine learning
and NLP have been discussed in section 2.1.2. Here we focus on the methods without
employing NLP techniques.
A variety of machine-learning and statistical techniques based on the discovery of
co-occurrence of protein names have been applied for protein-protein information extraction . They can be further divided into diﬀerent types based on the mining
units, such as abstracts, sentences and so on.
Approaches proposed in Andrade and Valencia and Marcottle et al. aim to
extract protein-protein interactions from a set of abstracts. Andrade and Valencia 
used a group of relevant documents against a set of random documents to extract domain
speciﬁc information such as gene functions and interactions. Marcottle et al. was only
interested in retrieving a large number of documents that probably contained information
about protein-protein interactions. We will discuss it in detail in section 2.3.1.
The ﬁrst machine-learning sentence-based information extraction system in molecular
biology was described in Craven and Kumlien . They developed a Bayesian classiﬁer
which, given a sentence containing mentions of two items of interest, returns a probability
that the sentence asserts some speciﬁc relations between them. Later systems have applied other technologies, including hidden Markov models and support vector machines,
to identify sentences describing protein-protein interactions.
Other approaches focus on a pair of proteins and detect the relations between them using probability scores. Stapley and Benoit used ﬁxed lists of gene
names and detected relations between these genes by means of co-occurrences in MED-
LINE abstracts. A matrix that contains distance dissimilarity measurement of every pair
of genes based on their joint and individual occurrence statistics was constructed based on
a user-deﬁned threshold. Stephens et al. furthered the method to discover relationships using more complicated computation on co-occurrences. Jenssen et al. used
a similar approach to ﬁnd relations between human gene clusters obtained from DNA
array experiments. Donaldson et al. constructed PreBIND and Textomy - an information extraction system that uses support vector machines to evaluate the importance
of protein-protein interactions.
An Example
In this section, we illustrate the process of detecting protein-protein interactions using
the method proposed in . The whole process can be divided into three steps.
1. Build the training and testing corpora. The training corpus contains 260 papers cited
by the Database of Interacting Proteins (DIP). Testing data which are denoted as
Yeast MEDLINE were obtained from MEDLINE by querying the PubMed using
the term “Saccharomyces cerevisiae” in the title, abstract, or MESH terms.
2. Construct discriminating words.
The discriminating words are deﬁned as those
words which may be useful for discriminating the training abstracts from other
abstracts. A dictionary was constructed containing the frequencies of the 60 000
most common words used more than three times in the Yeast MEDLINE abstracts.
For each word in the training abstracts, the probability P(n|N, f) of ﬁnding the
observed number of times n given the known dictionary frequency f and the total
number of words N in the training abstracts, was calculated from the Poisson
distribution as
P(n|N, f) ≈e−Nf (Nf)n
In practice, the log of the probability was calculated as ln P(n|N, f) ≈−Nf +
n ln Nf −ln n!. The 500 words in the training abstracts with the most negative log
probability scores were selected as discriminating words.
3. Score each abstract in Yeast MEDLINE by its likelihood of discussing protein-protein
interaction. Assume that an abstract has N words, the discriminating word set D
has M distinct words, ni denotes the number of occurrences of the discriminating
word di. At ﬁrst, modelling the P(ni|AbstractSet) with a Poisson distribution gives
P(ni|InteractionAbstract) = e−NfI,i(NfI,i)ni
P(ni|NonInteractionAbstract) = e−NfN,i(NfN,i)ni
where the fI,i is the frequency of the discriminating word i in the training abstracts,
fN,i is the dictionary frequency of the discriminating word i. Based on the Bayesian
form, the following equation can be obtained:
P(InactionAbstract|ni)
P(NonInactionAbstract|ni) = e−NfI,i(fI,i)ni
e−NfN,i(fN,i)ni ×
P(InteractionAbstract)
P(NonInteractionAbstract)
The score is deduced as following:
Likehood =
P(InactionAbstract|ni)
P(NonInactionAbstract|ni)
µ e−NfI,i(fI,i)ni
e−NfN,i(fN,i)ni
P(InteractionAbstract)
P(NonInteractionAbstract)
As the ratio between P(InteractionAbstract) and P(NonInteractionAbstract) is constant, it can be omitted from the log calculation.
ni ln fI,i
−N ∗(fI,i −fN,i)
Discussion
Simple statistical methods such as those based on protein co-occurrence information can
not precisely describe the relations between proteins and therefore tend to generate high
false negative error rate. On the contrary, complex statistical models need a large amount
of training data in order to reliably estimate model parameters, which is usually diﬃcult
to obtain in practical applications. Recently, the hidden vector state model (HVS) which
was previously proposed for spoken language understanding has been applied to extract
protein-protein interactions to strike the balance.
The HVS model explores the
embedded sentence structures using only lightly annotated corpus, unlike other statistical
parsers which need fully-annotated treebank data for training.
Also the hierarchical
information is embedded into the HVS model, which enable the HVS model extract the
relations between proteins precisely.
Performance of Current Work
The performance of the existing protein-protein interaction extraction methods along
with the data corpora they used are listed in Table 2.
As in the area of extracting information about protein-protein interactions, competitive evaluations have played important roles in pushing the ﬁelds of IE and NLP. Several
evaluations have been held in recent years. BioCreAtIvE (Critical Assessment of Information Extraction systems in Biology) 3 began in 2004 and provided two common
evaluation tasks to assess the state of the art methods for text mining applied to biological problems. The ﬁrst task dealt with extraction of gene or protein names from text, and
their mappings into standardized gene identiﬁers for three model organism databases (ﬂy,
mouse, yeast). The second task addressed issues of functional annotation, requiring
systems to identify speciﬁc text passages that supported Gene Ontology annotations for
speciﬁc proteins, given full text articles. Later on, the second BioCreAtIvE challenge
was held in 2006, focusing on gene mention tagging (ﬁnding the mentions of genes and
proteins in sentences drawn from MEDLINE abstracts), gene normalization (producing
a list of the EntrezGene identiﬁers for all the human genes/proteins mentioned in a collection of MEDLINE abstracts), and extraction of protein-protein interactions from text
(identifying protein- protein interactions from full text papers, including extraction of
3 
Table 2: Performance of existing protein-protein interaction extraction methods and the
data corpora used.
Result (%)
Shallow Parsing
34,343 sentences from abstracts retrieved from MEDLINE
using keywords “leucine zipper”, “zinc ﬁnger”, “helix loop
helix motif”
2,565 unseen abstracts extracted from MEDLINE with the
keywords molecular, interaction and protein for year 1,998
(560k words)
Training set consists of 500 abstracts from MEDLINE. Evaluation set consists of 56 abstracts collected using search strings
“protein” and “inhibit”
26 abstracts
Deep Parsing
492 sentences out of 250,000 abstracts on cytosine in MED-
The test corpus consists of 100 randomly selected scientiﬁc
abstracts from MEDLINE.
Articles from cell containing 7,790 words revealing 51 binary
3.4 million sentences from approximately 3.5 million MED-
LINE abstracts dated after 1,988 containing at least one notation of a human protein
229 abstracts from MEDLINE correspond to 389 interactions
from the DIP database.
Rule Based
474 sentences from 50 abstracts retrieved using “E2F1”
Escherichia
Escherichia
834 and 752 sentences containing at least two protein names
and one relation keyword for yeast and E.coli obtained by
a MEDLINE search using the following keywords, “protein
binding” as a MESH term and “yeast”, “E coli”, “protein”,
and “interaction”
Five diﬀerent sets of abstracts were used:
1. 1,435 MEDLINE abstracts directly referenced from
each of the Drosophila Swiss-prot entries.
2. 4,109 MEDLINE abstracts referenced directly from Fly
3. 111,747 abstracts retrieved by extending the set (2)
with the Neighbors utility.
4. 518 MEDLINE abstracts containing any of the protein
names (related with cell cycle control) and Drosophila
in the MESH list of terms.
5. 6,278 MEDLINE abstracts by expanding set (4) using
Neighbors to identify all related abstracts.
3,343 abstracts were obtained by querying MEDLINE with
the following keywords: “Saccharomyces cerevisiae”, “protein”, and “interaction”. The abstracts were ﬁltered and 550
sentences were retained containing at least one of four keywords “interact”, “bind”, “associate”, “complex” or one of
their inﬂections.
The top 50 biomedical papers were retrieved from the Internet by querying using the keyword ”protein-protein interaction”. Full texts were segmented into 65,536 sentences and
the sentences with fewer than two protein names were discarded. The ﬁnal corpus consists of about 1,200 sentences.
excerpts from those papers that describe experimentally derived interactions).
Interaction Extraction Challenge was associated with Learning Language in Logic
Workshop (LLL05). The challenge focuses on information extraction of gene interactions
in Bacillus subtilin, a model bacterium. It was reported that the best F-measure achieved
with the balanced recall and precision is around 50%.
As annotated corpora are important to the development as well as the evaluation of
protein-protein extraction systems, some online available annotated corpora are listed in
Table 3: Online annotated corpora for the extraction of protein-protein interactions.
Description
GENIA corpus version 3.0 consists of 2,000 MEDLINE abstracts with
more than 400,000 words and almost 100,000 annotations for biological terms.
www-tsujii.is.s.utokyo.ac.jp/GENIA/
It consists of two collections, training collection consisting of 99 abstracts with 1,745 protein names, test collection consisting of 101
abstracts with 1,966 protein names. The protein names in all the
abstracts were annotated manually.
www.sics.se/humle
/projects/prothalt/
The corpus consists of 2,258 MEDLINE abstracts in two domains: 1)
the molecular genetics of oncology (1,158 abstracts); 2) the inhibition
of enzymes of the CYP450 class (1,100 abstracts).
bioie.ldc.upenn.edu/
challenge Corpus
There are 80 sentences in the training set, including 106 examples of
genic interactions without coreferences and 165 examples of interactions with coreferences.
genome.jouy.inra.fr
/texte/LLLchallenge/
BioCreAtIvE II
Task 3 Corpus
The corpus consists of four parts of data, for four diﬀerent subtasks.
Overall, the training data was derived from the content of the IntAct and MINT databases.
The data ﬁles of both databases are
freely accessible for download and are compliant with the HUPO
PSI Molecular Interaction Format. The test set collection will consist of a collection of PubMed article abstracts in a format compliant
with the training collection format.
biocreative.sourceforge.net
/index.html
Challenges and Possible Solutions
The continuing growth and diversiﬁcation of the scientiﬁc literature, a prime resource for
accessing worldwide scientiﬁc knowledge, will require tremendous systematic and automated eﬀorts to utilize the underlying information. In the near future, tools for knowledge
discovery will play a pivotal role in systems biology. The increasing fervor on the ﬁeld of
biomedical information extraction gives the evidence. IE in biomedicine has been studied
for approximately ten years. Over these years, IE systems in biomedicine have grown
from simple rule-based pattern matcher to sophisticated, hybrid parser employing computational linguistics technology. But, until now, there are still several severe obstacles
to overcome as listed below.
• Poor performance;
• Changeable relations between biological entities;
• Gap between biologists and computational scientists;
• Self-contradictory extracted knowledge;
• Obstacles in NLP;
• Development of gold standard for evaluation systems.
The detailed explanation of each is given in the following paragraphs.
Poor performance—biomedical IE methods generate poorer results compared with
other domains such as newswire. In general, biomedical IE methods are scored with Fmeasure, with the best methods scoring about 0.85 without considering the limitation of
test corpus, which is still far from users’ satisfaction. The main reason is that information from ontologies4 or terminologies is not well used. Until recently, most biomedical IE
systems do not make use of information from ontologies or terminologies. Hence, ontologies together with terminological lexicons are prerequisites for advanced biomedical IE.
Since diﬀerent ontologies are employed in diﬀerent systems currently, uniﬁcation seems
necessary and impendent. Also, biomedical text needs to be semantically annotated and
actively linked to ontologies.
Changeable relations between biological entities—relations between biological
entities, such as proteins or genes are conditional and may change when the same entities
are considered in a diﬀerent functional context. As a consequence, every relation between
entities should be linked with the functional context in which the relation was observed.
Moreover, without considering the observed context, it is meaningless and impossible
to make general statements whether a relation detected by literature mining is a “yes”
or a “no” relation.
Obviously, to overcome this obstacle, in-depth analysis based on
more elaborately constructing grammars or rules in sentence or phrase level is requisite.
Hopefully, it will result in the increase of performance.
Gap between biologists and computational scientists—to bridge the gap between biologists and computational scientists.
seems to be crucial to the success of
biomedical IE. Currently, this ﬁeld is dominated by researchers with computational background; however, the biomedical knowledge is only possessed by biologists. That is crucial
for deﬁning standards for evaluation; for identiﬁcation of speciﬁc requirements, potential
applications and integrated information system for querying, visualization and analysis
of data on a large scale; for experimental veriﬁcation to facilitate the understanding of
biological interactions. Hence, to attract more biologists into the ﬁeld, it is important to
design simple and friendly user interfaces that make the tools accessible to non-specialists.
Self-contradictory extracted knowledge—the knowledge extracted from the literature may contradict itself under diﬀerent environment, conditions, or because of author’s errors, experimental errors or other issues. Although the contradictory knowledge
may occupy minor part of the whole interaction network, it is worth more attention.
To handle this challenge, one way is to categorize the corpora and deﬁne the conﬁdence
value for each category. For contradictory knowledge, the decision can be made based on
these conﬁdence values. The solution can also be applied to handling diﬀerent parts of
an article, such as the abstract, introduction, references and so on, which obviously are
of diﬀerent conﬁdences.
4Ontologies, structured lists of terms, are often used by NLP technologies to establish the semantic
function of a word in a document. The simplest form of ontology is a lexicon or a list of terms that belong
to a particular class. A lexicon usually consists of specialized terms and (optionally) their deﬁnitions.
Another form of ontology is a thesaurus, a collection of terms and their synonyms which are of immense
utility for NLP. A popular ontology in biomedicine is Gene Ontology (GO) .
Obstacles in NLP—some problems exist not only in the ﬁeld of biomedical IE,
but also in the ﬁeld of NLP. Two of them are: (1) Dealing with negative sentences,
which constitutes a well-known problem in language understanding . (2) Resolving
coreferences, the recognition of implicit information in a number of sentences may contain
key information, e.g. protein names, that later are used implicitly in other sentences.
Results in LLL challenge 05 show that F-measure can only achieve 25% when considering
coreferences.
Development of gold standard for evaluation systems—the development of
the gold standard for evaluation systems is still under way, far from maturity, which
requires more concerted eﬀorts.
The experience in the newswire domain shows that
the construction of evaluation benchmarks in the face of common challenges contribute
greatly to the rapid development of IE. Thus it is crucial to attach importance to evaluate
systems development in biomedicine. Also, eﬀorts will be required to focus on linking
the knowledge in the databases with text sources available. It is believed that in the
future, biomedical IE might provide new approaches for relation discovery that exploit
eﬃciently indirect relationships derived from bibliographic analysis of entities contained
in biological databases.