Improving SVM Accuracy by Training on Auxiliary Data Sources
Pengcheng Wu
 
Thomas G. Dietterich
 
School of EECS, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331
The standard model of supervised learning assumes that training and test data are
drawn from the same underlying distribution.
This paper explores an application in which
a second, auxiliary, source of data is available drawn from a diﬀerent distribution. This
auxiliary data is more plentiful, but of significantly lower quality, than the training and
test data. In the SVM framework, a training
example has two roles: (a) as a data point to
constrain the learning process and (b) as a
candidate support vector that can form part
of the deﬁnition of the classiﬁer.
The paper considers using the auxiliary data in either (or both) of these roles. This auxiliary
data framework is applied to a problem of
classifying images of leaves of maple and oak
trees using a kernel derived from the shapes
of the leaves. Experiments show that when
the training data set is very small, training
with auxiliary data can produce large improvements in accuracy, even when the auxiliary data is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the
training (and test) data. The paper also introduces techniques for adjusting the kernel
scores of the auxiliary data points to make
them more comparable to the training data
1. Introduction
When training data are very scarce, supervised learning is diﬃcult. Recently, many researchers have been
exploring other sources of information that might allow successful learning from very small training samples. These eﬀorts include learning by exploiting background knowledge and
Appearing in Proceedings of the 21 st International Conference on Machine Learning, Banﬀ, Canada, 2004. Copyright
2004 by the ﬁrst author.
learning from a mixture of supervised and unsupervised data . In this paper, we investigate another
source of additional information: auxiliary supervised
data drawn from a distribution diﬀerent from the target distribution.
Auxiliary data are often available in machine learning application problems.
For example, in medical
applications, data may have been gathered in diﬀerent countries or with somewhat diﬀerent deﬁnitions of
the class labels. In ﬁnancial analysis, data may have
been gathered in earlier years or with slightly diﬀerent deﬁnitions of the attributes (e.g., the deﬁnitions
of “productivity” and “consumer price index” change
over time). A challenge for machine learning is to ﬁnd
ways of exploiting this data to improve performance
on the target classiﬁcation task.
The utility of auxiliary data can be understood
through a bias/variance analysis.
Because the real
training data is scarce, a learned classiﬁer will have
high variance and therefore high error. Incorporating
auxiliary data can reduce this variance, but possibly
increase the bias, because the auxiliary data is drawn
from a diﬀerent distribution than the real data. This
analysis also suggests that as the amount of real training data increases, the utility of auxiliary data should
This paper was inspired by an application in image
classiﬁcation for botany.
Suppose you are hiking in
the forest, and you encounter an interesting plant. You
wonder what this plant is, so you clip oﬀa leaf, take it
home, and scan it using your scanner. Then you go to
a web-based classiﬁcation service, upload the image,
and the server classiﬁes the leaf and then provides information about the plant. We would like to provide
such a service for a large range of plant species. The
research described in this paper is part of this eﬀort.
In this plant image classiﬁcation task, the primary
classiﬁcation task is to determine the species of an
isolated leaf, given an image of that leaf. To obtain
training (and test) data for this task, we collected individual leaves from 4 species of maple trees and 2
species of oak trees and scanned these leaves to obtain
high-resolution color images. This is a time-consuming
process, and it is expensive to obtain a large number
of training examples for each species.
There is an alternative source of training data: plant
specimen collections.
At many universities, including ours, there is an Herbarium—a collection of dried
plant specimens. Each specimen consists of an entire
branch of a plant (stems, leaves, ﬂowers, seed pods,
and sometimes even roots) along with a label indicating genus, species, date and site of collection, and so
forth. These specimens diﬀer in many ways from isolated leaves. First, the specimens are old and dried,
so they are discolored. Second, each specimen typically contains several leaves, and these leaves typically
overlap and occlude each other. Third, the other plant
parts (stems, ﬂowers, seeds) are not useful for the primary isolated-leaf classiﬁcation task. Nonetheless, the
question arises of whether there is some way that we
can exploit these plant specimens to help train a classiﬁer for isolated leaves.
This paper explores a general solution to this problem
within the framework of support vector machines. We
consider two diﬀerent ways in which auxiliary training data can be incorporated into (a form of) support
vector machines, and we experimentally evaluate these
methods. The paper begins with a description of the
main approach. This is followed by presentation of our
particular application problem. Then the experiments
and their results are presented. A discussion of the
results and conclusions completes the paper.
2. Exploiting auxiliary training data
Suppose we are given N p training examples (xp
for i = 1, . . . , N p for our primary supervised learning
problem, where xp
i is a description of the ith training
example, and yp
i is the corresponding class label. The
superscript p indicates the “primary” learning task. In
addition, suppose we are given N a auxiliary training
examples (xa
i ) for i = 1, . . . , N a. We will assume
that these training examples are somehow similar to
the primary task, but they should be treated as weaker
evidence for the design of a classiﬁer.
Most learning algorithms can be viewed as seeking
an hypothesis h that minimizes some loss function
L(h(x), y) between the predicted class label h(x) and
the observed label y. Often, this can be formulated as
ﬁnding the hypothesis h that minimizes the objective
L(h(xi), yi) + λ D(h),
where D(h) is a complexity penalty to prevent over-
ﬁtting, and λ is an adjustable parameter that controls
the tradeoﬀbetween ﬁtting the data (by minimizing
the loss) and hypothesis complexity.
A natural approach to exploiting auxiliary training
data would be to change the objective to have a separate term for ﬁtting the auxiliary data
i ) + λD(y).
The parameter γ (presumably less than 1) controls
how hard we try to ﬁt the auxiliary data.
Crossvalidation or hold-out methods could be applied to set
2.1. Auxiliary data with k-nearest neighbors
In many learning algorithms, the training data play
two separate roles. Not only do they help deﬁne the
objective function J(h), but they also help deﬁne the
hypothesis h.
In the k-nearest neighbor algorithm
(kNN), for example, h(x) is deﬁned in terms of the
k training data points nearest to x. The parameter k
is chosen to minimize J(k) where J is the leave-one-out
cross-validation estimate of the loss. In this setting, we
can now consider two diﬀerent roles for the auxiliary
data. First, when choosing k, we can include the auxiliary data in the objective function as J′(k). Second,
we can include the auxiliary data in the set of potential neighbors. In other words, the auxiliary data can
be used both to evaluate a candidate classiﬁer using
J′ and also to deﬁne the classiﬁer.
To include the auxiliary data in the set of potential
neighbors, we found it best to separately compute the
Kp nearest primary neighbors and the Ka nearest auxiliary neighbors, and then take a weighted combination
of the votes of these neighbors. Speciﬁcally, let V p(c)
and V a(c) be the number of votes for class c from the
primary and auxiliary nearest neighbors.
overall vote for class c is deﬁned as
V (c) = θ(V p(c)/Kp) + (1 −θ)(V a(c)/Ka).
The parameter θ controls the relative importance of
the two types of neighbors. If θ = 1, then only the
primary nearest neighbors are voting, if θ = 0.5 and
Kp = Ka, then equal importance is given to primary
and auxiliary neighbors, and if θ = 1, then only the
auxiliary neighbors determine the classiﬁcation. The
parameters θ, Kp, and Ka must be set by internal
cross-validation to optimize the objective function (J
2.2. Auxiliary data with support vector
Now let us consider support vector machines and related methods. A support vector classiﬁer has the form
j αjyjK(xj, x) + b ≥0
where the αj and b are learned parameters and the
function K(xj, x) is a kernel function that in some
sense measures the similarity between the test example
x and the training example xj. Training examples for
which αj > 0 are called support vectors.
The α and b values are learned by solving a convex optimization problem. In this paper, we will consider linear programming support vector machines (LP-SVMs)
 since they encourage sparser solutions than the usual SVM quadratic regularization
penalty. This sparseness reduces the number of kernels
evaluated at classiﬁcation time :
Minimize :
yjαjK(xj, xi) + b
+ ξi ≥1 ∀i
The objective function includes one term, 
j αj, that
penalizes the complexity of the classiﬁer and another
i ξi, that measures how poorly the classiﬁer
ﬁts the training data. The slack variables ξi will be
positive precisely for those training examples that the
classiﬁer does not classify correctly with a margin of
at least 1.
As with kNN, there are two possible roles for an auxiliary training example. It can be considered as a potential support vector (indexed by j), and it can be
included as a constraint to be satisﬁed in the optimization problem (indexed by i). This results in the
following optimization problem:
subject to:
≥1 i = 1, . . . , N p
≥1 i = 1, . . . , N a
j ≥0 j = 1, . . . , N p
j≥0 j = 1, . . . , N a
This can be simpliﬁed in two ways. First, we can remove the auxiliary training examples from the constraints by deleting the second set of constraints (involving ξa) and setting Ca = 0. This gives an LP-SVM
in which the auxiliary examples are only used as support vectors. This increases the expressive power of
the classiﬁer, but it is still trained only to classify the
primary examples correctly.
Alternatively, we can keep the constraints but delete
the auxiliary examples from the set of candidate support vectors by deleting all terms involving N a
constraints and the objective function. The resulting
SVM will be deﬁned using only primary training examples as support vectors, but it will have been trained
to classify both primary and auxiliary examples well.
In the remainder of this paper, we will evaluate experimentally which of these three conﬁgurations (both,
support-vectors only, and constraints-only) gives the
best results on our isolated leaf classiﬁcation problem.
3. Application: Leaf Classiﬁcation
Figure 1 shows examples of isolated leaves and Herbarium specimens. Rather than extract feature vectors,
we compare leaf shapes to one another directly as follows. First, each image is thresholded to obtain a binary image (1 for plant pixel and 0 otherwise). Then
the boundary of each region is traversed, and the shape
of the boundary is converted into a sequence of local
curvatures. Let (xj, yj) be the coordinates of the jth
point on the boundary of a region. Deﬁne angle θj
as the angle between the line segments (xj−10, yj−10)–
(xj, yj) and (xj, yj)–(xj+10, yj+10). The sequence of
angles forms a loop. To compare two leaves, we apply
dynamic programming algorithms to align their angle sequences and compute a distance between them.
Similar “edit distance” methods have been applied
many times in pattern recognition and bioinformatics
 .
We employ three diﬀerent dynamic programming algorithms. The ﬁrst algorithm is applied to compare
two isolated leaves. Let {θi : i = 1, . . . , N} be the angle sequence of the ﬁrst leaf, and {ωj : j = 1, . . . , M}
be the angle sequence of the second leaf. We will duplicate the angle sequence of the second leaf so that j
Figure 1. Plant leaf images: (a) Isolated leaves; (b) Herbarium leaves
goes from 1 to 2M (and ωj = ωj+M for j = 1, . . . , M).
Let F be an N by 2M matrix of costs oriented to lie
in the ﬁrst quadrant. We can visualize an alignment
of the two leaves as a path that starts in some location
F1,k and matches the ﬁrst angle θ1 of the ﬁrst leaf to
angle ωk of the second leaf. This path then moves upward (increasing i) and to the right (increasing j) until
it ends in some position FN,k′, where it matches the
last angle θN of the ﬁrst leaf to angle ωk′ of the second
leaf. Cell Fi,j stores the total cost of the minimumcost path from F1,k for any k to Fi,j. The F matrix
can be ﬁlled in by traversing the matrix according to
Fi,j := min
Fi−1,j−1 + dij
Fi,j−1 + W1 + dij
Fi−1,j + W2 + dij
where dij = (θi −ωj)2 is the cost of matching the
two angles, W1 is the cost of a horizontal move that
skips ωj and W2 is the cost of a vertical move that
skips θi. In our experiments, W1 = W2 = 150. Note
that the match is constrained to match all of the θ
Optimal match
Unrepresentative
portions removed
Figure 2. Generating herbarium segments: (a) An isolated
example; (b) An herbarium region showing the longest
match to (a); (c) Close-up of the longest match.
angles, but that the match may stop before it has
matched all of the ω angles or it may wrap around
and match some ω’s twice. The ﬁnal matching score
is (minj FN,j)/
N 2 + (k′ −k)2.
This ﬁrst dynamic programming algorithm works well
for comparing isolated leaves, but it works very badly
for comparing isolated leaves to herbarium samples
or herbarium samples to each other.
The problem
is that a region of an herbarium sample can be very
large and contain multiple, overlapping leaves.
decided, therefore, to use our isolated training examples as “templates” to identify parts of the herbarium
samples that are most likely to correspond to a single leaf.
Speciﬁcally, we take each isolated training
example and match it to each segment of each herbarium sample of the same species. The purpose of this
match is to ﬁnd the longest contiguous partial match
of the isolated leaf against some part of the herbarium
sample. This partial match will be called an herbarium
segment, and it will play the role of the auxiliary training data in our experiments. The process is illustrated
in Figure 2.
The dynamic program for extracting herbarium segments works as follows. Let {θi : i = 1, . . . , N} be the
sequence of angles extracted from the isolated leaf and
{ωj : j = 1, . . . , M} be the angle sequence extracted
from one connected region of an herbarium sample of
the same species. Let S be a 2N ×2M matrix of costs.
A match will consist of a path that starts at any arbitrary point (is, js) in the lower left N ×M matrix and
terminates at some arbitrary point (ie, je) above and
to the right. S is ﬁlled according to the rule
Si,j := max
Si−1,j−1 + γ −dij
Si,j−1 + γ −W1 −dij
Si−1,j + γ −W2 −dij
As before, dij = (θi −ωj)2 is the cost of matching θi
to ωj, W1 is the cost of a horizontal move (skipping
Error rate
Number of isolated training examples per species
Isolated kNN
Herbarium kNN
Figure 3. kNN error rates (error bars show 95% conﬁdence
ωj) and W2 is the cost of a vertical move (skipping
θi). The important thing in this formula is γ, which is
the “reward” for extending the match one more angle.
The match begins and ends at points where 0 is the
largest of the four options in the max. It is easy to
keep track of the longest match in the array and to
extract the corresponding sequence of angles from the
herbarium region, (ωjs, . . . , ωje), to form an herbarium
segment. Empirically the value of γ is varied within
the range 250 ± 64 in each matching process until a
good match is found, that is, the ratio of the length of
the matched angle sequences is not less than 1/
not greater than
2. Finally, the extracted segment is
post-processed to remove angles skipped (by horizontal
moves) during the match.
The third dynamic program matches herbarium segments to each other and to isolated training examples.
It is identical to the ﬁrst algorithm, except that we do
not permit wrap-around of herbarium segments.
4. Experiments
We collected isolated leaves and photographed herbarium samples for six species—four maples (Acer Circinatum, Acer Glabrum, Acer Macrophyllum, and Acer
Negundo) and two oaks (Quercus Kelloggii and Quercus Garryana). There are between 30 and 100 primary
examples and herbarium specimens for each species.
Because we are interested in cases where primary data
is especially scarce, we choose 6 isolated training examples at random from each class and retained the
remaining examples as the (isolated) test set.
We generated learning curves by varying the size of
the training set from 1 to 6 examples per species. For
Mixing parameter θ
Number of isolated training examples per species
Figure 4. Chosen mixing rates θ for kNN
training sets of size m ≤6, there are
possible distinct training sets, so we report the error rate averaged
over all of these.
In each run, the auxiliary data is obtained by matching
the isolated examples in the training set against all regions of all herbarium samples from the same species.
Because the parameter γ is sensitive to tuning and
the length ratio constraint is strict, only 1 out of 5
matching processes produces a usable hebarium segment. Thus for each primary training set, we have an
auxiliary data set roughly 10 times as large.
4.1. kNN Experiments
Figure 3 shows the learning curves for kNN. In all
cases, the values of Kp (the number of primary nearest
neighbors), Ka (the number of auxiliary nearest neighbors), and θ (the mixing coeﬃcient) were set to optimize a lexicographical objective function consisting of
four quantities. The most important quantity was the
leave-one-out number of isolated examples misclassi-
ﬁed. Ties were then broken by considering the leaveone-out number of herbarium segments misclassiﬁed.
Remaining ties were broken to reduce the error margin (number of votes for the winning class −number
of votes for the correct class) on the isolated examples
and ﬁnally to reduce the error margin on the herbarium samples.
The ﬁgure shows that for small samples, mixing the herbarium examples with the isolated
training examples gives better performance, but the
diﬀerences are not statistically signiﬁcant. If we classify isolated test examples using only the herbarium
segments, the results are signiﬁcantly worse for small
training sets.
Figure 4 shows the values chosen for the mixing pa-
Test error rate
Training examples per species
iso constraints - iso SVs
her constraints - iso SVs
mix constraints - iso SVs
Test error rate
Training examples per species
iso constraints - her SVs
her constraints - her SVs
mix constraints - her SVs
Test error rate
Training examples per species
iso constraints - mix SVs
her constraints - mix SVs
mix constraints - mix SVs
Figure 5. Learning curves for 9 conﬁgurations of LP-SVMs.
From top to bottom: isolated support vectors, herbarium
support vectors, and mixed support vectors.
rameter θ. We can see that for samples of size 1 (per
species), approximately 75% of the weight is given to
the auxiliary neighbors, whereas for samples of size 6,
only 40% of the weight is given to the auxiliary neighbors. This accords with our intuition that as the sample gets larger, the variance (due to the small sample
of isolated leaves) decreases and hence, the auxiliary
neighbors become less useful.
4.2. LP-SVM Experiments
To apply SVMs, we must ﬁrst convert the edit distance
computed by the dynamic programming algorithms
into a kernel similarity function.
We employed the
simple transformation K(xi, xj) = 1/(edit distance).
However, it should be noted that this kernel is not
a Mercer kernel.
First of all, it is not symmetric,
K(xi, xj) ̸= K(xj, xi), because the dynamic programming algorithm does not treat the two angle sequences
identically (one is required to wrap around exactly,
while the other is not). Second, we veriﬁed that some
of the eigenvalues of the kernel matrix are negative,
which would not be true for a Mercer kernel.
practical consequences of this are not clear, and other
authors have found that empirical “kernels” of this
sort work very well . However,
from a theoretical standpoint, unless a kernel is a Mercer kernel, there is no equivalent higher-dimensional
space in which the learned decision boundary is a
maximum-margin hyperplane .
There are nine possible conﬁgurations for our LP-
The constraints can include only isolated
leaves, only herbarium segments, or both. The support
vectors can include only isolated leaves, only herbarium segments, or both.
Figure 5 plots learning curves for these nine conﬁgurations.
We note that, ﬁrst, the overall best con-
ﬁguration is to combine mixed constraints and mixed
support vectors. In short, the auxiliary data are useful both for representing the classiﬁer and for training
the classiﬁer. Second, for samples of size 1, it is very
important to have both mixed constraints and mixed
support vectors. This is exactly what is predicted by a
bias/variance analysis. Small samples have high variance, so it is better to mix in the auxiliary data to
reduce the variance, even if this introduces some bias.
Third, for samples of size 4, 5, and 6, it is very important to have mixed constraints, but it is OK to
use just isolated training examples as support vectors.
Hence, the auxiliary data is still important. One possible explanation is that 6 examples per species is still
not enough data to eliminate the need for auxiliary
training data. This is supported by the kNN experiments, where the best θ value was only 0.6 even with
6 examples per class.
To assess the statistical signiﬁcance of the results, we
applied McNemar’s test to perform pairwise comparisons of various conﬁgurations.
These comparisons
conﬁrm that the three trends mentioned above are statistically signiﬁcant.
Probability
Edit Distance
Figure 6. Comparison of edit distance scores for isolated
leaves and herbarium segments. The herbarium histogram
has been truncated. An additional 1.1% of the herbarium
edit distances extend from 1000 to 3200.
Optimal Cp/Ca
Training examples per species
w/o histogram equalization
w/ histogram equalization
Figure 7. Trained values of Cp/Ca
4.3. Histogram Equalization
Figure 6 compares the distribution of the edit distances computed between all of the examples (isolated and herbarium) and (a) the isolated leaves or (b)
the herbarium segments. The herbarium distances are
larger and 1,998 segments (1.1%) have edit distances
larger than 1000 (beyond the right edge of the ﬁgure).
We suspected that if we could make these distributions
more comparable, performance might improve.
We applied the following histogram equalization technique: Each distance computed with an herbarium
segment was transformed by taking the logarithm and
then scaling these to have the same range as the isolated edit distances.
This eliminates the very large
edit distance scores and shifts the distribution lower.
Histogram equalization has no eﬀect on the kNN algorithm, since our kNN algorithm handles the primary and auxiliary data separately.
For LP-SVMs,
histogram equalization had no statistically signiﬁcant
eﬀect on either the error rates or the relative merits
of the 9 diﬀerent conﬁgurations. The best conﬁguration is still the mixed-constraints/mixed-SV conﬁguration. We did ﬁnd, however, that histogram equalization changed the number of support vectors found by
the LP-SVM. At a sample size of 1, histogram equalization cuts the number of herbarium support vectors
by more than half and doubles the number of isolated
support vectors. At a sample size of 6, the number of
isolated support vectors is unchanged, but the number
of herbarium support vectors is reduced by roughly an
order of magnitude. An explanation for this is that
with the “outlier” herbarium segments reduced by histogram equalization, fewer herbarium support vectors
were needed to ﬁt them. However, since test set performance is measured strictly on isolated leaves, this
reduction in herbarium support vectors has relatively
little impact on the error rate.
Another eﬀect of histogram equalization was to change
the relative sizes of Cp and Ca, the complexity control parameters of the LP-SVM. Figure 7 plots the
ratio Cp/Ca. Without histogram equalization, we can
see that Cp was much larger than Ca for sample sizes
greater than 2, so much more weight was being placed
on ﬁtting the primary training examples than on ﬁtting the auxiliary ones. With histogram equalization,
the ratio stays closer to 1, which indicates that roughly
equal weight was being placed on primary and auxiliary training examples.
5. Conclusions
This paper has described a methodology for exploiting sources of auxiliary training data within the kNN
and LP-SVM learning algorithms.
We have shown
that auxiliary data, drawn from a diﬀerent distribution
than the primary training and test data, can signiﬁcantly improve accuracy. For the LP-SVM, Figure 8
shows that when training on only 1 example per class,
auxiliary data reduces the error rate from 27.8% to
22.5%, a reduction of nearly 20%. When training on 6
examples per class, the error rate decreases from 11.2%
to 5.8%, a reduction of 48%.
This paper has also shown how SVMs can be trained
to classify objects based on shape, by using boundary
curvature edit distances as a kind of kernel function.
By using separate Cp and Ca parameters in the SVM,
we can adjust the relative importance of ﬁtting the two
data sources. Edit distances have been used with the
kNN classiﬁer for many years. Our results suggest that
Test error rate
Training examples per species
Isolated Constraints and Support Vectors
Mixed Constraints and Support Vectors
Figure 8. Comparison of training on primary data only
(Isolated Constraints and Support Vectors) with training
on both primary and auxiliary data (Mixed Constraints
and Support Vectors).
Test error rate
Training set size (per species)
Figure 9. Performance of mixed kNN vs mixed SVMs.
SVMs may be able to give signiﬁcant improvements in
performance over such kNN classiﬁers. Figure 9 shows
that SVMs reduce the error rates by 34.6% (training
size 1) and 70.7% (training size 6).
Clearly, the more we can make the auxiliary data resemble the primary data, the more useful it will be.
In our application problem, we showed how to apply
the primary training examples as templates to extract
similar shape segments from the auxiliary data.
addition, we found that equalizing the distance distributions of the two data sources reduced the number of
support vectors.
It is easy to imagine ways of extending other learning algorithms to exploit auxiliary data sources. For
example, decision tree algorithms could use auxiliary
data for attribute selection, split threshold selection,
and tree pruning.
Neural network algorithms could
train on auxiliary data, but with reduced penalties
for misclassiﬁcation.
There are several interesting
directions to pursue for exploiting auxiliary data in
Bayesian network classiﬁers.