VU Research Portal
The social psychology of protest
van Stekelenburg, J.; Klandermans, P.G.
 
Current Sociology
DOI (link to publisher)
10.1177/0011392113479314
Link to publication in VU Research Portal
citation for published version (APA)
van Stekelenburg, J., & Klandermans, P. G. . The social psychology of protest. Current Sociology, 61(5-
6), 886-905. 
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
• Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
• You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
• You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately
and investigate your claim.
E-mail address:
 
Download date: 26. Mar. 2025
 
Current Sociology
 
The online version of this article can be found at:
DOI: 10.1177/0011392113479314
published online 15 March 2013
Current Sociology
Jacquelien van Stekelenburg and Bert Klandermans
The social psychology of protest
Published by:
 
On behalf of:
International Sociological Association
can be found at:
Current Sociology
Additional services and information for
 
Email Alerts:
 
Subscriptions:
 
 
Permissions:
What is This?
- Mar 15, 2013
OnlineFirst Version of Record
at Vrije Universiteit 34820 on March 16, 2013
csi.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
Current Sociology Review
0(0) 1­–20
© The Author(s) 2013
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0011392113479314
csi.sagepub.com
The social psychology of
Jacquelien van Stekelenburg and Bert
Klandermans
VU University Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Social psychological research has taught us a lot about why people protest. This
article provides a theoretical and empirical overview. Discussed are grievances, efficacy,
identification, emotions and social embeddedness, followed by the most recent approaches,
which combine these concepts into dual pathway models. Finally, two future directions
are discussed: (1) to shed light on the paradox of persistent participation, and (2) to
clarify how perceptions of sociopolitical context affects protest participation.
Collective action, emotions, grievances, identity, social psychology of protest
Why do people protest? This question has always intrigued social scientists. Why are
people prepared to sacrifice wealth, a pleasant and carefree life, or sometimes even their
lives for a common cause? This question brings us to the level of analysis of the individual and therefore to the realm of social psychology. People – social psychologists
never tire of asserting – live in a perceived world. They respond to the world as they
perceive and interpret it. Indeed, this is what a social psychology of protest is about –
trying to understand why people who are seemingly in the same situation respond so
differently. As social psychology explores the causes of the thoughts, feelings and actions
of people – and primarily how these are influenced by social contexts – it has a lot to
offer to the study of protest participation. We illustrate this point with an overview of
state-of-the-art theoretical approaches and a review of empirical evidence.
The question as to why people engage in protest has occupied social psychologists
for at least three decades, and it has received diverging answers over the years 
Klandermans et al., 2008 for empirical evidence combining these explanations; Van
Stekelenburg and Klandermans, 2007; 2010 for a theoretical overview; and Van Zomeren
et al., 2008 for a meta-analytical overview). We will describe the main theoretical
approaches and empirical evidence will be discussed. We close with a concluding section. In this section we will try to assess where we stand and propose future directions
that theorizing and research might take.
Before we proceed to the social psychological answer as to why people protest, we
devote a few words to protest behaviour itself. There is a vast array of specific protest
behaviours that people might exhibit as a reaction to strongly felt grievances. Wright et
al. have proposed a framework based on three distinctions: the first between inaction and action, the second between actions directed at improving one’s personal conditions (individual action) and actions directed at improving the conditions of one’s group
(collective action). The third distinction is between actions that conform to the norms of
the existing social system (normative action like petitioning and taking part in a demonstration) and those that violate existing social rules (non-normative action like illegal
protests and civil disobedience). This distinction is important because one may expect
that the motivational dynamics underlying the different protests are different. Indeed, the
fact that someone is prepared to take part in street demonstrations does not automatically
mean that he or she is inclined to use violence to reach their group’s goals?
Why people protest
Classical theories proposed that people participate in protest to express their grievances
stemming from relative deprivation, frustration, or perceived injustice . Scholars of social movements, however, began
to question the effects of grievances on movement participation and proposed that the
question to be answered is not so much whether people who engage in protest are
aggrieved, but whether aggrieved people engage in protest. They suggested that efficacy, resources and opportunities would predict protest participation . Meanwhile, scholars such as Reicher
 , Simon et al. and Klandermans and de Weerd , began to explore the
role of collective identity in protest behaviour. Recently, the role of emotions has drawn
the attention of protest researchers . In our work on migrants’
protest participation we integrated these elements into a single theoretical framework,
and we proposed a fifth element to consider – social embeddedness . Discussions about politics within networks increase efficacy and transform individual grievances into shared grievances and group-based anger, which translates into
protest participation.
Grievances
Grievance theories.  Prominent among grievance theories was relative deprivation theory. Feelings of relative deprivation result from comparison of one’s situation with a
standard – be it one’s past, someone else’s situation, or a cognitive standard such as equity
or justice . If comparison results in the conclusion that one is not receiving
at Vrije Universiteit 34820 on March 16, 2013
csi.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
Van Stekelenburg and Klandermans
what one deserves, one experiences relative deprivation. Runciman referred to
relative deprivation based on personal comparisons as egoistic deprivation, and to relative deprivation based on group comparisons as fraternalistic deprivation. Research suggests that fraternalistic deprivation is particularly important for engagement in protest
 . Foster and Matheson , however, showed that the relation is more complex.
They demonstrate that when the group’s experience becomes relevant for one’s own
experience – i.e. when the personal becomes political – motivation to protest increases.
People who experience both personal deprivation and group deprivation are the most
strongly motivated to take to the streets. On the basis of a meta-analysis, Van Zomeren et
al. conclude that the cognitive component of relative deprivation (as reflected in
the observation that one receives less than the standard of comparison) has less influence
on action participation than the affective component (as expressed by such feelings as
dissatisfaction, indignation and discontent about these outcomes).
Next to relative deprivation, social psychologists have applied social justice theory to
theorize on grievances and protest . Social justice literature distinguishes between two classes of justice judgements: distributive and procedural justice.
Distributive justice is similar to relative deprivation; it refers to the fairness of outcomes.
Procedural justice refers to the fairness of decision-making procedures and the relational
aspects of the social process . People care more about how they are treated than about outcomes – do authorities
treat them with respect, can authorities be trusted to do well by their people? On the basis
of these findings Tyler and Smith proposed that procedural justice might be a more powerful predictor of social movement participation than distributive justice, although they
never tested this idea directly .
Grievances and protest.  At the heart of every protest are grievances, be they the experience of illegitimate inequality, feelings of relative deprivation, feelings of injustice,
moral indignation about some state of affairs, or a suddenly imposed grievance
 . Illegitimate inequality is what relative deprivation and social
justice theories are about. Suddenly imposed grievances refer to an unexpected threat or
inroad upon people’s rights or circumstances . Grievances resulting from
violated principles refer to moral outrage because it is felt that important values or
principles are violated. In more general terms, intergroup conflicts can be framed as
conflicts about principles or conflicts around material interests . This distinction is important in the context of protest, because in
a conflict of interests people are more inclined to take an instrumental route to protest
to enforce changes, whereas a conflict of principles more likely leads to protests in
which people express their views and indignation .
Grievance theories came under attack in the 1970s by scholars arguing that grievances
do not provide a sufficient reason to participate in protest. Indeed, grievances abound
at Vrije Universiteit 34820 on March 16, 2013
csi.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
Current Sociology Review Article 0(0)
while protest does not. Therefore, they continue, the key question to address is: why do
some aggrieved people become mobilized, while others do not? Availability of resources
 and the presence of political opportunities 
were suggested as key to protest mobilization. Groups with more resources and opportunities are more likely to mobilize. The social psychological answer to the question as to
why some people become mobilized, while others do not is efficacy. Do people expect
that group-related problems can be solved by united efforts? Do people feel politically
efficacious, do they trust their politicians, or are they cynical about politics?
Efficacy – theory.  Efficacy refers to the individual’s expectation that it is possible to alter
conditions or policies through protest . This echoes certain properties of
the classic sociological construct of agency, which similarly refers to beliefs that individual actions have the potential to shape, and thus change, the social structure. For the
perception of the possibility of change to take hold people need to perceive the group to
be able to unite and fight for the issue and they must perceive the political context as
receptive to the claims made by their group. The first refers to group efficacy: the belief
that group-related problems can be solved by collective efforts , and the
second refers to political efficacy: the feeling that political actions can have an impact on
the political process . Political efficacy is conceptualized as having two dimensions: internal efficacy – the extent to which someone believes to understand politics and therefore participates in politics; and external efficacy – citizens’ faith
and trust in government. Related to political efficacy is political cynicism – defined as
the opposite of political efficacy and inversely related to trust in government .
Efficacy and protest.  Several studies have shown that feelings of efficacy are highly correlated with participation in protest and also meta-analytically this relation proved to be
important . Mummendey et al. propose that group –
rather than personal – efficacy predicts protest participation. Furthermore, Klandermans
 shows that people are more likely to participate in movement activities
when they believe this will help to redress their grievances at affordable costs. The relationship is straightforward: the more effective an individual believes protest participation
is, the more likely she or he is to participate. Efficacious and inefficacious people take
different routes to social change though: while normative forms of protest like petitioning
and demonstrations tend to attract highly efficacious people, non-normative forms of
protest are more likely to attract low efficacious people . Cynicism,
finally, works to both reduce and reinforce action participation depending on whether it
goes together with perceived unfairness . The least active are
those who combine political cynicism with the feeling that they are treated fairly; the
most active are those who combine cynicism with the feeling that they are treated unfairly.
In the 1980s it became clear that instrumental reasoning is not a sufficient reason to participate in protest. Increasingly, the significance of collective identity as a factor stimulating
at Vrije Universiteit 34820 on March 16, 2013
csi.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
Van Stekelenburg and Klandermans
participation in protest was emphasized. Several empirical studies report consistently
that the more people identify with a group the more they are inclined to protest on behalf
of that group . Also meta-analytically this
relation is confirmed .
Identity is our understanding of who we are and who other people are, and, reciprocally, other people’s understanding of themselves and others . Simon et
al. succinctly describe identity as a place in society. A place is a metaphorical
expression and stands for any position on any socially relevant dimension such as nationality, ethnicity, gender, age and so forth. A person has a personal and several social identities. Personal identity refers to self-definition in terms of personal attributes, whereas
social identity refers to self-definition in terms of social category memberships . If a social identity becomes more salient than personal identity, people are inclined to define their personal self in terms of what makes them different from
others, whereas they tend to define their social identities in terms of what makes them
similar to others. The redefinition from an ‘I’ into a ‘we’ as a locus of self-definition
makes people think, feel and act as members of their group and transforms individual
into collective behaviour 
Social identity theory.  In the 1970s, a social psychological identity perspective on protest
emerged in the form of social identity theory . Tajfel and
Turner showed that social categorization according to some trivial criterion such
as the ‘blue’ or the ‘red’ group suffices to make people feel, think and act as a group
member. Compared to this ‘minimal group paradigm’, real world intergroup conflicts
with histories, high emotional intensity attached to them and sociopolitical consequences
can be seen as ‘maximal group paradigms’ that bring group membership powerfully to
mind . SIT proposes that people generally strive for and
benefit from positive social identities associated with their groups. The only way for
participants in minimal group studies to obtain a positive social identity is by identifying
with the groups into which they are categorized, and then ensuring that their group comes
off best in the only available comparison between the groups (i.e. giving more rewards
to the in-group than the out-group). Why, then, would people identify with groups that
reflect negatively on them (e.g. disadvantaged or low-status groups)? SIT’s answer is
that three social structural characteristics affect how people manage their identity concerns. The first social structural characteristic is permeability of the group boundaries,
the possibilities perceived by the individual to attain membership of a higher status
group. Permeable group boundaries allow disadvantaged group members to leave their
group for a higher status group, whereas impermeable boundaries offer no such ‘exit’ . When people do not perceive possibilities to join a higher status
group, they might feel commitment to the lower status group. The second social structural characteristic is stability, the extent to which status positions are stable or variable. People who conceive status positions as variable see protest as a possible method
to heighten group status, especially when the low group status is perceived as illegitimate. Members of a low-status group who perceive the dominant group’s position as
at Vrije Universiteit 34820 on March 16, 2013
csi.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
Current Sociology Review Article 0(0)
illegitimate and unstable can use a variety of strategies to obtain a more positive social
identity. They may, for instance, redefine characteristics of their own group previously
seen as negative (Black is beautiful!); or they may engage in social competition of which
protest is the clearest expression.
Protest of powerful vs powerless.  Groups in conflict often differ in power and status, and
changing status relations and their perceived legitimacy are crucial in understanding
intergroup conflict. Traditionally, SIT studies have focused on low-status groups collectively challenging the actions of high-status groups. However, members of high-status
groups may also challenge the authority in solidarity with members of low-status groups
 . At the core of this political solidarity is psychological change in
the self-categorization of members of high-status groups through which it is no longer
the authority but the minority that best embodies the relevant norms, values and beliefs
that define who ‘we’ are and how ‘we’ should relate to each other. Through this process,
high-status members embrace low-status members’ cause as their own and become willing to collectively challenge the authority. Moreover, members of high-status groups
may perceive their own identity to be threatened too if they believe that their status is
eroding or that low-status groups are becoming more powerful . For instance, whenever an ethnic threat arises – due to substantial immigration
flows or economic contraction – majority groups react with exclusionary measures
 . Interestingly, it is perceptions of competition rather than
actual competition that evoke hostility to minorities .
Dual and multiple identities.  Recent work on multiple identities emphasizes that people can hold many different identities at the same time, which may push in
the same direction or may come into conflict. When two of the groups people identify
with end up on opposite sides of a controversy (for example, union members who are
faced with the decision to strike against their company), people might find themselves
under cross-pressure . Indeed, workers who go on
strike or movement activists who challenge their government are often accused of being
disloyal to the company or the country. González and Brown coined the term
‘dual identity’ to point to the concurrent workings of identities. These authors argue that
identification with a subordinate entity (e.g. ethnic identity) does not necessarily exclude
identification with a supraordinate entity (e.g. national identity). In fact, they hold that a
‘dual identity’ is the desirable configuration as it implies sufficient identification with
one’s own group to experience some basic security and sufficient identification with the
overarching identity to preclude divisiveness . There is evidence that immigrants who display a dual identity are more inclined to take onto the
streets on behalf of their group . This is further specified by
Klandermans et al. , who report that immigrants who display a dual identification
tend to be more satisfied with their situation than those who do not display such identity,
but if they are dissatisfied they will be more likely to participate in protest.
Identification and protest.  Why is group identification such a powerful motivational push
to protest? First of all, identification with others is accompanied by an awareness of
at Vrije Universiteit 34820 on March 16, 2013
csi.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
Van Stekelenburg and Klandermans
similarity and shared fate with those who belong to the same category. Furthermore, the
‘strength’ of an identity comes from its affective component ; the more ‘the group is in me’ the more ‘I feel for us’ and the stronger I am motivated to participate on behalf of the group. Collective
identification, especially the more politicized form of it, intensifies feelings of efficacy
 . Next to shared fate, shared emotions
and enhanced efficaciousness, identification with others involved generates a felt inner
obligation to behave as a ‘good’ group member . When selfdefinition changes from personal to social identity, the group norm of participation
becomes salient; the more one identifies with the group, the more weight this group norm
will carry and the more it will result in an ‘inner obligation’ to participate on behalf of
the group. Together these dynamics explain why group identification functions as a
‘stepping stone’ to a politicized identity.
Politicized identity.  Collective identities must politicize to become the engine of collective
action. Typically, politicization of identities begins with the awareness of shared grievances. Next, an external enemy is blamed for the group’s predicament, and claims for
compensation are levelled against this enemy. Unless appropriate compensation is
granted, the power struggle continues. Politicization of identities and the underlying
power struggle unfold as a sequence of politicizing events that gradually transforms the
group’s relationship to its social environment, whereby the tactical choices are again
shaped by identity . Hence, workers strike and anarchists fight the police.
If in the course of this struggle the group seeks to win the support of third parties such as
more powerful authorities (e.g. the national government) or the general public, identities
fully politicize . Langner (in prep.) developed a measure
of politicized collective identity (PCI) to assess individual differences in the political
meaning of an identity. The more politicized group members are the more likely they will
engage in collective action directed at the government or the general public. This is metaanalytically also demonstrated .
The study of emotions has become a popular research area in the social psychology of
protest. Such was not always the case. As rational approaches were the state-of-the-art,
emotions were often regarded as some peripheral ‘error term’ in motivational theories.
Group-based appraisal theories of emotions have reintroduced emotions to the social
psychology of protest. Emotions function as accelerators or amplifiers . Accelerators make something move faster, and amplifiers
make something sound louder. In the world of protest accelerating means that due to
emotions motives to join a social movement translate into action faster, while amplifying
means that these motives are stronger.
Appraisal theory of emotions.  People are continuously evaluating or appraising the relevance of their environment for their well-being. After a quick and automatic evaluation
of an event’s implications for one’s well-being and of one’s ability to cope with the
at Vrije Universiteit 34820 on March 16, 2013
csi.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
Current Sociology Review Article 0(0)
situation, other appraisal dimensions are evaluated: How does the event influence my
goals? Who or what caused the event? Do I have control and power over the consequences of the event? Are the consequences of the event compatible with my personal
values and (societal) norms ? As a consequence, two persons can appraise
the same event differently and have different emotional responses .
Appraisal theory was developed to explain personal emotions experienced by individuals. Yet, ‘the self’ implicated in emotion-relevant appraisals is clearly not only a
personal or individual self. If group membership becomes part of the self, events that
harm or favour an in-group by definition harm or favour the self, and the self might
thus experience emotions on behalf of the in-group. With such considerations in mind,
Smith developed a model of intergroup emotions that were predicated on
social identification with the group. The main postulate of intergroup emotion theory
is that when a social identity is salient, situations are appraised in terms of their consequences for the in-group, eliciting specific intergroup emotions and behavioural
intentions. Thus people experience emotions on behalf of their group when the social
category is salient and they identify with the group at stake .
Group-based emotions and protest.  Anger is seen as the prototypical protest emotion . For those of us who have been part of protest
events or watched reports on protest events in the news media, this is hardly surprising.
Indeed, it is hard to conceive of protest detached from anger. Van Zomeren et al. 
show that group-based anger is an important motivator of protest participation of disadvantaged groups. Leach and colleagues examined readiness for political action among
advantaged Australians to oppose government plans to redress disadvantaged Aborigines. They found that symbolic racism and relative deprivation evoked group-based anger
which in turn promoted willingness for political action . But advantaged group members can also perceive the in-group advantage as unfair and feel guilt
and anger about it. Anger related to in-group advantage, and to a lesser degree guilt,
appears to be a potent predictor for protest .
There exists a relation to efficacy. People who perceive the in-group as strong are
more likely to experience anger and desire to take action; people who perceive the
in-group as weak are more likely to feel fearful and to move away from the outgroup . Anger moves people to adopt
a more challenging relationship with authorities than subordinate emotions such as
shame and despair or fear . In explaining
different tactics, efficacy appears to be relevant too. Group-based anger is mainly
observed in normative actions where efficacious people protest. However, in nonnormative violent actions contempt appears to be the more relevant emotion . This suggests two emotional routes to
protest: an anger route based on efficacy leading to normative action and a contempt
route when legitimate channels are closed and the situation is
seen as hopeless invoking a ‘nothing to lose’ strategy leading to non-normative protest .
at Vrije Universiteit 34820 on March 16, 2013
csi.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
Van Stekelenburg and Klandermans
Social embeddedness
The decision to take part in protest is not taken in social isolation. On the contrary, individual grievances and feelings are transformed into group-based grievances and feelings
within social networks. As early as 1965, Almond and Verba observed a positive correlation between active engagement in voluntary associations and political efficacy. They
argued that by engaging in voluntary associations people learn about the working of
political institutions. This became known as social capital , defined by
Lin as ‘resources embedded in a social structure which are accessed and/or
mobilized in purposive actions’.
Social embeddedness and theory.  The concept of social capital has important implications
for advancing our understanding of the role of social embeddedness in protest participation. Exploring the impact of social capital takes into account the social context in which
the decision to participate or not is produced. As a set of relationships, social capital has
many different attributes, which are categorized into three components: a structural, a
relational and a cognitive component . The structural component of social capital refers to the presence or absence of network ties between actors
and it essentially defines who people can reach. Structural social capital encourages
cooperative behaviour, thereby facilitating mobilization and participation . The relational component of social capital concerns the
kinds of personal relationships people have developed through a history of interaction
 . It focuses on the particular relationships people have, such as
respect, trust and friendship. The structural position may be necessary, but it does not
appear sufficient to help individuals overcome the collective action dilemma. Relational
capital implies what people are actually able to receive in terms of informational, physical and emotional support. When trust is built between people they are more willing to
engage in cooperative activity through which further trust can be generated . The third – cognitive
component – is defined as those resources providing shared representations, interpretations and systems of meaning. It constitutes a powerful form of social capital in the
context of protest. The cognitive dimension is in protest literature referred to as raised
consciousness – a set of political beliefs and action orientations arising out of an awareness of similarity . Consciousness raising takes place within social
networks. It is within these networks that individual processes as grievance formation,
strengthening of efficacy, identification and group-based emotions all synthesize into a
motivational constellation preparing people for action. Both resource mobilization theory and political process theory emphasize the structural component, the role of social
networks, especially as mobilizing structures . Sociological and social psychological approaches put more
emphasis on the relational and cognitive component.
Social embeddedness and protest.  Social embeddedness plays a pivotal role in the context
of protest, but why? The effect of interaction in networks on the propensity to participate
in politics is contingent on the amount of political discussion that occurs in social
at Vrije Universiteit 34820 on March 16, 2013
csi.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
Current Sociology Review Article 0(0)
networks and the information that people are able to gather about politics as a result
 . Klandermans et al. provide evidence for such mechanisms:
immigrants who felt efficacious were more likely to participate in protest provided that
they were embedded in social networks, especially ethnic networks, which offer an
opportunity to discuss and learn about politics. Networks provide space for the creation
and dissemination of discourse critical of authorities, and provide a way for active opposition to these authorities to grow . In other words, this is where people
talk politics and thus where the factuality of the sociopolitical world is constructed and
people are mobilized for protest. Being integrated in a network increases the chances that
one will be targeted with a mobilizing message and that people are kept to their promises
to participate . For example, people with friends or
acquaintances that are already active within social movements are more likely to take
part in movement actions than others . Social networks function as communication channels, discursive processes take place to form consensus that makes up the symbolic resources in collective sense-making , people are informed of upcoming events and social capital as trust
and loyalty accumulate in networks to provide individuals with the resources needed to
invest in protest .
Mobilization
When an individual participates in protest this is the result of a sometimes lengthy process of mobilization. Mobilization is a complicated process that can be broken down into
several, conceptually distinct steps. Klandermans proposed to break the process
of mobilization down into consensus and action mobilization.
Consensus mobilization.  Participating because of common interests or ideologies requires
a shared interpretation of who should act, why and how. Movements affect such interpretations by the information they disseminate, a process known as framing . Gerhards and Rucht’s study of
flyers produced by the various groups and organizations involved in the protests against
the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank in Berlin is an excellent
example in this respect. These authors show how links are constructed between the ideological frame of the organizers of the demonstration and those of the participating organizations in order to create a shared definition of the situation.
Action mobilization.  Action mobilization is further broken down into four separate steps:
people need to sympathize with the cause, need to know about the upcoming event, must
want to participate and they must be able to participate .
The first step accounts for the results of consensus mobilization. It distinguishes the
general public into those who sympathize with the cause and those who do not. The more
successful consensus mobilization has been, the larger the pool of sympathizers a mobilizing movement organization can draw from. The second step is equally obvious as
crucial: it divides the sympathizers into those who have been target of mobilization
at Vrije Universiteit 34820 on March 16, 2013
csi.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
Van Stekelenburg and Klandermans
attempts and those who have not. The third step divides the sympathizers who have been
targeted into those who are motivated to participate in the specific activity and those who
are not. Finally, the fourth step differentiates the people who are motivated into those
who end up participating and those who do not. The net result of these different steps is
that some (usually small) proportion of the general public participates in protest. With
each step smaller or larger numbers drop out until an individual eventually takes the final
step to participate in an instance of collective political action.
Where do we stand: Assessment of research to date
In providing answers to the questions as to why people protest, we separately discussed
grievances, efficacy, identity, emotions and social embeddedness, but obviously in practice all these concepts are interwoven. And this is precisely what social psychological
protest research to date focuses on. Simon et al. proposed a dual path model to
protest participation in which they distinguished between an instrumental pathway,
guided by calculative reasoning that concentrates on the costs and benefits of participation, and an identity pathway, guided by processes of identification. In several studies
Simon and his collaborators find empirical support for their concept of a dual pathway to
protest participation. Be it in their studies of identification with the Fat Acceptance
Movement , the older people’s movement or the gay movement , both instrumentality and identification made unique contributions to the prediction of willingness to participate. Rather than replacing instrumentality
as an explanatory paradigm, identification is added to the explanation as a second pathway. Van Zomeren et al. also propose a dual path model, comprising an efficacy
and emotion path. The importance of emotions as motivators is shown, again without
replacing the instrumental pathway. In our own work we combined grievances, efficacy,
identity and emotions. The model we developed and began to test assigns a central, integrating role to processes of identification . In order to
develop the shared grievances and shared emotions a shared identity is needed (Figure 2).
Sympathizer
sympathizer
participant
Participant
Figure 1. The process of action mobilization.
See Klandermans and Oegema .
at Vrije Universiteit 34820 on March 16, 2013
csi.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
Current Sociology Review Article 0(0)
Motivational
Group-based
Figure 2.  Motivational framework integrating identities, grievances and emotions.
See Van Stekelenburg and Klandermans ; Van Stekelenburg et al. .
According to this model grievances originate from interests and/or principles that are felt
to be threatened. The more people feel that interests of the group and/or principles that
the group values are threatened, the angrier they are and the more they are prepared to
take part in protest to protect their interests and principles and/or to express their anger.
Future directions: Challenges for the social psychology
of protest
What are the challenges a social psychology of protest faces? Probably, the most significant challenge is the paradox of persistent participation . Activism frequently persists despite pessimism regarding the action’s ostensible goals . Why do people continue participating in protest
although it does not effectuate their claims? Drury and Reicher suggest that participation generates a ‘positive social-psychological transformation’. They argue that
participation in protest strengthens identification and induces collective empowerment.
The emergence of an inclusive self-categorization as ‘oppositional’ leads to feelings of
unity and expectations of support. This empowers people to offend authorities. Such
action, they continue, creates collective self-objectification, that is, defines the participant’s oppositional identity vis-a-vis the dominant out-group. More generally, the theme
of sustained participation raises another underexplored issue, namely the personal consequences of movement participation. The individual consequences of participation in
collective action are a relatively untouched area which scholars have just recently begun
to investigate .
This brings us to probably the most important challenge of the social psychology of
protest, namely to move from static decontextualized explanations of protest to more
dynamic, contextualized models of protest. In 2007 (Van Stekelenburg and Klandermans)
we made a plea for more dynamic models. We argued that a more dynamic approach
would provide the opportunity to study mechanisms through concepts like identification,
at Vrije Universiteit 34820 on March 16, 2013
csi.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
Van Stekelenburg and Klandermans
participation motives, efficacy, emotions and feelings of injustice as consequence and
antecedent of collective action. This is not easy, as Ellemers observes: ‘From an investigational point of view, it is difficult to deal with a variable that, at the same time, can be
a dependent and an independent variable, can develop over time or change across contexts‘ . Yet, studying protest participation in a more dynamic
way would do more justice to the theoretical and empirical richness of the concepts and
may be crucial to gain better insights into the processes at hand . An example of such a dynamic model next to those we discussed in the previous
pages is Van Zomeren et al.’s dynamic dual pathway model of protest . These authors introduce a dynamic model that integrates many common explanations of collective action (i.e. group identity, unfairness,
anger, social support and efficacy). The model conceptualizes collective action as the
outcome of two distinct processes: emotion-focused and problem-focused coping. The
former revolves around the experience of group-based anger, while the latter revolves
around beliefs in the group’s efficacy. The model makes explicit the dynamic nature of
collective action by explaining how undertaking collective action leads to the reappraisal of collective disadvantage, thus inspiring future collective action. Tausch and
colleagues are among the first to report empirical findings on how emotions affect the
dynamic nature of collective action participation. They show that protest participants
experience more out-group-directed anger and contempt, and self-directed positive
affect. Out-group anger and contempt rather than self-directed positive affect inspire
future collective action . In yet another study – a two-wave longitudinal field study – they examine how emotional responses to success and failure of collective action inspire future collective action (Tausch and Becker, in press). They found
that both pride (in relation to success) and anger (in response to failure) motivated future
collective action. While anger stemming from failure predicted future protest directly,
pride resulting from success enhanced feelings of efficacy which inspired future actions.
These few examples are an excellent start for the years to come, taking the dynamic
nature of collective action seriously will shed light on the many unanswered questions
related to sustained participation and disengagement – and indeed on the question of
protest, and then what ?
Next to antecedents and consequences of protest, our plea for dynamic models also
alludes to the thorny issue of causality. Indeed, the majority of the findings and relations
we reported is based on correlational data. Correlational data can be interpreted in causal
terms based on the theories we have, but cannot demonstrate causality. Take for instance
the relation between efficacy, embeddedness and protest. Based on social capital theories, we interpreted our correlational data in causal terms, that is, the more embedded
people are, the more efficacious they feel and the more they protest. However, are more
efficacious people more inclined to become members of organizations or do people
become more efficacious in their networks? We simply do not know. Social psychologists attempt to overcome the problem of causality by employing experimental methods.
These experiments have a high internal validity, and have the potential to make strong
causal statements. However, laboratory experiments are often detached from natural settings resulting in low ecological validity. Indeed, are students in the lab who report high
intentions to protest, really willing to take to the streets? We cannot be sure about it. First
at Vrije Universiteit 34820 on March 16, 2013
csi.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
Current Sociology Review Article 0(0)
of all, because the correlation between intentions and actual participation is moderate at
best , but perhaps more importantly, because we simply do not know whether artificially created grievances, identification and efficacy are
comparable to real life indignation stemming from imperilled interests or violated principles. In a longitudinal field study in a natural setting we seek to address this issue of
causality . Longitudinal data are collected in a newly built
Dutch neighbourhood. Within approximately a month of their arrival inhabitants receive
a questionnaire pursued by four follow-up surveys, which encompasses predictors of
protest, several protest intentions and actual participation and network questions. Thus,
we monitor the development of demand and supply of protest as it starts from scratch.
This means moving beyond correlation studies and studies of isolated individuals in
surveys or laboratories. In that way, we hope to be able to shed more light on causality
issues in protest participation.
A final theme that begs for more social psychological research is the impact of the
sociopolitical context affecting people’s routes to protest. If people are very angry and
decide to not take it anymore, the decision to protest is not taken in a social vacuum.
Collective struggles rooted in a social or political context are, by definition, fought out
in this context. Koopmans and Statham and Roggeband , for example,
showed that the dynamics of participation are created and limited by characteristics of
the national contexts in which people are embedded. So far, social psychological research
has hardly focused on the subjective experience of these macro-level factors. To be sure,
three decades ago social identity theory (SIT) proposed social structural characteristics
as the permeability of the group boundaries, stability and illegitimacy affecting people’s
inclination to protest. These rather abstract structural characteristics were good to manipulate in the laboratories, but what do they tell us about how real life economic, social and
political processes affect the routes that individual participants take towards protest?
How do political opportunities or restraints, or the strength or weakness of multiorganizational fields, or organizational frames, or the proposed tactic affect the routes that
individual participants take towards participation? Future social psychological research
should try to identify variables at the meso or macro level that are important in affecting
people’s subjective interpretations of their collective disadvantages.
Annotated further reading
First, we would like to suggest three books and one special issue on social movements and their
collective actions in general:
Klandermans B and Roggeband CM (eds) The Handbook of Social Movements across
Disciplines . New York: Springer. Read this book because it provides an interesting
overview of how different disciplines (sociology, political science, social geography, anthropology and social psychology) approach social movements.
Klandermans B The Social Psychology of Protest. Oxford: Blackwell. This book provides
an overview of the first two decades of the social psychology of protest.
Journal of Social Issues, December 2009. A special issue on the Social and Psychological
Dynamics of Collective Action. Guest editors: A Iyar and M van Zomeren.
Snow DA, Soule SA and Kriesi H (eds) The Blackwell Companion to Social Movements.
Oxford: Blackwell. A recent collection of different topics related to social movements.
at Vrije Universiteit 34820 on March 16, 2013
csi.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
Van Stekelenburg and Klandermans
On emotions in the context of protest we suggest the following book because it introduces and
conceptualizes group-based emotions:
Mackie DM and Smith ER (eds) From Prejudice to Intergroup Emotions: Differentiated
Reactions to Social Groups. New York: Psychology Press.
On identity we suggest to read:
Stryker S, Owens TJ and White RW (eds) Self, Identity, and Social Movements. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press. An interesting interdisciplinary overview on identity in the
context of social movements.
This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial, or
not-for-profit sectors.