Competitive Mechanisms Subserve Attention in Macaque Areas
John H. Reynolds,1 Leonardo Chelazzi,2 and Robert Desimone1
1Laboratory of Neuropsychology, National Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
20892-4415, and 2Dipartimento di Scienze Neurologiche e della Visione, Sezione di Fisiologia, University of Verona,
Verona, Italy
It is well established that attention modulates visual processing
in extrastriate cortex. However, the underlying neural mechanisms are unknown. A consistent observation is that attention
has its greatest impact on neuronal responses when multiple
stimuli appear together within a cell’s receptive ﬁeld. One way
to explain this is to assume that multiple stimuli activate competing populations of neurons and that attention biases this
competition in favor of the attended stimulus. In the absence of
competing stimuli, there is no competition to be resolved.
Accordingly, attention has a more limited effect on the neuronal
response to a single stimulus. To test this interpretation, we
measured the responses of neurons in macaque areas V2 and
V4 using a behavioral paradigm that allowed us to isolate
automatic sensory processing mechanisms from attentional
effects. First, we measured each cell’s response to a single
stimulus presented alone inside the receptive ﬁeld or paired
with a second receptive ﬁeld stimulus, while the monkey attended to a location outside the receptive ﬁeld. Adding the
second stimulus typically caused the neuron’s response to
move toward the response that was elicited by the second
stimulus alone. Then, we directed the monkey’s attention to one
element of the pair. This drove the neuron’s response toward
the response elicited when the attended stimulus appeared
alone. These ﬁndings are consistent with the idea that attention
biases competitive interactions among neurons, causing them
to respond primarily to the attended stimulus. A quantitative
neural model of attention is proposed to account for these
Key words: spatial attention; monkey; extrastriate cortex; V2;
Experiments on attention in extrastriate visual cortex can be
divided into two types. Those that have used a single receptive
ﬁeld stimulus have found that attention can increase the magnitude of neuronal responses . In contrast, studies using multiple receptive ﬁeld
stimuli have found that the effect of attention depends on the
neuron’s stimulus selectivity. If two stimuli appear together
within a neuron’s receptive ﬁeld, the response is smaller when
attention is directed to the poorer stimulus relative to when
attention is directed to the preferred stimulus .
The purpose of the present experiments was to test a model
that can unify these two streams of research by explaining both
types of results as arising from a common neural mechanism.
This “biased-competition model” 
depends on two assumptions. (1) When multiple stimuli appear
together, they activate populations of neurons that automatically
compete with one another. (2) Attending to a stimulus biases this
competition in favor of neurons that respond to the attended
stimulus. We tested these hypotheses by recording neuronal responses in areas V2 and V4, where attention has been studied
previously using both single and multiple receptive ﬁeld stimuli.
We tested the ﬁrst hypothesis of the model in Experiment 1.
We measured neuronal responses to two stimuli, both preferred
and nonpreferred, within the receptive ﬁeld when the monkey
was not required to attend to either stimulus. The stimuli were
presented one at a time and also together as a pair. If the ﬁrst
hypothesis of the model is true, then the response to a preferred
stimulus should be suppressed by the nonpreferred stimulus,
because of the action of the competing neuronal population
activated by that stimulus.
We tested the second hypothesis of the model in Experiment 2.
As in Experiment 1, we measured neuronal responses to two
receptive ﬁeld stimuli, presented individually and as a pair. We
then measured the response to the pair while the monkey attended to each individual stimulus. If the second hypothesis of
the model is true, then this should cause the pair response to
move toward the response that was elicited when the attended
stimulus appeared alone.
A simple three-parameter implementation of the biasedcompetition model demonstrates that it can satisfy the two linear
constraints that are imposed by the results of these experiments.
Using the parameters derived to ﬁt these data, the model also ﬁts
previously published data on response modulation when attention
is directed to a single receptive ﬁeld stimulus. We conclude by
describing two easily tested predictions of the model.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Many of the details of the recording techniques have been described
previously . Brieﬂy, three adult male rhesus monkeys
Received Aug. 18, 1998; revised Nov. 5, 1998; accepted Dec. 8, 1998.
This work was supported by the National Institute of Mental Health Intramural
Research Program. J.H.R. was supported by a fellowship from the McDonnell-Pew
Foundation. L.C. was supported in part by a grant from the Human Frontier Science
Program Organization.
Correspondence should be addressed to Dr. Robert Desimone, Chief, Laboratory
of Neuropsychology, 49 Convent Drive MSC 4415, Building 49, Room 1B80,
Bethesda, MD 20892-4415.
Copyright © 1999 Society for Neuroscience
0270-6474/99/191736-18$05.00/0
The Journal of Neuroscience, March 1, 1999, 19(5):1736–1753
(Macaca mulatta) were surgically implanted with a head post, a scleral
eye coil, and recording chambers. Surgery was conducted under aseptic
conditions with isoﬂuorane anesthesia, and antibiotics and analgesics
were administered postoperatively. Preoperative magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) was used to identify the stereotaxic coordinates of V2
and V4. V4 recording chambers were placed over the prelunate gyrus.
Additional plastic recording chambers were used for V2 recordings,
centered 15 mm lateral and 15 mm dorsal to the occipital pole. The skull
remained intact during the initial surgery, and small holes (;3 mm in
diameter) were later drilled within the recording chambers under ketamine anesthesia and xylazine analgesic to expose the dura for electrode
penetrations.
Conﬁrmation of recording sites
At the beginning of the study, several penetrations were made in each
chamber to ensure that the electrode was in the appropriate visual area.
This was determined by assessing receptive ﬁeld sizes, topographic
organization, and feature preferences at each site. All implants were
nonferromagnetic (plastic recording chambers, titanium screws, and
brass head posts), so it was possible to verify the locations of our
recording sites using additional MRI scans. After our experimental data
were collected, we rescanned two monkeys with a marker electrode
(sharpened tungsten microelectrode; Frederick Haer & Co., Brunswick,
ME) inserted in each recording chamber at the coordinates used during
recording. We used a plastic cylinder that ﬁt snugly inside the recording
well to hold the marker electrode in place during the scan. At each end
of the cylinder was a grid that was perforated with small holes, spaced 1
mm apart (Christ Instruments, Damascus, MD). Each marker electrode
was lowered through the grids and into the brain to a depth of ;2 cm
beneath the dura using the same micropositioner and x–y stage that had
been used during recording. Before the micropositioner and x–y stage
were removed, a drop of glue was applied to hold the marker electrode
in the grid. After the micropositioner and x–y stage were removed, the
end of the electrode that was protruding from the recording well was then
cut, and a plastic cap was placed over the recording chamber during the
These marker electrodes were clearly visible in each scan. The positions of these markers, the positions of electrode tracks made during
recording, and the positions of the holes in the skull beneath each
recording chamber all veriﬁed that our recording sites were appropriately
located in areas V2 and V4. The third monkey, from which eight neurons
were recorded, has not been rescanned.
Recording technique
Recordings were obtained from a tungsten microelectrode that was
controlled by a hydraulic microdrive. We made no effort to select neurons
from a particular layer of cortex. We recorded from the ﬁrst neurons
encountered that could be clearly isolated and had sufﬁciently large
receptive ﬁelds (see Receptive ﬁeld mapping). The portion of area V4
where we recorded was directly beneath the recording chamber, so the
ﬁrst cells encountered were those in the superﬁcial cortical layers. Neurons in area V2 were recorded by passing the electrode through V1 on the
opercular surface, through the underlying white matter, and into the
portion of V2 that lies on the posterior bank of the lunate sulcus.
Therefore, the ﬁrst cells encountered in V2 recordings were typically in
the deep layers. Thus, there may be a bias toward deeper recordings in
V2 and more superﬁcial recordings in V4.
In most cases, two neurons could be recorded simultaneously and
differentiated on the basis of the size and shape of the spike waveform,
and an on-line spike-sorting computer was used to classify these spikes by
means of a template-matching procedure. Although this system allowed
the concurrent recording of two neurons, spikes arising from both neurons simultaneously (within a 1 msec interval) could not be detected.
The stimuli used throughout all experiments in both cortical areas were
selected from a set of 16 stimuli composed of all combinations of four
oriented bars (0, 45, 90, and 135°) presented in four colors (red, blue,
green, and yellow). The bars were 0.25° of visual arc wide by 1° in length.
The colors were chosen to be photometrically equiluminant, with a
luminance of 8.60 cd/m 2, presented against a gray background of luminance 0.65 cd/m 2. In Experiment 1, all stimuli were 250 msec in duration. In Experiment 2, stimulus duration ranged from 50 to 250 msec.
Receptive ﬁeld mapping
A manually (computer mouse) controlled ﬂashing bar stimulus was used
to establish the outer boundaries of the multiunit receptive ﬁeld. After
cells were isolated, this same ﬂashing bar stimulus was used to estimate
the position in the visual ﬁeld where stimuli would generate the strongest
response (the “hot spot” of the cell). Each of the 16 possible stimuli
described above was then presented at this position, and the stimulus that
gave the greatest response was identiﬁed. This stimulus was then repeatedly presented in a random sequence at 11 positions falling at regular
intervals along an arc of equal eccentricity centered on the hot spot and
extending bilaterally into the surround of the receptive ﬁeld. The responses of the cell at these 11 positions constituted a one-dimensional
proﬁle of the receptive ﬁeld. Two of these 11 positions were used
throughout the rest of the recording session. These two positions were
selected to give approximately equivalent responses to the mapping
stimulus and to be clearly inside the receptive ﬁeld. To achieve these two
goals, we found that it was necessary to place stimuli closer together for
neurons with smaller receptive ﬁelds. Therefore, the stimuli used to test
neurons in area V2 typically were closer together than were those used to
test neurons in area V4. Because most receptive ﬁelds in both V2 and V4
were approximately symmetric around the hot spot, the two positions
were typically approximately symmetric around the hot spot. For neurons with small receptive ﬁelds (including most V2 neurons), it was
usually the case that the 11 positions used in this automatic mapping
procedure were spaced closely together. We were careful to choose
positions that were far enough apart to avoid overlap between the
stimulus pairs that would appear together in the main experiment. If a
receptive ﬁeld was too small to ﬁt two stimuli easily at equally potent
positions inside the receptive ﬁeld, the neuron was excluded, and we
attempted to isolate a different neuron.
Experiment 1: characterization of V4 neurons’ responses to
stimulus pairs
Stimulus conﬁgurations and experimental procedures. The stimulus con-
ﬁguration used in Experiment 1 is shown in Figure 1A. The monkey was
rewarded for passively ﬁxating a ﬁxation spot at the center of the
computer screen while stimuli were presented within the receptive ﬁeld
of the neuron under study. Stimuli could appear at one of two possible
locations within the receptive ﬁeld, which were selected as described
above. At the beginning of a recording session, the stimulus that would
appear at position one, designated the reference stimulus, was chosen
from the set of 16 possible stimuli (four orientations 3 four colors)
described above. The identity of the reference stimulus was ﬁxed
throughout the recording session. On each trial, the stimulus that would
appear at position two, designated a probe stimulus, was selected at
random from the same set of 16 possible stimuli. We sought to test
neuronal responses to stimulus pairs across the full spectrum of possible
reference–probe selectivity values. Therefore, the reference stimulus was
chosen sometimes to be the stimulus (among the set of 16 possible
stimuli) eliciting the largest response, sometimes to be that eliciting the
smallest response, and sometimes to be that eliciting a response that fell
between the largest and the smallest response. There is no reason to
believe that the best stimulus of the 16 was the “optimal” stimulus for
On any given trial, stimuli appeared in one of three possible conﬁgurations. (1) the reference stimulus appeared at position one, 2) a probe
stimulus appeared at position two, or 3) the reference stimulus appeared
at position one together with a probe stimulus at position two. Whenever
a trial included a probe stimulus (i.e., conﬁgurations 2 or 3), the identity
of the probe stimulus was selected for that trial at random from the set
of 16 possible stimuli. A recording session consisted of 540 complete
trials. These were composed of 60 trials in which the reference stimulus
appeared alone, 240 trials in which each of the 16 possible probes
appeared alone (15 repetitions of each probe), and 240 trials in which
each of the 16 possible probes appeared with the reference stimulus (15
repetitions of each pair).
Data analysis. For each cell, we computed the average ﬁring rate over
a 250 msec window (stimulus duration) beginning 70 msec after stimulus
onset (typical V4 neuron response onset). We chose this time window to
cover the neuron’s full response period. To verify that our results are not
an artifact of this particular time window, we have repeated this analysis
using time windows that included only the ﬁrst 100 msec of response, the
second 100 msec of response, and the time window that was used in
Experiment 2. All of these analyses yielded qualitatively similar results.
Averages were computed in three stimulus conﬁgurations: (1) the
Reynolds et al. • Competitive Attention Mechanisms in Macaque V2 and V4
J. Neurosci., March 1, 1999, 19(5):1736–1753 1737
reference stimulus appearing alone, (2) each of the 16 probe stimuli
appearing alone, and (3) each of the 16 resulting reference–probe pairs.
We normalized all responses by dividing by the highest ﬁring rate
observed within that time window in any stimulus condition. We then
computed the difference between the normalized response of the cell to
the reference stimulus (REF) and each probe (PROBEi). This yielded 16
selectivity values, denoted SEi, for each cell: SEi 5 PROBEi 2 REF.
This selectivity index can range from 21 to 11, with negative values
indicating that the reference stimulus elicited the stronger response, a
value of 0 indicating identical responses to reference and probe, and
positive values indicating that the probe stimulus elicited the stronger
We then computed an index that quantiﬁed the change in ﬁring rate
that resulted from adding the probe stimulus to the reference stimulus.
This sensory interaction index (SIi) is the difference between the normalized response to the reference stimulus (REF) and the normalized
response to the pair composed of the reference stimulus and the ith
probe stimulus (PAIRi): SIi 5 PAIRi 2 REF. Like the selectivity index,
the sensory interaction index can take on values from 21 to 11. Negative
values indicate that the response to the pair was smaller than the
response to the reference stimulus (i.e., adding the probe stimulus
suppressed the neuronal response). A value of 0 indicates that adding the
probe stimulus had no effect on the neuron’s response. Positive values
indicate that adding the probe increased the neuron’s response. For each
neuron, we quantiﬁed the relationship between selectivity and sensory
interactions by performing a linear regression on the 16 selectivity and
sensory interaction indices. A criterion level of p , 0.05 was used in all
statistical analyses.
These indices were computed to test the ﬁrst assumption of the
biased-competition model. According to the model, when two stimuli
appear within a neuron’s receptive ﬁeld, the pair response is predicted to
fall between the responses elicited when the stimuli appear individually.
Thus, the response to a preferred reference stimulus (SE , 0) is predicted to be suppressed by the addition of a poor probe stimulus within
the receptive ﬁeld (SI , 0). Likewise, the response to a poor reference
stimulus (SE . 0) should be increased by the addition of a preferred
probe stimulus within the receptive ﬁeld (SI . 0). Finally, if a reference
stimulus and a probe stimulus generate equivalent responses (SE 5 0),
then the pair response is predicted to be equal to either individual
stimulus response (SI 5 0). Thus, according to the biased-competition
hypothesis, the relationship between sensory interactions and selectivity
should be positive and should pass through the origin (SE 5 SI 5 0).
The possibility that stimulus onset may have captured attention. One
possible concern is that the appearance of a stimulus can capture attention, even if behaviorally irrelevant. If this occurred for the stimuli used
in the present experiment, it might have caused a change in neuronal
response. Although we cannot eliminate this possibility, we do not
believe that this presents a serious problem. The empirical relationship
found between selectivity and sensory interactions under passive ﬁxation
in Experiment 1 was replicated in Experiment 2, in which the monkey
actively attended to stimuli presented simultaneously outside the receptive ﬁeld. Thus, any exogenous attention effects in Experiment 1 were
evidently small in magnitude, possibly because the monkey learned to
ignore the peripheral stimuli after thousands of stimulus presentations.
Second, our conclusions do not depend on the absolute magnitude of
neuronal responses. Instead, they depend on a comparison of responses
to the different stimuli. Provided that attention was not directed preferentially to a particular stimulus, any effect of attention would not be
expected to inﬂuence the observed dependence of sensory interactions
on selectivity.
Experiment 2: characterization of the effect of attention on
sensory interactions in areas V2 and V4
Stimulus conﬁgurations and experimental procedures. The attention task,
which is similar to a task described previously , is
illustrated in Figure 1, B and C. At the beginning of a recording session,
a reference stimulus and a probe were selected from the same set of 16
possible stimuli used in Experiment 1. These two stimuli were used
throughout a recording session.
Stimuli could appear at four locations: two locations within the receptive ﬁeld and two other locations outside the receptive ﬁeld. To minimize
the possibility that the extrareceptive ﬁeld stimuli appeared within the
surround of the receptive ﬁeld, we placed these stimuli across the vertical
meridian. As an added precaution, we avoided recording from cells
whose receptive ﬁelds were near the vertical meridian. For the majority
of recordings, the across-meridian stimuli appeared at positions that were
mirror images of the receptive ﬁeld locations, as depicted in Figure 1B.
For a few recordings, the across-meridian stimuli appeared at positions
that were above the horizontal meridian, 180° from the receptive ﬁeld.
The results of the experiment did not seem to depend on which of these
two conﬁgurations was used. Nevertheless, it remains possible that for
some cells, the extrareceptive ﬁeld stimuli may have fallen within the
surround of the receptive ﬁeld. However, these stimuli appeared in all
attention conditions and all conﬁgurations of receptive ﬁeld stimuli
(probe, reference, and pair). Therefore, any effect that they potentially
may have had on neuronal responses would not be expected to bias our
results. Also, similar patterns of attention effects were observed in areas
V2 and V4, despite the fact that V4 receptive ﬁelds and surrounds are
signiﬁcantly larger.
Stimulus conﬁgurations, Experiments 1 and 2, and task, Experiment 2. A, In Experiment 1, stimuli could appear at two locations
within the receptive ﬁeld (indicated by the dotted outline). On a given trial,
either (1) the reference stimulus appeared at position 1, (2) a probe
stimulus appeared once at position 2, or (3) the reference appeared at
position 1 and a probe appeared at position 2. B, In Experiment 2, stimuli
could appear at four positions: two within the receptive ﬁeld and two
across the vertical meridian. In the attend-away condition, the monkey
attended to one of the stimuli across the midline from the receptive ﬁeld.
On each trial, the reference, the probe, or the pair appeared within the
receptive ﬁeld. In the attend-receptive-ﬁeld-stimulus condition, stimuli
appeared at all four positions, and the monkey attended to the reference
or probe stimulus within the receptive ﬁeld. C, Examples of stimulus
sequences. The monkey’s task was to respond when a diamond-shaped
target appeared at the attended location, while ignoring distractor targets,
which occasionally appeared at the other locations. From trial to trial, the
length of the stimulus sequence varied at random, so the monkey never
knew when the target would appear. At the beginning of a block of trials,
there were a few instruction trials, in which a bright cue box appeared at
the location to be attended. After the monkey was reliably responding to
the targets appearing at the cued location and ignoring distractors appearing at other locations, the cue was removed, and the task continued in
the absence of the cue. From block to block, the monkey was recued to
attend to a different location.
1738 J. Neurosci., March 1, 1999, 19(5):1736–1753
Reynolds et al. • Competitive Attention Mechanisms in Macaque V2 and V4
During a block of trials, the monkey had to attend to one of the
positions and ignore the others to detect a target stimulus at the attended
location. In the “attend-away” condition, the monkey attended to stimuli
appearing at one of the two positions across the vertical meridian from
the receptive ﬁeld while the reference stimulus, the probe stimulus, or
the pair appeared within the receptive ﬁeld. In the “attend-receptive-
ﬁeld-stimulus” condition, the reference and probe stimuli both appeared
together within the receptive ﬁeld, and attention was directed to either
the reference stimulus or the probe stimulus within the receptive ﬁeld.
Simultaneously, unattended stimuli appeared at the two positions across
the vertical meridian from the receptive ﬁeld.
We directed the monkey’s attention to a given location as follows. At
the beginning of each block of trials, the monkey received a few (typically
three to ﬁve) “instruction trials” that indicated where it was to attend for
that block of trials. On these instruction trials, a bright cue box appeared
at the location to be attended (see Fig. 1C.) The monkey’s task was to
detect the presence of a diamond-shaped target stimulus appearing at the
cued location. This target appeared at the end of a variable-length
sequence of zero to six nontarget (reference or probe) stimuli. The
length of a given sequence varied from trial to trial. Therefore, the
monkey could not know in advance when the target diamond would
appear and had to attend to the cued location throughout the trial to
distinguish the target from the nontargets, release the bar, and earn
reward. Stimulus sequences appeared synchronously at the other positions, and distractor targets occasionally appeared embedded within
them. If the monkey released the response lever after the appearance of
a distractor target, the trial was aborted, and another trial began after a
brief delay. After the monkey was reliably releasing the response lever
when the target appeared at the cued location, the cue was removed, and
the monkey had to continue performing the task without the cue.
It was rarely the case that the monkey would work long enough for us
to complete an experiment, ﬁnd a new set of cells, and complete a second
experiment within a single recording session. However, it was often
possible to continue recording from the same neuron using an additional
stimulus pair. Therefore, to maximize the amount of data collected, we
recorded from a neuron with one or more additional reference–probe
pairs, whenever possible.
Data analysis. Neuronal responses were analyzed for trials occurring
after the spatial cue was removed (i.e., the instruction trials were excluded from the analysis). We measured neuronal responses during a 150
msec time window beginning 120 msec after stimulus onset (the period
over which we typically observed attentional modulation). To verify that
our results are not an artifact of this particular time window, we have
repeated this analysis using time windows that depend on stimulus
duration and on response onset time and windows that varied from cell
to cell to cover the period of attentional modulation. All of these analyses
yielded qualitatively similar results. However, it is worth noting that, as
a result of variability in the timing of sensory interactions and attention
effects, we did miss some effects that fell outside the time window. See,
for example, the ﬁgure that shows the response of a neuron for which
sensory interactions and attention effects began before the beginning of
this time window (see Fig. 7).
Because nontarget stimuli greatly outnumbered target stimuli and
distractor targets, the nontarget responses could be measured more
reliably than the target responses. Therefore, our results are based on
analysis of responses to nontarget stimuli. However, under similar experimental conditions, Luck et al. have compared the effect of
attention on neuronal responses to target versus nontarget stimuli. They
found that spatial attention has comparable effects on responses to target
and nontarget stimuli.
Responses were measured in ﬁve conditions. In the attend-away condition, we measured responses to (1) the reference stimulus, (2) the
probe stimulus, or (3) the pair, while the monkey attended away from the
receptive ﬁeld. In the attend-receptive-ﬁeld-stimulus condition, we measured the pair response, while attention was directed to (4) the reference
stimulus or (5) the probe.
As in Experiment 1, we normalized each cell’s responses by dividing
all ﬁring rates by the highest ﬁring rate observed, for that cell, in any of
the ﬁve conditions. Using these normalized responses, we then computed
a selectivity index, SE, for each reference and probe: SE 5 PROBE 2
REF. We then computed a sensory interaction index for each of the three
attentional conditions (attend away, attend to reference, and attend to
probe). This was the difference between the response to the reference
stimulus (REF) and the response to the pair of stimuli, with attention
directed either away from the receptive ﬁeld (PAIRa), toward the reference stimulus (PAIRr), or toward the probe (PAIRp): SIa 5 PAIRa 2
REF, SIr 5 PAIRr 2 REF, and SIp 5 PAIRp 2 REF. These indices are
comparable with the indices derived in Experiment 1, except that SIr and
SIp correspond to sensory interactions when attention was directed to the
reference and probe stimulus, respectively.
Experiment 2 included many more experimental conditions than did
Experiment 1. Therefore, to avoid a combinatorial explosion, it was
necessary to reduce the number of probe stimuli from the 16 probes used
in Experiment 1. Typically the monkey worked long enough to enable us
to record from at most four different reference–probe pairs. For many
cells, only one pair could be tested completely. It was therefore impossible, in Experiment 2, to quantify the relationship between selectivity
and sensory interactions across stimuli within single cells. Instead, these
comparisons were made across neurons within each cortical area. As in
Experiment 1, we quantiﬁed the relationship between selectivity and
sensory interactions in each cortical area by performing linear regressions on the selectivity and sensory interaction indices derived for
each cell.
Model simulations
A simple model neural circuit, illustrated in Figure 2, was used to
simulate the results of Experiments 1 and 2. The model, which is a simple
feedforward competitive neural network, is deﬁned by the four equations
shown at the bottom of Figure 2. The model includes two classes of cells.
The circle at the top of Figure 2 represents the neuron (output) being
measured. The two circles at the bottom of the diagram in Figure 2
represent populations of upstream neurons (inputs) that respond to the
Model circuit diagram. The circle on top represents the neuron
being recorded. The variable y is the ﬁring rate of this neuron. The two
circles at the bottom of the diagram represent populations of “input”
neurons that respond to the reference (left) and probe (right) stimuli and
that project to the measured cell. The average response of the ith input
population is designated xi. Black lines indicate the excitatory projections
from each input population to the measured cell, and gray lines indicate
the inhibitory projections, which are assumed to depend on inhibitory
interneurons (not shown). The variable wi
1 is the magnitude, or weight,
of the excitatory projection from the ith input population, and wi
weight of the inhibitory projection from the ith input population. For a
complete description of the model, see Materials and Methods.
Reynolds et al. • Competitive Attention Mechanisms in Macaque V2 and V4
J. Neurosci., March 1, 1999, 19(5):1736–1753 1739
reference (left) and probe (right) stimuli. Lines connecting the inputs to
the output represent feedforward synaptic connections. Inhibitory inputs
are assumed to depend on inhibitory interneurons (not shown).
Equations 1 and 2 (Fig. 2) describe the total excitatory and inhibitory
inputs, respectively, to the measured cell. The total excitatory input to
the cell (E) is simply the sum of the activities of the two input populations multiplied by their respective excitatory weights, as shown in
Equation 1. The total inhibitory input to the cell (I) is the sum of the
activities of the two input populations multiplied by their respective
inhibitory weights, as shown in Equation 2.
Equation 3 (Fig. 2) describes how the ﬁring rate of the output neuron
( y) changes over time. This equation was originally introduced by
Grossberg to provide an explanation of how feedforward competitive neural networks can be constructed to avoid saturating their responses to strong inputs (e.g., high-contrast stimuli) while remaining
sensitive to weak inputs. See Grossberg and Levine and Grossberg
 for further discussion.
The ﬁrst term [(B 2 y)E] governs excitatory input. B is the maximum
response of the cell. Therefore, (B 2 y) is always positive. If excitatory
input is greater than zero, then (B 2 y)E is positive, resulting in an
increase in response that grows smaller as the cell’s response y approaches its maximum rate. The second term (2 yI) governs inhibitory
input. If inhibitory input is greater than zero, then 2 yI is negative,
resulting in a decrease in response toward zero. The third term (2 Ay) is
a passive decay term.
The net effect of excitatory and inhibitory input is described by
Equation 4 (Fig. 2), which is the equilibrium response of the output
neuron. The passive decay parameter A and the cell’s maximum response
B are constants. Therefore, the equilibrium response depends on the
relative contributions of the excitatory input E and the inhibitory input I.
Large values of E will drive the equilibrium ﬁring rate toward the cell’s
maximum ﬁring rate B. Large values of I will cause the cell to remain
Attention is assumed to increase the strength of the signal coming from
the population of cells activated by the attended stimulus. The exact
mechanism by which this increase could occur is unknown. It is implemented here by increasing the efﬁcacy of synapses projecting to the
measured cell from the population activated by the attended stimulus.
Increasing the strength of the signal from the attended stimulus population causes it to have a greater inﬂuence on the total mix of excitation and
inhibition. Consequently, the response of the cell is driven toward the
response that would be elicited if the attended stimulus were presented
For all simulations, the maximum neuronal ﬁring rate B was arbitrarily
set to 1, and the passive decay parameter A was set to 0.2. For each model
neuron, the excitatory and inhibitory weights projecting from the populations of neurons activated by the reference and probe stimuli were
selected at random from a uniform distribution ranging from 0 to 1. To
simulate the stochastic nature of neural responses, 610% random noise,
selected from a uniform distribution, was added to the response of the
cell in each condition. Attention was implemented by increasing by a
factor of 5 the excitatory and inhibitory synaptic weights projecting from
the input neuron population responding to the attended stimulus. No
other parameters appear in the model.
Simulation of Experiment 1. The responses of each model neuron to the
reference stimulus, the 16 probes, and the corresponding 16 pairs were
computed as follows. The reference stimulus and each of the 16 probes
were assumed to activate their own input populations. Each of these
input populations was assigned an excitatory and an inhibitory weight at
random from a uniform distribution ranging from 0 to 1. In the circuit
diagram shown in Figure 2, the input on the left is intended to correspond to the reference stimulus, which is constant for a given cell in the
simulation of Experiment 1. The input on the right is intended to
correspond to one of the 16 probe stimuli.
For each probe, the model was activated in three conditions. In the
reference condition, the reference input activity level was set to 1, and
the probe input was set to 0. In the probe condition, the probe input was
set to 1, and the reference input was set to 0. In the pair condition, the
probe and reference inputs were both set to 1. In each of the three
conditions, the equilibrium response of the model neuron was computed
according to Equation 4 in Figure 2. The resulting responses were then
used to compute the indices of selectivity and sensory interaction, as
described for Experiment 1.
Simulation of Experiment 2. The model simulation of Experiment 2
was conducted in the same manner as was the simulation of Experiment
1, with two changes. First, only one probe and one reference were
presented to each model neuron. So, in the circuit diagram shown in
Figure 2, the left input is intended to correspond to the reference
stimulus, and the right input is intended to correspond to the probe.
Second, to incorporate attention to the reference and probe stimulus, the
model was also simulated in two additional conditions. In both of these
conditions, the reference and probe input activity levels were both set to
1. In the attend-reference condition, the strengths of synaptic weights
from the reference stimulus input were multiplied by a factor of 5. In the
attend-probe condition, the strengths of synaptic weights from the probe
stimulus input were multiplied by a factor of 5.
Experiment 1
Experiment 1 was designed to examine how the responses elicited
by a single stimulus within the receptive ﬁeld (the reference
stimulus) are inﬂuenced by the addition of a second receptive
ﬁeld stimulus (the probe), in the absence of attentional modulation. Depending on the mechanisms that govern responses to
stimulus pairs, adding the probe might be expected to result in an
increase, a reduction, or a more complex change in the pair
response, compared with the response elicited by the reference
stimulus. An increase in response could occur as a result of
additional recruitment of V1 afferents by the second stimulus. A
reduction in response could occur as a result of diminished
bottom-up or top-down excitatory drive. Response suppression by
extrareceptive ﬁeld stimuli has been observed in area V1
 . Response suppression has also been observed in higher-order areas
that provide feedback to areas V2 and V4 . Alternatively, the individual stimulus
responses might bear no systematic relationship to the response
elicited by the pair. For example, the pair response might depend
on factors other than the ﬁring rates elicited by the individual
stimuli, such as the geometric relationships between the stimuli
 or their color contrast
 . Or, V2 and V4 cells might simply treat the
pair as a third, independent stimulus, with its own arbitrary
In contrast to these alternatives, the biased-competition hypothesis predicts that the pair response should fall between the
responses to the reference and probe stimuli. According to the
hypothesis, stimuli activate competing populations of neurons. To
the extent that a probe stimulus has any inﬂuence on the neuronal
response, the probe should move the pair response toward the
response the probe would give if it had been presented alone.
Adding a low-ﬁring rate probe should drive down the response to
a high-ﬁring rate reference stimulus. Adding a high-ﬁring rate
probe should drive up the response to a low-ﬁring rate reference
stimulus. If probe and reference stimuli individually elicit identical responses, then this same response should be generated when
they appear together as a pair.
We recorded the responses of 18 neurons from area V4 of one
monkey. Our results indicate that in area V4, the responses of
neurons to pairs of bar stimuli are a weighted average of the
individual stimulus responses. This is illustrated in Figure 3,
which shows the responses of a typical cell to the reference
stimulus, the 16 different probes, and the resulting 16 stimulus
pairs. Figure 3, A–C, shows the effect of adding three of the probe
stimuli. For a probe that elicited a lower mean response than did
the reference (Fig. 3A), the addition of the probe was suppressive.
For a probe that elicited an average response approximately equal
to the response elicited by the reference stimulus (Fig. 3B), the
pair response was similar to the responses to the probe and
1740 J. Neurosci., March 1, 1999, 19(5):1736–1753
Reynolds et al. • Competitive Attention Mechanisms in Macaque V2 and V4
reference. For a probe stimulus that elicited a stronger response
than did the reference stimulus (Fig. 3C), the addition of the
probe caused an increase in the cell’s mean response.
This relationship held across all 16 probe stimuli, as illustrated
in Figure 3D. Each point corresponds to the indices of sensory
interaction ( y-axis) versus selectivity (x-axis) for each probe
stimulus. Points labeled A–C correspond to the examples shown
in Figure 3, A–C. The data were positively correlated [r 2 5 0.53;
r 2 signiﬁcantly different from 0, F(1,15) 5 16.91 and p 5 0.001] and
fell along a line with a positive slope (10.67), indicating that the
effect of adding a probe stimulus was proportional to the selectivity of the cell’s response to the reference and the probe
stimulus. Adding a probe tended to suppress the neuronal response if the probe presented alone elicited a smaller response
than did the reference stimulus. A probe tended to increase the
neuronal response if the probe alone elicited a larger response
than did the reference stimulus. The most suppressive probes
tended to be those that elicited the smallest responses, when
Single cell, Experiment 1. A–C, The response of a single V4 neuron to the reference, a probe, and the corresponding pair is shown in each
panel. Stimulus conditions are indicated by the square icons in A–C. The receptive ﬁeld is indicated by the dotted outline in each icon. The dot in the top
right corner of each icon represents the ﬁxation point. The x-axis shows time (in milliseconds) from stimulus onset, and the thick horizontal bar indicates
stimulus duration. The vertical bar in the upper left corner shows the SEM of the response of this neuron, averaged over the three stimulus conditions
for each panel. The blue line that is constant across all three panels shows the response to the reference stimulus, which was a vertical green bar. The
response to the reference stimulus averaged over the deﬁned time window (70–320 msec after stimulus onset) was 11.75 spikes/sec. A, The green line
indicates the response to a vertical yellow probe that drove the cell at a low average rate (4.51 spikes/sec). The response to the pair, indicated by a red
line, was strongly suppressed by the probe stimulus (5.31 spikes/sec). B, A 45° blue bar probe, which elicited a response that was slightly smaller than the
response to the reference stimulus (mean response, 8.76 spikes/sec), caused a smaller suppression in the cell’s response (mean pair response, 8.82
spikes/sec). C, A 45° green bar probe, which elicited a response that was larger than the response to the reference (mean response, 17.80 spikes/sec),
increased the cell’s response (mean response to pair, 13.81 spikes/sec). D, Indices of selectivity (x-axis) and sensory interaction ( y-axis) for all 16 probe
stimuli are shown. The indices corresponding to each of the probes illustrated in A–C are indicated by squares and are labeled in D. A negative selectivity
index (indicating that the response to the probe was less than the response to the reference stimulus) was typically paired with a negative sensory
interaction index (indicating that the addition of the poor probe suppressed the response of the cell). Nonselective reference–probe pairs showed little
or no sensory interactions. Preferred probes increased the response to the reference stimulus. Ref, Reference stimulus.
Reynolds et al. • Competitive Attention Mechanisms in Macaque V2 and V4
J. Neurosci., March 1, 1999, 19(5):1736–1753 1741
presented alone. The probes causing the greatest increase in
response tended to be those that elicited the largest responses,
when presented alone. The intercept (20.02) was not signiﬁcantly
different from 0 [t(14) 5 20.40; p 5 0.3486]. Thus, probes such as
the one corresponding to point B in Figure 3D, which gave
responses similar to that of the reference stimulus, had little or no
effect when added to the reference stimulus.
Sensory interactions are, for this cell, approximately proportional to selectivity. Therefore, the slope of the best-ﬁt line
provides a convenient way to quantify the relative inﬂuence
exerted by the stimuli.
The equation of the best-ﬁt line relating selectivity and sensory
interaction indices can be written:
SIi 5 w SEi 1 offset,
where w is the slope of the regression equation, and offset is the
increase or decrease in response that is not accounted for by
selectivity (i.e., the vertical intercept of the best-ﬁt line). This
equation can be rewritten:
PAIRi 2 REF 5 w (PROBEi 2 REF) 1 offset.
Rearranging terms, this can be expressed:
PAIRi 5 w PROBEi 1 (1 2 w)REF 1 offset.
Thus, the response to the pair (PAIRi) is the average of the
response to the probe (PROBEi) and the response to the reference stimulus (REF), weighted by the slope w, plus the offset
term. The slope of the best-ﬁt line (w) indicates how heavily the
pair response is weighted toward the response to the probe. The
value (1 2 w) is the weighting factor of the reference stimulus.
The slope w for the cell illustrated in Figure 3 was 0.67, and the
offset was not signiﬁcantly different from 0. Therefore, for this
cell, the pair response can be described as a weighted average of
the responses to the probe and reference stimuli, with the reference stimulus exerting less inﬂuence (0.33) than the probe (0.67).
Note that, for this neuron, the reference stimulus exerted less
inﬂuence than the probe despite the fact that the response to the
reference was larger than the responses to 13 out of 16 probes
(probes with negative selectivity values). Surprisingly, the degree
of inﬂuence exerted by a given stimulus does not seem to depend
only on the magnitude of the response elicited by that stimulus.
Six representative neurons, Experiment 1. A–F, The correlation between
selectivity and sensory interactions, across
16 probes, for one cell. A, The same cell
that appeared in Figure 3 shown for comparison. B–D, Cells whose responses to
pairs showed a greater degree of probe
control (slope . 0.5). E, F, Cells for which
the reference was the dominant stimulus
(slope , 0.5). In all cases, probe–reference
pairs for which the cell was nonselective
showed little or no sensory interactions.
1742 J. Neurosci., March 1, 1999, 19(5):1736–1753
Reynolds et al. • Competitive Attention Mechanisms in Macaque V2 and V4
Although this weighting factor varied from cell to cell, responses to the pair typically conformed to this pattern. Figure 4
shows examples of six cells (including the example from Fig. 3D
for comparison) that illustrate the range of correlations we observed. Across the population, sensory interactions were proportional to selectivity. However, responses to the pair showed
varying degrees of reference–probe sensitivity. For some cells,
such as the one illustrated in Figure 4D, the pair response
depended strongly on reference–probe selectivity (intercept 5
0.05; slope 5 0.8162), indicating that the pair response was
determined primarily by the probe stimulus and not by the reference. For others, such as the cell illustrated in Figure 4F, the
responses to the pairs were approximately equal to the response
to the reference stimulus, regardless of the size of the responses
to the probes (intercept 5 20.006; slope 5 0.11). The cell was
selective for the probes, but there was no corresponding change in
the responses to the pairs, which were approximately equal to the
response to the reference stimulus. Sixteen of 18 cells (89%) had
regression slopes between 0 (pair response equal to the response
to the reference stimulus, regardless of the response to the probe)
and 1 (pair response equal to the response to the probe). The two
cells with slopes outside this range had small slopes (20.07 and
20.06) that were not signiﬁcantly different from 0 [F(1,15) 5
0.1728 and p 5 0.6835; F(1,15) 5 0.0669 and p 5 0.80, respectively]. Across the population, the mean regression intercept was
0.01, which was not signiﬁcantly different from 0 [t(17) 5 0.5619;
p 5 0.5815], indicating that, on average, the addition of the probe
stimulus did not result in a net change in neuronal response that
could not be attributed to the selectivity of the cell for reference
and probe.
When the probe inﬂuenced the neuronal response, it typically
moved the pair response toward the response that was elicited by
the probe alone. Across cells, the neuronal response was signiﬁcantly changed by the addition of the probe for 83 stimulus pairs
tested (two-tailed t test, p , 0.05). For 35 out of 83 (42%) of
these, the probe suppressed the pair response, and for the remaining 48 out of 83 (58%), the probe increased the pair response. Of the 35 pairs for which the probe was signiﬁcantly
suppressive, 34 out of 35 (97%) of these probes were less preferred than was the reference stimulus (i.e., poor probes that
suppressed the neuronal response). Of the 48 pairs for which the
probe increased the response, 37 out of 48 (77%) of these probes
were relatively more preferred than was the reference stimulus
(i.e., preferred probes that increased the neuronal response).
Thus, when the probe caused a signiﬁcant change in the neuronal
response, this change was toward the response elicited by the
probe 86% (71 out of 83 probes) of the time.
These data are incompatible with some possible models of
sensory processing in areas V2 and V4. In particular, we can
eliminate models in which the response to a pair of stimuli is
greater than the response to the preferred stimulus appearing
alone or less than the response to the poor stimulus alone. We can
also eliminate models in which the pair is treated as a third,
independent stimulus, with its own arbitrary response.
Experiment 2
The second experiment was designed to examine the relationship
between (1) selectivity, (2) the sensory interactions resulting from
adding a probe stimulus within the receptive ﬁeld of the cell, and
(3) the effect of directing attention to either the reference or
probe stimulus. In agreement with the ﬁnding of Luck et al.
 , we often observed increases in the spontaneous ﬁring rate
of neurons when attention was directed to a location within the
receptive ﬁeld, during the period before the stimulus appeared.
However, in the present experiment, we were interested in characterizing the effects of attention on neuronal responses evoked
by stimuli within the receptive ﬁeld. Therefore all of the results
described below are based on stimulus-evoked responses.
We recorded in areas V2 and V4, where previous studies have
found attentional modulation of neuronal responses. We measured the responses of 158 neurons in three monkeys (86 in V2; 72
in V4). For some cells, the monkey worked long enough to record
responses from more than one reference–probe pair. Responses
were analyzed for all reference–probe pairs for which reference
and probe each gave signiﬁcant responses, relative to the neuron’s
spontaneous ﬁring rate, with attention directed away from the
receptive ﬁeld of the cell. A total of 208 stimulus pairs in 67 V2
cells and 138 stimulus pairs in 57 V4 cells gave signiﬁcant responses (two-tailed t test, p , 0.05) for both reference and probe.
For these 124 neurons (346 stimulus pairs), we analyzed the
relationship between selectivity and sensory interactions. Consistent with the results of Experiment 1, the effect of adding a probe
depended on the cell’s selectivity for reference and probe. This is
illustrated in Figure 5, which shows the relationship between
selectivity (x-axis) and sensory interactions ( y-axis) for cells in
V2 (Fig. 5A) and V4 (Fig. 5B). In both cortical areas, there is a
strong correlation between selectivity and sensory interactions
[V2, r 2 5 0.58; r 2 signiﬁcantly different from 0, F(1,207) 5 285.9
and p , 0.000001; V4, r 2 5 0.61; r 2 signiﬁcantly different from 0,
F(1,137) 5 213.3 and p , 0.000001]. This relationship appears
linear and passes near the origin (intercept, 20.01 and 10.08 for
V2 and V4, respectively). In V2, the intercept (20.01) is not
signiﬁcantly different from 0 [t(206) 5 21.082; p 5 0.14]. However,
in V4, the intercept (0.08) is signiﬁcantly .0 [t(136) 5 6.1476; p ,
0.000001], indicating that adding the probe stimulus within the
receptive ﬁeld caused an increase in response that does not
depend on the cell’s selectivity for the reference and probe
stimuli. However, the magnitude of this increase is very small,
relative to the changes in response that depend on selectivity for
reference and probe. Both populations have slopes near 0.5
(10.53 and 10.55 for V2 and V4, respectively) that are not
signiﬁcantly different from 0.5 [t(206) 5 1.0395; p 5 0.15; t(136) 5
1.2403; p 5 0.11], indicating that, on average, reference and probe
stimuli exerted approximately equivalent inﬂuence over pair responses. Thus, as in Experiment 1, these results are incompatible
with models in which the response to a pair of stimuli falls outside
the range of responses deﬁned by the two individual stimuli
presented alone. As in Experiment 1, these results are also
incompatible with models in which the pair is treated as a third,
independent stimulus, with its own arbitrary response.
When attention was directed to one of the stimuli, this caused
a substantial reduction in the inﬂuence of the nonattended stimulus. If the neuronal response was reduced as a result of adding
the probe, then this suppressive effect was diminished when
attention was directed to the reference stimulus. Likewise, if
adding the probe increased the neuronal response, then directing
attention to the reference stimulus caused the response to move
back toward the reference stimulus response. This is illustrated in
several ﬁgures (see Figs. 6–9) that show responses of individual
neurons in areas V2 and V4. Figure 6A shows the responses of a
V2 neuron for which adding the probe stimulus reduced the
response. Attention was directed away from the receptive ﬁeld of
the cell (attend-away condition). The reference stimulus elicited a
robust response (Fig. 6A, dotted line). The pair response :1736–1753 1743
dashed line) was strongly suppressed by the presence of the probe
stimulus. The response to the probe (Fig. 6A, solid line) is shown
for comparison. Figure 6B shows the responses of the same
neuron, except that in this case, the dotted line shows the response
of the cell to the pair when attention was directed to the reference
stimulus. The majority of the suppression caused by the probe
stimulus was eliminated when attention was directed to the reference stimulus.
For other neurons, adding the probe stimulus increased the
neuronal response, and this increase was eliminated by attention.
This is illustrated in Figure 7, A and B. This V2 neuron gave a
moderate response to the reference stimulus that was substantially increased by the addition of the probe stimulus. Attention to
the reference stimulus ﬁltered out most of the increase that
resulted from adding the preferred probe. Similar effects were
observed in area V4, as illustrated in Figures 8 and 9. As in V2,
when the response to the probe was lower than the response to the
reference, adding the probe typically suppressed the neuronal
response (Fig. 8). When the response to the probe was higher than
the response to the reference stimulus (see Fig. 9), adding the
probe typically increased the neuronal response. In V4, as in V2,
Relationship between selectivity and sensory interactions recorded in Experiment 2, with attention directed away from the receptive
ﬁeld. A, B, Data from cells in V2 and V4, respectively. Each point
corresponds to the indices of selectivity and sensory interaction computed
for a given reference–probe pair. Responses were computed using a time
window from 120 to 270 msec after stimulus onset. Cells tested with more
than one reference–probe pair appear more than once in the ﬁgure.
Consistent with the results of Experiment 1, a strong positive correlation
between selectivity and sensory interactions, in both cortical areas, was
found. Both best-ﬁt lines passed close to the origin (20.01 and 0.08),
indicating that adding the second stimulus had little effect on the pair
response that was not accounted for by selectivity. Slopes were not
signiﬁcantly different from 0.5, indicating that, across both populations,
the reference and probes exerted approximately equivalent control over
responses to pairs (slopes, 0.53 and 0.55).
Attention ﬁltering out the effect of a suppressive probe in V2.
A, B, The x-axis shows time (in milliseconds) from stimulus onset, and the
thick horizontal bar indicates stimulus duration. The y-axis shows instantaneous ﬁring rate. The vertical bar in the upper right corner shows the
SEM response for this neuron, averaged across experimental conditions.
A, Responses when attention was directed away from the receptive ﬁeld
are shown. Small iconic ﬁgures illustrate sensory conditions. Within each
icon, the dotted line indicates the receptive ﬁeld, and the small dot
represents the ﬁxation point. In this and subsequent ﬁgures, we indicate
the reference stimulus by a vertical bar and the probe by a horizontal bar.
In fact, the identity of both stimuli varied from cell to cell. The dotted line
shows the response to the reference stimulus. The solid line shows the
response elicited by the probe. The response to the pair (dashed line) was
suppressed by the addition of the probe. B, The upper, dotted line shows
the pair response when attention (indicated by the cone symbol) was
directed to the reference stimulus. The responses to the unattended probe
(solid line) and pair (dashed line), taken from A, are repeated for comparison. Attention to the reference stimulus caused the cell’s response to
move upward, toward the response that was elicited by the unattended
reference stimulus presented alone (dotted line in A). Att Away, Attend
away; Att Ref, attend reference.
1744 J. Neurosci., March 1, 1999, 19(5):1736–1753
Reynolds et al. • Competitive Attention Mechanisms in Macaque V2 and V4
the effect of attention was to ﬁlter out the effect of the nonattended stimulus.
Across neurons, adding the probe typically caused the neuronal
response to move toward the response elicited by the probe alone.
This sensory interaction could be magniﬁed by directing attention
to the probe or reduced by directing attention to the reference
stimulus. This is illustrated in Figures 10 and 11, which show the
relationship between selectivity, sensory interactions, and attention in V2 and V4, respectively. Figure 10, A and B, shows the
relationship between selectivity and sensory interactions for neurons whose responses to a given reference–probe pair showed a
statistically signiﬁcant change in response when attention was
directed to the probe stimulus, as determined by a two-tailed,
unpaired t test ( p , 0.05). For neurons tested with more than one
reference–probe pair, each pair was tested independently. A
given pair was included if the response elicited by the pair
changed signiﬁcantly when attention was directed to the probe
stimulus. Therefore, some neurons appear more than once, if
more than one pair elicited a response that was signiﬁcantly
changed by attention to the probe. A total of 55 out of 67 neurons
(82%) tested with 96 out of 208 reference–probe pairs (46%)
showed statistically signiﬁcant changes in their responses to pairs
when attention was directed to the probe stimulus.
The increased inﬂuence of the attended probe stimulus can be
observed by comparing data in Figure 10, A and B. Figure 10A
shows the relationship between selectivity and sensory interaction
when attention was directed away from the receptive ﬁeld. The
indices are correlated (r 2 5 0.60), and the relationship appears
linear. The slope was 0.47, which was not statistically different
from 0.5 [t(94) 5 20.6704; p 5 0.2521], indicating that, with
attention directed away from the receptive ﬁeld, reference and
probe stimuli exerted approximately equal inﬂuence over neuronal responses. The intercept of the best-ﬁt line (20.04) was
slightly but signiﬁcantly ,0 [t(94) 5 22.4731; p 5 0.0076]. For this
subpopulation, adding a second stimulus within the receptive ﬁeld
caused a small (4% of maximum response) reduction in mean
response, in addition to the larger changes in ﬁring rate that were
related to selectivity.
When attention was directed to the probe stimulus, this magniﬁed the sensory interactions caused by the probe. This is re-
ﬂected in a steeper relationship between selectivity and sensory
interaction indices. Figure 10B shows the indices for the same
cells shown in Figure 10A, but in this case, the pair responses
used to compute the sensory interaction indices were measured
Attention ﬁltering out the effect of an enhancing probe in V2.
The format is identical to that in Figure 6. A, With attention directed away
from the receptive ﬁeld, this cell gave a moderate response to the
reference stimulus (dotted line). The response elicited by the probe (solid
line) was much higher, and the addition of the probe drove up the
response to the pair (dashed line). B, When attention was directed to the
reference stimulus, the pair response (dotted line) was reduced to a level
comparable with the response to the unattended reference stimulus (dotted line in A). The response to the unattended pair (dashed line) and the
probe (solid line) are repeated from A for comparison.
Attention ﬁltering out the effect of a suppressive probe in V4.
The format is identical to that in Figure 6. A, With attention directed
away, the response to the reference stimulus (dotted line) was suppressed
(response to pair, dashed line) by the addition of the probe (response to
probe, solid line). B, Attention to the reference stimulus drove the pair
response (dotted line) toward the response elicited by the unattended
reference stimulus presented alone (dotted line in A).
Reynolds et al. • Competitive Attention Mechanisms in Macaque V2 and V4
J. Neurosci., March 1, 1999, 19(5):1736–1753 1745
when attention was directed to the probe. Attention increased the
slope of the regression line, from 0.47 to 0.69 (increase of 0.22).
A comparison of the regression slopes indicated that this increase was signiﬁcant [F(1,190) 5 14.4;
p 5 0.0002]. This increased slope was also signiﬁcantly different
from 0.5 [t(94) 5 3.1946; p 5 0.0001], indicating that when attention was directed to the probe stimulus, the probe exerted greater
inﬂuence over the pair response. In addition to this change of
slope, there was a small (0.066) but signiﬁcant increase in the
average response to the pair [unpaired t test, t(95) 5 2.3052; p 5
0.02]. This is reﬂected in an upward shift in the best-ﬁt line. Thus,
in addition to the magniﬁed inﬂuence of the attended probe,
attention caused an increase in response that was unrelated to
selectivity. Selectivity and sensory interactions were still strongly
correlated (r 2 5 0.59) with attention directed to the probe
When attention was directed to the reference stimulus, this
caused the pair response to move toward the response elicited by
the reference stimulus alone. This is illustrated in Figure 10, C
and D, which shows the relationship between selectivity and
sensory interactions for neurons whose responses to a given
reference–probe pair changed signiﬁcantly when attention was
directed to the reference stimulus. As in the previous analysis,
signiﬁcance was determined by a two-tailed, unpaired t test ( p ,
0.05). A total of 56 out of 67 neurons (84%) using 97 out of 208
reference–probe pairs (47%) showed statistically signiﬁcant
changes in the pair response when attention was directed to the
reference stimulus.
Figure 10C shows, for this population, that the relationship
again appears to be linear. The intercept (20.04) was slightly but
signiﬁcantly ,0 [t(95) 5 22.5228; p 5 0.0067]. The slope (0.55)
was not signiﬁcantly different from 0.5 [t(95) 5 1.2924; p 5 0.0997],
indicating that, across this subpopulation, reference and probe
exerted approximately equivalent inﬂuence over neuronal responses with attention directed away from the receptive ﬁeld.
The increased inﬂuence of the attended reference stimulus is
evident in the reduced slope in Figure 10D. This graph shows
indices for the same population of cells shown in Figure 10C, but
in this case, the pair response used to compute each sensory
interaction index was recorded when attention was directed to the
reference stimulus. The slope dropped from 0.55 in the attendaway condition (Fig. 10C) to 0.24 with attention directed to the
reference stimulus (Fig. 10D; a reduction of 0.31). This reduction
in slope was signiﬁcant [F(1,192) 5 22.16; p 5 0.000005]. The
reduced slope was also signiﬁcantly different from 0.5 [t(95) 5
24.4587; p 5 0.00001], indicating that, with attention directed to
the reference stimulus, the reference exerted greater inﬂuence
over the pair response. The reduced inﬂuence of the probe
stimulus is also reﬂected in a diminished correlation coefﬁcient,
from r 2 5 0.67 with attention directed away from the receptive
ﬁeld to r 2 5 0.16 with attention directed to the reference stimulus. As with attention directed to the probe (Fig. 10B), there was
a small (0.04) increase in the mean response to the pairs, but this
was not statistically signiﬁcant [unpaired t test, t(96) 5 1.3993;
p 5 0.16].
In summary, across V2 cells that showed signiﬁcant attentional
modulation, attention strongly determined which stimulus drove
the cell’s response to the pair. When attention was directed to the
probe stimulus, the pair response was a weighted average of 69%
of the response to the probe plus 31% of the response to the
reference stimulus. When attention was directed to the reference
stimulus, the pair response was a weighted average of 24% of the
response to the probe plus 76% of the response to the reference
stimulus. In addition, there was a small (4–6%) and marginally
signiﬁcant increase in mean ﬁring rate that was unrelated to the
individual stimulus responses.
The average effect of attention was reduced when computed
over the entire population, including responses to pairs that were
not signiﬁcantly modulated by attention. Across this entire population, the sensory interaction/selectivity slope with attention
directed away from the receptive ﬁeld was 0.53. The slope increased by 0.14 to 0.67 when attention was directed to the probe
and decreased by 0.19 to 0.34 when attention was directed to the
reference stimulus. The total shift, from 0.67 down to 0.34 (a shift
of 0.33), was 27% smaller when computed over the entire population than was the shift of 0.45 observed for responses that
showed signiﬁcant attention effects.
Figure 11 shows comparable results for neurons recorded in
area V4. A total of 39 out of 57 neurons (68%) tested with 61 out
of 138 reference–probe pairs (44%) showed a signiﬁcant (twotailed t test, p , 0.05) change in pair response when attention was
directed to the probe. The relationship between selectivity and
sensory interactions appears linear. With attention directed away
from the receptive ﬁeld (see Fig. 11A), the selectivity and sensory
interaction indices for these neurons are correlated (r 2 5 0.55),
Attention ﬁltering out the effect of an enhancing probe in V4.
The format is identical to that in Figure 6. A, With attention directed away
from the receptive ﬁeld, the moderate response to the reference stimulus
(dotted line) was increased (response to pair, dashed line) by the addition
of the probe (response to probe, solid line). B, This increase was diminished when attention was directed to the reference stimulus (response to
pair, with attention to reference stimulus, dotted line).
1746 J. Neurosci., March 1, 1999, 19(5):1736–1753
Reynolds et al. • Competitive Attention Mechanisms in Macaque V2 and V4
and the slope of the best-ﬁt line was 0.49. This slope was not
signiﬁcantly different from 0.5 [t(59) 5 20.1663; p 5 0.4343],
indicating equivalent inﬂuence of reference and probe with attention directed away from the receptive ﬁeld. The best-ﬁt line
was shifted slightly but signiﬁcantly [t(59) 5 2.8226; p 5 0.0032]
upward (10.06), indicating that, in addition to sensory interactions related to selectivity, the addition of the second stimulus
caused a small increase in response. With attention directed to
the probe (Fig. 11B), the indices were still highly correlated (r 2 5
0.60). As in V2, attention to the probe signiﬁcantly increased the
slope, from 0.49 to 0.83 [increase of 0.34; F(1,120) 5 22.618; p 5
0.000006]. The increased slope was also signiﬁcantly different
from a slope of 0.5 [t(59) 5 3.7178; p 5 0.0002], indicating greater
inﬂuence by the attended probe.
As in area V2, attending to the reference stimulus typically
caused the pair response to move toward the response that was
elicited by the reference stimulus. A total of 37 out of 57 neurons
(65%) in 59 out of 138 stimulus conﬁgurations (43%) showed a
signiﬁcant effect of directing attention to the reference stimulus.
For these cells (Fig. 11C), the relationship between selectivity and
sensory interaction appears linear. The best-ﬁt line was shifted
slightly upward (10.06), indicating that the addition of the second
stimulus caused an increase in response that was unrelated to
selectivity [t(57) 5 3.0362; p 5 0.0018]. The slope of the best-ﬁt
line was 0.6, which was signiﬁcantly .0.5 [t(57) 5 1.8835; p 5
0.0324]. This indicates that for this subpopulation, there was a
small but marginally signiﬁcant bias in favor of the probe stimulus
with attention directed away from the receptive ﬁeld. Note that
probe and reference stimuli were selected daily from the same
stimulus set, and it was impossible to know in advance which of
two stimuli would exert greater control over the pair response.
Therefore, we can only assume that for this subset of neurons, we
happened to pick probes that exerted, on average, slightly greater
inﬂuence over responses to the pairs than did the corresponding
reference stimuli.
Attention to the reference stimulus overcame this bias, as
reﬂected by the reduced slope in Figure 11D. Directing attention
to the reference signiﬁcantly [F(1,116) 5 20.796; p 5 0.00001]
decreased the slope from 0.60 down to 0.21 (decrease of 0.39).
The reduced slope was also signiﬁcantly different from 0.5 [t(57) 5
23.2059; p 5 0.0011], indicating greater inﬂuence by the attended
reference stimulus. As in V2, the reduced inﬂuence of the unattended probe stimulus was also reﬂected in a diminished correlation coefﬁcient, from r 2 5 0.66 with attention directed away
from the receptive ﬁeld to r 2 5 0.09 with attention directed to the
reference stimulus. There were also small but signiﬁcant increases
in the average response, when attention was directed to the probe
stimulus [mean shift 5 0.13; unpaired t test, t(60) 5 3.8168; p 5
0.0003] or to the reference stimulus [mean shift 5 0.10; unpaired
t test, t(58) 5 3.7941; p 5 0.0004]. These increases are reﬂected in
an upward shift of the best-ﬁt lines (Fig. 11B,D).
In summary, across V4 cells that showed signiﬁcant atten-
Figure 10.
V2 neurons showing attention effects.
A, The relationship of sensory interaction indices
( y-axis) to selectivity indices (x-axis) when attention was directed away from the receptive ﬁeld.
All stimulus pairs were included that elicited a
response that changed signiﬁcantly (two-tailed t
test, p , 0.05) when attention was directed to the
probe stimulus. B, Same population that is shown
in A. Directing attention to the probe stimulus
caused the probe to have enhanced inﬂuence over
the pair response, as reﬂected in the increased
slope (slope, 0.69 vs 0.47 with attention directed
away from the receptive ﬁeld in A). C, The relationship of selectivity to sensory interaction indices when attention was directed away from the
receptive ﬁeld. All stimulus pairs were included
that elicited a response that changed signiﬁcantly
(two-tailed t test, p , 0.05) when attention was
directed to the reference stimulus. D, Same population that is shown in C. Directing attention to
the reference stimulus caused the probe to have
diminished inﬂuence over the pair response, as
reﬂected in the decreased slope (slope, 0.24 vs
0.55 with attention directed away from the receptive ﬁeld in C). Some cells were tested with more
than one pair of stimuli, so some cells appear
more than once. All responses were computed
using a time window from 120 to 270 msec after
stimulus onset.
Reynolds et al. • Competitive Attention Mechanisms in Macaque V2 and V4
J. Neurosci., March 1, 1999, 19(5):1736–1753 1747
tional modulation, we observed a shift of control that was
comparable in magnitude with the shift observed in V2. When
attention was directed to the probe stimulus, the pair response
was a weighted average of 83% of the response to the probe
plus 17% of the response to the reference stimulus. When
attention was directed to the reference stimulus, the pair
response was a weighted average of 21% of the response to the
probe plus 79% of the response to the reference stimulus. In
addition, there was a small (10–13%) but signiﬁcant increase in
mean ﬁring rate that was unrelated to the individual stimulus
responses.
As in V2, the average effect of attention was reduced when
computed over the entire population, including responses to pairs
that were not signiﬁcantly modulated by attention. Across the
entire V4 population, the sensory interaction/selectivity slope
with attention directed away from the receptive ﬁeld was 0.55.
The slope increased by 0.19 to 0.74 when attention was directed to
the probe and decreased by 0.21 to 0.34 when attention was
directed to the reference stimulus. The total shift, from 0.74 down
to 0.34 (a shift of 0.40), was 35% smaller when computed over the
entire population than was the shift of 0.62 observed for responses that showed signiﬁcant attention effects.
Although these data indicate that when attention effects
were observed, their direction and magnitude depended on the
direction and magnitude of underlying sensory interactions, it
was not the case that sensory interactions alone guaranteed the
presence of attention effects. In both areas, we regularly found
stimulus pairs for which the addition of the probe caused
signiﬁcant sensory interactions, with no corresponding effect of
directing attention to the reference stimulus. A total of 48 out
of 208 stimulus pairs tested in area V2 (23%) and 34 out of 138
stimulus pairs tested in area V4 (25%) caused sensory interactions that were not accompanied by attention effects. Thus,
when attention is directed to a stimulus, the responses of some
neurons continue to be inﬂuenced by the presence of the
unattended stimulus.
Model simulation results
A simple neural circuit that satisﬁes the constraints imposed by
the data from Experiments 1 and 2 is illustrated in Figure 2 and
is described in detail in Materials and Methods. To test whether
the model is consistent with the results of Experiment 1, we
simulated a total of 100 model neurons, differing only in their
randomly assigned weights. For each model neuron, we computed
the response to the reference stimulus alone, the responses to
each of the 16 probes, and the responses to each of the resulting
stimulus pairs. Selectivity and sensory interaction indices were
then computed for each probe. These indices are shown for six
representative model neurons in Figure 12 (compare with data in
Fig. 4). Across the population, the median slope was 10.506,
indicating that, on average, reference and probe exerted approximately equivalent inﬂuence over the model neuron’s responses
Figure 11.
V4 neurons showing attention effects. A,
The relationship of sensory interaction indices ( yaxis) to selectivity indices (x-axis) when attention
was directed away from the receptive ﬁeld. All stimulus pairs were included that elicited a response that
changed signiﬁcantly (two-tailed t test, p , 0.05)
when attention was directed to the probe stimulus. B,
Same population that is shown in A. Directing attention to the probe stimulus caused the probe to have
enhanced inﬂuence over the pair response, as re-
ﬂected in the increased slope (slope, 0.83 vs 0.49 with
attention directed away from the receptive ﬁeld in
A). C, The relationship of selectivity to sensory interaction indices when attention was directed away
from the receptive ﬁeld. All stimulus pairs were
included that elicited a response that changed significantly (two-tailed t test, p , 0.05) when attention
was directed to the reference stimulus. D, Same
population that is shown in C. Directing attention to
the reference stimulus caused the probe to have
diminished inﬂuence over the pair response, as re-
ﬂected in the decreased slope (slope, 0.21 vs 0.60
with attention directed away from the receptive ﬁeld
in C). Some cells were tested with more than one
pair of stimuli, so some cells appear more than once.
All responses were computed using a time window
from 120 to 270 msec after stimulus onset.
1748 J. Neurosci., March 1, 1999, 19(5):1736–1753
Reynolds et al. • Competitive Attention Mechanisms in Macaque V2 and V4
to the pair. However, as we observed for the cells recorded in
Experiment 1, some model neurons (such as those shown in Fig.
12B–D) had steeper slopes, whereas others (such as those in Fig.
12E,F) had shallower slopes, corresponding to a greater inﬂuence of the probe and reference, respectively.
According to the model, this range of slopes is the result of
differences in the strength of the (randomly chosen) projections
from the population of input neurons that respond to the reference stimulus. Cells for which the reference stimulus had weak
projections (such as those illustrated in Fig. 12B–D) had steeper
slopes because the probe stimuli made up the majority of the
input to the cell. Cells for which the reference stimulus projections were stronger (such as those illustrated in Fig. 12E,F) had
shallower slopes because responses to pairs were dominated by
the inputs from the reference stimulus.
Figure 13 shows the results of simulating Experiment 2 (i.e.,
the effects of attention). Again, 100 model neurons were simulated with the same parameters used to simulate Experiment 1.
As in the previous simulation, excitatory and inhibitory weights
were chosen at random for both the reference and the probe
stimuli. Figure 13A shows a scatter plot of these indices. As in the
recording data (compare with data in Figs. 10A,C, 11A,C), when
attention was directed away from the receptive ﬁeld, the slope of
the best-ﬁt line relating selectivity and sensory interactions for
the model neurons was ;0.5. The reference and probe had
approximately equal inﬂuence over the pair response. The best-ﬁt
line passes near the origin (10.07), indicating that there was a
small increase in response beyond that depending on selectivity.
To simulate Experiment 2, we modeled the effect of attention
by increasing the strength of inputs driven by the attended stimulus, as described in Materials and Methods. Figure 13B shows
the indices of selectivity and sensory interaction that were computed when attention was directed to the probe stimulus. As in
the experimental data (compare with data in Figs. 10B, 11B),
attention caused a moderate increase in the mean ﬁring rate
across model neurons. This is reﬂected in an upward shift (10.10)
in the line relating sensory interactions to selectivity, similar to
the upward shifts of 10.06 and 10.11 that were observed in V2
and V4, respectively. In contrast to the small change in intercept,
there was a large effect of attention on the slope, which increased
from 0.52 to 0.78 (increase 10.26), reﬂecting enhanced inﬂuence
of the attended probe stimulus. This increase in slope is comparable with the increases measured in V2 (10.22) and V4 (10.34).
Figure 13C shows the effect of directing attention to the refer-
Figure 12.
Model simulation of Experiment
1. Each panel (A–F) shows the relationship
between sensory interactions ( y-axis) and selectivity (x-axis) for a single model neuron
tested with 16 probe stimuli. By varying only
randomly selected excitatory and inhibitory
weights, the model generates slopes that span
the range observed in Experiment 1. Compare
with Figure 4. Simulations are fully described
in Materials and Methods.
Reynolds et al. • Competitive Attention Mechanisms in Macaque V2 and V4
J. Neurosci., March 1, 1999, 19(5):1736–1753 1749
ence stimulus. Attending to the reference resulted in a small
(10.04) upward shift in the line relating sensory interaction to
selectivity, which is comparable with upward shifts of 10.06 and
10.11 observed in V2 and V4, respectively. Again, the change in
intercept was small, compared with the reduction in slope that
occurred when attention was directed to the reference stimulus.
Attention drove the slope from 0.52 down to 0.18, reﬂecting the
reduced inﬂuence of the probe stimulus when attention was
directed to the reference stimulus (compare with data in Figs.
10D, 11D). This change in slope (20.34) is comparable with the
changes observed in V2 (20.31) and V4 (20.39).
These model predictions are robust in that they do not depend
on many parameters that are ﬁne-tuned to achieve an adequate
ﬁt. Rather, the magnitudes of attention effects relate directly to
individual parameters of the model. The predicted magnitude of
the upward shift is a function of the passive decay parameter A.
If the model neuron has a larger rate of passive decay, its equilibrium response rate is further below its saturation response.
Therefore a given increase in input strength resulting from attention causes a greater increase in response and a larger upward
shift in the line relating sensory interactions to selectivity. The
size of the predicted change in slope depends on the magnitude of
the magniﬁcation factor that is applied to the strength of the
inputs from the attended stimulus. A larger magniﬁcation factor
causes the pair response to move further toward the response
elicited by the attended stimulus, resulting in a larger change in
DISCUSSION
In Experiment 1, we found that, during passive ﬁxation, the
neuronal response to a pair of oriented bars depends linearly on
the responses to the individual bars. If reference and probe are
selected to give identical responses, then the pair response is
typically indistinguishable from the responses to the individual
stimuli. However, if the orientation and color of the probe are
adjusted to cause it to elicit a larger response than that of the
reference stimulus, the pair response typically increases. The
magnitude of this increase grows in proportion to the response
elicited by the probe. Changing the probe to a nonpreferred
orientation or color typically reduces the pair response. As the
probe becomes more nonpreferred, it typically becomes proportionally more suppressive. Thus, the degree of inﬂuence exerted
by a stimulus over the neuronal response to the pair is not simply
proportional to the magnitude of the response evoked by that
stimulus. Instead, the inﬂuence exerted by a stimulus and the
response it elicits when presented alone must be considered to be
separate variables. These ﬁndings were replicated in Experiment
2 with attention directed away from the receptive ﬁeld.
In Experiment 2, we found that when attention is directed to
one of two receptive ﬁeld stimuli, its effect depends on these
underlying sensory interactions. In the absence of sensory interactions, attention to either individual stimulus typically is limited
to a moderate increase in mean response. When sensory interactions do occur, the magnitude and direction of the observed
attention effects depend on the magnitude and direction of the
underlying sensory interactions. If the addition of the probe
suppresses the neuronal response, then attention to the reference
stimulus typically ﬁlters out some of this suppression. If adding
the probe facilitates the response, attention to the reference
typically ﬁlters out some of this facilitation. Attending to the
probe magniﬁes the change that was induced by the addition of
the probe.
These linear relationships between selectivity, sensory interactions, and attention effects provide several constraints on the set
of possible models of ventral stream visual processing. Because of
the many stages of complex processing that occur between the
retina and cortical areas such as V2 and V4, these constraints
narrowly circumscribe the set of possible models. However, as our
simulations show, these results can be understood within the
context of the proposed model.
Figure 13.
Model simulation of Experiment 2. A, The sensory interaction and selectivity indices of 100 model neurons simulated with no
attentional bias either to the probe or to the reference stimulus. Compare
with Figures 10, A and C, and 11, A and C. B, The indices of the same 100
model neurons with an attentional bias added to the probe stimuli.
Compare with Figures 10B and 11B. C, The same population of 100
model neurons with an attentional bias added to the reference stimulus.
Compare with Figures 10D and 11D. The magnitude and direction of
changes in slope and vertical offset are comparable with those observed in
Experiment 2. Simulations are fully described in Materials and Methods.
1750 J. Neurosci., March 1, 1999, 19(5):1736–1753
Reynolds et al. • Competitive Attention Mechanisms in Macaque V2 and V4
Model predictions
In addition to providing a way to satisfy these constraints, the
model also makes predictions about neuronal responses under
conditions that were not tested in the present experiments. First,
it predicts the conditions under which attention to a single receptive ﬁeld stimulus should result in an increase in neuronal response.
bottom-up drive reaching the measured neuron, which forces the
neuron’s response upward, toward its maximum ﬁring rate for
that particular stimulus. If the bottom-up inputs driven by a
particular stimulus are strong enough that the cell’s response has
saturated, then attention is predicted to have no inﬂuence on the
response. However, if the response is not saturated, then attention is predicted to increase it. Thus, a prediction of the model is
that attention should increase neuronal responses to stimuli that
elicit responses within the dynamic range of the cell. These would
include stimuli that activate populations of afferents that project
weakly to the measured cell or stimuli of low brightness or color
In addition, the model makes a novel prediction about how
neuronal responses should depend on the relative salience of two
receptive ﬁeld stimuli, when attention is directed away from the
receptive ﬁeld. Speciﬁcally, if the salience of one receptive ﬁeld
stimulus is increased relative to the salience of another receptive
ﬁeld stimulus, this should cause the pair response to move toward
the response elicited by the ﬁrst stimulus. For example, suppose
the response to a preferred stimulus is suppressed by the addition
of a less-preferred stimulus. Then, according to the model, increasing the luminance contrast of the less-preferred stimulus
should increase the strength of the inputs from that stimulus,
resulting in greater suppression of the response to the pair. This
is predicted to occur even when the less-preferred stimulus elicits
a signiﬁcant excitatory response on its own. Finally, the model
predicts that the increased inﬂuence of the more salient stimulus
can be offset if attention is directed to the lower salience stimulus.
Baseline shift
The model can also account for a number of previously reported
results, such as the observation that the
spontaneous ﬁring rate of V2 and V4 neurons increases when
attention is directed to a location within the receptive ﬁeld.
According to the model, attention increases the efﬁcacy of synapses projecting from afferent neurons whose receptive ﬁelds are
at the attended location. As a result of this increase, spontaneous
activity among these afferents is predicted to be better able to
activate the measured neuron, resulting in higher spontaneous
activity in the measured neuron. If the synapses of inputs projecting from the afferent neurons are weak or sparse, this shift in
baseline ﬁring rate is predicted to be small. It is predicted to be
larger for afferents with stronger projections to the measured cell.
In agreement with this prediction, Luck et al. found that
the increase in spontaneous activity is larger when attention is
directed to the center of the receptive ﬁeld (stronger afferent
projections) versus a position near the edge of the receptive ﬁeld
(weaker afferent projections).
Attention to a single receptive ﬁeld stimulus
The model is also consistent with previously reported spatial
attention effects in the ventral stream using single stimuli within
the receptive ﬁeld . These studies have reported no change or
small increases in responsiveness with attention directed to the
receptive ﬁeld stimulus. These ﬁndings are compatible with the
model’s prediction that increases in response will be observed for
a single stimulus, provided the stimulus has not already saturated
the neuronal response. With the same parameters used to simulate the results of the present experiments, the model predicts a
mean increase of 17.5% in neuronal response to a single stimulus
with attention, which falls within the range of effects reported in
these studies.
According to the model, these increases in response should
depend on the magnitude of the attentional signal. Stronger
top-down attentional feedback is assumed to result in larger
increases in input strength for the attended stimulus. Therefore,
the magnitude of the response increase caused by attention to a
single stimulus in a difﬁcult task is predicted to be equal to or
greater than any increase observed in an easy task, using identical
stimuli. In agreement with this, Spitzer et al. reported
moderate (18%) increases in neuronal responsiveness in V4 when
attention was directed to a single stimulus in a difﬁcult discrimination task but not in a less-demanding task.
Three additional spatial attention studies conducted with a
single receptive ﬁeld stimulus should be considered within the
context of the present results. Motter has reported that in
the ventral stream, attention to a stimulus inside the receptive
ﬁeld can cause increases or decreases in response when stimuli
appear outside the receptive ﬁeld. Connor et al. have
reported that the response to a single receptive ﬁeld stimulus can
increase or decrease, depending on which of several extrareceptive ﬁeld stimuli is attended. One possible explanation for both of
these ﬁndings is that attention modulated sensory interactions
resulting from the addition of the extrareceptive ﬁeld stimuli.
None of these studies compared the response of the receptive
ﬁeld stimulus with and without the extrareceptive ﬁeld stimuli,
with attention directed away from the receptive ﬁeld. Therefore,
it is unknown whether the extrareceptive ﬁeld stimuli induced
sensory interactions. However, extrareceptive ﬁeld stimuli are
known to modulate the responses of cells in the areas examined
in these studies. Cells in V4, for example, have large, stimulusselective, silent surrounds that can be either inhibitory or excitatory . Because of the relationship
between attention effects and sensory interactions demonstrated
in the present experiment, it would be useful to know whether the
attention effects observed in these three studies were accompanied by sensory interactions resulting from the presence of the
extrareceptive ﬁeld stimuli.
Comparing these results with those of previous
experiments with multiple receptive ﬁeld stimuli
The attention effects observed in the present experiment are
compatible with those of previous studies that have examined the
effect of attention when multiple stimuli appeared within the
receptive ﬁelds of neurons in the ventral stream . These studies have found
neuronal responses to be larger when attention was directed to
the preferred stimulus relative to when the poor stimulus was
attended. Among these studies, the experiment that is more
closely related to the present experiment is the study of Luck et
al. , which used the same stimuli and the same behavioral
task. Luck et al. reported that, among V4 neurons that
showed attention effects, responses were, on average, 63% higher
when attention was directed to the preferred stimulus than when
attention was directed to the poor stimulus. Using the same
selection criteria, we ﬁnd that, on average, responses were 69%
Reynolds et al. • Competitive Attention Mechanisms in Macaque V2 and V4
J. Neurosci., March 1, 1999, 19(5):1736–1753 1751
higher. We ﬁnd attention effects of comparable magnitude in area
V2, where, on average, responses to stimulus pairs were 79%
higher when attention was directed to the preferred stimulus
relative to when attention was directed to the poor stimulus.
The remaining studies of attention in the ventral stream did not
explicitly manipulate spatial attention. Instead, they manipulated
nonspatial variables such as whether the stimuli matched the form
of a cue or whether the monkey was
engaged in a particular task . In these
studies, the stimulus-evoked responses and/or baseline ﬁring
rates of neurons were found to vary depending on behavioral
condition, but the relationship between such nonspatial attention
effects and the ﬁndings of the present study is not yet clear.
The purpose and limitations of the model
The biased-competition model provides a uniﬁed, quantitative
framework within which to place a number of observed and
predicted attention effects. However, our implementation of this
model is not intended to be an account of the actual neural
circuitry underlying visual attention. Many of the details of this
circuitry are simply unknown. For instance, the source of the
biasing feedback is unknown, as are the neural elements that are
the targets of feedback in the cortex. In the absence of detailed
knowledge of the circuitry underlying attention, it is not yet
possible to distinguish between a number of alternative models.
These include models that implement competitive interactions
using lateral inhibitory connections and that assume that the
attentional bias is mediated either by a direct excitatory signal or
by invoking synchronous discharge among cells whose receptive
ﬁelds overlap with the focus of attention . Our purpose in providing a simple
but mathematically complete implementation of the biasedcompetition model is to provide a demonstration proof that
biased competition can satisfy the constraints imposed by the
present experiments while remaining compatible with results that
have been reported using single receptive ﬁeld stimuli. Because it
is simple, has a closed-form solution, and depends on only three
parameters, it is possible to use the model to make quantitative
predictions that can be tested experimentally, to refute the
model, or to determine better how it is implemented in the brain.
Biased competition in the dorsal stream
Recent experiments suggest that similar mechanisms may be at
work in the dorsal stream. Ferrera and Lisberger have
found that the onset time of a smooth pursuit eye movement to a
target moving in one direction can be increased by the presence
of a distractor moving in the opposite direction or reduced by the
presence of a distractor moving with the target. They have modeled this result using a winner-take-all competitive network that
receives top-down feedback that biases competition between the
target and distractor. They have also found that the responses of
some neurons in areas MT and MST to a moving stimulus depend
on whether the stimulus is a target of a smooth pursuit eye
movement and have suggested that
this might reﬂect a top-down biasing signal. In related experiments, Treue and Maunsell have found that attention
modulates the responses of directionally selective neurons in
areas MT and MST. They found that the response to a single
stimulus is increased in magnitude when the stimulus is attended.
However, larger attention effects were observed when attention
was directed to one of two receptive ﬁeld stimuli. When attention
was directed to a dot moving in the neuron’s preferred direction
of motion, the response was greater than when attention was
directed to a dot moving in the opposite direction. Recanzone et
al. have found that neurons in areas MT and MST respond
to pairs of stimuli in a manner that is highly consistent with what
we have found in the ventral stream; namely, the response to a
stimulus moving in a nonpreferred direction was increased by the
addition of a second stimulus moving in the preferred direction.
Likewise, the response to a stimulus moving in a non-null direction for the cell was suppressed by the addition of a stimulus
moving in the null direction. Taken together, these results seem
to suggest that biased competition may be a basic computational
strategy that has been adopted throughout the visual system and
possibly in other modalities as well.