26 March 2025
The ventriloquist effect results from near-optimal bimodal integration / ALAIS D.; D. BURR. - In: CURRENT
BIOLOGY. - ISSN 0960-9822. - STAMPA. - 14: , pp. 257-262.
Original Citation:
The ventriloquist effect results from near-optimal bimodal
integration
Terms of use:
Publisher copyright claim:
(Article begins on next page)
La data sopra indicata si riferisce all'ultimo aggiornamento della scheda del Repository FloRe - The abovementioned date refers to the last update of the record in the Institutional Repository FloRe
La pubblicazione è resa disponibile sotto le norme e i termini della licenza di deposito, secondo quanto
stabilito dalla Policy per l'accesso aperto dell'Università degli Studi di Firenze
 
Availability:
The webpage of the repository was last updated on
Questa è la Versione finale referata (Post print/Accepted manuscript) della seguente pubblicazione:
Repository istituzionale dell'Università degli Studi
di Firenze
Open Access
Current Biology, Vol. 14, 257–262, February 3, 2004, 2004 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved. DOI 10.1016/j.cub.2004.01.029
The Ventriloquist Effect Results
from Near-Optimal Bimodal Integration
Results for the various unimodal location discriminations for naive observer L.M. are shown in Figure 1A.
The curves plot the proportion of trials in which the
David Alais1,2 and David Burr1,3,*
1Istituto di Neuroscienze del CNR
56127 Pisa
second stimulus was seen to the left of the first, as
a function of actual physical displacement. Following
2Auditory Neuroscience Laboratory
Department of Physiology
standard practice, the data were fitted with cumulative
Gaussian functions free to vary in position and width:
University of Sydney
New South Wales 2006
the position of the median (50% leftward) is termed
the point of subjective equality (PSE), and the width 
3Department of Psychology
represents the estimate of localization accuracy (presumed to depend on internal noise). For all unimodal
University of Florence
50125 Florence
conditions, the PSE was near 0, but  varied considerably. For visual stimuli,  was smallest (approximately
1) for the smallest Gaussian blobs and largest (approximately 20) for the largest (in line with the results of ).
Localization accuracy for the auditory click was around
6, falling midway between the various visual stimuli.
Note that this poor localization does not necessarily
Ventriloquism is the ancient art of making one’s voice
reflect performance under natural or “free-field” condiappear to come from elsewhere, an art exploited by
tions where all auditory cues (including intensity differthe Greek and Roman oracles, and possibly earlier
ences and monaural cues) are available. Free-field local-
 . We regularly experience the effect when watching
ization of spectrally rich stimuli such as click trains
television and movies, where the voices seem to emaproduces discrimination thresholds on the order of 1
nate from the actors’ lips rather than from the actual
sound source. Originally, ventriloquism was explained
With unimodal thresholds established, we then meaby performers projecting sound to their puppets by
sured localization for a blob and click presented simultaspecial techniques , but more recently it is assumed
neously. Observers were asked to envisage each prethat ventriloquism results from vision “capturing”
sentation as a single event, like a ball hitting the screen,
sound . In this study we investigate spatial localand report which of the two presentations was more
ization of audio-visual stimuli. When visual localization
leftward. For one presentation (randomly first or secis good, vision does indeed dominate and capture
ond), the visual and auditory stimuli were in conflict,
sound. However, for severely blurred visual stimuli
with the visual stimulus displaced  degrees rightward
(that are poorly localized), the reverse holds: sound
and the auditory stimulus displaced  degrees leftward
captures vision. For less blurred stimuli, neither sense
(SV  SA  2, where SV and SA are the spatial positions
dominates and perception follows the mean position.
of the visual and auditory stimuli). The average position
Precision of bimodal localization is usually better than
of this stimulus was always zero, as in previous studies
either the visual or the auditory unimodal presentation.
 . On the other (non-conflict) presentation, the two
All the results are well explained not by one sense
modalities were covaried to the left or right of center by
capturing the other, but by a simple model of optimal
the amount shown in the abscissa (with positive meancombination of visual and auditory information.
ing rightward).
The different colored symbols in Figures 1B–1D show
Results and Discussion
results for   5, 2.5, or 0. The pattern of results
depended critically on blob size, which increases
Observers were required to localize in space brief light
through (B)–(D). For small blob widths (4; Figure 1B),
“blobs” or sound “clicks,” presented either separately
the curves were displaced systematically in the direction
(unimodally) or together (bimodally). In a given trial, two
of  (to the side where the visual stimulus was dissets of stimuli were presented successively (separated
placed), suggesting that vision dominated the perceived
by a 500 ms pause) and observers were asked to indicate
position of the incongruent stimuli (the ventriloquist efwhich appeared to be more to the left, guessing if unsure.
fect). However, for large blobs (64; Figure 1D), the re-
The visual stimuli were low-contrast (10%) Gaussian blobs
verse held, with the curves displaced in the opposite
of various widths, back-projected for 15 ms onto a transdirection of , indicating that the click dominated perlucent perspex screen (80  110 cm) subtending 90 
ceived position, an “inverse ventriloquist effect.” For the
108 when viewed binocularly from 40 cm. The auditory
mid-sized blobs (32; Figure 1C), the curves tended to
stimuli were brief (1.5 ms) clicks presented though two
cluster together, suggesting that the perceived position
visible high-quality speakers at the edge of the screen,
depended on an average of the two modalities.
with the apparent position of the sound controlled by
Figure 2 summarizes the results of Figure 1, together
interaural time differences.
with those of two other observers, S.D. (naive) and author D.A. The upper panels show the PSE, the median
displacement of the conflict stimulus (calculated from
*Correspondence: 
Current Biology
Figure 1. Unimodal and Bimodal Localization of Visual and Auditory Stimuli
Results are for one observer L.M., naive of
the goals and actual conditions of the experiment. Four other subjects (two summarized
in Figure 2 and two not reported) behaved
similarly.
(A) Psychometric functions for localizing either an auditory click (green speaker-shaped
symbols) or visual blobs of various Gaussian
space constants (2  4, black; 2  32,
red; or 2  64, blue). The auditory stimuli
were brief (1.5 ms) clicks, with their apparent
position on the median plane controlled by
interaural time differences (ITDs). Timing resolution was 15.3 s, corresponding to about
1.2 in lateral angle (calibrated separately for
each observer). All trials comprised two stimulus presentations, one presented near-centrally (with a small jitter from trial to trial) and
the other displaced leftward or rightward by
an amount given by the abscissa. The ordinate shows the proportion of times the observer judged the probe presentation (randomly
“leftward.”
hundred fifty trials were run for each condition, over ten separate sessions. The data
show that the points of subjective alignment
are similar for all stimuli (0), while the
widths of the visual functions (assumed to
reflect internal neural noise) increase with the
width of the visual stimulus (see also Figure
2B). The width of the auditory function lies
midway between the smallest and largest visual stimuli.
(B–D) Psychometric functions for localizing
bimodal presentations of the click and blob
together (click centered within the blob), for
blob widths 4 (B), 32 (C), or 64 (D). One
presentation (randomly first or second) was
the conflict stimulus, with the visual stimulus
horizontally displaced  rightward and the
auditory stimulus displaced  leftward. In the
other non-conflict presentation, both stimuli
were displaced in the same direction by the
amount shown by the abscissa (positive indicates rightward). The values of  were 5
(black symbols), 2.5 (red), 0 (green), 2.5 (blue), or 5 (mauve), randomly intermingled within each session. Two hundred fifty trials were
run for each condition, over ten separate sessions. Figure 2 summarizes these data, together with those of another two subjects.
Gaussian fits like those in Figure 1), as a function of the
multimodal information may be combined in an optimal
way by summing the independent stimulus estimates
audio-visual conflict (). The blue and black dashed
lines (respectively) show the predicted results if vision or
appropriate
weighting scheme. The weights correspond to the inaudition were to dominate completely. The continuous
lines are model predictions (described below), in close
verse of the noise associated with each estimate, given
by the variance 2 of the underlying noise distribution
agreement with the data. As noted previously, for small
blobs (black symbols), the PSE varies directly with ;
(assumed to be approximated by the squared width of
the psychometric function). This model is “optimal” in
for large blobs (blue symbols), it varies inversely; and
for mid-sized blobs (red and green symbols), it was
that it combines the unimodal information to produce a
multimodal stimulus estimate with the lowest possible
almost independent of . The lower panels show the
localization-accuracy thresholds for the various condivariance (that is, with the greatest reliability). Optimum
combination of the independent auditory and visual estitions, given by the standard deviations of the Gaussian
fits. Visual accuracy varied directly with the width of
mates Sˆ A and Sˆ V is given by (see ):
the Gaussian blobs, while localization accuracy for the
auditory click was similar to those of the mid-sized blob.
Sˆ VA  wVSˆ V wASˆ A
The combined thresholds (average of all the conflict
conditions), indicated by the red circles, are usually
where wV and wA are the relative weights for each modality, inversely proportional to their localization varilower than either visual or auditory threshold alone.
Several authors have recently suggested that
Bimodal Integration and the Ventriloquist Effect
Figure 2. Effect of Conflict on Localization of
Visual and Auditory Stimuli
(A) PSE for localizing the bimodal stimulus as
a function of audio-visual conflict (). The
PSE was defined as the median of the cumulative Gaussian distributions for each observer (see examples of Figure 1). The results
are shown for various sizes of visual blob,
indicated by the colors (L.M.: 4, black
squares; 32, red circles; and 64, blue triangles; D.A.: 1.6, 38, and 50; S.D.: 1.6, 38,
and 50, green triangles; and 64). For the
small blob sizes, the perceived bimodal position varied directly with the visual stimulus,
while for the larger blobs they varied with
audition. For the mid-sized blobs, there is little variation. The dotted black and blue lines
show the predicted result if vision and audition were to dominate totally. The continuous
lines are not fits to the data, but predictions
from optimal statistical combination of cues
(Equation 1), obtained solely from the parameters of the unimodal measurements (shown
(B) Localization error (given by the root-variance of the psychometric functions) as a
function of blob size. The blue symbols show
the unimodal visual thresholds and the green
dashed line the auditory unimodal thresholds.
thresholds
shown by the filled red circles, and the predicted thresholds (from optimal combination:
Equation 3) by the black open circles joined
by the lines. Note that for all subjects, the
second point along the abscissa is where visual and auditory localization errors are most similar. In these cases, the model predicts that
bimodal variance should be lower than those of either vision or audition (see also Figure 3).
further test of the optimal combination model. If a reducwA 
tion in variance is observed, it shows that the combined
estimate of location is not merely an averaging of the
and likewise for WV. Estimates of 2
A can be obtwo unimodal estimates, as might occur by sampling
tained by the Gaussian fit of the unimodal data of Figure
randomly from each. The black lines in Figure 2B show
1A (also plotted in Figure 2B). From these we calculated
the predicted thresholds from the optimal combination.
visual and auditory weights for the various blob widths
For the smallest and largest blob sizes, the difference
and predicted how PSE should vary with , assuming
between the optimal combination prediction and the
that the best visual and auditory estimates (Sˆ V and Sˆ A)
best unimodal estimate (visual or auditory) is very small
were given by the actual position of the visual and audiand virtually impossible to assess statistically. However,
tory sources,  and , respectively (given that the
for blob sizes around 30, where V and A are similar,
unimodal location estimates were all close to zero).
there is a small improvement predicted in localization
These predictions are shown by the continuous lines in
accuracy which approaches √2. For the subjects in Fig-
Figure 2A, and clearly fall very close to the actual data.
ure 2B, the predicted improvement ranges from 1.18
Note that the predictions have no free parameters and
to 1.35 (since the unimodal variances are not exactly
are based solely on the unimodal data, not the data of
identical, they do not quite reach √2). The results tend
Figure 2A.
to follow the predictions, but not perfectly. While for
An important further prediction of optimal combina-
D.A. (the most experienced psychophysical observer of
tion of visual and auditory information is that the varibimodal stimuli) the predictions are very good indeed,
ance of the combined estimate will always be less than
for S.D. the combined performance is worse than preeither individual estimate, provided that the underlying
dicted for the two largest blurs, and for L.M. for the
noise distributions are independent:
smallest blur. While performance is in some cases not
as predicted, there is only one statistically significant
deviation from the predicted value (L.M., 64 blob, p 
The reduction in combined variance will be greatest
Figure 3 shows auditory, visual, bimodal, and prewhen 2
A and least when they are most different
dicted bimodal thresholds for one blob size (the one
(where the lower variance will dominate). The model
yielding the most similar auditory and visual thresholds
does not predict a large improvement in localization
and hence the largest predicted improvement) for each
subject, and for the group mean. In all six subjects,
accuracy, √2 at best, but the prediction does provide a
Current Biology
Figure 3. Comparison of Actual and Predicted Thresholds for Visuo-Auditory Localization
(A) Visual, auditory, bimodal, and predicted
localization errors for six subjects, for the visual condition which yielded thresholds most
similar to the auditory thresholds. Visual
blobs of 38 were used in all cases except
for L.M., in which they were 32. This graph
includes data from the three subjects of Figure 2B. The bars show standard errors of the
mean, calculated by 500 repetitions of a bootstrap procedure , with the error of the predicted result calculated from the two unimodal thresholds, with propagation of errors
based on Equation 3. The probabilities of rejecting the null hypothesis (that the bimodal
threshold was the same as the best unimodal
threshold), calculated by the bootstrap t test
(one-tailed, 5000 repetitions) for the six observers were: L.M., 0.24; D.A., 0.5; S.D., 0.11;
R.A., 0.057; V.A., 0.03; and N.M., 0.07.
(B) Averages of all six subjects, after normalizing to unity for the predicted value (so the error in that condition is zero). The improvement of
the bimodal condition over the average unimodal conditions was 1.425, compared with a predicted value of 1.414. Averaging the performance
of the six observers and comparing best unimodal performance with bimodal performance in a one-tailed, matched samples t test produced
a clearly significant difference, with t5  3.69 and p
0.01. When the bimodal thresholds were tested against the predicted thresholds by
the bootstrap t test technique, none were significantly different (all p values greater than 0.2).
bimodal localization was better than either unimodal
inverse estimate of noisiness, rather than one modality
capturing the other. As visual localization is usually far
localization and always near the predicted threshold.
The predicted differences are not large compared with
superior to auditory location, vision normally dominates,
apparently capturing the sound source and giving rise
the measurement errors associated with estimating
curve slopes (obtained from a bootstrap technique 
to the classic ventriloquist effect. However, if the visual
estimate is corrupted sufficiently by blurring the visual
and indicated by the error bars). Individually, on a paired
t test analysis between the bimodal and the best unitarget over a large region of space, the visual estimate
can become worse than the auditory one, and optimal
modal condition, only two out of six cases reached 5%
significance (details in caption). However, for none of
localization correctly predicts that sound will effectively
capture sight. This is broadly consistent with other rethe subjects is the bimodal threshold greater than the
best unimodal estimate, and none differs statistically
ports of integration of sensory information .
However, it differs slightly from the results of Battaglia
from the predicted threshold (p
0.2 for all). Averaging
the data, however, produces a clear result: the bimodal
et al. , who investigated localization in depth with
visual and auditory cues in conflict, degrading visual
thresholds are lower than the average of the visual and
auditory thresholds by a factor of 1.425 (compared with
performance by the introduction of noise (following ).
They found that vision tended to dominate more than
a predicted improvement of 1.414). Comparison of the
best unimodal performance with bimodal performance
predicted by Equation 1, and were forced to introduce
a hybrid Bayesian model to explain their effects. Unforin a one-tailed, matched samples t test produces a
clearly significant result, with t5  3.69 and p
tunately, they do not report thresholds for the bimodal
conditions to determine whether bimodal presentation
Overall, the results support a model in which visual
and auditory information is combined by minimizing variimproved localization under these conditions, the more
stringent test for statistically optimum combination. It
ance, leading to an improvement in discriminating bimodal spatial location. The lack of statistical signifiis unclear why the results of this study are different
from ours, but we can point to several differences in
cance on individual subjects may be due to several
factors. First, estimates of the width of psychometric
experimental design: Battaglia et al. required subjects
to localize in depth (rather than in the horizontal plane),
functions are intrinsically variable, so measurement error can obscure true differences. Second, there may
corrupted their visual stimuli with noise (rather than blurring), and presented both conflict and comparison stimbe an additional noise source at the level of bimodal
combination, not considered in the model. Third, there
ulus simultaneously (rather than successively), possibly
overloading the auditory system. More crucially, the
may be correlations between the noise sources of the
visual and auditory modalities, as has been demonconflict situation was always in the same direction, vision negative and audition positive, that could easily
strated recently in other modalities . Fourth, factors such as attention and learning to use normally lesslead to “recalibration” (adaptation), considerably affecting the results . Finally, we cannot exclude the
reliable modalities (sound in this case) should also be
studied, particularly for untrained, naive observers.
effects of learning and instructions: our subjects, both
authors and naive, were trained extensively on the audi-
We conclude that the ventriloquist effect is a specific
example of near-optimal combination of visual and auditory task and were asked to think of the display as a ball
thudding onto the screen to ensure that they attended to
tory space cues, where each cue is weighted by an
Bimodal Integration and the Ventriloquist Effect
Received: November 14, 2003
both visual and auditory aspects of the stimuli. We can-
Revised: December 23, 2003
not be certain if any of these differences was crucial in
Accepted: December 23, 2003
obtaining the current results, but it does seem reason-
Published: February 3, 2004
able that subjects be encouraged to use and to trust
their nonpreferred sense and that the perceptual system
not be given the chance to recalibrate to a consistent