I.J. Modern Education and Computer Science, 2017, 12, 26-37
Published Online December 2017 in MECS ( 
DOI: 10.5815/ijmecs.2017.12.04
Copyright © 2017 MECS I.J. Modern Education and Computer Science, 2017, 12, 26-37
Latest Customizations of XP: A Systematic
Literature Review
Faiza Anwer, Shabib Aftab
Department of Computer Science, Virtual University of Pakistan
Email: {faiza.anwer28, shabib.aftab}@gmail.com
Received: 10 August 2017; Accepted: 16 October 2017; Published: 08 December 2017
Abstract—Software development process model plays a
key role in developing high quality software. However
there is no fit-for-all type of process model exist in
software industry. To accommodate some specific
project’s needs, process models have to be tailored.
Extreme Programming (XP) is a well-known agile model.
Due to its simplicity, best practices and disciplined
approach researchers tried to mold it for various types of
projects and situations. As a result a large number of
customized versions of XP are available now days. The
aim of this paper is to analyze the latest customizations of
XP. For this purpose a systematic literature review is
conducted on studies published during 2013 to 2017. This
detailed review identifies the objectives of customizations,
specific areas in which customizations are done and
practices & phases which are being targeted for
customizations. This work will not only serve the best for
scholars to find the current XP states but will also help
researchers to predict the future directions of software
development with XP.
Index Terms—Extreme Programming, XP, Agile,
Customized XP, Modified XP, Tailored XP, Systematic
Literature Review.
I. INTRODUCTION
Agile software development models provide a good,
light weight and cost-effective option for quality software
development. Agile manifesto defines the values and
principles which are applied in iterative fashion to obtain
quality software in limited time .
A number of agile software development models emerged
with the time having potential to handle various project
types with agility. Most commonly used agile models
incudes Extreme programming (XP), Scrum, Feature
Development
Development Method (DSDM), Kanban, Lean Software
Development
Development (ASD) .
Extreme Programming (XP) is one of the oldest known
agile models that gave new directions to software
development. Kent Beck presented XP model in 1999 but
still today it is one of the most debating topics in software
industry. XP revealed a new perspective of software
development that gives much importance to customer
satisfaction,
requirements
collaboration than plan driven software development
models . XP works well for small scale,
low risk projects . It uses best software practices
in the disciplined way to develop high quality software
 . It can easily accommodate changing requirements
with good level of customer satisfaction and can deliver
qualitative software within limited time . XP
practices like pair programming, on-site customer,
collective code ownership, continuous integration and
continuous testing were new for software industry but
their satisfactory results enforced developers to adopt
them even in diversified projects. Due to XP’s flexibility
and simplicity, researchers showed great interest in
customizing XP. They tried to make it suitable for
various scenarios by tailoring its phases or by adding
more practices for some specific needs. As a result there
are a number of modified versions of XP available now
days. In this paper a systematic literature review is
conducted to explore the latest transformation of XP. This
SLR considered related literature published during 2013
to 2017 by applying inclusion and exclusion criteria.
Further organization of this paper is as follows. Section
II describes related work, section III defines research
methodology used for this SLR. Section IV presents
critical review of selected papers. Section V enlists and
discusses the finding of this detailed review. Section VI
finally concludes the paper.
II. RELATED WORK
Wide acceptance of agile methods fascinated many
researchers to explore different aspects of agile software
development. There are a number of SLR’s mentioned in
this section which provide valuable information about
different aspects of agile software development. However
it is observed that very little contribution is made for
extreme programming. Few literature reviews are
available which does not provide clear picture of XP's
current state. Agile methods are famous due to user
involvement
development
especially in requirement engineering process. In 
authors conducted a systematic literature review to
explore the art of requirements engineering in agile
methods. This study mainly focused on various
methodologies used to invite stakeholders by presenting
Latest Customizations of XP: A Systematic Literature Review
Copyright © 2017 MECS I.J. Modern Education and Computer Science, 2017, 12, 26-37
their perspective during requirements engineering and
management process. Another study in this regard is
conducted in , for this review authors selected
literature from 2002 to 2013 to extract data about
requirements engineering practices and challenges in
agile methods. A SLR was conducted in , to find the
direct and indirect effect of agile release practices on
software projects. Agile release practices are used for fast
and low cost software development. In , SLR was
conducted to find out the challenges, and success factors
identified during agile method’s transformation for large
scale industrial projects. Authors listed 35 challenges and
29 success factors for which selected papers are analyzed.
In , authors grabbed an emerging trend of combining
agile practices with outsourced software development.
This type of development faced the coordination and
communication problems. This study focused on finding
useful communication practices and then it differentiated
these practices from classical practices used in nondistributed environment. In , authors presented
different agile methods tailoring aspects and criteria of
practice’s selection used for tailoring. This SLR
considered the literature published during 2002 to 2014 to
find the common trends and criteria used for process
tailoring. Another area of software development is
covered in . Authors conducted SLR to present the
effort estimation methods used in agile software
development. They concluded that expert judgement
based technique, planning poker and use case points
technique are the most commonly used estimation
methods in agile development. In , authors used SLR
to find the security related issues in software
development using extreme programming (XP). Authors
used the literature published during 2002 to 2012. They
concluded that XP practices can be successfully
combined with security based practices for effective
results. In , authors studied the literature regarding
integration of user centered design with agile software
development models. They concluded that this integration
is mostly used for design and usability evaluation
however there is a lack of studies that provide its
empirical proof. Pair programming is one of the
distinguishing practices of XP, to find its effect on quality
and effort, a meta-analysis is conducted in . Results
of this analysis showed that pair programming has a little
better performance in term of quality but also has
negative effect on effort used for software development.
Another systematic review to study the effect of pair
programming is conducted in . The authors identified
the factors which can affect the usefulness of pair
programming. In , authors studied impact of user
involvement in the project success by performing a
systematic literature review. They analyzed 87 empirical
studies and found that user involvement plays a positive
role in project success.
III. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
To conduct a successful SLR, we need a proper
research methodology that can help in achieving the
complete research objectives. Different studies are
available that provide the guidelines for systematic
literature review . By consulting these
studies we formulated a systematic research strategy to
In a broader view, SLR has three basic steps namely
plan review, conduct review and document review,
however further detail can be added to make it more
elaborative. Detailed steps are extracted from the
guidelines of . The research methodology
which is followed includes following steps: 1) Define
research questions, 2) Find keywords to form query string,
3) Define research space to get data, 4) Set criteria to
include or exclude papers, 5) extract literature using
criteria, 6) Assess study quality, 7) Synthesize required
data, and finally 8) document results and outcomes Fig.
Fig.1. Steps of Systematic Literature Review
A. Research Questions
Research questions represent the research objectives.
Answers to these research questions help in concluding
SLR. According to step 1 of our research strategy, here
are the research questions which will cover our research
objectives.
RQ1: Which are the customized versions of XP
process model?
RQ2: Do the customized versions tailor XP phases?
RQ3: Which practices, roles or events are included
in XP to make it more effective and efficient?
RQ4: What objectives are achieved through XP
customization?
RQ5: Do these modified or improved models are
validated through empirical proof?
B. Search Space and Query String
Keywords extracted from the research questions are
“Agile”, “Extreme Programming”, “XP”, “process”,
Latest Customizations of XP: A Systematic Literature Review
Copyright © 2017 MECS I.J. Modern Education and Computer Science, 2017, 12, 26-37
“model”, “method”, “modified”, “improved”, “tailored”,
“changed”, “enhanced” and “customized”.
These keywords are arranged in following query.
(Modified OR improved OR customized OR tailored
OR changed OR enhanced AND (Agile AND (Extreme
Programming OR XP AND (Process OR Model OR
Method)))).
Search space represents libraries and repositories from
where data can be collected. In our case, we selected
Google Scholar to find the papers from 2013 to 2017.
Above mentioned query string is used to extract required
literature.
C. Selection Criteria
Selection of related material is done based on inclusion
and exclusion criteria defined in this section. IC
represents inclusion criteria whereas EC represents
exclusion criteria.
1) Inclusion Criteria
Inclusion criteria consist of following rules to extract
related material for this SLR.
IC1: Papers which are published during 2013 to
IC2: Papers which are available in journals,
conferences,
proceedings
conferences
workshops.
IC3: papers which have presented modified form
of XP with the help of figure.
IC4: papers which have tried to enhance XP
practices.
IC5: papers which have provided practical proof
of modified XP model.
2) Exclusion Criteria
Exclusion criteria consist of following rules to exclude
un-related material for this SLR.
EC1: Papers which are not published in the
duration of 2013 to 2017.
EC2: Papers which are not written in English
EC3: papers whose full text is not available.
EC4: Literature which is under review or part of
thesis report.
EC5: Literature which is a part of any book.
EC6: Papers that contain survey or review about
previous work.
EC7: papers which provided only XP related
material other than modified model.
EC8: papers that merged XP with any other
process model to form a hybrid model.
EC9: papers which did not provide any pictorial
representation of proposed model.
EC10: papers that proposed XP application in
some field other than software development.
EC11: papers that introduced new tools to use XP
process models.
Using search strings based on identified keywords,
initially we found 9795 results. Step by step filter is
applied to select the most relevant papers based on our
selection criteria as shown in Fig. 2.
D. Quality Assessment
For a successful and useful review, the focus on quality
is very necessary. To make our SLR more useful, every
step is completed under the quality umbrella. To ensure
the higher quality, following measures are taken.
All the literature is selected from authentic and
renowned libraries and databases.
Only reputed journals publications are included in
All the literature is collected without any
biasedness and discriminations.
Search results
9795 Papers
Removed duplicates
9503 Papers
Filtered by selection criteria
598 Papers
Filtered by article¶s title
128 Papers
Filtered by abstract
Filtered by reading full text
Fig.2. Search Process for Final Selection of Papers
E. Data Extraction and Classification
Data is extracted by considering the guidelines given in
 . By screening the papers finally nine most relevant
papers are selected for review. Data extraction and
classification is done according to format given in table 1.
Latest Customizations of XP: A Systematic Literature Review
Copyright © 2017 MECS I.J. Modern Education and Computer Science, 2017, 12, 26-37
Table 1. Data Extraction and Classification Format
Description
Bibliographic Detail
Paper’s title, author’s name, publication
conference,
Data Extraction
Model name/ Model title
Methodology used
survey, empirical proof.
Project suitability
Small scale projects, medium scale
projects, large scale projects.
Data Synthesis/ Classification
Objectives of
Customization
Enhancement of model, elimination of
drawbacks,
functionality.
Strategy used for
customization
Alteration of phases/practices, addition
or removal of practices, addition of new
Targeted XP practices
customization?
IV. CUSTOMIZED FORMS OF EXTREME PROGRAMMING
This section aims to explore the 9 selected papers to
identify the key problems and their proposed solution.
Moreover this section also highlights the modules,
practices, roles, phases and principles which are being
added, customized or removed by the authors in their
proposed solutions.
A. SXP: Simplified Extreme Programing Process Model.
SXP (Simplified Extreme Programming) is a modified
version of XP process model that provides a simpler way
of software development for small and medium scale
projects . In this model, authors tried to cover the
limitations
documentation and customer’s involvement. Authors
discussed that absence of proper architectural structure
and design can affect agility of development process and
software quality. Moreover authors highlighted some of
the XP practices like pair programming and on-site
customer, which cannot be used in all type of projects. It
is already discussed in previous researches that pair
programming and on-site customer practices are not
useful for each type of projects. Authors mentioned a
number of studies which tried to solve these problems but
a common lapse in these solutions was the loss of process
simplicity and agility. To overcome the limitations of
classical XP without effecting its simplicity and agility,
authors proposed SXP that introduced design and
documentation activities in the model. Unnecessary
rituals are eliminated from development process to
maintain the simplicity and agility. The proposed SXP
model consists of five development phases: 1)
Initialization, 2) Analysis, 3) Design, 4) Development &
Testing and 5) Release. SXP restricted the customer’s
involvement in first and last phase only. Main activities
performed during initialization phase are requirement
gathering and project planning. This phase involved
personnel’s from both customer and developer’s side to
decide the project scope, cost and technology used for
development. Requirements are collected through story
cards that have a small description of required
functionality along with priority assigned. A project plan
is created to document necessary details about project.
Next is the analysis phase, in which activities like
architectural structure, iteration plan and effort & cost
estimation is performed and documented. SXP
introduced an explicit design phase to overcome design
related issues. In this phase software is designed using
use-case and sequence diagrams which provide better
development guidance to the developers. Test planning
activity performed in this phase relates to the test first
strategy of classical XP. Development and testing phase
is an iterative phase in which coding and functional
testing is performed repeatedly until successful code is
integrated. After integration testing final acceptance
testing is performed by customer in release phase. In case
of successful testing final product is released to customer
with user manuals.
Shortcomings:
SXP model incorporated analysis and design phase and
produced documentation during each phase of the model.
Although it is a better approach for medium scale projects
having continuously changing requirements but for small
and simple projects, this can create extra overhead for the
development team. Furthermore there is an obvious need
of empirical proof to check the effectiveness and
efficiency of proposed model.
B. Component Based Software Architecture Refinement
and Refactoring Method into Extreme Programming.
In , classical XP is modified by incorporating
architectural and design related framework. This
framework adds ability of component based architecture
reusability in XP. Authors found that short term
development time in XP is a hazard in developing
reusable components. That’s why newly required
functionality can only be developed from scratch. To
overcome this problem authors suggested component
based architecture refinement framework for XP. They
claimed that incorporating this framework in XP can
reduce development time, effort and the cost of
development. The steps in proposed reuse process model
includes; i) Component search and retrieval ii) Identify
component to extend and refine iii) Generate target
component and iv) Repository management.
Proposed model suggested that instead of developing a
new component for required functionality, reusability of
already existing components should be checked. For this
purpose reusable repository is maintained and searched
before development of new functionality. In this step,
components that can be reused in particular requirements
Latest Customizations of XP: A Systematic Literature Review
Copyright © 2017 MECS I.J. Modern Education and Computer Science, 2017, 12, 26-37
are selected. In next step selected components are being
examined keenly to check which part is according to
requirements and which should be eliminated. Based on
their suitability these are identified as candidate for
customization, refactoring, or extension. If there are some
components that partially implement the functionality,
then these components can be customized or extended to
adopt required functionality. Refactoring can also be
applied to the selected components. Refactoring is a
stepwise activity in which a component is improved
without changing its external behavior. These extended,
customized or refactored components are refined further
for the sake of efficiency. In last step of this framework
repository is updated with newly created components for
later use.
Shortcomings:
Although proposed framework covers a very important
limitation of XP however reusability of existing
components requires some extra effort in managing
components repository. Moreover, in the absence of
empirical proof or case study it is difficult to understand
the working of framework in XP.
C. Proposal of Enhanced Extreme Programming Model.
Programming model that claimed to improve agility and
quality at same time. XP lacks documentation and design
activities and uses extreme testing and refactoring during
development iteration for quality enhancement. Due to
sequential execution of testing and refactoring in classical
XP, agility is affected badly. Authors found an inverse
relationship between quality and agility. Lack of
documentation and upfront design make it suitable for
small projects only. To overcome quality, agility,
documentation, design and response time related issues,
authors proposed an enhanced XP model. Proposed EXP
model introduced parallel refinement iteration along with
actual development iteration. This helped in handling
inverse relationship between agility and quality.
Proposed model has four phases; Initial iteration,
Incremental iteration, Final iteration and Quality iteration.
EXP keeps the classical XP development phases intact
and adds a parallel refinement phase for non-functional
requirements.
EXP development process starts with initial phase. In
this phase development starts with basic development
activities of XP like plan, design, code and test. However
during coding, a refactoring team member works with
programmers to understand and monitor coding activity.
Later during refactoring of code, this team member helps
other team members to resolve confusion and problems
about written code. Authors suggested that team leader
can be the best candidate for this role as he has to control
both coding and refactoring teams. He should have good
technical knowledge that helps to manage project easily.
Incremental iteration is an iterative phase that keeps
iterating until the set goal is reached. It is not main
development team’s responsibility to refine design, code
or test. Development team takes new requirements for
each iteration and repeat plan, design, code and test
activities with these requirements. On the other side,
refactoring team starts quality iteration in parallel to
incremental iteration to save time after completing first
development iteration. For that purpose all artifacts of
previous iteration are handed over to refactoring team.
This refactoring is completed in supervision of team
member that has previously monitored the designing and
coding phase and has good understanding about
developed code and design. First of all design and
architectural documents are refined that give sufficient
support for code refactoring. During code refactoring
technical team leader works with refactoring team.
Additional functionality can be added or previous code
can be changed during refactoring. Then tests are refined
according to added or changed functionality. In case of
bugs, new changes can be made accordingly. Finally
document refining team refines poorly written documents.
Final iteration is completed by successfully implementing
requirements
iteration.
requirements now more clear to programmers that give
better understanding about system.
Shortcomings of model:
This model used a parallel refinement cycle to ensure
quality however the software projects having higher
interdependencies among modules are difficult to build
using this model. Another problem with this model is the
need of more resources than usual. Parallel execution of
development and refinement cycle demands more team
members and other resources that increase development
D. Mapping Formal Methods to Extreme Programming
(XP) –A Futuristic Approach.
FXP is a modified version of XP that specially
designed for life critical projects. Classical XP is usually
used for small projects with no security and safety issues
involved. In authors proposed a new model that map
formal methods on XP to incorporate agility in formal
methods. Formal methods are used for life and safety
critical projects. These methods are more precise and
mathematical in nature to handle critical projects.
However these models are laborious and costly to use
both in term of effort and resources. Whereas XP model
has limitations related to software design and architecture.
To overcome these drawbacks, authors combined the
strengths of both models in . FXP used formal
methods like Software Cost Reduction (SCR), Algebraic
Specification and Design by Contract (DbC) in different
phases to make it suitable for safety critical projects.
First step of FXP is about requirement gathering. FXP
used story cards to collect requirement. This is same as
used in classical XP where customer writes story cards to
describe the required functionality in the system. The
only difference is that a formal method Software Cost
Reduction (SCR) is used in this process to formally
represent the requirements. SCR used four tables
(Condition Table, Event Transition Table, Linkage Table,
and Directory) to represent requirement’s conditions and
Latest Customizations of XP: A Systematic Literature Review
Copyright © 2017 MECS I.J. Modern Education and Computer Science, 2017, 12, 26-37
their association . In condition table all the possible
conditions used for a mode are listed. This is done for
each mode to represent complete functionality of the
system. Event transition table showed output regarding
each mode, event and value. Whereas linkage table
represents the association among different modes.
Directory is used to keep the record of each datatype.
Second phase of FXP is release plan. As the name
suggest, a complete plan is developed for the project
keeping in view the requirements collected in previous
phase. Priority table is built to define order of
development using condition table. In next step a Gantt
chart is drawn to show the development time for each
task. Concurrent task are also identified here to speed up
development. Important decision about team size, code
ownership, working hours, sitting arrangement and pair
programming are taken in this phase. The authors have
adopted most of the things from XP perspective however
in pair programming it is considered that one of the
programmer must be expert in formal methods. Next
phase of FXP is iteration to release phase in which tasks
are grouped in iterations. Each iteration can include new
task to implement or task that failed to pass acceptance
test in previous iteration. All possible test cases are also
written in this phase. For this purpose a formal method
called algebraic expression is used. Algebraic expression
is a mathematical way of representing functions with
their signature, return type and axioms. After completing
this, programmers convert this specification in code. In
next phase, implemented code is tested for final
acceptance. FXP used Design by Contract (DbC) formal
method. In DbC a contract is written using languages
like java, JML or Eiffiel. This contract includes
preconditions, invariants and post conditions. All the
implementation is checked against this contract. In case
of any nonconformity, code is fixed later by developers.
Finally after successful acceptance testing recently
implemented built is released to customer.
Shortcomings of model:
Incorporation of formal method in XP demands some
extra training and expertise of development team. To
prove the validity of FXP model, authors only relied on
expert’s opinion. A case study or empirical proof is
strongly needed to prove the efficiency and authenticity
E. Extended Iterative Maintenance Life Cycle Using
eXtreme Programming.
Software maintenance is a continuous and unavoidable
process for a software. Good maintenance can increase
the quality and operational life of a software. in 
authors found that most of the existing models of
software maintenance are derived from traditional water
fall model and hence not suitable for handling problems
related to unstructured code, team morale, poor project
visibility, communication and test suits. Authors
suggested that these problems can be solved by using
agile methodologies. Their iterative and incremental
nature and emphasis on team collaboration, customer
interaction makes them suitable for software maintenance
 . Authors chose XP for this purpose due to its best
practices and proposed an extended model for software
maintenance that used IEEE 1219 standard from XP
perspective. This extended model consists of seven
phases that includes identification and categorization,
implementation, acceptance testing and release. Request
of change stories . The
aim behind this study was to combine the strengths of XP
and PSP to develop high quality software. Authors
suggested that using PSP, developers can improve their
planning and estimation capabilities and can strive for
quality by lowering the defect rate. Modified XP model
presented in this paper showed that how all these personal
qualities can be used with XP phases. This model
includes six practices form XP and six practices from
PSP. Proposed model in consists of five phases
named as Exploration phase, Planning phase, Personal
Productionizing phase.
Exploration phase is same as in classical XP where
requirements
Development team also considers different possible
architectural structures, tools and techniques for the
developed system. In planning phase, stories are
prioritized and selected for the current release.
Development schedule and cost is estimated on the basis
of selected stories. In this phase developers are free to
take their own decisions. While in personal planning
phase individual developer plan their activities and
estimate time required to fulfill assign tasks. Use of
coding standards, time and defect recording logs helped
developers to evaluate their daily performance. Iteration
to release phase can consists of many iterations to
complete a release. After successful code completion,
system moved towards productionizing phase. Some
more testing is performed to check the validity of the
developed system.
Shortcomings of model:
The proposed model can only be used for small scale
projects where teams are small and familiar with PSP.
Due to absence of practical application of this model, it is
difficult to decide about its usability.
G. Estimation of the New Agile XP Process Model for
Medium-Scale Projects Using Industrial Case Studies.
In , author tried to extend classical XP for medium
scale projects with large development teams. This model
tried to break the concept that XP can only be used for
small scale projects with small teams. Author introduced
analysis and risk management activity to overcome the
project failure risk. Proposed model also tried to cover
classical XP drawbacks like lack of up front design and
no documentation. Proposed model is validated through
two industrial case studies one for small scale projects
and other for medium scale projects.
Proposed model consists of four phases that are project
planning phase, analysis and risk management phase,
design and development phase and testing phase.
In project planning phase, proposal document is
prepared by using
Cost-Benefit Analysis (CBA)
technique. This document contains economic, technical
and operational feasibility reports that help to check the
feasibility
Furthermore
development team members are also selected in this
phase. Team size can be vary by considering project size,
and schedule. Analysis and risk management phase starts
after checking the feasibility of the project. Detailed
requirement are collected in this phase which are
documented properly. This model used story cards for
requirement elicitation like classical XP. Customer
prioritizes these story cards on the basis of his needs.
These story cards are then selected for current release
using planning poker technique. In design and
development phase, author combined design and
development activities for the sake of agility and
efficiency. Author used prototyping technique for design
and requirement verification whereas refactoring is used
during design and coding activities. This model used pair
programming for coding. Programmers write code for
current release’s stories and in the meanwhile Interface
Specification document for next release is also prepared.
Design and coding activities are repeated until whole
stories are implemented for the project. In the meanwhile
implemented code is integrated continuously. In next
phase implemented code is tested using unit testing,
integration testing and system testing. Finally acceptance
testing is conducted for customer verification. In case of
successful acceptance testing, system is deployed at
customer’s
Deployment
installation, training and security activities.
Shortcomings of model:
Adding analysis and risk management phases in
classical XP can affect agility of development process.
H. Role –Based Extreme Programming (XP) for Secure
Software Development.
Although XP gives good performance in developing
software within limited time and cost however it is also a
fact that there is no emphasis on developing secure
software in this model. To overcome this limitation
authors proposed an additional role in . Authors
explored that there is no practices or role that help to
develop secure software. In such situation developed
software is open to security threats. Although using XP, a
product can be delivered quickly but later it may require a
lot of repair due to security risks. Authors proposed that
by introducing a new role called “Security Master”, we
can lower down the effort and cost of later fixes which is
required to make the software secure. Authors actually
extend the model presented in to develop secure
software using XP. Authors introduced a new role and
some additional security elements in XP practices to
make it suitable for secure software development. They
mentioned different practices for five major roles to
implement security measures in XP. Here is the detail of
XP practices for each role.
Customer: planning game, small releases, metaphor
and on-site customer.
Coach: small releases, coding standards.
Latest Customizations of XP: A Systematic Literature Review
Copyright © 2017 MECS I.J. Modern Education and Computer Science, 2017, 12, 26-37
Manager: planning game, small releases, metaphor,
small design, continuous integration and coding standards.
Programmer: planning game, small releases, metaphor,
small design, refactoring, pair programming, collective
code ownership, continuous integration, 40-hours week,
coding standards.
Tester: testing, 40-hours week
However authors suggested that these practices cannot
be implemented correctly until a professional person
provide the guidance. Security master will be responsible
for providing proper training to other team members
regarding security, types of security attacks and their
effects on software quality. XP practices related to
security master includes planning game, small releases,
metaphor, small design, refactoring, pair programming,
collective code ownership, continuous integration, 40hours week and coding standards.
Shortcomings of model:
Paper does not provide the implementation detail about
role of security master. There is no guidance what type of
rights he has and what type of rules he has to follow
while interacting with other team members. There is no
practical application of this model to get any idea about
model authenticity.
I. Prioritizing CRC Cards as a Simple Design Tool in
Extreme Programming.
Some researchers tried to enhance XP practices for
better results. In , authors used Analytical Hierarchy
Process (AHP) for prioritizing Class Responsibility
Collaboration (CRC) cards. Authors found that among
different XP design tools CRC cards are more effective
tool for developing simple object oriented design. These
cards provide flexible and quick help in finding object
class, members and their relationship. However,
prioritizing these cards has great effects on decisions
regarding design. For example classes that are linked with
many responsibilities have great effect on system
coherence and need a lot of refactoring during
implementation whereas collaboration among classes
indicates the system coupling. To make this process
simple and systematic, authors recommended the use of
AHP in CRC cards prioritizing process.
AHP provides a systematic way of analyzing a
problem that have multiple criteria. AHP is a hierarchical
model that reflects human thinking process. As discussed
in AHP consists of five steps. In first step a hierarchy
model is developed by breaking down the problem into
interrelated decision elements. In next step a criteria is
being defined to construct a pair wise comparison
matrix. Each criteria on the same level is compared with
other criteria with respect to their importance to the main
goal. In next step a pairwise matrix for alternatives is
constructed. Whereas consistency of judgment errors is
calculated using consistency ratio. Finally to choose the
highest score weighted average rating is calculated.
Using AHP authors defined following criteria to prioritize
CRC cards .
1: Which class responsibility has more effect on
2: Which classes have strongest relationship with other
3: Which classes are stable and have fewer tendencies
towards change?
Authors conducted an experiment consisting of 12
Master’s students divided in two teams. These teams built
same projects with different design tools. Authors found
that team using AHP for CRC cards prioritization gave
better results than other team.
Shortcomings of model:
Proposed solution requires handful expertise in
applying AHP technique for CRC cards prioritization.
That can be achieved by giving training or by hiring some
expert in this field. However in both cases it will
overburden development process and may affect agility
and cost of development.
V. FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION
This section provides the descriptive results of this
mapping and gives answers to the research questions,
whereas in table 2 these results are summarized for the
quick view.
This mapping reveals that after 16 year of agile
method’s advent, it is still a hot area of research.
Researchers are working on the improvement of agile
process models, especially on customization and
integration of these models. XP is one of the oldest and
famous agile methods used in software industry. A large
number of customized forms of XP are proposed by
different researchers in past twenty years however this
research is focusing to find the recent customized
versions. The published literature which is considered for
this research is from 2013 to 2017. After applying the
criteria, we finally selected nine best
appropriate papers. After critical analysis of these papers,
following answers are found to the research questions.
RQ1: Which are the customized versions of XP process
All the papers discussed from to are the
customized versions of XP. All these studies have done
customization of XP model by either integrating or
removing any particular practice, phase or role in the
process lifecycle. The summary of these tailored models
is presented in section IV of this research and also is
available for quick view in table 2 and 3.
RQ2: Do the customized versions tailor XP phases?
All papers except , have changed the XP phases to
make them according to their needs by introducing or
removing different practices, activities and roles as
shown in Table 2. In , a new role of security master is
Latest Customizations of XP: A Systematic Literature Review
Copyright © 2017 MECS I.J. Modern Education and Computer Science, 2017, 12, 26-37
Table 2. Summary of Analyzed papers in SLR
RQ3: Which practices, roles or events are included in XP
to make it more effective and efficient?
The selected papers shows that the different practices,
values, phases and roles are included by researchers
during the customization. For improvement, they have
targeted almost all activities of XP life cycle for software
process improvement such as requirements gathering,
designing, testing, maintenance, security, quality control.
The detail regarding the nature of customization along
with the practices, roles, events, activities and phases is
provided in section IV of this research and also is
available for quick view in Table 2.
RQ4: What objectives are achieved through XP
customization?
It has been found that the primary objective of the
customization of each selected paper is to achieve the
good quality end product by improving software process
life cycle in an effective and efficient way. Researchers
have tailored the classical XP model by integrating or
removing particular phases, practices, events and roles to
make it fit for certain projects in certain circumstances.
The proposed model in helped to develop medium
scale projects with better design and documentation
opportunities. Model proposed in introduced concept
of reusability to overcome architectural issues. Model
proposed in tried to improve quality without effecting
agility of the process. In , formal methods are used in
XP phases to make it suitable for safety critical projects.
In , an XP based model is proposed for software
maintenance. Paper used Personal Software Process
(PSP) to improve the quality and project planning
abilities of developers. In , XP is customized to handle
large scale projects with big teams. In , a new role is
introduced to develop secure software. Paper 
introduced a new prioritizing technique for better design
decisions.
Architectur
refinement
Maintenanc
Role Based
Prioritizing
in Extreme
Objective of
customizati
related to
design and
documentati
strength of
architectural
refinement
reusability
agility of XP
XP process
for safety
improvemen
maintenance
process by
maintainable
Increasing
developer’s
productivity
integrating
practices in
Customizing
XP for large
and medium
having large
developing
simplifying
Medium and
Small Scale
Small scale
Small scale
Small Scale
practice(s)/
programmin
Refactoring
programmin
Collective
ownership,
40 hours per
XP and PSP
customizati
design phase
reusability
refinement
refinement
development
cycle of XP
for the sake
of quality
Integrated
methods in
maintenance
activities are
introduced
practices to
developer’s
productivity
Changed XP
new role in
for better
Validation
Methodolog
y used for
Validation
Latest Customizations of XP: A Systematic Literature Review
Copyright © 2017 MECS I.J. Modern Education and Computer Science, 2017, 12, 26-37
RQ5: Do these modified or improved models are
validated through empirical proof?
Papers and gives no empirical validation
of proposed model whereas in paper a survey is
conducted from software professionals to validate
proposed model. Papers and used empirical
proof to validate their studies.
Table 3. List of Selected Papers
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper a systematic literature review is
customizations. A research methodology is defined with
inclusion and exclusion criteria to extract relevant data.
According to defined criteria, nine most appropriate
papers are selected for review. Critical analysis of these
papers revealed that after almost twenty years of XP’s
invention,
researchers
transformation to make it more adoptable and effective.
Results showed that researchers customized XP phases
and practices to achieve best results in different projects.
Some researchers merged more practices and elements to
make it applicable for specific needs. XP limitations
which make it difficult to use in large and critical natured
projects are eliminated by customization. However main
objective of these customizations is to make XP suitable
for different type and size of projects along with
maintaining
development with reduction in cost, time and effort is a
big achievement but lack of empirical proof make it
difficult to access the applicability of proposed models.
To prove the innovation and effectiveness of proposed
model, empirical validation is strongly recommended.