Italy and the United Kingdom. They will also
help watchdogs and others to scrutinize such
technologies.
What do COVID-19 contact-tracing apps
do? Running on a mobile phone, they inform
people that they have spent time near someone with the virus. The contacts should then
respond according to local rules, for example
by isolating themselves. Prompt alerts are
key because the incubation time of the virus
is up to two weeks1–4.
These digital interventions come at a price.
Collecting sensitive personal data potentially
threatens privacy, equality and fairness. Even
if COVID-19 apps are temporary, rapidly rolling
out tracing technologies runs the risk of creating permanent, vulnerable records of people’s
health, movements and social interactions,
over which they have little control.
More ethical oversight is essential. So far,
such concerns have focused on rights to
privacy (see go.nature.com/3e7jntx). Some
governments have pledged to protect data
privacy (see go.nature.com/3grwfe8). Apple
and Google are developing a common interface to support apps that do not require central
data storage (see Nature 
Protect privacy, equality and
fairness in digital contact
tracing with these key
questions.
Passengers on an underground train in Seoul. South Korea used contact tracing to great effect early in the pandemic.
Ethical guidelines for
COVID-19 tracing apps
Jessica Morley, Josh Cowls, Mariarosaria Taddeo & Luciano Floridi
SEONGJOON CHO/BLOOMBERG VIA GETTY
echnologies to rapidly alert people
when they have been in contact with
someone carrying the coronavirus
SARS-CoV-2 are part of a strategy to
bring the pandemic under control.
Currently, at least 47 contact-tracing apps are
available globally (see go.nature.com/2zc1qhk).
They are already in use in Australia, South Korea
and Singapore, for instance. And many other
governments are testing or considering them.
Here we set out 16 questions to assess whether
— and to what extent — a contact-tracing app
is ethically justifiable. These questions could
assist governments, public-health agencies and
providers to develop ethical apps — they have
already informed developments in France,
Nature  |  Vol 582  |  4 June 2020  |  29
Setting the agenda in research
2020). However, other ethical and social
considerations must not be cast aside in the
rush to quell the pandemic.
For instance, contact-tracing apps should be
available and accessible to anyone, irrespective of the technology needed or their level
of digital literacy. Yet many apps work only
with certain phones. Australia, for example,
has no plans to make its app work with phones
that use software older than Apple’s iOS 10 or
Android 6.0. In the United Kingdom, around
one-fifth of adults do not use a smartphone,
and so might be excluded from a digital contact-tracing programme.
Rolling out an app without considering its
wide ethical and social implications can be
dangerous, costly and useless. For example,
Bluetooth signals that show the proximity of
two individuals’ mobile phones are not a certain indicator of infection risk — two people
might be in the same space but physically separated, for example, by a wall. A high level of
false positives from such an app (for instance,
as a result of self-reporting) could lead to
unjustified panic. And minimal protections
against false negatives (people not using the
app to report that they are unwell) could spur
a false sense of safety in others and increase
the risk of infection.
The public might reject apps that breach
principles of privacy, equality and fairness.
This would frustrate the efforts and waste
the resources being invested in developing
and deploying such technology. Lack of
consideration of ethics could erode trust in
the government and public-health services
— as happened last month, when the Norwegian Data Protection Authority accused the
Norwegian Institute of Public Health of failing to carry out a proper risk assessment of its
contact-tracing app, Smittestopp.
Many approaches
Temporarily restricting some fundamental
rights and freedoms might be ethically justifiable in the context of hastening the end
of the pandemic. Quarantining individuals,
for example, helps to prevent the spread of
the disease. Arguably, it might be unethical
not to use digital tracing apps when necessary. Nevertheless, much depends on the
effectiveness of the app, the goal pursued,
the type of system and the context in which
it will be deployed.
Countries and regions are taking different approaches. China’s Alipay Health Code
app assigns a digital QR code to each user,
which is colour-coded red, amber or green
to indicate that person’s quarantine status
and thus their ability to move around. People
quarantined in Hong Kong must wear an
electronic bracelet that shares their location with local authorities through an app.
Poland requires citizens to self-isolate for
14 days after returning from overseas, and to
Those responsible for contact-tracing apps
should answer the following.
Principles: is this the right app to develop?
1. Is it necessary?
• Yes, it must be developed to save lives (+).
• No, there are better solutions (–).
2. Is it proportionate?
• Yes, the gravity of the situation justifies the
potential negative impact (+).
• No, the potential negative impact is
disproportionate to the situation (–).
3. Is it sufficiently effective, timely,
popular and accurate?
• Yes, evidence shows that it will work, is
timely, will be adopted by enough people
and yields accurate data and insights (+).
• No, it does not work well, is available too
late or too early, will not be used widely,
and is likely to collect data that have false
positives and/or false negatives (–).
4. Is it temporary?
• Yes, there is an explicit and reasonable date
on which it will cease (+).
• No, it has no defined end date (–).
Requirements: is this app being developed
in the right way?
5. Is it voluntary?
• Yes, it is optional to download and install (+).
• No, it is mandatory and people can be
penalized for non-compliance (–).
6. Does it require consent?
• Yes, people have complete choice over
what data are shared and when, and can
change this at any time (+).
• No, default settings are to share everything
all the time, and this cannot be altered (–).
7. Are the data kept private and users’
anonymity preserved?
• Yes, data are anonymous and held only
on the user’s phone. Others who have been
in contact are notified only that there is a
risk of contagion, not from whom or where.
Methods such as differential privacy are used
to ensure this. Cyber-resilience is high (+).
• No, data are (re)identifiable owing to the
level of data collected, and stored centrally.
Locations of contacts are also available.
Cyber-resilience is low (–).
8. Can users erase the data?
• Yes, they can do so at will; all data are
deleted at the end point (+).
• No, there is no provision for data deletion,
nor a guarantee that it can ever be deleted (–).
9. Is the purpose of data collection defined?
• Yes, explicitly; for example, to alert users
that they have encountered a potentially
infected person (+).
• No, the purposes of data collection are not
explicitly defined (–).
10. Is the purpose limited?
• Yes, it is used for tracing and tracking of
COVID-19 only (+).
• No, it can be regularly updated to add extra
features that extend its functionality (–).
11. Is it used only for prevention?
• Yes, it is used only to enable people
voluntarily to limit spread (+).
• No, it is also used as a passport to enable
people to claim benefits or return to work (–).
12. Is it used for compliance?
• No, it is not used to enforce behaviour (+).
• Yes, non-compliance can result in
punishment such as a fine or jail time (–).
13. Is it open-source?
• Yes, the code is publicly available for
inspection, sharing and collaborative
improvement (+).
• No, the source code is proprietary, and no
information about it is provided (–).
14. Is it equally available?
• Yes, it is free and distributed to anyone (+).
• No, it is arbitrarily given only to some (–).
15. Is it equally accessible?
• Yes, it is user-friendly, even for naive users,
and works on the widest possible range of
mobile phones (+).
• No, it can be used only by those with
specific devices and with sufficient digital
education (–).
16. Is there a decommissioning process?
• Yes, there is a process for shutting it down (+).
• No, there are no policies in place (–).
Is this contact-tracing app
ethically justifiable?
30  |  Nature  |  Vol 582  |  4 June 2020
Guidelines
send geotagged ‘selfies’ to the police to prove
they are at home. Singapore’s TraceTogether
app has been downloaded by about 25% of its
population, much less than the 60% needed.
This has led the country to introduce its
SafeEntry system, which requires users to
check in to public places using their national
identity card or by scanning a QR code with
their phone.
Apps differ in how they collect and
store data. For example, they might rely
on systems that are centralized, as in Australia and Singapore, or decentralized,
as in Germany and Italy . Centralized apps
send pseudonymized data collected by a
user’s phone to a central database controlled
by, for example, a national health agency,
where contacts are matched. Decentralized
approaches instead match contacts on the
user’s device (see go.nature.com/3e7jntx).
Use of an app can be voluntary, as the European Commission recommended in April
(see go.nature.com/2x2hrat), or not. India’s
app, for instance, is mandatory for citizens
living in virus-containment zones and for all
government and private-sector employees.
Apps in Argentina and the United Kingdom
ask users to self-report their symptoms,
whereas the Norwegian app relies on the user
having a formal diagnostic test.
More coordination is needed. Some supranational efforts to harmonize the apps are
under way. The World Health Organization,
for example, is developing a symptom-checking app that might also enable contact tracing
in under-resourced countries. The European
Data Protection Supervisor has called for a
Europe-wide contact-tracing app5. The European Commission has outlined requirements
for digital tracing solutions deployed in the
European Union, including compliance with
EU data protection and privacy rules1.
Countries and regions should consider a
broader set of ethical concerns, including
equality and fairness. Government agencies
and developers working under pressure
might find it hard to make these judgement
calls quickly. In other contexts, such as bioethics, ethical review boards typically have
much more time to deliberate. Expert groups
might be set up to advise, as France, Italy
and the United Kingdom have done. (L.F. is
a member of the UK National Health Service
COVID-19 App Data Ethics Advisory Board; see
go.nature.com/3cxyzrw).
Four principles
To be ethical, a contact-tracing app must
abide by four principles: it must be necessary, proportional, scientifically valid and
time-bound. These principles are derived
from the European Convention on Human
Rights, the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights (ICCPR) and the United
Nations Siracusa Principles, which specify
the provisions in the ICCPR that limit how it
can be applied.
However, there are many ways in which an
app can meet these principles. To address
this gap, we have synthesized 16 questions
that designers, deployers and evaluators
should answer (see ‘Is this contact-tracing
app ethically justifiable?’). For each, we give
examples of how an app might be designed
and used in a more (+) or less (–) ethically justifiable way. These questions apply to apps
that have been released, as well as for those
in development6.
In theory, an ethical app should satisfy
all 16 factors. The questions themselves
might not be controversial, but the answers
are likely to generate disagreement about
whether and how much an app satisfies a
factor, and which ethical factors should be
a priority.
In practice, there will be trade-offs. These
will depend on the laws, values, attitudes
and norms in different regions, as well as on
changes over time in the spread and scale of
the virus and the available technology. For
example, it might be more ethically justifiable to deploy an app that does not fully meet
the stipulation that it should “work on the
widest possible range of mobile phones” in a
country with high smartphone penetration,
such as South Korea — where more than 95%
of people owned a smartphone in 2018. But it
might be less justifiable in Japan, where 66%
of the population did.
Similarly, what was ethically justifiable in
one place yesterday might not be so tomorrow. For example, Germany shifted from a
centralized to a decentralized app after some
300 experts signed an open letter strongly
criticizing the centralized approach. The
same happened in Italy after Apple and
Google announced their plan to support
decentralized apps. Singapore could follow
suit. Its centralized TraceTogether app was
developed before the Apple–Google interface was available, and developers are now
aiming to make it compatible.
An app’s implementation strategy and
impact must also be considered. Something
that looked good on paper can turn out to
be ineffective in practice. This was the case
with the Australian COVIDsafe app. Concerns
about third-party access to user data and
low compatibility with phones running old
operating systems have led to a low level of
adoption. More than a month since deployment, the minimum threshold of 40% has not
been met. This is making the app irrelevant
for managing the pandemic in Australia.
If an app fails, it becomes unnecessary,
and thus unethical. Apps that are no longer
beneficial should be improved or decommissioned. A review and exit strategy must be
in place to establish when and how fast this
should happen. These assessments should be
conducted by an independent body, such as
a regulator or an ethics advisory board, and
not by the designers or the government itself.
Circumstances and attitudes are changing
quickly, so the questions in our framework
must be asked anew at regular intervals.
One chance
Governments might not have a second chance
to get an intervention right — failure now
could breach public trust for the foreseeable future. Governments, developers and
deployers must ensure that COVID-19 contact-tracing apps satisfactorily address the
ethical questions we set out. Apps that do not
should not be deployed; alternatives should
be considered.
Simply rolling out a tracing app without
ethical consideration is not acceptable.
Even in a crisis, a ‘try-everything’ approach
is dangerous when it ignores the real costs,
including serious and long-lasting harms to
fundamental rights and freedoms, and the
opportunity costs of not devoting resources
to something else.
The authors
Jessica Morley is a graduate researcher at the
Oxford Internet Institute, University of Oxford,
UK. Josh Cowls is a doctoral researcher at
the Oxford Internet Institute, University of
Oxford, UK, and at The Alan Turing Institute,
London, UK. Mariarosaria Taddeo is a senior
research fellow at the Oxford Internet Institute,
University of Oxford, UK, and a Turing Fellow/
DSTL Ethics Fellow at The Alan Turing Institute,
London, UK. Luciano Floridi is professor of
philosophy and ethics of information at the
Oxford Internet Institute, University of Oxford,
UK, and a Turing Fellow and chair of the Data
Ethics Group at The Alan Turing Institute,
London, UK.
e-mail: 
1. European Commission. Commission Recommendation
(EU) 2020/518 of 8 April 2020 ; available at
 
2. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control.
Novel Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Pandemic:
Increased Transmission in the EU/EEA and the UK — Sixth
Update .
3. Ferretti, L. et al. Science 368, eabb6936 .
4. Keeling, M. J., Hollingsworth, T. D. & Read, J. M. Preprint
at medRxiv 
5. Wiewiórowski, W. EU Digital Solidarity: A Call for a Pan-
European Approach Against the Pandemic .
6. Floridi, L. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A 376, 20180081 .
“Governments might not
have a second chance to get
an intervention right.”
Nature  |  Vol 582  |  4 June 2020  |  31