Chebyshev Expansion Approach to the AC Conductivity of the Anderson Model
Alexander Weiße
School of Physics, The University of New South Wales, Sydney NSW 2052, Australia
 )
We propose an advanced Chebyshev expansion method for the numerical calculation of linear response functions at ﬁnite temperature. Its high stability and the small required resources allow for a comprehensive study
of the optical conductivity σ(ω) of non-interacting electrons in a random potential (Anderson model) on large
three-dimensional clusters. For low frequency the data follows the analytically expected power-law behaviour
with an exponent that depends on disorder and has its minimum near the metal-insulator transition, where also
the extrapolated DC conductivity continuously goes to zero. In view of the general applicability of the Chebyshev approach we brieﬂy discuss its formulation for interacting quantum systems.
PACS numbers: 78.20.Bh, 72.15.Rn, 05.60.Gg
The numerical calculation of linear response functions is
one of the standard tasks in condensed matter theory and many
other areas of physics. In practice, however, the number of degrees of freedom usually becomes enormously large and can
easily reach N ≈106 or more, e.g., for a quantum many body
problem. A complete diagonalisation of such systems and a
naive evaluation of linear response functions is prohibitive is
such situations, since the required time would scale at least
as N 3. The use and development of new numerical methods
which are linear in the system size has therefore become an
essential part of current research. In the present work we follow this line and propose an advanced Chebyshev expansion
method for the calculation of dynamical correlation functions
at ﬁnite temperature. It exceeds previous attempts, in particular, since it requires only a single simulation run for all temperatures and, if applied to non-interacting fermions, for all
chemical potentials.
As a particularly interesting application, we study the optical (AC) conductivity σ(ω) of non-interacting electrons in
a random potential, which has so far resisted a thorough numerical treatment. The basic model to describe this kind of
problem and many of its features was proposed by Anderson
almost ﬁfty years ago1, and since then attracted a considerable amount of analytical, numerical, and experimental work2.
Starting from spinless fermions c(†)
which are allowed to hop
between neighbouring sites of a crystal,
disorder can be introduced in the form of a random, uniformly
distributed local potential ǫi ∈[−W/2, W/2] parameterised
by the disorder strength W. Given this Hamiltonian the question arises, whether its one-particle eigenfunctions span the
entire lattice, thus resembling the Bloch waves known from
an ordered crystal (W = 0), or are localised in the vicinity of
certain lattice sites. Naturally, this change in the spatial structure of the wave functions is reﬂected in the (DC) conductivity
of the system, being insulating or metallic depending on the
disorder strength W, the spatial dimension d, and the particle density (or chemical potential µ). Much of our current
understanding of this disorder-induced metal-insulator transition is based on the one-parameter scaling theory of Abrahams et al.3, which in d ≤2 dimensions predicts insulating
behaviour for any ﬁnite disorder W > 0 and a continuous
metal-insulator transition at some Wc(µ) > 0 for d > 2. The
critical behaviour near the transition is usually described in
terms of nonlinear σ-models4 and is widely believed to follow
power laws with a correlation/localisation length ξ diverging
as ξ ∝|Wc −W|−ν, and the DC conductivity vanishing as
σ(0) ∝(Wc −W)s. Numerical work conﬁrmed much of
this general picture and over the last years focused on the precise determination of the critical line Wc(µ) and of the critical
exponents, which so far could not be calculated analytically.
For the above model the most reliable data (Wc(0)/t = 16.54
and ν = 1.57, cf. Ref. 5) is based on the transfer-matrix
method6, where in a quasi-one-dimensional geometry the correlation length ξ is obtained from the ﬁnite size scaling of the
Lyapunov exponents. Unfortunately, approaches of this type
cannot directly access the DC conductivity σ(0) or its critical behaviour. Our knowledge of the exponent s is therefore
mainly based on scaling arguments7, namely, s = (d −2)ν.
However, the validity of the one-parameter scaling theory and
of the corresponding critical behaviour has been repeatedly
called into question8,9, and instead the non-power-like critical
behaviour known for the Bethe lattice has been proposed to
hold also for hyper-cubic systems. The resolution of this certainly not completely settled issue may require the use of alternative numerical methods, which should preferably be based
on true d dimensional systems and yield complementary critical quantities.
As noted before, here we want to focus on the numerical calculation of the optical conductivity σ(ω) of threedimensional (cubic) clusters. This allows for a test of various
analytical predictions for the ﬁnite frequency behaviour, and
eventually we can draw conclusions about the zero-frequency
response. In particular, for d dimensional systems Wegner7
found σ(ω) ∼ω(d−2)/d to hold exactly at the metal-insulator
transition, a prediction which is consistent also with the oneparameter scaling theory10. On the metallic side of the transition different studies10,11,12 agree that for small enough frequency the conductivity should behave as ∆σ = σ(ω) −
σ(0) ∼ω(d−2)/2, whereas on the insulating side we expect
the well known σ(ω) ∼ω2 behaviour independent of the spatial dimension13. As will become clear below, the numerical calculation of σ(ω) is a challenging task, which certainly
is the reason that only the prediction for the critical point in
d = 3, i.e., σ(ω) ∼ω1/3, is conﬁrmed so far14,15. Within linear response the real part of the optical conductivity is given
|⟨n|Jx|m⟩|2
[f(Em)−f(En)] δ(ω−ωnm) , (2)
where |n⟩and |m⟩denote eigenstates of the Hamiltonian
with energies En and Em, ωnm = En −Em, f(E) =
1/(exp(β(E −µ)) + 1) is the Fermi function, and Jx =
i+xci) the x-component of the current operator. Even at zero temperature Eq. (2) involves a summation over matrix elements between all one-particle eigenstates
of H, which can hardly be calculated for a reasonably large
system. Consequently, until now, the number of numerical
attempts to this problem is very small.
Some authors relied on a full diagonalisation of the Hamiltonian and an explicit summation of the current matrix elements14,16,17,18, but
of course the system sizes manageable with this approach are
very limited. Even the dramatically improved performance
of present day computers allows only the study of clusters of
about L3 = 203 sites. More recently the so-called forced oscillator method15 and the projection method19 were applied
to the problem, which increased the accessible system size
to about 303 and 2563 sites, respectively. However, the frequency and parameter ranges considered in these works were
rather limited, and unfortunately the resolution as well as the
statistical quality of the data seem to be insufﬁcient for a detailed analysis of the low-frequency behaviour19.
About a decade ago Silver and R¨oder20 proposed the kernel polynomial method (KPM) for the calculation of the density of states of large Hamiltonian matrices, which, in addition, turned out to be a very robust and reliable tool for
the calculation of temperature dependent static quantities and
zero-temperature dynamical correlation functions of interacting systems (which in contrast to Eq. (2) require only a single summation over the matrix elements between the groundstate and excitations)21. In a nutshell, after appropriate rescaling of the Hamiltonian, ˜H = (H −b)/a, and of the energy spectral quantities like the density of states, ρ(E) =
n=0 δ(E −En)/N, are expanded in terms of Chebyshev
polynomials Tm(x) = cos(m acos(x)). To alleviate the effects of a truncation of such a series the result is convoluted
with a particular kernel (the Jackson kernel), and to a good
approximation ρ(E) then reads
ρ(E) ≈g0µ0 + 2 PM−1
m=1 gmµm Tm[(E −b)/a]
a2 −(E −b)2
Here the gm account for the kernel and the µm are the actual expansion coefﬁcients, µm =
ρ(x) Tm[(x−b)/a] dx =
Tr[Tm( ˜H)]/N. It turns out that the numerical calculation of
the coefﬁcients µm does not require the full evaluation of the
trace of the polynomial Tm( ˜H). Instead, self-averaging properties, used also in Monte Carlo simulations, allow for an replacement of the trace by an average over a small number
R ≪N of random states |r⟩. If, in addition, recursion relations for the Chebyshev polynomials are taken into account,
FIG. 1: The matrix element density j(x, y) for the Anderson model
at W/t = 2 and 12. Note the dip developing at x = y which ﬁnally
causes the vanishing DC conductivity.
for sparse Hamiltonians of dimension N the numerical effort
for the calculation of all M coefﬁcients µm is proportional
to RNM/2, i.e., linear in N. Once the µm are known the
reconstruction of the target function is facilitated by the close
relation between Chebyshev expansion and Fourier transform,
i.e., the availability of divide-and-conquer type algorithms
So far we are aware of only one attempt22 to generalise
the kernel polynomial method to ﬁnite-temperature dynamical
correlations (note that for non-interacting systems the numerical effort is equal for T = 0 and T > 0). In this recent letter
Iitaka and Ebisuzaki22 propose a Chebyshev expansion of the
Boltzmann or Fermi weights (see Eq. (2)), which is used to
generate a set of correspondingly weighted random vectors.
These states are then subject to standard numerical time evolution and measurements of the targeted operator, and ﬁnally
yield the considered correlation function. Although certainly
being a useful approach, we argue that it is still unnecessarily
complicated, mainly because each change in the temperature
T or chemical potential µ requires a new simulation.
To avoid these complications we propose a slight increase
in the level of abstraction, namely, the introduction of twodimensional KPM. A closer inspection of Eq. (2) shows that
σ(ω) is easily written as an integral over a matrix element
j(x, y) = 1
|⟨n|Jx|m⟩|2δ(x −En)δ(y −Em) ,
j(x, x + ω)[f(x) −f(x + ω)] dx .
The quantity j(x, y), however, is of the same structure as the
density of states, except for being a function of two variables.
As was shown by Wang23 some years ago, it can thus be expanded as a series of polynomials Tl(x)Tm(y) and the expansion coefﬁcients µlm are characterised by a similar trace,
µlm = Tr[Tl( ˜H)JxTm( ˜H)Jx]/Ld. Again the trace can be replaced by an average over just a few random vectors |r⟩, and
the numerical effort for an expansion of order l, m < M ≪N
ranges between 2RNM and RNM 2, depending on whether
memory is available for up to M vectors of dimension N or
not. Probably overlooking the potential of the approach, so far
ω / (6t + W/2)
σ(ω) ⋅ (6t + W/2)
3, M=1024, S=240..360
3, M=2048, S=400..440
W/t = 4,6,8...18,20,24,28,40
FIG. 2: Optical conductivity of the 3D Anderson model at T = 0
and µ = 0 (band centre) for increasing disorder W . The thick red
lines mark W/t = 16, which approximately corresponds to the critical disorder. Data denoted by solid lines is based on N = 503 site
clusters, expansion order M = 1024, and S = 240 . . . 360 disordered samples, dashed lines in the inset correspond to N = 1003,
M = 2048 and S = 400 . . . 440.
only the zero temperature response was studied and, in particular, the back transformation of the expansion coefﬁcients
relied on pure truncated Chebyshev series23. The latter, however, suffer from unwanted high-frequency oscillations and
the positivity of j(x, y) is not ensured. We therefore generalised the Jackson kernel and the KPM to two dimensions.
Combined with fast Fourier methods, which are available for
arbitrary dimension, this leads to an easy and reliable method
for the calculation of j(x, y) and σ(ω).
Note the main advantage of this approach: Once we know
the coefﬁcients µlm and the resulting j(x, y), we can immediately calculate σ(ω) for all temperatures and all chemical potentials, without repeating the most time consuming
step of calculating µlm (and, for the present model, averaging over several realisations of disorder). In addition, as
was shown in a number of works, standard KPM is numerically much more stable and allows much higher resolution
than the popular Lanczos recursion approach24. We therefore believe that the new generalisation of KPM will also outperform the ﬁnite-temperature Lanczos methods proposed recently25,26. The generalisation of the approach to interacting
systems is straightforward27. It merely requires a substitution
of the Fermi function by the Boltzmann weight in Eq. (4), and
a division of the result by the partition function, which is readily obtained from an expansion of the density of states.
Applying the approach to the Anderson model, we obtain
the matrix element density j(x, y) shown in Figure 1. Starting from a “shark ﬁn” at weak disorder, with increasing W the
density j(x, y) spreads in the entire energy plane, simultaneously developing a sharp dip along x = y. A comparison with
Eq. (4) reveals, that it is this dip which is responsible for the
decreasing and ﬁnally vanishing DC conductivity. For µ = 0
(band centre) and T = 0 the corresponding optical conductivity σ(ω) is given in Figure 2. Note, that the calculation is
based on large ﬁnite clusters with up to N = L3 = 1003 sites
and periodic boundary conditions, the data is averaged over
up to S = 440 disordered samples, and the expansion order
M = 1024 . At
weak disorder the conductivity is almost Drude like with only
a small dip at low frequency. With increasing disorder this
small-ω feature becomes more pronounced and ﬁnally leads
to insulating behaviour at strong disorder. Beyond a sharpening maximum near ω ≈t the conductivity falls of almost with
a power law and later exponentially.
The high precision of the data allows for a detailed comparison of the low frequency behaviour with the above mentioned
analytical results. In the inset of Figure 2 we focus on the
low frequency part and plot the conductivity data again on a
double-logarithmic scale. Clearly, for disorder W/t ≥16 the
data follows a power law, whereas for W/t < 16 the slight
upturn at low frequencies accounts for the ﬁnite DC conductivity. To substantiate these ﬁndings, in Figure 3 we show ﬁts
of the low-frequency data to σ(ω) = σ(0) + Cωα. Starting
from the localised phase at large W the DC conductivity σ(0)
is zero and the exponent α decreases continuously with W,
reaching α = 1/3 near W/t ≈16. Below that value σ(0)
increases continuously with decreasing disorder W, and the
same seems to hold for α. Note that we slightly vary µ around
zero to expand the data basis and estimate the error of the ﬁts.
Unfortunately, for W/t < 16 the three free parameters lead to
a sizeable uncertainty in particular for the exponent α. Nevertheless, we can conﬁrm the general trends, namely an increase
of the exponent α from 1/3 at the critical point to eventually
a value of 2 at very large disorder, and an increase towards
α = (d −2)/2 = 1/2 for weak disorder. Although our data
looks rather convincing, note one potential problem: The considered frequencies might still be too large for an observation
of the correct scaling, since from analytical work12 the √ω or
ω2 behaviour of σ(ω) is expected only for frequencies smaller
than a cut-off of the order of ωcr ∼1/(ρ(µ)ξ3), while for
ω ≫ωcr ∆σ ∼ω1/3. On the other hand, also an increased
resolution did not show any indication of such a cross-over,
even though, particularly on the insulating side, the localisation length ξ rapidly decreases with W, reaching the order of
1 for the largest disorder values considered. We hope further
studies can resolve this puzzling issue.
Keeping in mind the above subtleties, we can also try to
address the critical behaviour expressed in σ(0). As the comparison of data for 503 and 1003 sites in Figure 2 illustrates,
for the considered frequencies the AC conductivity does not
suffer from noticeable ﬁnite-size effects. This is corroborated
by estimates of the diffusion length Lω (the distance electrons
diffuse within a ﬁeld cycle; cf. Ref. 10), throughout yielding
Lω ≪L. Therefore the ﬁt parameter σ(0) in Figure 3 should
correspond to the thermodynamic limit of the DC conductivity, which for dimension d = 3 is widely believed to follow a
σ(0) ∼(Wc −W)s law with s = ν ≈1.57. However, the
curvature of σ(0), derived from our data, seems to be larger,
leading to s of the order of 2. On the other hand, we also
obtained reasonable ﬁts using the expression for the Bethe
lattice8, σ(0) ∼(Wc −W)−3/2 exp(−A(Wc −W)−1/2),
3, M=1024, S=240..360
3, M=2048, S=400..440
1.9e-4 |W-Wc|
112 |W-Wc|
-1.5exp(-16.9 |W-Wc|
µ ∈ [-0.05 W, 0.05 W]
FIG. 3: Exponent α and DC conductivity σ(0) obtained from ﬁts
of the low-frequency conductivity to σ(ω) = σ(0) + C ωα (vertical bars in the inset of Fig. 2 mark the underlying frequency
range). Error bars are estimated by slightly varying µ in the range
−0.05W . . . 0.05W .
which would contradict the behaviour generally assumed for
the d = 3 Anderson model. Although resolving these interesting questions certainly requires an improvement of both the
resolution and the statistical quality of the data, our results
shed new light on the Anderson transition and illustrate the
potential of the numerical approach.
In summary, we described a promising new technique for
the numerical calculation of ﬁnite temperature dynamical correlation functions for both interacting and non-interacting
quantum systems.
By extending the Kernel Polynomial
Method to functions of two variables, we avoid the disadvantages of thermal projection techniques, and obtain reliable
results for all temperatures (and chemical potentials) from a
single simulation run. Being a hybrid of the iterative schemes
of numerical diagonalisation and of random sampling, the
approach might also inspire new Monte-Carlo methods for
correlation functions.
Applying the method to the Anderson model we present comprehensive data for the AC conductivity, which substantially improves previous numerical
studies with respect to accessible system size, considered frequency and parameter range, as well as statistical signiﬁcance.
In addition, we conﬁrm analytical predictions for the lowfrequency behaviour of the AC conductivity, but ﬁnd indications that the critical behaviour of the DC conductivity might
deviate from the commonly presumed form.
The author acknowledges valuable discussion and comments of
H. Fehske and J. Oitmaa, the hospitality at the MPI PKS Dresden,
the grant of computational resources by APAC and ac3, and ﬁnancial
support by the Australian Research Council.
1 P. W. Anderson, Phys. Rev. 109, 1492 .
2 D. J. Thouless, Physics Reports 13, 93 ; P. A. Lee and T. V.
Ramakrishnan, Rev. Mod. Phys. 57, 287 ; B. Kramer and
A. Mac Kinnon, Rep. Prog. Phys. 56, 1469 .
3 E. Abrahams, P. W. Anderson, D. C. Licciardello, and T. V. Ramakrishnan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 42, 673 .
4 K. B. Efetov, Adv. Phys. 32, 53 .
5 K. Slevin and T. Ohtsuki, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 382 .
6 A. Mac Kinnon and B. Kramer, Z. Phys. B 53, 1 .
7 F. J. Wegner, Z. Phys. B 25, 327 .
8 K. B. Efetov and O. Viehweger, Phys. Rev. B 45, 11546 .
9 M. R. Zirnbauer, Phys. Rev. B 34, 6394 .
10 B. Shapiro and E. Abrahams, Phys. Rev. B 24, 4889 .
11 R. Oppermann and F. Wegner, Z. Phys. B 34, 327 .
12 B. Shapiro, Phys. Rev. B 25, 4266 .
13 N. F. Mott, Adv. Phys. 16, 49 .
14 P. Lambrianides and H. B. Shore, Phys. Rev. B 50, 7268 .
15 H. Shima and T. Nakayama, Phys. Rev. B 60, 14066 .
16 R. C. Albers and J. E. Gubernatis, Phys. Rev. B 17, 4487 .
17 A. Singh and W. L. McMillan, J. Phys. C 18, 2097 .
18 M. Hwang, A. Gonis, and A. J. Freeman, Phys. Rev. B 35, 8974
19 T. Iitaka, in High Performance Computing in RIKEN 1997, vol. 19
of RIKEN Review, pp. 136–143, Inst. Phys. Chem. Res. (RIKEN),
Japan .
20 R. N. Silver and H. R¨oder, Int. J. Mod. Phys. C 5, 935 .
21 R. N. Silver, H. R¨oder, A. F. Voter, and D. J. Kress, J. of Comp.
Phys. 124, 115 .
22 T. Iitaka and T. Ebisuzaki, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 047203 .
23 L.-W. Wang and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 1039 ; L.-
W. Wang, Phys. Rev. B 49, 10154 .
24 R. Haydock, V. Heine, and M. J. Kelly, J. Phys. C 5, 2845 .
25 J. Jakliˇc and P. Prelovˇsek, Phys. Rev. B 49, 5065 .
26 M. Aichhorn, M. Daghofer, H. G. Evertz, and W. von der Linden,
Phys. Rev. B 67, 161103 .
27 More details to be published elsewhere.