Retrosynthetic Reaction Prediction Using Neural Sequence-to-
Sequence Models
Bowen Liu,†
Bharath Ramsundar,‡
Prasad Kawthekar,‡ Jade Shi,† Joseph Gomes,†
Quang Luu Nguyen,† Stephen Ho,† Jack Sloane,† Paul Wender,†,§
and Vijay Pande*,†,‡,∥
†Department of Chemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, United States
‡Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, United States
§Department of Chemical and Systems Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, United States
∥Department of Structural Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, United States
S Supporting Information
ABSTRACT: We describe a fully data driven model that
learns to perform a retrosynthetic reaction prediction task,
which is treated as a sequence-to-sequence mapping problem.
The end-to-end trained model has an encoder−decoder
architecture that consists of two recurrent neural networks,
which has previously shown great success in solving other
sequence-to-sequence prediction tasks such as machine
translation. The model is trained on 50,000 experimental
reaction examples from the United States patent literature,
which span 10 broad reaction types that are commonly used by
medicinal chemists. We ﬁnd that our model performs
comparably with a rule-based expert system baseline model,
and also overcomes certain limitations associated with rulebased expert systems and with any machine learning approach that contains a rule-based expert system component. Our model
provides an important ﬁrst step toward solving the challenging problem of computational retrosynthetic analysis.
■INTRODUCTION
Organic synthesis is a critical discipline that directly brings
scientiﬁc and societal beneﬁts by enabling access to poorly
available molecules and, more signiﬁcantly, to new molecules
that have never been studied before. This accessibility
fundamentally enables other ﬁelds of research such as materials
science, environmental science, and drug discovery. Retrosynthetic analysis is a technique widely used by organic
chemists to design synthetic routes to “target” molecules, where
the target is recursively transformed into simpler precursor
molecules until commercially available “starting” molecules are
identiﬁed.1−3 It encompasses two related tasks. The ﬁrst task,
reaction prediction, involves predicting how a set of reactants
will react to form products. The second task involves planning
the optimal series of reaction prediction steps to recursively
deconvolute the target molecule into simple or commercially
available precursor molecules in a way that minimizes steps,
cost, time, and waste.4,5
Computational retrosynthetic analysis tools can potentially
greatly assist chemists in designing synthetic routes to novel
molecules, and would have many applications in drug discovery,
medicinal chemistry, materials science, and natural product
synthesis. Since the 1960s, chemists have recognized the
promise of modern computing in assisting organic synthesis
analyses. However, although various algorithms have been
developed over the years, their widespread acceptance by
mainstream chemists has lagged.6 In part, this is due to these
approaches being applicable to only relatively simple target
molecules for which expert chemists could readily deduce
synthetic plans without assistance.7 The ﬁrst class of algorithms
uses reaction rules that are either manually encoded by human
experts or automatically derived from a reaction database.8−23
The key drawback of such rule-based expert systems is that they
generally cannot make accurate predictions outside of their
knowledge base. As a result, these systems perform poorly
when generalizing to new target structures and reaction types.
The second class of algorithms uses principles of physical
chemistry to predict energy barriers of a reaction based on ﬁrst
principles.24−30 Although this approach can generalize to novel
molecules and reaction types, currently such calculations are
often prohibitively expensive to perform for full synthetic
planning problems.
The third class of algorithms is based on machine learning
techniques, which attempt to address the shortcomings of the
rule-based and the physical chemistry approaches by making
predictions that generalize better than those of rule-based
approaches at a computational cost that is much less than those
July 11, 2017
Published: September 5, 2017
Research Article
 
© 2017 American Chemical Society
DOI: 10.1021/acscentsci.7b00303
ACS Cent. Sci. 2017, 3, 1103−1113
Cite This: ACS Cent. Sci. 2017, 3, 1103-1113
This is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits
copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.
of physical chemistry approaches.31−34 More recently, deep
learning techniques have been applied to the reaction
prediction task. The typical deep learning approach combines
a rule-based expert system with a feedforward neural network
(NN) component that performs candidate ranking. The NN
either ranks the applicability of each rule in the knowledge base
to a given example35,36 or ranks the likelihood of each predicted
product obtained by applying all the rules in the knowledge
base to a given example.37
However, these types of deep learning approaches are
fundamentally dependent on the rule-based expert system
component and thus inherit some of its major limitations. In
particular, these approaches have issues with making accurate
predictions outside of the rule-based knowledge base. Additionally, there is a trade-oﬀbetween deﬁning very general rules
that result in a lot of noise and deﬁning very speciﬁc rules that
are only applicable to a limited set of reactions with very
speciﬁc reactants and products.35 The reaction rules are
necessarily inadequate representations of the underlying
chemistry because they focus on the local molecular environment of the reaction centers only. Furthermore, the rule-based
expert system components used by these deep learning
approaches do not fully account for stereochemistry; noticeably, none of their reported reaction examples contain
molecules with stereocenters.
An alternative deep learning approach that eliminates the
rule-based expert system component would overcome these
limitations. One way to view the reaction prediction task is to
cast it as a sequence-to-sequence prediction problem, where the
objective is to map a text sequence that represents the reactants
to a text sequence that represents the product, or vice versa.
Although molecules are usually represented as 2D or 3D
graphs, they can also be equivalently expressed as text
sequences in line notation format, such as simpliﬁed
molecular-input line-entry system (SMILES)38 or International
Chemical Identiﬁer (InChI).39 The text representation of
molecules in various chemoinformatic applications and the
relationships between organic chemistry and linguistics have
been explored previously.40−45 Recently, Nam and Kim46
described a neural sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) model for
the forward reaction prediction task. The model was trained
end-to-end on a combination of artiﬁcially generated reactions
and experimental reactions from an open source patent data
set.47 Given an input SMILES that represents the reactants, the
model directly outputs a SMILES that represents the predicted
Here, we attempt to solve the retrosynthetic reaction
prediction task, which presents additional challenges compared
to the forward reaction prediction task, because the input in the
retrosynthetic reaction prediction task contains less information
and there are many more possible outputs. For forward reaction
prediction, the starting materials signiﬁcantly constrain the
reaction types that are possible and limit the number of
possible products. On the other hand, for retrosynthetic
reaction prediction, there are usually multiple possible ways to
disconnect the target molecule, via many diﬀerent reaction
types, to produce a large number of possible starting materials.
Indeed, every bond in the target molecule represents a possible
retrosynthetic disconnection. Figure 1 shows a synthetic
scheme for phenylalanine that illustrates the asymmetry in
the input constraints for the forward and retrosynthetic
reaction prediction tasks. In the forward direction, each of
the three diﬀerent sets of starting materials and reaction
conditions will result in phenylalanine as the single major
product. Conversely, in the retrosynthetic direction, the
phenylalanine can be disconnected into three diﬀerent sets of
starting materials.
In this work, we describe our initial studies directed at
solving the challenging problem of computational retrosynthetic analysis. In particular, we develop a fully data driven
seq2seq model that learns to perform the retrosynthetic
reaction prediction subtask. For a given target molecule and a
speciﬁed reaction type, the model predicts the most likely
reactants that can react in the speciﬁed reaction type to produce
the target molecule. The seq2seq model is trained end-to-end
on a subset of experimental reactions with labeled reaction
types48 from an open source patent database.47 We show that
the trained seq2seq model performs comparably with a rulebased expert system baseline model on the relatively simple
chemistry found in the patent data set.
Problem Deﬁnition. Concretely, the retrosynthetic reaction prediction task is shown in Figure 2. Given an input
SMILES that represents the target molecule and a speciﬁed
reaction type, the model predicts the output SMILES which
represents the likely reactants that can react in the speciﬁed
reaction type to form the target molecule.
Data Preparation. We use a ﬁltered patent data set, derived
from an open source patent database,47 which contains 50,000
atom-mapped reactions that have been classiﬁed into 10 broad
reaction types.48 This ﬁltered patent data set was originally
constructed to represent the typical reaction types found in the
medicinal chemist’s toolkit. The reaction examples are further
preprocessed to eliminate all reagents in order to only contain
reactants and products,48 and then canonicalized. We addition-
Figure 1. Phenylalanine synthetic scheme.
ACS Central Science
Research Article
DOI: 10.1021/acscentsci.7b00303
ACS Cent. Sci. 2017, 3, 1103−1113
ally process this data set so that each reaction example contains
a single product by splitting any reactions with multiple
products into multiple single product reactions that contain the
original reactants. Any resulting reaction examples with trivial
products such as inorganic ions and solvent molecules are
removed. Table 1 shows the distribution of the 10 reaction
classes in the ﬁnal processed data set. Finally, the data set was
split into training, validation, and test data sets (8:1:1).
Model. Seq2seq Model. Neural sequence-to-sequence
(seq2seq) models map one sequence to another and have
recently shown state of the art performance in many tasks such
as machine translation.49,50 It is based on an encoder−decoder
architecture that consists of two recurrent neural networks
(RNN) and can include an attention mechanism that aligns the
target tokens with the source tokens.49 Figure 3 shows a simple
seq2seq encoder−decoder architecture for our retrosynthetic
reaction prediction task.
We adapt the open source seq2seq library from Britz et al.51
for our characterwise seq2seq model. The encoder−decoder
architecture consists of long short-term memory (LSTM) cells,
which is a variant of RNN cells that more eﬀectively learn longrange dependencies in the sequences.52 More speciﬁcally, the
seq2seq model consists of a bidirectional LSTM encoder and a
LSTM decoder. Furthermore, an additive attention mechanism
is used.49 The key hyperparameter settings of the seq2seq
model are shown in Table S1.
The seq2seq model is trained on the training data set with
reaction atom-mapping removed. Each reaction example is split
into a source sequence and target sequence. The source
sequence consists of a sequence of characters that is derived
from splitting the SMILES that correspond to the product into
characters, with a reaction type token prepended to the
sequence. The source sequence is reversed prior to feeding into
the encoder. The target sequence consists of a sequence of
characters that is derived from splitting the SMILES that
correspond to the reactants into characters. The seq2seq model
is evaluated every 4000 training steps on the validation data set,
and model training is stopped once the evaluation log
perplexity starts to increase.
Finally, the trained seq2seq model is evaluated on the test
data set with reaction atom-mapping removed. Each target
molecule SMILES example from the test data set is converted
into an input sequence of characters, with a reaction type token
prepended to the sequence, and reversed prior to feeding into
the encoder. A beam search procedure is used for model
inference. Figure 4 depicts a partially completed beam search
procedure with a beam width of 5 for an example input. For
each source sequence input that represents the target molecule,
the top N candidate output sequences ranked by overall
sequence log probability at each time step during decoding are
retained, where N is the width of the beam. The decoding is
stopped once the lengths of the candidate sequences reach the
maximum decode length of 140 characters. The candidate
sequences that contain an end of sequence character are
considered to be complete. On average, about 97% of all beam
Figure 2. Retrosynthetic reaction prediction task and an example of a
possible retrosynthetic disconnection for a target molecule.
Table 1. Distribution of Major Reaction Classes within the
Processed Reaction Data Set
reaction class
reaction name
no. of examples
heteroatom alkylation and arylation
acylation and related processes
C−C bond formation
heterocycle formation
protections
deprotections
reductions
oxidations
functional group interconversion (FGI)
functional group addition (FGA)
Figure 3. Seq2seq model architecture.
ACS Central Science
Research Article
DOI: 10.1021/acscentsci.7b00303
ACS Cent. Sci. 2017, 3, 1103−1113
search predicted candidate sequences are complete. These
complete candidate sequences represent the reactant sets
predicted by the seq2seq model for a particular target molecule,
and they are ranked by the overall sequence log probabilities,
which consist of the log probabilities of the individual
characters in each complete candidate sequence. Additional
beam search statistics and performance measures are shown in
Baseline Model. The baseline model is a rule-based expert
system that applies retrosynthetic reaction rules of a speciﬁed
reaction type to a target molecule to obtain the reactants. The
reaction rules are automatically extracted from the training data
set. The rule extraction algorithm is adapted from Coley et al.’s
implementation,37 which was based on the algorithms
described by Law et al.20 and Bogevig et al.53 For each atommapped reaction example in the training data set, the reaction
centers are extracted by identifying changes in connectivity
between product atoms and the corresponding reactant atoms.
The reaction centers are expanded to include immediately
neighboring atoms. A SMARTS string that describes the
reaction core pattern is generated for the reactants and product,
and combined to form a reaction SMARTS string that
represents the retrosynthetic reaction rule. Each reaction rule
is labeled with the reaction type of the corresponding reaction
example that it was extracted from. Overall, 29272 valid rules
were extracted from the training data set, which represents a
rule coverage of 73.1% in the training data set. A rule is deﬁned
to be valid if it is able to regenerate the product from the
reactants and the reactants from the product in the reaction
example from which the rule is extracted. After ﬁltering out
duplicated rules, we end up with 2868 unique retrosynthetic
reaction rules, deﬁned by SMARTS strings.
The rule-based expert system is evaluated on the test data set.
Each target molecule SMILES example from the test data set is
applied by all the rules of the particular reaction type. The
resulting top N reactant sets obtained from the successful
reaction rules are ranked by the number of occurrences of the
corresponding rule of the target reaction class that were
observed in the training data set.
All scripts were written in Python (version 3.5), and RDKit
 54 was used for reaction preprocessing and
rule extraction. The seq2seq model was built with TensorFlow
(version 1.0.1).55
Performance on the Test Data Set. Table 2 shows the
top-N accuracies of the rule-based expert system baseline and
the seq2seq model on the test data set. The top-N accuracy
refers to the percentage of examples where the ground truth
reactant set, which is the actual patent literature reported
reactant set for the corresponding target molecule in the test
data set, was found within the top N predictions made by the
model. By this metric, we observed that the seq2seq model
performs comparably to the baseline model. Although the
baseline model does not incorporate any NN component to
perform candidate ranking, the performance of the baseline
model becomes less sensitive to candidate ranking as N
increases. The maximum accuracy of the baseline model, which
is the percentage of examples where the ground truth reactant
set was found in any of the predictions made by the baseline
model, is 69.5%. This represents the maximum possible test
accuracy of the baseline model, as well as any deep learning
approach that combines a NN component that performs
candidate ranking with this rule-based expert system. The
reason is that if no reaction rule exists that can produce the
ground truth reactant set from the input molecule, then the NN
component cannot rank it. The top-50 accuracy of the seq2seq
model is higher than this maximum baseline accuracy.
Figure 4. A partially completed beam search procedure with a beam width of 5 for an example input. Note that only the top 5 candidate sequences
are retained at each time step. The visualization was produced using the seq2seq model library from Britz et al.51
Table 2. Comparison of Top-N Accuracies between the
Baseline and Seq2seq Models
top-N accuracy (%)
ACS Central Science
Research Article
DOI: 10.1021/acscentsci.7b00303
ACS Cent. Sci. 2017, 3, 1103−1113
Figure 5. continued
ACS Central Science
Research Article
DOI: 10.1021/acscentsci.7b00303
ACS Cent. Sci. 2017, 3, 1103−1113
Some representative examples of correct seq2seq model
predictions for each reaction class are shown in Figure 5. The
examples are depicted in the retrosynthetic direction.
The detailed top-10 results for the baseline model and the
seq2seq model broken down by the reaction classes are shown
in Table 3. The name of each reaction class is shown in Table 1.
The baseline model performs signiﬁcantly better in reaction
class 1 (heteroatom alkylation and arylation) and reaction class
2 (acylation and related processes). The common feature of
these reaction classes is that the reactions are possible with
many diﬀerent functional groups at the reaction site. For
example, in Figure 5, the acylation reaction between a
carboxylic acid and an amine would also be possible with
another carbonyl compound that has a suitable leaving group,
such as an acyl chloride. Additionally, the target molecules in
the data set for these reaction classes often have multiple
possible reaction sites. The knowledge base in the baseline
model contains reaction rules for each of the possible functional
groups that were present in the reaction examples from the
training data set. Therefore, the baseline model is able to easily
enumerate reactant sets that span most of the possible
functional group and reaction site combinations. On the
other hand, the seq2seq model currently predicts only a few
valid reactant sets that contain diﬀerent possible functional
group and reaction site combinations. As a result, the particular
ground truth reactant set is more likely to be found in the
predicted reactant sets from the baseline model.
The baseline model also performs signiﬁcantly better in
reaction class 4 (heterocycle formation). The key feature of this
reaction class is the formation of cyclic and aromatic structures,
which results in a large diﬀerence between the reactant set
SMILES string and the target molecule SMILES string. Also,
there is a relatively small number of reaction examples in the
training data set for this reaction class. Overall, these two
factors cause the seq2seq model to make a lot of grammatical
mistakes in the SMILES predictions.
The seq2seq model performs signiﬁcantly better in reaction
class 5 (protections) and reaction class 6 (deprotections). The
common feature of reaction classes 5 and 6 is that the reactants
have large leaving groups that are not included in the product
side. As a result, the very general rules in the baseline model,
which only contain the immediate neighborhood of the
reaction centers, do not capture the identities of the leaving
groups. Conversely, the seq2seq model captures the global
molecular environment of all the reaction species and is able to
predict the leaving groups correctly.
Error Analysis of the Seq2seq Model. The seq2seq
model makes three kinds of prediction errors:
1. The predicted reactant SMILES is grammatically invalid.
This is a result of the SMILES text representation of the
molecules, which is fragile because single character
alterations can completely invalidate the SMILES. Since
the seq2seq decoder does not explicitly understand the
grammar that underlies the SMILES representation, and
Figure 5. Representative examples of correct seq2seq model predictions for each reaction class.
Table 3. Breakdown of the Top-10 Accuracy of the Baseline and Seq2seq Models by Reaction Class
reaction class
top-10 accuracy (%)
no. of examples
ACS Central Science
Research Article
DOI: 10.1021/acscentsci.7b00303
ACS Cent. Sci. 2017, 3, 1103−1113
also formulates predictions one character at a time, it is
likely that some of the predicted reactant SMILES are
invalid. Table 4 shows a breakdown of this type of error,
and Figure 6 shows examples of this type of error.
2. The predicted reactant SMILES is grammatically valid,
but the overall reaction is not chemically plausible. This
is a typical error in which the predicted reactant set
cannot react in the speciﬁed reaction type to produce the
target molecule. Many of these errors can also be
attributed to the fragile SMILES text representation
because small alterations in the SMILES can result in
very large diﬀerences in the resulting molecule. Figure 7
shows examples of this type of error.
3. The predicted reactant SMILES is grammatically valid
and the overall reaction is chemically plausible. Although
the predicted reactant set does not match the ground
truth reactant set, the predicted reactant set is likely to
react in the speciﬁed reaction type to produce the target
molecule. One reason for this type of error is the
possibility of multiple possible functional group combinations or reactants that can react in the same reaction
type to form the target molecule. Another reason is the
presence of multiple reaction sites in the target molecule
that can be disconnected retrosynthetically, so multiple
possible reactant sets are chemically plausible. Figure 8
shows examples of this type of error.
Ranking of the Seq2seq Model Predictions. The ranked
predictions from the beam search decoding procedure of the
seq2seq model correspond well to chemical reactivity. For the
top-10 predictions with both the baseline and seq2seq models,
Figure 9 depicts a histogram that shows the counts of the
highest rank that is assigned to the prediction which matches
the ground truth for each example in the test data set. Overall,
the higher the rank of the prediction, the more likely that the
prediction corresponds to the ground truth. The distribution
for the seq2seq model is much more skewed toward the highest
ranks compared to the baseline model, which naively ranks by
the number of occurrences of the rules that were observed in
the training data set.
Analysis of the Seq2seq Model Attention Weights.
Figures S1−S10 show the attention weights between characters
in the input sequence, which represents the target molecule and
speciﬁed reaction type, and characters in the output sequence,
which represents the predicted reactants, for representative
examples of correct seq2seq model predictions in each reaction
class. The attention weights provide information on which
characters in the input sequence were considered to be more
important when a particular character in the output sequence
was generated. Generally, we see strong weights that trend
diagonally, which monotonically align molecular substructures
that are shared between the input and output. Additionally, we
see that the input reaction type token generally has high
weights with characters in the output sequence that correspond
to the neighborhood of the reaction centers.
■DISCUSSION
Comparison between the Seq2seq and Rule-Based
Baseline Model. The seq2seq model performs comparably to
the rule-based baseline model on the processed patent data set,
although the models perform diﬀerently for certain reaction
types. Importantly, the seq2seq model has some signiﬁcant
advantages compared to the baseline model, and by extension
to the deep learning based approaches that combine a rulebased expert system with a NN model for candidate ranking.
First, the seq2seq model can be trained in a fully end-to-end
manner directly from the training data set. The seq2seq model
both implicitly learns the chemical rules and performs
candidate ranking via the beam search decoding procedure.
Conversely, the typical deep learning approach to reaction
prediction combines a rule-based expert system component
Table 4. Breakdown of the Grammatically Invalid SMILES
Error for Diﬀerent Beam Sizes
no. of valid
no. of invalid
Figure 6. Examples of reactant SMILES that are grammatically invalid:
(a) reaction class 3 (C−C bond formation); (b) reaction class 7
(reductions).
Figure 7. Examples of reactant SMILES that are grammatically valid,
but the overall reaction is chemically implausible: (a) reaction class 2
(acylation and related processes); (b) reaction class 7 (reductions).
ACS Central Science
Research Article
DOI: 10.1021/acscentsci.7b00303
ACS Cent. Sci. 2017, 3, 1103−1113
with a NN model component for candidate ranking, where the
individual components need to be independently set up and
trained. Also, any rule-based expert system that automatically
extracts reaction rules from the reaction data set depend heavily
on accurate atom-mapping to describe the correspondence
between the reactant and product atoms, which is itself a
nontrivial problem.56 The seq2seq model does not require
atom-mapped reaction examples for training.
Second, the seq2seq model scales better to larger training
data sets. The eﬃciency of rule-based expert systems depends
on the number of rules in the knowledge base, which is an issue
because the size of the knowledge base generally increases as
the size of the training data set increases. For the baseline
model, as well as any deep learning approaches that use a rulebased expert system and a NN component to rank the
likelihood of each predicted molecular species for a given
example,37 the inference cost directly depends on the size of the
knowledge base since every rule in the knowledge base must be
exhaustively applied. On the other hand, the inference cost of a
particular seq2seq model is independent of the size of the
training data set and depends primarily on the width of the
beam search decoding procedure. For deep learning approaches
that use a rule-based expert system and a NN component to
rank the applicability of each rule in the knowledge base for a
given example,35,36 a previous study showed that the
classiﬁcation accuracy decreases as the size of the knowledge
base increases for a speciﬁc training data set size, likely because
the number of reaction rules that need to be ranked in the
multiclass classiﬁcation problem also increases.35 Overall, as
training data set size increases, the increasing NN accuracy
from more training examples is partially oﬀset by the negative
eﬀect on accuracy from the increased number of reaction rules
to classify. In order to reduce the number of rules in the
knowledge base, previous studies35,37 removed rare reaction
rules that occurred fewer times than a speciﬁed threshold. A
side eﬀect of this is a reduced rule coverage over the reaction
examples, especially for rare reaction types.
Third, the seq2seq model incorporates information about the
global molecular environment since the model learns from the
complete SMILES for both the reactants and the target
molecule in each reaction example. Also, the complete input
target molecule SMILES is used to make predictions. However,
the baseline model focuses only on the local molecular
environment because the automatically extracted reaction
rules in the knowledge base only incorporate the immediately
neighboring atoms around the reaction centers. This results in
an important issue with rule-based expert systems when
performing the retrosynthetic reaction prediction task. In
particular, the reaction examples in the data set are processed
Figure 8. Examples of reactant SMILES that are grammatically valid and the overall reaction is chemically plausible: (a) reaction class 1 (heteroatom
alkylation and arylation); (b) reaction class 2 (acylation and related processes).
Figure 9. Histogram of the highest rank assigned to the ground truth
match in the top-10 predictions of the seq2seq and baseline models for
each example. Note that the relative total counts across all the ranks
for the seq2seq and baseline models is proportional to their relative
top-10 accuracies shown in Table 2.
ACS Central Science
Research Article
DOI: 10.1021/acscentsci.7b00303
ACS Cent. Sci. 2017, 3, 1103−1113
into the form depicted in Figure 2, where each reaction consists
of a single target molecule and one or more reactants. In all
cases, every atom in the target molecule is atom-mapped and
can be linked to reactant atoms. Unfortunately, the inverse is
not true because, for most reaction classes, not all atoms in the
reactants are atom-mapped. These unmapped reactant atoms
are the leaving groups which are not incorporated into the
target molecule structure in the forward reaction. The issue
arises when the leaving groups are large, which occurs
commonly in reaction classes 5 (protections) and 6
(deprotections). If very general reaction rules are extracted
that only contain the immediate neighborhood of the reaction
centers, they will not fully capture the identities of the leaving
groups. As a result, for these reaction classes that involve large
leaving groups, the rules do not have suﬃcient information to
reproduce the reactants from the target molecule. One solution
would be to extract more speciﬁc rules that contain a larger
neighborhood around the reaction centers in order to capture
the identities of the leaving groups. However, the disadvantage
with more speciﬁc rules is that they are less generalizable to
new examples in the test data set. Ultimately, there is a trade-oﬀ
between deﬁning very general reaction rules and deﬁning very
speciﬁc reaction rules, which is challenging without manual
intervention. Furthermore, a direct beneﬁt of the seq2seq
model incorporating the global molecular environment is that
the model naturally accounts for stereochemistry. On the other
hand, in order for deep learning approaches that combine a
rule-based expert system with a NN model component to
account for stereochemistry, both the reaction rules in the
knowledge base and the descriptors that are used in the NN
model must incorporate stereochemistry. Existing algorithms
that automatically extract reaction rules do not fully address the
issue of stereochemistry.
Molecular Representations. The seq2seq model maps
one sequence to another, which restricts us to representing
molecules using text sequences. In this study, we predominantly
focused on the SMILES text representation because it has
characteristics that make it particularly attractive as a text
representation for molecules in a product to reactant sequenceto-sequence mapping task. Generally, when a reaction is
expressed in a SMILES representation, there are many
subsequences that are shared between the reactant and product
SMILES strings. The SMILES representation reﬂects the fact
that most reactions modify a particular reaction center, while
keeping other parts of the molecule the same. The presence of
shared subsequences between the input and output sequences
makes the sequence-to-sequence mapping task relatively easier
because the input and output sequences are similar. In
comparison, our preliminary experiments using the InChI text
representation for molecules in the seq2seq model resulted in
worse performance when compared to using SMILES. This
outcome is likely because InChI has a more complicated
hierarchical syntax, which involves arithmetic to obtain the
atom connectivity, and also there are fewer shared subsequences between the reactant and product InChI strings in a
reaction. The weaker performance of InChI compared with
SMILES when applied in a model that decodes text sequences
is also in agreement with the observations of Gómez-
Bombarelli et al.40 in their autoencoder architecture for
generating molecular structures. Nonetheless, our results have
shown that a key weakness with representing molecules using
text sequences is the fragility of the representation, since very
small changes in the text sequence can result in a very large
change in the resulting molecular structure. A more natural way
to represent molecules is to directly use graph representations,
and our future work will explore model architectures that can
take advantage of this feature.
■CONCLUSION
Overall, we have created a data driven neural sequence-tosequence model to solve the retrosynthetic reaction prediction
task, which is a critical task in computational retrosynthetic
analysis. While the current implementation of the seq2seq
model performs comparably to the rule-based expert system
baseline, the seq2seq model has fundamental advantages over
rule-based expert systems and over any deep learning approach
that depends on a rule-based expert system component. The
seq2seq model can be trained in an end-to-end manner, scales
more eﬃciently to larger data sets, and naturally incorporates
the global molecular environments of the reaction species. We
believe that there exists signiﬁcant room for improvement over
the current relatively unoptimized seq2seq model, so further
work is likely to lead to greater prediction accuracies.
In following work, we will seek to increase the accuracy of
the seq2seq model by exploring architectural variants and by
exploring new data sets. Additionally, since the seq2seq model
is a very general architecture for mapping input sequences to
output sequences, we could include reaction conditions and
yields during training in order to predict reaction conditions
and yields alongside the reactants during the decoding
procedure. Furthermore, an interesting extension to the
seq2seq models would be to use one-shot techniques57−59 to
allow our retrosynthetic reaction prediction models to make
reasonable predictions for reaction classes where only a few
example reactions are available for training. We envision that
our seq2seq model and its future variants would act as the
single step reaction prediction module in a multistep
retrosynthetic analysis tool, whereby a search procedure
recursively deconvolutes the target molecule using the
chemistry learned by the seq2seq model until simple or
commercially available precursor molecules are obtained.
We believe that the approach and model architecture
described in this work constitute an important early step
toward solving the computational retrosynthetic analysis
problem. Although the chemical complexity of the reactions
and molecules explored in this work is intentionally simple to
facilitate analysis and thus is quite far away from what is
typically faced by mainstream synthetic chemists today, we
strongly believe that the future evolution of this approach could
bridge this gap and result in tools that can become useful for
the expert chemist and also more broadly for those less skilled
in the science.
■ASSOCIATED CONTENT
Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the
ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acscentsci.7b00303.
Additional tables and ﬁgures (PDF)
The neural network model, processed data sets, and evaluation
code will be made available at 
pandegroup/reaction_prediction_seq2seq.git.
■AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Author
*E-mail: .
ACS Central Science
Research Article
DOI: 10.1021/acscentsci.7b00303
ACS Cent. Sci. 2017, 3, 1103−1113
Bowen Liu: 0000-0003-0609-3087
Bharath Ramsundar: 0000-0001-8450-4262
Paul Wender: 0000-0001-6319-2829
The authors declare the following competing ﬁnancial
interest(s): V.P. is a consultant and SAB member of
Schrodinger, LLC, and Globavir, sits on the Board of Directors
of Apeel Inc, Freenome Inc, Omada Health, Patient Ping, and
Rigetti Computing, and is a General Partner at Andreessen
■ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Franklin Lee for critical reading and feedback on the
manuscript. B.L. is supported by the NIH (U19 AI109662).
B.R. is supported by the Fannie and John Hertz Foundation.
S.H. is supported by a Postdoctoral Fellowship, PF-15-007-01-
CDD, from the American Cancer Society. The Pande Group is
broadly supported by grants from the NIH (R01 GM062868
and U19 AI109662) as well as gift funds and contributions
from Folding@home donors. This research was also supported
by the National Science Foundation (P.W.: CHE1265956). We
acknowledge the generous support of Dr. Anders G. Frøseth
and Mr. Christian Sundt for our work on machine learning.
■REFERENCES
(1) Corey, E. J.; Cheng, X.-M. The Logic of Chemical Synthesis; Wiley:
New York, 1989.
(2) Corey, E. J. General Methods for the Construction of Complex
Molecules. Pure Appl. Chem. 1967, 14, 19−38.
(3) Corey, E. J.; Wipke, W. T. Computer-Assisted Design of
Complex Organic Syntheses. Science (Washington, DC, U. S.) 1969,
166, 178−192.
(4) Wender, P. A.; Quiroz, R. V.; Stevens, M. C. Function through
Synthesis-Informed Design. Acc. Chem. Res. 2015, 48, 752−760.
(5) Wender, P. A. Toward the Ideal Synthesis and Molecular
Function through Synthesis-Informed Design. Nat. Prod. Rep. 2014,
31, 433−440.
(6) Ley, S. V.; Fitzpatrick, D. E.; Ingham, R. J.; Myers, R. M. Organic
Synthesis: March of the Machines. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2015, 54,
3449−3464.
(7) Judson, P. Knowledge-Based Expert Systems in Chemistry: Not
Counting on Computers; RSC Theoretical and Computational
Chemistry Series; The Royal Society of Chemistry: 2009.
(8) Szymkuć, S.; Gajewska, E. P.; Klucznik, T.; Molga, K.; Dittwald,
P.; Startek, M.; Bajczyk, M.; Grzybowski, B. A. Computer-Assisted
Synthetic Planning: The End of the Beginning. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.
2016, 55, 5904−5937.
(9) Pensak, D. A.; Corey, E. J. LHASALogic and Heuristics
Applied to Synthetic Analysis. In Computer-Assisted Organic Synthesis;
ACS Symposium Series; American Chemical Society: 1977; Vol. 61,
(10) Corey, E. J.; Wipke, W. T.; Cramer, R. D.; Howe, W. J.
Techniques for Perception by a Computer of Synthetically Significant
Structural Features in Complex Molecules. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1972, 94,
(11) Corey, E. J.; Howe, W. J.; Orf, H. W.; Pensak, D. A.; Petersson,
G. General Methods of Synthetic Analysis. Strategic Bond
Disconnections for Bridged Polycyclic Structures. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
1975, 97, 6116−6124.
(12) Corey, E. J.; Long, A. K.; Greene, T. W.; Miller, J. W.
Computer-Assisted Synthetic Analysis. Selection of Protective Groups
for Multistep Organic Syntheses. J. Org. Chem. 1985, 50, 1920−1927.
(13) Salatin, T. D.; Jorgensen, W. L. Computer-Assisted Mechanistic
Evaluation of Organic Reactions. 1. Overview. J. Org. Chem. 1980, 45,
2043−2051.
(14) Gasteiger, J.; Hutchings, M. G.; Christoph, B.; Gann, L.; Hiller,
C.; Löw, P.; Marsili, M.; Saller, H.; Yuki, K. A New Treatment of
Chemical Reactivity: Development of EROS, an Expert System for
Reaction Prediction and Synthesis Design. In Organic Synthesis,
Reactions and Mechanisms; Springer Berlin Heidelberg: Berlin,
Heidelberg, 1987; pp 19−73.
(15) Satoh, H.; Funatsu, K. SOPHIA, a Knowledge Base-Guided
Reaction Prediction System - Utilization of a Knowledge Base Derived
from a Reaction Database. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 1995, 35, 34−44.
(16) Satoh, K.; Funatsu, K. A Novel Approach to Retrosynthetic
Analysis Using Knowledge Bases Derived from Reaction Databases. J.
Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci. 1999, 39, 316−325.
(17) Gelernter, H.; Rose, J. R.; Chen, C. Building and Refining a
Knowledge Base for Synthetic Organic Chemistry via the Methodology of Inductive and Deductive Machine Learning. J. Chem. Inf.
Model. 1990, 30, 492−504.
(18) Chen, J. H.; Baldi, P. No Electron Left Behind: A Rule-Based
Expert System To Predict Chemical Reactions and Reaction
Mechanisms. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2009, 49, 2034−2043.
(19) Chen, J. H.; Baldi, P. Synthesis Explorer: A Chemical Reaction
Tutorial System for Organic Synthesis Design and Mechanism
Prediction. J. Chem. Educ. 2008, 85, 1699.
(20) Law, J.; Zsoldos, Z.; Simon, A.; Reid, D.; Liu, Y.; Khew, S. Y.;
Johnson, A. P.; Major, S.; Wade, R. A.; Ando, H. Y. Route Designer: A
Retrosynthetic Analysis Tool Utilizing Automated Retrosynthetic Rule
Generation. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2009, 49, 593−602.
(21) Gothard, C. M.; Soh, S.; Gothard, N. A.; Kowalczyk, B.; Wei, Y.;
Baytekin, B.; Grzybowski, B. A. Rewiring Chemistry: Algorithmic
Discovery and Experimental Validation of One-Pot Reactions in the
Network of Organic Chemistry. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2012, 51,
7922−7927.
(22) Segler, M. H. S.; Waller, M. P. Modelling Chemical Reasoning
to Predict and Invent Reactions. Chem. - Eur. J. 2017, 23, 6118−6128.
(23) Jorgensen, W. L.; Laird, E. R.; Gushurst, A. J.; Fleischer, J. M.;
Gothe, S. A.; Helson, H. E.; Paderes, G. D.; Sinclair, S. CAMEO: A
Program for the Logical Prediction of the Products of Organic
Reactions. Pure Appl. Chem. 1990, 62, 1921−1932.
(24) Zimmerman, P. M. Automated Discovery of Chemically
Reasonable Elementary Reaction Steps. J. Comput. Chem. 2013, 34,
1385−1392.
(25) Wang, L.-P.; Titov, A.; McGibbon, R.; Liu, F.; Pande, V. S.;
Martínez, T. J. Discovering Chemistry with an Ab Initio Nanoreactor.
Nat. Chem. 2014, 6, 1044−1048.
(26) Wang, L.-P.; McGibbon, R. T.; Pande, V. S.; Martinez, T. J.
Automated Discovery and Refinement of Reactive Molecular
Dynamics Pathways. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2016, 12, 638−649.
(27) Xu, L.; Doubleday, C. E.; Houk, K. N. Dynamics of 1,3-Dipolar
Cycloaddition Reactions of Diazonium Betaines to Acetylene and
Ethylene: Bending Vibrations Facilitate Reaction. Angew. Chem. 2009,
121, 2784−2786.
(28) Rappoport, D.; Galvin, C. J.; Zubarev, D. Y.; Aspuru-Guzik, A.
Complex Chemical Reaction Networks from Heuristics-Aided
Quantum Chemistry. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2014, 10, 897−907.
(29) Socorro, I. M.; Taylor, K.; Goodman, J. M. ROBIA: A Reaction
Prediction Program. Org. Lett. 2005, 7, 3541−3544.
(30) Martínez, T. J. Ab Initio Reactive Computer Aided Molecular
Design. Acc. Chem. Res. 2017, 50, 652−656.
(31) Kayala, M. A.; Azencott, C.-A.; Chen, J. H.; Baldi, P. Learning to
Predict Chemical Reactions. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2011, 51, 2209−2222.
(32) Kayala, M. A.; Baldi, P. ReactionPredictor: Prediction of
Complex Chemical Reactions at the Mechanistic Level Using Machine
Learning. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2012, 52, 2526−2540.
(33) Carrera, G. V. S. M.; Gupta, S.; Aires-de-Sousa, J. Machine
Learning of Chemical Reactivity from Databases of Organic Reactions.
J. Comput.-Aided Mol. Des. 2009, 23, 419−429.
(34) Zhang, Q.-Y.; Aires-de-Sousa, J. Structure-Based Classification of
Chemical Reactions without Assignment of Reaction Centers. J. Chem.
Inf. Model. 2005, 45, 1775−1783.
ACS Central Science
Research Article
DOI: 10.1021/acscentsci.7b00303
ACS Cent. Sci. 2017, 3, 1103−1113
(35) Segler, M. H. S.; Waller, M. Neural-Symbolic Machine Learning
for Retrosynthesis and Reaction Prediction. Chem. - Eur. J. 2017, 23,
5966−5971.
(36) Wei, J. N.; Duvenaud, D.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. Neural Networks
for the Prediction of Organic Chemistry Reactions. ACS Cent. Sci.
2016, 2, 725−732.
(37) Coley, C. W.; Barzilay, R.; Jaakkola, T. S.; Green, W. H.; Jensen,
K. F. Prediction of Organic Reaction Outcomes Using Machine
Learning. ACS Cent. Sci. 2017, 3, 434−443.
(38) Weininger, D. SMILES, a Chemical Language and Information
System. 1. Introduction to Methodology and Encoding Rules. J. Chem.
Inf. Model. 1988, 28, 31−36.
(39) Heller, S.; McNaught, A.; Stein, S.; Tchekhovskoi, D.; Pletnev, I.
InChI - the Worldwide Chemical Structure Identifier Standard. J.
Cheminf. 2013, 5, 7.
(40) Gómez-Bombarelli, R.; Duvenaud, D.; Hernández-Lobato, J. M.;
Aguilera-Iparraguirre, J.; Hirzel, T. D.; Adams, R. P.; Aspuru-Guzik, A.
Automatic Chemical Design Using a Data-Driven Continuous
Representation of Molecules. arXiv 2016, 1610.02415.
(41) Ikebata, H.; Hongo, K.; Isomura, T.; Maezono, R.; Yoshida, R.
Bayesian Molecular Design with a Chemical Language Model. J.
Comput.-Aided Mol. Des. 2017, 31, 379−391.
(42) Jastrzębski, S.; Leśniak, D.; Czarnecki, W. M. Learning to
SMILE(S). arXiv 2016, 1602.06289.
(43) Bjerrum, E. J. SMILES Enumeration as Data Augmentation for
Neural Network Modeling of Molecules. arXiv 2017, 1703.07076.
(44) Segler, M. H. S.; Kogej, T.; Tyrchan, C.; Waller, M. P.
Generating Focussed Molecule Libraries for Drug Discovery with
Recurrent Neural Networks. arXiv 2017, 1701.01329.
(45) Cadeddu, A.; Wylie, E. K.; Jurczak, J.; Wampler-Doty, M.;
Grzybowski, B. A. Organic Chemistry as a Language and the
Implications of Chemical Linguistics for Structural and Retrosynthetic
Analyses. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2014, 53, 8108−8112.
(46) Nam, J.; Kim, J. Linking the Neural Machine Translation and
the Prediction of Organic Chemistry Reactions. arXiv 2016,
1612.09529.
(47) Lowe, D. M. Extraction of Chemical Structures and Reactions from
the Literature; University of Cambridge: 2012.
(48) Schneider, N.; Stiefl, N.; Landrum, G. A. What’s What: The
(Nearly) Definitive Guide to Reaction Role Assignment. J. Chem. Inf.
Model. 2016, 56, 2336−2346.
(49) Bahdanau, D.; Cho, K.; Bengio, Y. Neural Machine Translation
by Jointly Learning to Align and Translate. In ICLR; 2014.
(50) Sutskever, I.; Vinyals, O.; Le, Q. V. Sequence to Sequence
Learning with Neural Networks. In NIPS; 2014.
(51) Britz, D.; Goldie, A.; Luong, T.; Le, Q. Massive Exploration of
Neural Machine Translation Architectures. arXiv 2017, 1703.03906.
(52) Hochreiter, S.; Schmidhuber, J. LONG SHORT-TERM
MEMORY. Neural Comput. 1997, 9, 1735−1780.
(53) Bøgevig, A.; Federsel, H.-J.; Huerta, F.; Hutchings, M. G.; Kraut,
H.; Langer, T.; Löw, P.; Oppawsky, C.; Rein, T.; Saller, H. Route
Design in the 21st Century: The IC SYNTH Software Tool as an Idea
Generator for Synthesis Prediction. Org. Process Res. Dev. 2015, 19,
(54) RDKit: Open-source cheminformatics 
(55) Abadi, M.; Agarwal, A.; Barham, P.; Brevdo, E.; Chen, Z.; Citro,
C.; Corrado, G. S.; Davis, A.; Dean, J.; Devin, M. TensorFlow: Large-
Scale Machine Learning on Heterogeneous Distributed Systems. arXiv
2015, 1603.04467.
(56) Chen, W. L.; Chen, D. Z.; Taylor, K. T. Automatic Reaction
Mapping and Reaction Center Detection. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.
Comput. Mol. Sci. 2013, 3, 560−593.
(57) Vinyals, O.; Blundell, C.; Lillicrap, T.; Kavukcuoglu, K.;
Wierstra, D. Matching Networks for One Shot Learning. In NIPS;
(58) Santoro, A.; Bartunov, S.; Botvinick, M.; Wierstra, D.; Lillicrap,
T. One-Shot Learning with Memory-Augmented Neural Networks.
arXiv 2016, 1605.06065.
(59) Altae-Tran, H.; Ramsundar, B.; Pappu, A. S.; Pande, V. Low
Data Drug Discovery with One-Shot Learning. ACS Cent. Sci. 2017, 3,
ACS Central Science
Research Article
DOI: 10.1021/acscentsci.7b00303
ACS Cent. Sci. 2017, 3, 1103−1113