Brain Tumor Segmentation and Radiomics
Survival Prediction: Contribution to the BRATS
2017 Challenge
Fabian Isensee1, Philipp Kickingereder2, Wolfgang Wick3, Martin Bendszus2,
and Klaus H. Maier-Hein1
1 Division of Medical Image Computing, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Heidelberg, Germany
2 Department of Neuroradiology, Heidelberg University Hospital,
Heidelberg, Germany
3 Neurology Clinic, Heidelberg University Hospital,
Heidelberg, Germany
Abstract. Quantitative analysis of brain tumors is critical for clinical
decision making. While manual segmentation is tedious, time consuming and subjective, this task is at the same time very challenging to
solve for automatic segmentation methods. In this paper we present our
most recent eﬀort on developing a robust segmentation algorithm in the
form of a convolutional neural network. Our network architecture was
inspired by the popular U-Net and has been carefully modiﬁed to maximize brain tumor segmentation performance. We use a dice loss function
to cope with class imbalances and use extensive data augmentation to
successfully prevent overﬁtting. Our method beats the current state of
the art on BraTS 2015, is one of the leading methods on the BraTS 2017
validation set (dice scores of 0.896, 0.797 and 0.732 for whole tumor,
tumor core and enhancing tumor, respectively) and achieves very good
Dice scores on the test set (0.858 for whole, 0.775 for core and 0.647
for enhancing tumor). We furthermore take part in the survival prediction subchallenge by training an ensemble of a random forest regressor
and multilayer perceptrons on shape features describing the tumor subregions. Our approach achieves 52.6% accuracy, a Spearman correlation
coeﬃcient of 0.496 and a mean square error of 209607 on the test set.
Keywords: CNN, Brain Tumor, Glioblastoma, Deep Learning
Introduction
Quantitative assessment of brain tumors provides valuable information and therefore constitutes an essential part of diagnostic procedures. Automatic segmentation is attractive in this context, as it allows for faster, more objective and
potentially more accurate description of relevant tumor parameters, such as the
volume of its subregions. Due to the irregular nature of tumors, however, the
development of algorithms capable of automatic segmentation remains challenging.
 
The brain tumor segmentation challenge (BraTS) aims at encouraging the
development of state of the art methods for tumor segmentation by providing
a large dataset of annotated low grade gliomas (LGG) and high grade glioblastomas (HGG). Unlike the previous years, the BraTS 2017 training dataset, which
consists of 210 HGG and 75 LGG cases, was annotated manually by one to four
raters and all segmentations were approved by expert raters . For each patient a T1 weighted, a post-contrast T1-weighted, a T2-weighted and a FLAIR
MRI was provided. The MRI originate from 19 institutions and were acquired
with diﬀerent protocols, magnetic ﬁeld strengths and MRI scanners. Each tumor was segmented into edema (label 2), necrosis and non-enhancing tumor
(label 1) and active/enhancing tumor (label 4). The segmentation performance
of participating algorithms is measured based on the DICE coeﬃcient, sensitivity, speciﬁcity and Hausdorﬀdistance. Additional to the segmentation challenge,
BraTS 2017 also required participants to develop an algorithm for survival prediction. For this purpose the survival (in days) of 163 training cases was provided
Inspired by the recent success of convolutional neural networks, an increasing number of deep learning based automatic segmentation algorithms have been
proposed. Havaei et al. use a multi-scale architecture by combining features
from pathways with diﬀerent ﬁlter sizes. They furthermore improve their results by cascading their models. Pereira et al. stack more convolutional layers
with smaller (3x3) ﬁlter sizes. They develop separate networks for segmenting
low grade and high grade glioblastomas (LGG and HGG, respectively). Their
LGG network consists of 4 convolutional layers, followed by two dense and a
classiﬁcation network. The HGG network is composed of 7 convolutional layers.
Both and use 2D convolutions. Kamnitsas et al. proposed a fully connected multi-scale CNN that was among the ﬁrst to employ 3D convolutions. It
comprises a high resolution and a low resolution pathway that are recombined
to form the ﬁnal segmentation output. For their submission to the brain tumor
segmentation challenge in 2016 , they enhanced their architecture through the
addition of residual connections, yielding minor improvements. They addressed
the class imbalance problem through a sophisticated training data sampling
strategy. Kayalibay et al. developed very successful adaptation of the popular U-Net architecture and achieved state of the art results for the BraTS
2015 dataset. Notably, they employed a Jaccard loss function that intrinsically
handles class imbalances. They make use of the large receptive ﬁeld of their architecture to process entire patients at once, at the cost of being able to train
with only one patient per batch.
Here we propose our contribution to the BraTS 2017 challenge that is also
based on the popular U-Net architecture . Being both based on the U-Net,
our network architecture shares some similarities with . However, there are
a multitude of diﬀerent design choices that me made regarding the exact architecture of the context pathway, normalization schemes, number of feature
maps throughout the network, nonlinearity and the structure of the upsampling
pathway. Particularly through optimizing the number of feature maps in the localization pathway, our network uses twice as many ﬁlters than while being
trained with only a slightly smaller input patch size and a larger batch size.
We furthermore employ a multiclass adaptation of the dice loss and make
extensive use of data augmentation.
Image based tumor phenotyping and derived clinically relevant parameters
such as predicted survival is typically done by means of radiomics. Intensity,
shape and texture features are thereby computed from segmentation masks of
the tumor subregions and subsequently used to train a machine learning algorithm. These features may also be complemented by other measures handcrafted
to the problem at hand, such as the distance of the tumor to the ventricles and
critical structures in the brain . Although our main focus was put on the
segmentation part of the challenge, we developed a simple radiomics based approach combined with a random forest regressor and a multilayer perceptron
ensemble for survival prediction.
Segmentation
Data preprocessing With MRI intensity values being non standardized, normalization is critical to allow for data from diﬀerent institutes, scanners and
acquired with varying protocols to be processed by one single algorithm. This
is particularly true for neural networks where imaging modalities are typically
treated as color channels. Here we need to ensure that the value ranges match
not only between patients but between the modalities as well in order to avoid
initial biases of the network. We found the following simple workﬂow to work
surprisingly well. First, we normalize each modality of each patient independently by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation of the
brain region. We then clip the resulting images at [−5, 5] to remove outliers and
subsequently rescale to , with the non-brain region being set to 0.
Network architecture Our network is inspired by the U-Net architecture .
We designed the network to process large 3D input blocks of 128x128x128 voxels.
In contrast to many previous approaches who manually combined diﬀerent input
resolutions or pathways with varying ﬁlter sizes, the U-Net based approach allows the network to intrinsically recombine diﬀerent scales throughout the entire
Just like the U-Net, our architecture comprises a context aggregation pathway that encodes increasingly abstract representations of the input as we progress
deeper into the network, followed by a localization pathway that recombines
these representations with shallower features to precisely localize the structures
of interest. We refer to the vertical depth (the depth in the U shape) as level,
with higher levels being lower spatial resolution, but higher dimensional feature
representations.
Fig. 1. Network architecture. Our architecture is derived from the U-Net . The
context pathway (left) aggregates high level information that is subsequently localized
precisely in the localization pathway (right). Inspired by we inject gradient signals
deep into the network through deep supervision.
The activations in the context pathway are computed by context modules.
Each context module is in fact a pre-activation residual block with two
3x3x3 convolutional layers and a dropout layer (pdrop = 0.3) in between. Context
modules are connected by 3x3x3 convolutions with input stride 2 to reduce the
resolution of the feature maps and allow for more features while descending down
the aggregation pathway.
As stated previously, the localization pathway is designed to take features
from lower levels of the network that encode contextual information at low spatial resolution and transfer that information to a higher spatial resolution. This
is achieved by ﬁrst upsampling the low resolution feature maps, which is done by
means of a simple upscale that repeats the feature voxels twice in each spatial
dimension, followed by a 3x3x3 convolution that halves the number of feature
maps. Compared to the more frequently employed transposed convolution we
found this approach to deliver similar performance while preventing checkerboard artifacts in the network output. We then recombine the upsampled features with the features from the corresponding level of the context aggregation
pathway via concatenation. Following the concatenation, a localization module
recombines these features together. It also further reduces the number of feature
maps which is critical for reducing memory consumption. A localization module
consists of a 3x3x3 convolution followed by a 1x1x1 convolution that halves the
number of feature maps.
Inspired by we employ deep supervision in the localization pathway by
integrating segmentation layers at diﬀerent levels of the network and combining
them via elementwise summation to form the ﬁnal network output. Throughout
the network we use leaky ReLU nonlinearities with a negative slope of 10−2 for
all feature map computing convolutions. We furthermore replace the traditional
batch with instance normalization since we found that the stochasticity
induced by our small batch sizes may destabilize batch normalization.
Training Procedure Our network architecture is trained with randomly sampled patches of size 128x128x128 voxels and batch size 2. We refer to an epoch
as an iteration over 100 batches and train for a total of 300 epochs. Training is
done using the adam optimizer with an initial learning rate lrinit = 5 · 10−4,
the following learning rate schedule: lrinit · 0.985epoch and a l2 weight decay of
One challenge in medical image segmentation is the class imbalance in the
data that hampers the training when using the conventional categorical crossentropy loss. In the BraTS 2017 training data for example, there is 166 times
as much background (label 0) as there is enhancing tumor (label 4). We approach this issue by formulating a multiclass Dice loss function, similar to the
one employed in , that is diﬀerentiable and can be easily integrated into deep
learning frameworks:
i ui,kvi,k
i ui,k + P
where u is the softmax output of the network and v is a one hot encoding of
the ground truth segmentation map. Both u and v have shape I by K with i ∈I
being the voxels in the training patch and k ∈K being the classes. ui,k and vi,k
denote the softmax output and ground truth for class k at voxel i, respectively.
When training large neural networks from limited training data, special care
has to be taken to prevent overﬁtting. We address this problem by utilizing a
large variety of data augmentation techniques. Whenever possible, we initialize
these techniques using aggressive parameters that we subsequently attenuate
over the course of the training. The following augmentation techniques were
applied on the ﬂy during training: random rotations, random scaling, random
elastic deformations, gamma correction augmentation and mirroring.
The fully convolutional nature of our network allows to process arbitrarily
sized inputs. At test time we therefore segment an entire patient at once, alleviating problems that may arise when computing the segmentation in tiles with
a network that has padded convolutions. We furthermore use test time data
augmentation by mirroring the images and averaging the softmax outputs over
several dropout samples.
Survival Prediction
The task of survival prediction underpins the clinical relevance of the BraTS
challenge, but at the same time is very challenging, particularly due to the
absence of treatment information and the small size of the available dataset. For
this subchallenge, only the image information and the age of the patients was
Fig. 2. Qualitative segmentation result. Our approach is capable of segmenting the
large necrotic cores while also detecting the small structures within the tumor core.
Edema is shown in blue, enhancing tumor in green and non-enhancing and necrotic
tumor in red.
Our approach to survival prediction is based on radiomics. We characterize
the tumors using image based features that are computed on the segmentation
masks. We compute shape features (13 features), ﬁrst order statistics (19 features) and gray level co-occurence matrix features (28 features) with the pyradiomics package . The tumor regions for which we computed the features
were the edema (ede), enhancing tumor (enh), necrosis (nec), tumor core (core)
and whole tumor (whole). We computed only shape features for edema and the
whole tumor, shape and ﬁrst order features for tumor core and the entire feature set for non-enhancing and necrosis and enhancing tumor. With the image
features being computed for all modalities, we extracted a total of 517 features.
These features are then used for training a regression ensemble for survival
prediction. Random forests are well established in the radiomics community for
performing well, especially when many features but only few training data are
available. These properties make random forest regressors the prime choice for
the scenario at hand (518 features, 163 training cases). We train a random forest
regressor (RFR) with 1000 trees and the mean squared error as split criterion.
Additionally, we designed an ensemble of small multilayer perceptrons (MLP)
to complement the output of the regression forest. The ensemble consists of 15
MLPs, each with 3 hidden layers, 64 units per layer and trained with a mean
squared error loss function. We use batch normalization, dropout (pdrop = 0.5)
and add gaussian noise (µ = 0, σ = 0.1) in each hidden layer. The outputs of
the RFR and the MLP ensemble are averaged to obtain our ﬁnal prediction.
Segmentation
We trained and evaluated our architecture on the BraTS 2017 and 2015 training datasets via ﬁve fold cross-validation. No external data was used and the
Fig. 3. The most prominent mode of error for the tumor core is the non enhancing
tumor region. Edema is shown in blue, enhancing tumor in green and non-enhancing
and necrotic tumor in red.
Sensitivity
whole core enh.
whole core enh. whole core enh.
Kamnitsas et al. 0.85 0.67 0.63
0.60 0.67 0.85 0.86 0.63
Kayalibay et al. 0.85 0.72 0.61
0.91 0.73 0.67 0.82
0.85 0.74 0.64 0.91 0.73 0.72 0.83
Table 1. BraTS 2015 test set results. We used the ﬁve models obtained by training a
ﬁve fold cross-validation on the BraTS 2015 training data as an ensemble.
networks were trained from scratch. Furthermore, we used the ﬁve networks
obtained by the corresponding cross-validation as an ensemble to predict the
respective validation and test set. Both
the training set and validation/test set results were evaluated using the online
evaluation platforms to ensure comparability with other participants.
Table 1 compares the performance of our algorithm to other state of the art
methods on the BraTS 2015 test set. Our method compares favorably to other
state of the art neural networks and is currently ranked ﬁrst in the BraTS 2015
test set online leaderboard. In Table 2 we show an overview over the segmentation
performance of our model on the BraTS 2017 dataset.
Qualitative segmentation results are presented in Figures 2 and 3. Our network is capable of accurately segmenting large tumor regions (such as the necrotic
cores in Figure 2) as well as ﬁne grained details (scattered necrotic regions in
the tumor core). Note how the thin wall of the enhancing region in the uppermost part of the tumor in Figure 2 was segmented with voxel-level accuracy
whereas the manual ground truth label spilled into the bordering edema region.
Furthermore, the small spot of enhancing tumor that is surrounded by edema
in the ground truth segmentation can, upon closer inspection of the raw data
(see patient Brats17 TCIA 469 1), be identiﬁed as a blood vessel that has been
erroneously included in the enhancing tumor region by the annotator. Figure 3
demonstrates the main mode of error of our model. The former non-enhancing
Sensitivity
Speciﬁcity
HausdorﬀDist.
whole core
enh. whole core
enh. whole core
enh. whole core enh.
BraTS 2017 Train 0.895 0.828 0.707 0.890 0.831 0.800 0.995 0.997 0.998 6.04
BraTS 2017 Val
0.896 0.797 0.732 0.896 0.781 0.790 0.996 0.999 0.998 6.97
Table 2. Results for the BraTS 2017 dataset. Train: 5 fold cross-validation on the
training data (285 cases). Val: Result on the validation dataset using the ﬁve models
from the training cross-validation as an ensemble (46 cases).
tumor label, which was integrated into the necrosis label for the BraTS 2017
challenge, is often not well deﬁned in the training data. As a result, our algorithm learns where to predict this label from the context rather than based on
image evidence and seems to sometimes guess where to place it.
Quantitatively, we achieve Dice scores of 0.896, 0.797 and 0.732 for whole,
core and enhancing, respectively, on the BraTS 2017 validation set. This result
places us among the best performing methods according to the online validation
leaderboard. When comparing these values to the Dice scores achieved on the
training set (0.895, 0.828, 0.707) we conclude that our model, together with the
extensive data augmentation used during training, does not overﬁt to the training
dataset. We purposefully did not submit more than once to the validation set in
order to ensure that we do not overﬁt by adapting our hyper parameters to the
validation data.
25 quantile
75 quantile
Table 3. BraTS 2017 test set results. The scores were computed by the organizers of
the challenge based on our submitted segmentations.
Table 3 shows the test set results as reported back to us by the organizers
of the challenge. We achieved mean Dice scores of 0.858 (whole tumor), 0.775
(tumor core) and 0.647 (enhancing tumor). These scores are lower than the ones
obtained on either training or validation set, which is surprising provided that
we did not observe overﬁtting during training and on the validation set. Based
on the high median Dice scores we hypothesize that the test set contained a
signiﬁcant number of very diﬃcult cases. Also, we are uncertain how cases with
no enhancing tumor in the ground truth segmentation are aggregated into the
mean since their Dice score is always zero by deﬁnition.
Ground Truth Segmentation
Our Segmentation
MLP ens combined
MLP ens combined
shape, age (66)
344.89 352.00
353.12 343.19
glcm, age (225)
348.14 462.16
350.78 388.99
ﬁrst order, age (229)
358.69 388.44
354.66 381.42
shape, glcm, age (290)
344.86 431.96
346.40 378.73
shape, ﬁrst order, age (294) 352.64 372.59
351.56 360.24
glcm, ﬁrst order, age (453) 353.18 443.64
354.30 383.82
350.40 385.66
352.95 372.04
Table 4. Survival prediction experiments. We trained a random forest regressor (RFR)
and a MLP ensemble (MLP ens). Averaging the regression outputs of the RFR and
MLP ensemble yields the combined result. The best root mean squared error is achieved
when using RFR and MLP ensemble together with only shape features and the patients
Survival Prediction
We extensively evaluated the components of our regression ensemble as well as
diﬀerent feature sets with the aim of minimizing the mean squared error by
running 5-fold cross-validations on the 163 provided training cases. A summary
of our ﬁndings for both the ground truth and our segmentations is shown in
Table 4. We observed that the random forest regressor performs very well across
all feature sets while the MLP ensemble is much less stable with an increasing
number of features. The overall best results were obtained by averaging the
MLP ensemble output with the one from the random forest regressor (column
combined) and using only shape features and the age of a patient. Interestingly,
while the random forest performance is almost identical between ground truth
and our segmentations, the MLP ensemble performs better on our segmentations
for all feature sets, which is also reﬂected by the combined results. The best
root mean squared error we achieved was 335.08 (mean absolute error 232.76)
in a ﬁve-fold cross-validation on the training set. On the test set we obtained
457.83 RMSE (MSE 209607), an accuracy of 52.6% and a Spearman correlation
coeﬃcient of 0.496.
Discussion
In this paper we presented contribution to the BraTS 2017 challenge. For the
segmentation part of the challenge we developed a U-Net inspired deep convolutional neural network architecture which was trained from scratch using only
the provided training data, extensive data augmentation and a dice loss formulation. We achieve state of the art results on BraTS 2015 and presented promising
scores on the BraTS 2017 validation set. On the test set we obtained mean dice
scores of 0.858 for whole tumor, 0.775 for tumor core and 0.647 for the contrast
enhancing tumor. Training time was about ﬁve days per network. Due to time
restrictions we were limited in the number of architectural variants and data
augmentation methods we could explore. Careful architecture optimizations already allowed us to train with large 128x128x128 patches and a batch size of 2
with 16 ﬁlters at full resolution, which is signiﬁcantly more than in . Training with larger batch sizes and more convolutional ﬁlters in a multi-GPU setup
should yield further improvements, especially provided that we did not observe
signiﬁcant overﬁtting in our experiments. While most of our eﬀort was concentrated on the segmentation part of the challenge, we also proposed an ensemble
of a random forest regressor and a multilayer perceptron ensemble for the survival prediction subchallenge. By using only shape based features, we achieved a
root mean squared error of 335.08 and a mean absolute error of 232.76 in a ﬁve
fold cross-validation on the training data and using our segmentations. On the
test set, our survival prediction approach obtained 457.83 rmse (209607 mse),
an accuracy of 52.6% and a Spearman correlation coeﬃcient of 0.496. The survival prediction task could be improved further by considering the position in
the tumor relative to other structures in the brain such as the ventricles, optical
nerve ﬁbers or other important ﬁbre tracts. Furthermore, our group based manual feature selection should be replaced by a proper feature selection algorithm
such as forward/backward selection or a feature ﬁlter based approach .