ORIGINAL PAPER
A neurofuzzy algorithm for learning from complex granules
Bruno Apolloni1 • Simone Bassis1 • Jacopo Rota1 • Gian Luca Galliani1 •
Matteo Gioia1 • Luca Ferrari1
Received: 23 July 2015 / Accepted: 15 February 2016 / Published online: 4 April 2016
 Euratom: Universita` degli studi Milano;  European Union 2016
In the context of complex granule computations
within the Interactive Granular Computating (IGC) paradigm we frame a cognitive task where user perceptions of
the suitability of a good are in relation to the parameters of
the device producing it, all within a learning loop aimed at
continuously improving those perceptions. We achieve this
goal by extending the Fuzzy Inference System (FIS)
paradigm to contexts where variables reckoning the user
perceptions live in a non-metric space, hence neither users
nor the learning algorithm have access to their true value.
Namely, receiving in input a set of both crisp and fuzzy
variables (respectively, from the hard_suit and the soft_suit
of the c-granule to account for user and device logs), the
inference system is asked to compute via the link_suit a set
of crisp parameters satisfying some fuzzy evaluations stated by the user. A further complication is that the outputs
are evaluated exactly in terms of the true unknown values
held by the fuzzy attributes, which in turn must be inferred
by the system. The whole work arose from everyday life
problems faced by the European Project Social&Smart
with the aim of optimally regulating household appliance
runs. It represents a special instance of Interactive Rough
Granular Computing (IRGC) that we face with a two-phase
procedure that is reminiscent of the distal learning in
neurocontrol. A web service is available where the reader
may check the efﬁciency of the assessed procedure.
Fuzzy inference systems  Interactive granular
computing  Complex granules  Distal learning  Twophase learning
1 Introduction
Within the wide spectrum of theoretical, methodological
and technological aspects covered by the Granular Computing framework, let us focus on a relatively new one
rooted on the two interwoven concepts of Interactive
Granular Computing [IGC ] and
Complex Information Granule [c-granule, Skowron and
Jankowski ]. Both arise from the need of putting in
relation an internal setting made of information granules
with the physical world representing the external environmental counterpart that those granules affect. In the age of
user experience these relations have
great relevance in many operational situations when we
want to optimize the person’s perception of pleasantness
about using a particular device. A way of dealing with the
two contexts passes through the deﬁnition of complex
information granules (c-granules), which are usually related to interplaying agents that face the physical environment through abstractly deﬁned windowed hunks 1:225–246
DOI 10.1007/s41066-016-0018-1
1990). This deﬁnition takes place in terms of the three
components: (1) the soft_suit, recording perceived properties of hunks and their interactions; (2) the hard_suit,
responsible for the response of the environment to the
agents’ interactions in terms of physical variables, and (3)
the link_suit, piping interactions between agent and environment, allowing the former to perform sensory measurement and/or actions on the physical objects. The
granule interactions in the physical and mental worlds are
generally exploited among agents that are mainly directed
to the social evolution of huge communities of them,
addressing the fundamental issues in Wisdom Technology , and are implemented
in terms of ontology updating , usually under the framework of Interactive
Rough Granular Computing [IRGC ]. Rather, in this paper
we focus on the interactions inside the single c-granule,
and rule them in terms of a peculiar Fuzzy Inference
System [FIS ]. The common ground
between the two perspectives lies in the adaptive judgment
about interactive computations on c-granules, which allows
an inductive and rational evaluation of user-system interactions .
Since their introduction by Zadeh , fuzzy sets
have been intended as a rigorous way of dealing with nonformalized knowledge falling in the sphere of the experience and intuition of the designers. In place of explaining
why, membership functions comprise a clear way of describing the granularity of the information owned by them.
Within the Granular Computing framework, fuzzy sets
constitute the key ingredients of both the theory of
approximate reasoning , a powerful framework for reasoning in the face of imprecise and uncertain
information, and its operational counterpart known as
fuzzy rule systems as well .
In this paper, we use fuzzy rules to manage the intragranule interactions, where the two main contributions we
provide focus on stretching the Granular Information features to cope with the speciﬁc soft_suit of our c-granule,
and on devising the Granular Constructs to deal with them
within the link_suit, respectively. Namely, we consider
fuzzy sets inside a universe of discourse that is hidden to
the user and then offer a method for both identifying and
controlling fuzzy rule systems based on this kind of fuzzy
attributes. We call this method learning from nowhere, not
to diminish its value, rather to remark on the extremely
poor a priori information a Granular Construct may exploit
during a training session, and extend the distal learning
construct from the neural network to the fuzzy set framework to get rid of this drawback. We note that hidden
universes of discourse and our c-granule constitute a realistic scenario that we may meet very frequently in our
everyday life. In fact, we faced and resolved it in our own
the European project SandS,1 which deals with the conduction of common household appliances. We devote a
great part of the paper to the setup and conduction of
numerical experiments, due to the relevance of this challenging problem and to the consequent casting out nines it
represents for a concrete suitability of some Granular
Constructs.
Fuzzy rule systems represent the favorite tool for solving system control problems when fuzziness affects the
description of their dynamics .
Even though different interpretations of logical connectives, fuzzy implication and compositional operators lead
to a variety of well-known inference mechanisms ruling the
semantics of a fuzzy rule-based system (consider for
instance the Mamdami, Tsukamoto, Sugeno and Larsen
reasoning models), its general expression may be synthesized in the following one :
if x1 is A11 and
and xn is A1n then o is B1
if x1 is A21 and
and xn is A2n then o is B2
if x1 is Ak1 and
and xn is Akn then o is Bk
where Aij and Bi, for all i ¼ 1; . . .; k (k—the number of
rules), j ¼ 1; . . .; n (n—the number of conditions), are
fuzzy sets deﬁned in the corresponding input and output
spaces; xi and o are input and output variables (possibly
linguistic) corresponding to, respectively, the i-th condition
and conclusion. In the above system, the premise of the i-th
wiðxÞ ¼ Vn
j¼1 lAijðxjÞ, where lAðxÞ denotes the membership
grade of x to the fuzzy set A. In turn, together with the
consequent Bi (preﬁxed by then), ﬁring strength wiðxÞ
contributes to the individual rule output B0
i ¼ wiðxÞ !
lBiðoÞ and, through a proper aggregation operator, to the
overall system output, computed as Wk
i. The various
instances of fuzzy inference schemes arise then from the
different interpretations given to the above connectives and
operators, as well as from the adopted shapes of membership functions .
Within the mentioned project SandS, where we aimed at
optimally and adaptively ruling in remote the microcontrollers of household appliances, we faced peculiar fuzzy
rules which, re a bread maker for example, sound as
if the loaf is slightly soft AND soggy then increase
baking time
if the loaf is very crusty AND crunchy then decrease
baking time
1 
Granul. Comput. 1:225–246
model might seem the most appropriate
schema to frame the above rules—mainly due to its
widespread acceptance and intuitiveness which makes it
well suited to human input, a more in-depth investigation
led us to prefer the Sugeno reasoning model . Here, the consequents are crisp variables to
be computed through a weighted mixture of functions
depending directly on the input variables; in formula:
wifiðx; sÞ ¼
i¼1 wifiðx; sÞ
where fi deﬁnes the activation function (for short Sugeno
function) of the i-rule, whose shape, arguments and free
parameters s depend on the chosen model, and wi denotes
the satisfaction degree of the premise of the rule, i.e. its
ﬁring strength. Finally, x and o refer, respectively, to the
crisp input variables and the overall output of the system.
Our preference for this model was mainly motivated by
the possibility of injecting prior knowledge in the ruleset,
speciﬁcally in terms of rules and variables identiﬁcation,
and Sugeno function deﬁnition as well, thanks to speciﬁc
competences and expertises held by household manufacturers and expert practitioners in the ﬁeld. For greater
clariﬁcation, returning to the two aforementioned rules,
let’s consider the pictorial system schema shown in Fig. 1.
Recent studies in the bread-making process have taught us that to have, for instance, a
crunchy crust, we have to prolong the baking time and
lower the baking temperature but not intervene directly in
the leavening process. This information allows us not only
to select a useful subset of rules ﬁne for meeting user
needs, but even to identify the shape and possibly some
parameters of the involved Sugeno functions.
Of course, this choice is not free from complications.
The ﬁrst drawback, which in turn shows up in the distinguishing features of our fuzzy sets—the ﬁrst main contribution of our paper—is linked to the fact that some input
variables (such as the above crustiness and moistness) live
in a non-metric space, in the sense that the user is not able
to attribute a speciﬁc value to them. In fact, when the user
says that ‘‘the loaf is very crusty’’, even if s/he distinguishes different kinds of crustiness falling within the same
quantiﬁer ‘‘very crusty’’, s/he has no reference metric to
identify its speciﬁc value. Bread crustiness is a subjective
attribute not simply as it may vary on a per user basis;
rather, the same user may attribute to a same crustiness
level the term ‘‘very crusty’’ in certain contexts/recipes,
and ‘‘low crusty’’ in other ones. Vice versa, the same
quantiﬁer ‘‘very crusty’’ may incorporate a wide spectrum
of crustiness levels, whose relation is hidden from the user
her/himself and dynamically changes according to external
non-measurable factors. In other words, crustiness level xj
exists, but its value cannot be objectively set by the user,
who in turn limits her/himself to assigning it a quantiﬁer
s/he retains suitable during a particular period of her/his
life. Nevertheless, to identify a suitable value of the output
o in (2) (both to compute the satisfaction degree of the
Fig. 1 A learning from cgranules instance. In the picture,
x1 and x2 refer, respectively, to
the fuzzy variables crustiness
and moistness; the fuzzy sets
A11 and A12 refer to the
linguistic variables ‘‘slightly
soft’’ and ‘‘soggy’’ (i.e. ‘‘poorly
crusty’’ and ‘‘very moist’’),
while A21 and A22 to ‘‘very
crusty’’ and ‘‘crunchy’’ (i.e.
‘‘not much moist’’),
respectively; the output oj of
each Sugeno function describes
the numeric contribution of the
j-th rule to the baking time. All
contributions are gathered in the
output of the system through (2)
Granul. Comput. 1:225–246
premise and to instantiate the Sugeno function in the
consequent) we must estimate the values of such hidden
variables—a problem that per se is not far from the one of
identifying the state transition matrix in the Hidden Markov Models ; it does, however,
run into special difﬁculties given the control framework
where it is embedded. The second main contribution of this
paper consists in overcoming these difﬁculties.
Actually, the typical taxonomy for Granular Constructs
 shown in Fig. 2 considers the two
alternatives where the antecedent is either a crisp variable
to be framed into a fuzzy set by the interface (ﬁrst row in
the picture), or the fuzzy set as a whole (second row). Our
case is an intermediate one, where we need the crisp
variables both to compute the satisfaction degree of the
premise and to instantiate the Sugeno function in the
consequent. But we do not know their values. Typical
approaches for further stressing the fuzziness of some
variables are represented by type 2 fuzzy sets , where membership degrees are in turn fuzzy
sets, and by higher order fuzzy sets , where
the universe of discourse of a fuzzy set is in turn made up
of fuzzy sets. Our approach is, rather, reminiscent of the
fuzzy set calibration introduced in Pedrycz et al. . In
that case a proper non-linear mapping is learned from an
original universe of discourse to another one that may
prove more suitable for supporting the fuzziness of some
attributes. In our case this mapping remains implicit, since
we do not know the original universe and aim directly to
infer the single elements of it which support the questioned
attributes.
The identiﬁcation of the crisp variables—the core of the
hard_suit component of our c-granule—is further complicated by the special features of the Sugeno functions fis in
two respects. On the one hand, in the absence of expert
knowledge, we dare to use functional forms, such as linear
or quadratic ones, to interpret consequents like ‘‘increase/
decrease’’ of the baking time. Although a common plague
of the Sugeno approach , it reﬂects
a fortiori the robustness and ﬂexibility of this model,
capable of ﬁtting highly non-linear trends in spite of the
simple (possibly linear) regressors each rule produces in
output. On the other hand, we do not know the relation
between the operational parameter (the baking time) and its
effect on the crustiness and moistness appreciation provided by the user. This entails a non-trivial identiﬁcation
problem to be faced in a way reminiscent of distal learning
in neurocontrol with a twophase (identiﬁcation and control) algorithm. In particular,
the operational parameters (i.e. baking time and temperature, leavening time, etc.), being directly controlled by the
learner, play the role of proximal variables in the distal
learning framework. Actually, these variables are the only
levers the learner can move to modify the bread consistency and quality. Conversely, user judgments (re baking
crustiness, for instance) are distal variables that the learner
controls indirectly through the intermediary of the proximal variables. The only assumption the whole system relies
on is that the target values of user judgments be always
available;
requirements
straightforwardly met: independently of the true (unknown) level of crustiness, in case the user is satisﬁed with
Processing
Crisp Data
Crisp Decision
Processing
Fuzzy Decision
Crisp Data
Processing
Crisp Decision
Fuzzy Data
Processing
Fuzzy Data
Fuzzy Decision
Fig. 2 Four fundamental modes
of the use of fuzzy
models 
Granul. Comput. 1:225–246
the crust consistency, s/he will not request any further
adjustment aimed at increasing/decreasing its texture.
To give some hints on the information ﬂow characterizing the proposed FIS together with the interrelate role
played by both proximal and distal variables, let’s consider
a very simplistic system composed of the following single
baking time is somewhat high AND baking
temperature is very high AND the loaf is slightly soft
increase baking time very much AND lower baking
temperature a bit
Firstly, both operational crisp parameters (baking time
and temperature) and user fuzzy judgments (bread softness and sogginess) are provided in input to the rule,
where the former characterize the current status of the
system to be controlled (i.e. the bread machine), while the
latter represent the user appreciation of the bread produced by the device in its actual conﬁguration. Then the
rule controls the two operational parameters by invoking
two Sugeno functions aimed at estimating how the
parameters should be modiﬁed to meet user requirements.
Proceeding with the lead example, we ﬁnd that the output
of this rule might be ‘‘increase the baking time by 12
seconds and lower the temperature by 10 degrees’’. The
person determining whether or not the proposed settings
of the system are optimal, or at least preferable w.r.t.
previous ones, is the user who, after having tasted the
home-baked bread, is called upon to evaluate its softness
and sogginess through two fuzzy judgments. The latter
will have a twofold role in the learning process: they
represent both the target to be achieved by the system and
at the same time its fuzzy input for the next trial. As for
the former, the system will use these values to tune the
way operational parameters are modiﬁed so as to achieve
a conﬁguration satisfying the user tastes, corresponding to
the barycentric position w.r.t. the two evaluations. As for
the latter, the FIS per se may be considered as a dynamic
system where learner, user, and indirectly the bread
machine, continually interrelate with another until an
optimal conﬁguration is reached. So, the input of the
system at the next time step will be constituted both by
the operational parameters obtained in output at the previous iteration and the same user fuzzy judgments playing
the role of target values at the previous time step.
At this point, some remarks are noteworthy.
We are free to select the structure of the rules, with the
aim of achieving a suitable balance between informativeness of the system and its trainability, where the
former calls for a high number of rich rules; vice versa
for the latter. On the one hand, we may subdivide the
overall FIS in various parts, called clusters henceforth,
each one deputed to tune a single operational parameter. On the other hand, while letting the target be
constituted by all the available judgments, to reduce
the number of rules we may consider as input only the
operational parameter to be tuned in the cluster the rule
belongs to.
The extra complexity w.r.t. a standard FIS is constituted by learning from nowhere the value of those
variables related to user evaluations. The true values of
bread softness and crustiness, while hidden from both
FIS and user her/himself, are needed to compute both
the rule strength and the output of the Sugeno function.
The aim of the whole process is then to learn these
values along with the parameters the FIS is composed
of, so as to meet user requirements. Obviously, we may
bargain with respect to the shape of the membership
functions and the non-linearities of the scales of these
variables. However, as to the two extremal alternatives: hlinear scale (no matter the meaning of the
variables) and highly complex membership functionsi,
hunknown scale (we just infer the coordinates of the
sample points), elementary membership functions
(such as triangular or Gaussian)i, implicitly in line
with , we prefer the latter, as a
sort of kernel trick applied to
fuzzy rules.
To tune the system according to the user judgments,
our extension to the fuzzy rules of the two-phase
algorithm proposed in the distal learning framework consists of an
initial task where the learner identiﬁes the system by
discovering, through a classical supervised learning
task, the mapping between operational parameters and
user judgments (hence the term identiﬁcation phase).
After having identiﬁed the system, the learner switches
to a control phase, aimed at regulating the system so as
to satisfy user needs.
No assumption is made on the expertise level and
competencies of the user. In the lead example, s/he
plays the role of bread tester: taking a loaf out of the
bread maker, s/he relies only on her/his palate and
sense of taste to evaluate the bread’s consistency. In
turn, the inference system should be able to adapt to
the user needs even in case of out-of-the-ordinary
comments and judgments. Users should not to be
confused with experts, such as appliance manufacturers. Contrary to the former, the latter may directly
inject some prior knowledge to the system, by
Granul. Comput. 1:225–246
suggesting, for instance, the most adequate rules or the
shape of Sugeno functions, as explained in the next
In our paper we implement our c-granule in two scenarios:
(1) a case study where, using a graphical tool, we are
challenged
morphological
parameters are computed, on the basis of user evaluations
based on four criteria, by a FIS trained on a relatively small
and noisy dataset; and (2) the actual assessment of the
SandS system on a bread maker.
The paper is organized as follows. In Sect. 2 we formalize the training problem and specify the adopted
options. In Sect. 3 we describe the two experimental scenarios, framing the latter within the SandS project, while in
Sect. 4 we discuss the numerical results. Conclusions are
drawn in Sect. 5.
2 The formal framework
Having framed our inference instance in the IGC paradigm
in the Sect. 1, we focus in this section on its solution in
terms of the training of a FIS that we characterize by:
nc crisp variables yis, associated to the operational
parameters;
nf fuzzy variables gis, each described by r linguistic
quantiﬁers, associated to the task execution evaluation;
k rules, grouped in nc clusters each containing kc ¼
rnf þ1 rules, where each cluster is responsible for the
update of the single operational parameter, and each
rule consists in principle of nf þ 1 antecedents (the nf
fuzzy variables plus the operational parameter the
cluster refers to).
Framing the lead example in the above context, Fig. 1
shows two out of the kc rules constituting the cluster
responsible for the baking time, where we have nf ¼ 2
fuzzy variables g1 and g2 (loaf crustiness and humidity) but
no crisp variable. Actually, according to the system
architecture described in the above bullet list, a realistic
model, such as the one adopted in our experiments, would
include as input even the crisp variable baking time y1,
after a suitable fuzziﬁcation. In the experiments we ﬁxed
r ¼ 3 as a suitable compromise between richness of the
manageability
operational
instance, the three fuzzy sets associated to loaf crustiness
have been chosen as: poorly, regular, and very crusty.
For purpose of clarity, we structure our method according
to the standard ANFIS architecture , which
proves well suited to implementing the Sugeno model. It is
composed of 6 layers (see Fig. 3), which from left to right
complete the following tasks: (1) input coding, (2)
computing the related membership degrees to the rules’
antecedents, (3) synthesizing them into overall satisfactions
of the single rule antecedents, (4) normalizing the above
satisfactions on the rule set, (5) computing the effect of the
single rules on the consequent according to the Sugeno
functions, and (6) combining the single effects into the rule
system consequents.
In greater detail, the computations in the various layers
are as follows:
layer 0, where we enter the n ¼ nc þ nf input variables
x ¼ ðy; gÞ, is complicated by the hidden features of
those underlying the fuzzy sets (namely, the judgments
g). This resolves in the addition of learned shift values
d to initial ones, where the latter may be either the
nominal values of the fuzzy numbers used by the tester
or completely random numbers (in a reasonable range)
computed by the system. The output of this layer is a
vector ex, where:
if xi is a crisp variable yi
if xi is a fuzzy variable gi
Returning to the lead example and using as initial
values for the fuzzy sets their nominal values, with
reference to the second rule we note that the fuzzy
variable g1  very crusty translates into the crisp value
obtained by adding to the mode of the fuzzy set A22 the
learned shift parameter d2. In turn the mode is learned
as well by the neuro-fuzzy procedure;
in the fuzziﬁcation layer 1, where the membership
functions (m.f.s) are introduced, we focus only on
triangular functions lAfa;b;cgðexÞ and asymmetric Gaussian-like functions lAfm;rl;rrgðexÞ which require only three
parameters to be speciﬁed ;
lAfa;b;cgðexÞ ¼
if ex 2 ½a; b
if ex 2 ðb; c
lAfm;rl;rrgðexÞ ¼
if ex  me
if ex [ m:
Each membership value reﬂects how much each input
variable matches with the corresponding fuzzy set;
in layer 2, we compute the satisfaction degree wj of the
premise of the j-th rule (the conjunction of the
antecedents) as the product of the membership degrees
of the metric variables, i.e. using the product T-norm.
Remembering that Aji refers to the m.f. fuzzifying the ith variable in the j-rule, we have:
Granul. Comput. 1:225–246
The ﬁring strength of the j-rule reﬂects how much the
variables in input to that rule satisfy its premises;
in layer 3, the normalized satisfaction degree wj is
computed as usual by dividing a single degree by the
sum of degrees in a same cluster c consisting of kc
The in-cluster-based normalization is a powerful tool
contributing considerably to injecting non-linearities in
the overall system, all while preserving the comparable
role held by each operational parameter in the task
execution;
in layer 4, Sugeno functions fi are computed as a function
of the crisp variables ex computed in layer 0 (both y and g,
after having learned the shift values modulating the
latter). In particular, fi is composed of a linear combination of suitable (possibly different) scalar functions 1 of
each input variable (for instance the identity function,
power laws, log, exp, etc.), where the weights s of the
linear combination constitute the free parameters to be
suitably learned. In the lead example, after having (either
randomly or with some expert advice) decided on the
shape of scalar functions 1s, the resulting Sugeno
function, which reads f2ðex; s1Þ ¼ s21ex1 þ s22ex2
2 (in case
a linear and a quadratic scalar function 1 were chosen for,
respectively, ex1 and ex2), provides the numerical contribution of the second rule to the baking time, reﬂecting the
action to be taken according to the satisfaction degree of
its premises. Finally,
in layer 5, the outputs of the Sugeno functions are
summed in each cluster c with a weight equal to the
normalized satisfaction degree computed at layer 3:
wjfjðex; sjÞ
In other words, the more a rule is compatible with the
input instance, the higher will be its contribution to the
overall output—which reads as the value assigned to
the baking time during the next task execution in the
lead example.
To sum up, each cluster c in the system, in input the value
of both the operational parameters yðtÞ and the task execution
evaluation
depending on the operational task to be faced), computes as
output the operational parameter oðtþ1Þ
at the next
time step, which in turn receives user evaluation in terms of
the fuzzy variables gðtþ1Þ. For the sake of conciseness, we
will drop the temporal index in the notation whenever no
ambiguities arise. Moreover, due to the twofold role played
by the operational variables yc in terms of both input and
output of the system, we still refer to the latter with oc.
We address the entire training task in terms of a backpropagation
algorithm (Werbos
derivative chain as the following:
where h represents the generic parameter to be learned in
the premises and consequents of the FIS, and where scalar
symbols were used to lighten the notation. In particular, the
error E takes a twofold expression depending on the
learning phase (see Table 1). It is the canonical mean
square error between original signal s (the target) and
reconstructed signal o in the identiﬁcation phase, where the
former is the value of operational parameters (i.e., baking
time in the lead example) which we expect for a given
input to the FIS, while the latter is the output proposed by
the system. Although in principle the original signal s may
Fig. 3 The proposed neurofuzzy system architecture
Granul. Comput. 1:225–246
be suggested by household appliance manufacturers, some
remarks on its effective identiﬁcation in real-world scenarios will be given in the experimental Sect. 3.
On the contrary, in the control phase—which is devoted
to the tuning of the FIS according to user needs after suitable identiﬁcation of the same—error E is assumed to be the
square of the task execution evaluation (judgment g).
This choice is motivated by the fact that the set point of
g, i.e. the judgment corresponding to complete satisfaction
of the user, is 0, while positive/negative deviations from it
encompass direction and magnitude of user dissatisfaction.
In the lead example, while a consistency of the bread crust
satisfying user tastes will be described by the fuzzy judgment ‘‘properly crusty’’, even though its true value remains
hidden from both user and system, we assume it to be 0
only in case of full satisfaction (i.e. perfect crust consistency). Each evaluation subtending a consistency crustier
than the optimal will be associated to positive shifts from
the set point; vice versa in the case of an excessively soft
crust. Being the only criteria ruling the learning from
nowhere inference framework, these order relations introduced on the fuzzy judgments prove to be essential requisites for the success of the inference task.
Note that in the identiﬁcation phase g is a dummy
variable, so that oE
oo in (8) contracts in oE
oo, with o, the
cluster output, computed as in (7), whereas in the control
og is g itself, modulo a constant. The last derivatives
of o w.r.t. all the underlying parameters identifying both
membership functions in the premises and regression
coefﬁcients in the Sugeno functions are computed as usual
[see Masulli et al. ; Casalino et al. 1998] for a
revisiting of [Nauck et al. , Ch. 8.3]. It is worth
noting that in addition to the above parameters, since the
true values underlying the fuzzy sets responsible for the
user evaluation are hidden, we added another parameter,
namely the shift d, to the nominal value of the fuzzy
number g [i.e. the central vertex b of the triangular m.f.s or
the mean m of the asymmetric Gaussian-like m.f.s in (4)].
While its derivative computation is analogous to the one
performed on the nominal value of the fuzzy set, we
remind the reader that, contrary to the latter which is
associated to a single membership function, each shift d
refers to each user judgment. So, if the user interacts with
the system for m times through a total of ng evaluation
variables, then the total number of ds parameter will be
m  ng. This fact, which conﬁrms the intrinsic complexity
of the learning task w.r.t. standard neuro-fuzzy architectures like ANFIS, highlights how each user judgment is
totally decoupled from previous individual evaluations. In
this acceptation, the system cannot rely on the existence of
presumed relations between two consecutive ‘‘very crusty’’
comments, as this type of linguistic quantiﬁer may refer to
two completely different ideas of bread consistency.
As for training modality, we distinguish between either
batch mode or cyclic mode 
in the identiﬁcation phase, thanks to their efﬁciency and
learning stability, and online mode in the control phase,
which in turn matches with the real-time mechanism
adopted to obtain new instances hoperational parameters,
user evaluationsi.
Moreover, according to the principle of justiﬁable
information granularity , which states that a
fuzzy set should reﬂect (or match) the available experimental data to the highest extent, all while being speciﬁc
enough to come with a well-deﬁned semantic, we further
rearranged the inputs exis through a proper transformation
so as to make them well framed in the corresponding fuzzy
sets by ﬁlling their support.
Namely, consider the fuzzy sets shown in Fig. 4a where
the three triangular m.f.s are related to the linguistic
quantiﬁers ‘‘not no crisp’’, ‘‘properly crisp’’, and ‘‘very
crisp’’, while the bullets refer to inputs exis processed by the
system during a history of user interactions. An initial
strategy consists in rescaling the inputs exis in one-shot (at
each learning cycle) so that their c and 1  c empirical
quantiles would coincide, respectively, with the fuzzy
maxmin and minmax of the three fuzzy numbers . This holds true, respectively, for a proper
choice of c, where maxmin gives the maximum of the left
extremes delimiting the support of the fuzzy sets, while
minmax the minimum of the analogous right extremes. In
particular, having introduced the afﬁne transformation
qðexÞ ¼ aex þ b, at each learning cycle we obtained a by
 q1cmaxminqcminmax
 minmaxmaxmin
, where qc is the c empirical quantile of the
inputs exs. Black bullets in Fig. 4a show the results of the
rescaling applied to the gray bullets when c was set equal to
The second strategy, which took the form of an incremental procedure, was the default choice in our experiments, having the obvious advantage to avoid abrupt
oscillations in the training process. It is depicted in Fig. 4b
in the case of asymmetric Gaussian-like m.f.s. Namely,
Table 1 The analytics of the two-phase learning procedure
Granul. Comput. 1:225–246
having introduced for each linguistic variable two translation parameters b0; c0 and one scaling parameter a0, we
applied the afﬁne transformation:
q0ðexÞ ¼ a0ðex  b0Þ þ c0
to the shifted input value ex of each linguistic variable gi so
as to match both position and spread of all the currently
learned m.f.s. In particular, we considered a mixture M of
asymmetric Gaussian random variables , which
differs from the companion set of m.f.s only in the normalization factor, and computed its mean mM and standard
deviation rM . At each system
evaluation, through a gradient-descent procedure, we
gradually modiﬁed translation and scaling parameters
in (9) to minimize the sum of the mean square errors
between the two aforementioned statistics mM and rM and
their sample realizations computed on the observed data. In
Fig. 4b the position of black bullets is the output of several
steps of the proposed incremental procedure.
At this point two remarks are noteworthy. Firstly, re the
sole user evaluation variables gs, the output (3) of layer 0
must be further processed so as to include the chosen
transformation (q or q0) as the last step. Secondly, we
avoided to operate a local rescaling on the single fuzzy sets
(e.g. ‘‘poorly crisp’’) since we would be obliged to make
each point exi belong to a single fuzzy set. While in principle this operation can be straightforwardly performed by
attributing a point to the fuzzy set whose membership
grade is maximal, this assignment is not free from introducing biases in the learning process. This is due to the
continuous adjustment of m.f. parameters and input position during learning.
In conclusion, focusing on asymmetric Gaussian-like
m.f.s, our inference concerns the parameter vector h, with:
h ¼ mji; rlji; rrji; dpi; scji
where m; rl and rr denote, respectively, mean, left and right
standard deviation of the Gaussian m.f. as in (4), d is the
aforementioned shift of each fuzzy input variable, s reads
as the generic regression parameter of the Sugeno function,
while c, j and i are indexes coupled, respectively, with the
output units, the rules, and the input variables. In the
identiﬁcation phase their increments are ruled as shown in
Table 2. Rather, in the control phase the error function
where gðtþ1Þ
is the i-th evaluation provided by the user at
time t þ 1.
Here, the derivative ogðtþ1Þ
ooðtþ1Þ is the most critical part of the
chain rule (8), since we do not know the mapping linking
the FIS output o to the user judgment g. Actually, this
mapping is user-dependent, as s/he is the sole actor
responsible for this association—consider for example the
evaluation as ‘‘too crusty’’ of the currently tasted loaf.
Therefore, we propose either:
an analytical solution in the reciprocal of the derivative
ogðtÞ , as clear from the identiﬁcation of oðtþ1Þ, or
a numerical solution in the ratio of the differences at
consecutive time steps of the two quantities, i.e.
gðtþ1ÞgðtÞ
oðtþ1ÞoðtÞ, to bypass identiﬁcation errors.
The feasibility of the former solution, which in terms of the
chain rule (8) reads as:
!1ooðtþ1Þ
comes directly from the FIS architecture, having in the
judgment g at time t one of the inputs of the system, and
in the operational parameter o at time t þ 1 exactly its
output. Indeed, referring g to a different time step (exactly the previous one), we see that it suffers from the
typical plague of being identiﬁed in a domain that may
be far from the one where o will be applied during the
Fig. 4 a Triangular, and b asymmetric Gaussian-like fuzzy sets
corresponding to the linguistic quantiﬁer ‘‘low crisp’’, ‘‘properly
crisp’’, and ‘‘very crisp’’. Gray and black bullets represent the history
of user interactions with the system, respectively, before and after
applying the principle of justiﬁable information granularity
Granul. Comput. 1:225–246
alternating the two phases . However,
remark to have never been forced to apply this strategy
in our experiments.
The second solution
although temporally consistent, may deserve overﬁtting,
and in any case suffers from the cold start problem.
3 The experimental framework
Granular computing gathers a set of constructs and procedures which have arisen with the goal of matching
computational intelligence tools with concrete operational
frameworks . The interactions of
information granules with the physical world and their
relation to perception of interactions in the physical world
covered by the c-granule paradigm pave the way to
concrete solutions of real-world problems. Strictly along
these lines, the main experiment testbed of our procedure
is framed within the European project SandS, which is
aimed at building up a physical and computational networked infrastructure allowing household appliances to
better meet the needs of their owners. This is achieved
through ﬁnely tuned instructions dispatched by a social
network to the appliances, in turn equipped with intelligent functionalities. In these settings, the goal is to learn a
fuzzy rule system capable of producing proper recipes for
our household appliances, where a recipe is the sequence
of instructions which completely deﬁne the working cycle
of these appliances. As an example, in the context of a
loaf taken out of the bread maker, an excerpt of a recipe
could be identiﬁed by the following hparameter, valuei
hfirst leavening time; 60mini
hbaking time; 150mini
hbaking temperature; 190i
The goal is to produce recipes that exactly meet needs and
preferences of the appliance owner, where the latter are
expressed in terms of evaluation on the product/service
provided by the appliance, such as loaf moistness and
crustiness in the lead example.
In doing this, we have a drawback to eliminate and a
challenge to meet.
The drawback concerns the dynamic feature of the entire
training procedure. Indeed, since we aim to learn how to
get a better user evaluation, we must embed the training
phase inside an overall cycle where:
a user asks for a task execution;
the social network computes the related recipe as a
result of previous recipes and related evaluations, and
dispatches it to the appliance;
the appliance executes the recipe; and
the user issues an evaluation on the executed task, so
closing the loop (see Fig. 5).
The problem is that step 3 is deﬁnitely time consuming
(generally, in the order of hours), thus slowing the entire
procedure down. This is a pitfall and a severe benchmark
as well, since it is met very frequently when we want to
Table 2 Back-propagation-like
equations ruling the
identiﬁcation phase of the
proposed FIS
Dscji ¼ g sc  oc
Þwj  1cjðexiÞ
Þ scji  oc
wj exi  mji
if exi  mji
Þ scji  oc
wj exi  mji
if exi [ mji
Þ scji  oc
wj exi  mji
if exi  mji
if exi [ mji
if exi  mji
Þ scji  oc
wj exi  mji
if exi [ mji
 exi  mji
if exi  mji
 exi  mji
if exi [ mji
Parameter g denotes the learning rate. The only input variables exis coupled with the shifts ds in (12.5) are
the fuzzy judgments gis
Granul. Comput. 1:225–246
apply the soft computing paradigm to real scenarios and
not to simulated ones. Hence, the success in managing this
problem will decree the success of the entire paradigm; in
turn, rendering this procedure successful is the aforementioned challenge that we met with a two-step strategy. On
the one hand, we assessed and validated our FIS paradigm
on a case study—namely, the face beautifying task—which
has the same features yet almost null recipe execution time
(see Sect. 3.1). On the other hand, after a brief explanation
of the SandS project and architecture, we apply in Sect. 3.2
the procedure to the actual task of producing recipes for our
appliances.
3.1 The case study: face beautiﬁcation
The face beautifying task is described in the following
algorithm.
Start from a picture of a slightly deformed face like in
a tester is requested to express a f5; . . .; þ5g
Likert evaluation of the picture
w.r.t. the four criteria listed in Table 3b;
on the basis of these evaluations, the FIS algorithm
(replaced by a human operator in the ﬁrst 120 runs)
anthropomorphic
parameters
reported in Table 3a;
according to these changes, obtaining variations
like in Fig. 6b;
the new picture is supplied to the tester for a new
evaluation, so that the procedure continues from
until either a satisfactory picture is achieved (not
necessarily close to the original one, see Fig. 6c), or a
given stopping condition is reached.
Interested readers may play with the online tool2,
meanwhile contributing to the enrichment of the continually growing benchmark. At the same time, they may have
ﬁrst-hand experience of the intrinsic complexity of the task.
In fact, despite the immediacy and at ﬁrst glance apparent
local scope of the anthropomorphic parameters, actually
they have been planned so as to be responsible for a global
morphing of the face. They are also highly correlated with
one another, so that a slight modiﬁcation of one parameter
has an effect on face elements in principle ruled by any
other parameters. Analogously, the employed evaluation
criteria are not simply a matter of subjective interpretations. In addition, their relation with anthropomorphic
parameters is highly non-linear and non-univocal, in the
sense that various parameter settings may collapse in the
same evaluation, even when performed by the same user.
Thanks to the online tool, at a rate of 20 iterations per
hour, we may rely on circa 1000 triplets htask, recipe,
evaluationi in approximately one week, where:
tasks may be differentiated on the basis of both the
involved tester and the face to be enhanced: we may in
fact suppose that the evaluation answers differ both
from tester to tester on a same picture, and from face to
face on the same tester;
recipes will be generated through slight modiﬁcations
of the current anthropomorphic parameters, thanks to
fuzzy rules properly tuned by the learning algorithm on
the basis of the tester fuzziﬁed evaluations. An excerpt
of a prototypical recipe could be:
hfacewidth; þ 3:26i
hfaceheight;  2:41i
hnoselength; þ 1:63i
Fig. 5 The online training cycle
2 
Granul. Comput. 1:225–246
where we used as value of each pair the shift the
corresponding anthropomorphic parameter should be
affected by;
users provide their evaluations at each image modiﬁcation through a suitable Likert scale.
In this way we may plan to gather operational indications
for the training of FIS on our actual appliances’ testbed.
Namely, in both cases the evaluation criteria, expressed in
the discrete range f5; . . .; þ5g, guide the learning system
in the selection of a dozen operational parameters, each
affecting the results of the process (pleasant face in one
case, good bread, soft laundry, etc. in the other one).
Analogously, since the relation underlying user evaluation
and operational parameters is unknown, we will rely on a
set of rules, synthesizing a general wisdom, whose premises are mainly fuzzy while their consequences are metric. Also for the face experiment we will use the proposed
special Sugeno system where some of the metric variables
in input to the premises (precisely those referred to the user
evaluations) are hidden.
3.2 The goal testbed
In an extreme synthesis, we are setting up the SandS
ecosystem which deals with a
social network aimed at producing recipes with tools of
computational intelligence, to be dispatched to household
appliances grouped in homes via a domestic WiFi network.
A recipe is a set of scheduled, possibly conditional,
instructions (hence a sequence of evaluated parameters
such as water temperature or soak duration) which completely deﬁne the running of an appliance. They are managed by a home middleware to be properly transmitted to
the appliance via suitable protocols.
The entire contrivance is devised to optimally carry out
usual housekeeping tasks through a proper running of home
appliances with a minimal user intervention. Feedbacks are
sent by the housekeepers and appliances themselves to a
networked intelligence module (in the role of a virtually
electronic super-mom in Fig. 7) to close the continuous
recipe optimization loop. In this cadre, experts and appliance manufacturers may contribute with off-line advices
and suggestions. An electronic board interfaces each single
appliance to the home middleware.3 An excerpt of a recipe
for washing machine is reported in Table 4. It consists of
two tables; with the former we ﬁx the parameters that
characterize the working cycle to be executed by the
machine; with the latter we list the sequence of instructions
that are sent step by step to the machine to implement this
working cycle.
A relevant aspect concerns the network intelligence. In
our approach, starting from the most suitable baseline
recipe, we modify some of its parameters on the basis of
the feedback it received on its execution. We do so through
a rule set that has been trained on the log of the triples
htask, recipe, evaluationi. In this way we translate our
inference problem on the recipe parameter variations into
the one of identifying the rules generating the recipes. In
addition, since the underlying rules are based in great part
on vague evaluations expressed by the user both on the past
recipe performance and on the current task speciﬁcation,
also in this case we fall in the ﬁeld of fuzzy rule systems
with hidden variables, proper to the learning from nowhere
framework. Actually, analogously to Table 3, in Table 5
we list the operational parameters and evaluation criteria in
the bread-making task.
Fig. 6 Morphing of a face
Table 3 List of anthropomorphic parameters and evaluation criteria
employed in the face beautiﬁcation task 
 
snapshot tutorial.
Granul. Comput. 1:225–246
4 Numerical results
4.1 The face beautiﬁcation experiment
At present, we have performed two kinds of experiments
by computing either a subset or the entire set of face
parameters. Moreover, since the procedure we propose is
relatively new, we focused on the same face beautifying
task to conduct many numerical investigations on the
constituent steps of the algorithm, with special focus both
on the positioning of the hidden variables under the fuzzy
sets and on the identiﬁcation of the Sugeno functions and
their inverses too.
4.1.1 Turing like test
As for the former, like in the Turing Test ,
in our experiment we let 6 parameters—mainly related to
nose and eyes shaping—be tuned by the user, and the
other 5—regulating the overall face dimensions and
mouth—be produced by our fuzzy rule system, with the
aim that the two families of parameters would result
indistinguishable to an external observer. First of all, we
obtained a suitable training set by letting users interact
with the online face beautiﬁcation tool.4 Namely, each
beautiﬁcation
cyclically
adjusting the 11 anthropomorphic parameters and then
evaluating the pleasantness of the resulting face. In this
way, we got a collection of 121 records, each deputed to
describe each beautiﬁcation task through a list of hface
parameters, evaluationi histories. On the basis of the
above training set, the identiﬁcation phase proved satisfactory, as shown by the Mean Square Error (MSE) curves
reported in Fig. 8.
Accordingly,
correspondence
between the original parameters set by the user in the
121 records of the training set and the companion ones
computed by the fuzzy rule systems. The 45 degree
Table 4 An excerpt of washing
machine recipe
(a) The operational parametersthat characterize each phase
(b) The sequence of instructions setting their valuein the machine board
Fig. 7 The SandS super-mom
4 
Granul. Comput. 1:225–246
straight lines highlight the good approximation of the
recovered points.
As for the FIS architecture used throughout this
experimentation, we peaked randomly the components 1is
of each Sugeno function f among linear and quadratic
functions, committing the FIS for a proper identiﬁcation
of the related coefﬁcients. We used the asymmetric
Gaussian-like m.f.s in (4) and afﬁne transformation (9) to
let the coordinates of the linguistic variables fulﬁll the
support of the Gaussian bells. Clusters of rules were used
singularly
anthropomorphic parameters are affected by. Each cluster
was composed of 35 rules, where 3 is the number of
levels of the adopted fuzzy quantiﬁers (e.g., with reference to the approachability evaluation, they read as
‘‘low’’,‘‘somewhat’’, and ‘‘very approachable’’, standing,
respectively, for ‘‘aloof’’, ‘‘apathetic’’, and ‘‘friendly’’),
and 5 is the number of antecedents in the rules: the 4
evaluations plus the questioned parameter computed in
the previous run. Namely, for purposes of homogeneity
with the other antecedents, we decided to group into three
fuzzy sets the values assumed by the single questioned
parameter in the training set (using the same three-level
quantiﬁers as the ones adopted for evaluation variables),
and to specialize the rules for each fuzzy quantiﬁer and
for each cluster as well.
The control phase consists of a recall of the identiﬁed
system, still subject to a continuous training based on the
sole user evaluations. Namely, having as target the judgment the user makes on the pleasant appearance of the
current face, and modifying its parameters on the basis of
the history of user interaction in terms of pairs hface
parameters, evaluationsi, the fuzzy system is called upon
to generate new face parameters, with the aim of moving
user judgments around their set points. Prior to a more
rigorous evaluation procedure, we let a dozen users evaluate the pleasantness of the face generated by the FIS after
about 15 iterations. They all said that they were highly
satisﬁed. Fig. 10 reports the trajectories of parameters and
evaluations along a session where three different faces
were submitted to one of these users. In all instances both
parameters and evaluations converged to the optimal value
(set equal to 0), after some wandering in the respective
spaces. In fact, observing a full user satisfaction in correspondence to no modiﬁcations, in output to the FIS, of
the values of the operational parameters, means that a
suitable equilibrium point has been achieved by the
A different trend is denoted by the parameters when
their setting is left in the hands of the user. In Fig. 11 we
observe less spread in their values but no convergence to
the neutral settings at the end of the three training sessions
outlined in the picture.
4.1.2 The complete task
The second experiment, involving the entire set of
parameters, has similar operational features but weaker
identiﬁcation performances, as denoted, for instance, by the
two recovering graphs in Fig. 12.
However, the user is able to drive the image toward the
face in Fig. 13a, which he assumed to be satisfactory,
through the parameters’ paths in Fig. 13b. The fact is that,
during the face beautifying session, a two-way adaptation
process occurs: FIS adapts to the user evaluations and user
adapts to the FIS behavior. This process is shorter (around
15 steps) when the system is well identiﬁed in the batch
phase, and longer (23 steps) when starting from a less
accurate FIS. It is exactly this reciprocal adaptation process
that we rely on in the transfer from the case study to the
appliances’ regulation instances.
For a preliminary comparative study, we considered a
Actor-Critic
Reinforcement
procedure as a competitor of our
method. In a true essence, the Actor is the user replaced by
the system which decides how to improve a face. The
Critic is deﬁnitely the user who evaluates the effects of the
parameter changes chosen to improve the face. Per se, the
Table 5 List of operational
parameters and evaluation
criteria employed in the breadmaking task 1:225–246
procedure results in a random walk in the parameter space
with two sagacities:
it gives very small perturbations to the already trained
it drives the chance in a very conservative way, relying
on a backtracking procedure as the last option.
The pseudocode of the entire procedure is reported in
Algorithm 1.
(orig, recov) par1
(orig, recov) par2
(orig, recov) par3
(orig, recov) par5
(orig, recov) par6
Fig. 9 Comparison between the original parameters set by the user in the 121 records of the training set (x axis), and the companion ones
computed by the fuzzy rule systems (y axis)
Fig. 8 Course of the Mean Square Error (MSE) during FIS identiﬁcation phase
Granul. Comput. 1:225–246
The lead strategy is to encourage the exploration of the
parameter space each time this produces a good result and
to compress the exploration in the opposite case. When
the exploration gets stuck in a local optimum, so that
explorations are more and more inhibited (parameter
variation ranges close to 0), we call for a long jump by
resetting the variation ranges to their default values. If the
jump is inappropriate (negative evaluation) then a backtracking procedure is performed, and another jump is
realized. Finally, the algorithm stops after too many
negative jumps.
The face beautiﬁcation experiment shows improvements
in a trend passing from phenotypes to genotypes. The Critic
bases its actions on the user’s likes/dislikes (the phenotype). However, it may root its computations on the ranges
of the parameter changes on the used parameters (the
genotypes). The core of the above procedure lies in the
criterion: if changes give rise to improvements (hence
further likes) then maintain a large range, exactly in the
directions where the modiﬁcations have been affected.
Hence, if a parameter has been decremented with success
(a new user like) decrease the negative extreme of the
effected changes. Rather, if it gave rise to a dislike, then
increase the negative extreme. Analogously with the positive extreme. The local minimum trap may be discovered
simply by thresholding the change ranges: when the range
of each parameter goes below a given threshold (hence,
after many dislikes), we reset the ranges to the initial
values, thus favoring a long jump in another parameters’
region. If no jump is effective, then stop.
par trajectories
eval trajectories
Fig. 10 Parameters and evaluations trajectories observed during the beautiﬁcation process carried out with the FIS support
Fig. 11 Parameters trajectories observed during the beautiﬁcation
process carried out without the FIS support
Granul. Comput. 1:225–246
We pay for the simplicity of the algorithm with a longer
set of trials before getting satisfactory results. Fig. 14
shows this aspect as a companion of Fig. 13. We may see
the squeezed thread of the parameters due to the reset of
their range after the sticking in a local minimum.
4.2 Adequacy, rationality and generality
of the proposed procedure
We used the same dataset collected for the face beautifying
task to check the reasonableness and correctness of the
various steps constituting our learning algorithm. In particular, we focus here on the adequacy of the procedure in
discovering the hidden variables, which in turn represents
the main novelty of the proposed FIS. Namely, with reference to the same control phase described in detail in the
previous sections, for each judgments gs we were asked to
ﬁnd some regularities with the corresponding hidden
variables hs learned by the system. To this aim, we randomly drew initial values for the latter in the range ½5; 5
and coupled each h with a judgment g, ranging in the
integer lattice f5; . . .; þ5g. Representing each judgment
g through three fuzzy quantiﬁers (namely, ‘‘low’’, ‘‘medium’’ and ‘‘high’’), we run the learning algorithm by
adjusting both hidden variables hs and parameters of the
triangular m.f.s so as to achieve full user satisfaction.
Fig. 15 denotes the good performance of the procedure in
discovering the hidden variables, highlighting the preservation of the monotonicity between the values expressed
by the users (y axis), namely the judgments gs, and the
level of the fuzzy set identiﬁed within the three m.f.s by the
one denoting the maximum membership of h (x axis). In
view of the initial random coupling between hidden variables hs and user judgments gs, this is a remarkable result
reﬂecting the general requirement of monotonicity on the
maps considered in . These experiments and emerging properties indicate that our method is
very general and robust, so as to be employable in many
operational ﬁelds for purposes of eliminating our blindness
re the universe of discourse. Indeed, we simply transfer the
above procedures to the goal testbed without noteworthy
4.3 Facing the original task
Moving on to our recipe generation task, we applied our
two-phase procedure to the bread maker experiment dataset.5 It was generated by letting the partners of the SandS
project prepare the loaf with the bread machine and then
asking a suitable set of tasters to evaluate the quality of the
home-baked bread. Repeating this experiment each day
over a period of 4 months, we obtained a total of 200 pairs
hoperational
parameters,
evaluationsi.
Table 5, in this case we have 10 parameters (time and
temperature in the 5 baking phases) and 4 evaluations as
(orig, recov) par5
(orig, recov) par11
Fig. 12 Same graphs as in
Fig. 9, when all 11 parameters
are jointly identiﬁed
Fig. 13 Face beautiﬁcation
when all 11 parameters are
jointly identiﬁed: a the face
obtained after 23 evaluations
performed by the user; b the
companion parameters
computed by the fuzzy rule
5 The database is available at 
Granul. Comput. 1:225–246
well. Clusters of rules were used to singularly generate the
operational parameters. The overall FIS architecture was
the same as the one adopted for the face beautiﬁcation task
(refer to Sect. 4.1 for more details).
As our ﬁrst training instance, we omitted training the
FIS on parameters 6, due to its scarce variability, and 10,
since temperature settings above the security threshold (set
to 150 in the microcontroller) are dummy. Rather, the
identiﬁcation on the remaining parameters (after proper
normalization)
sufﬁciently
satisfactory
However, many records in the training set have been
collected during a sort of users’ training phase, so that their
suggestions about the new recipe—which constitutes the
FIS target on the identiﬁcation phase—may deﬁnitely
prove misleading. Hence we decided to dope the training
set with a set of examples made up of the original instances
as to the premises and of the optimal parameter settings
(which we learned during the experimental campaign) as to
the consequences. This expedient was proﬁtable, as con-
ﬁrmed by the mean square error curves reported in Fig. 17.
Essentially the system is pushed toward the optimal
parameters in the consequents, proﬁting from a well-biased
noise represented by the original examples. With this FIS
conﬁguration the system produces a good tuning of the
bread maker parameters even on new inputs (hence in
generalization). However, to render the system really
adaptive to the judgments of the single user so as to learn
how to get a better evaluation from her/him, we needed to
train the FIS following the single user interactions depicted
in Fig. 5, as we did with the face beautiﬁcation case study.
Here the problem is a little trickier due to the slowdown
incurred by the entire process, which in turn is caused by
the delays introduced by the appliance during the recipe
execution. Hence we devised the following expedient.
After a good system identiﬁcation (performed as before),
we may assume that FIS computes the correct parameters
in the doped part of the training set, so that the evaluation
given in correspondence of these parameters properly
applies to the computed parameters as well. So, we may
use this part of the training set to train the system on the
evaluations as well (the control phase). Rather, we adopted
an intermediate strategy by pairing the identiﬁcation error
with the control error through a mutual weighting based on
a linearly convex composition. Namely, with reference to
Table 1, the error becomes:
i þ ð1  nÞ
ðsi  oiÞ2
for proper (small enough) n 2 ½0; 1. Now that the FIS has
been weaned, it is ready to work online. In this case, the
Fig. 14 Same pictures as in
Fig. 13 when the parameter
exploration is drawn by
Reinforcement Learning
(a) judgment g1
(b) judgment g2
Fig. 15 Monotonicity preservation in the hidden variables
Granul. Comput. 1:225–246
error expression remains the same, where the second term
acts as a regularization term, since the target s now is the
previous parameter value and n is more or less big,
depending on the evaluation values. The criterion is: if the
overall evaluation is close to 0, then refrain FIS from
producing new parameters that are far from the current
ones. Vice versa do not hesitate to move far from them if
the current evaluation is poor (nowhere near 0). Table 6
parameter values
parameter recovering
Fig. 16 Plots of the tested operational parameter values and their recovering in the bread-making experiment
Granul. Comput. 1:225–246
reports a log of these online interactions leading to a gentle
reduction of the leavening and baking parameters in
response to user evaluations, expressed in terms of slight
defects of softness, baking, and crustiness.
5 Conclusions
In this paper, we solve a new learning instance, that we
denote by learning from complex granules, in response to a
new characterization of information granules in terms of
fuzzy sets on a hidden universe of discourse and their
relations with the physical environment. What emerges is a
new Granular Construct that by means of cognitive tools
solves the problem of learning the parameters of a single cgranule. It is framed between the two constructs investigated so far: one where crisp variables are fuzziﬁed to enter
a fuzzy rule, and the other where fuzzy sets are dealt with as
a whole within a fuzzy rule. The learning procedure is an
extension of the back-propagation algorithm running on an
architecture that is rather complex as for both the questioned variables and the two (identiﬁcation/control) operational phases. Robustness of the numerical results and
weakness of the theoretical guarantees are inherited by the
original algorithm. Currently, we claim no comparative
efﬁciency w.r.t. other approaches to the problem, apart from
a trivial comparison with Reinforcement Learning in the
case study. Rather, we stress its suitability as a very general
method for concretely solving problems that are frequently
met in the real life. In the sector of white goods manufacturers this is witnessed by the conduction of household
appliances in a true fuzzy framework, where the principal
inputs come from user reactions. In a tight concreteness
thread, we considered all operational aspects of the speciﬁc
Fig. 17 Mean square error descent on the 10 operational parameters of the doped training set
Table 6 Log of online user interactions with the system
1st Leaven.
2nd Leaven.
Pre-Baking
Turning golden
Evaluation
Granul. Comput. 1:225–246
problem of training a bread maker, and found the proof of
its solution in a record of people daily preparing their loaves
of bread according to the suggestions of the trained system.
Future work will be devoted to exploring in greater
depth the theoretical aspects of the paradigm we have
introduced. The main questions to answer are:
To what extent may we reduce the data inside the
information granule? Obviously, this sentence may be
read in many ways, questioning what we denote by
datum, what by information granule. In a very
pragmatic approach, we may ask ourselves about the
sense of ruling a bread maker on the basis of feedback
from a kook. In this case we may have a virtual reality
where the user is satisﬁed, along with an effective
reality where the same user may be intoxicated by the
bread his machine has baked.
To what extent we may make our c-granule a more
complex granule? We must recall that a distinguishing
feature of our granule is that the soft_suit is rooted in a
hidden universe of discourse, a drawback that we try to
overcome thanks to its strong relationship with the
signals coming from the hard_suit and an efﬁcient
link_suit. Parameterizing the granules in terms of
approximation spaces, for instance, requires measures
on the universe of discourse that would constitute an
additional target of our inference system. The additional complexity opens the path to interesting abstract
operations on granules, such as composition, hierarchy,
etc., which become crucial in ﬁeld such as Big
Data Pedrycz and Chen . As we mentioned in
Sect. 2, for now we privileged a pure subsymbolic way
based on the cognitive adjustment of non-symbolic
parameters. However, the exploration of a hybrid
approach will be a relevant part of our future work.