Turkish Online Journal of Distance Education-TOJDE April 2005 ISSN 1302-6488 Volume :6 Number: 2 Article No:3
Exemplary Online Educators:
Creating a Community of Inquiry
Associate Professor Beth PERRY RN, PhD
Centre for Nursing and Health Studies,
Athabasca University-CANADA
Associate Professor Margaret EDWARDS RN, PhD
Centre for Nursing and Health Studies,
Athabasca University, CANADA
www.athabascau.ca
November 18, 2004
INTRODUCTION
Within most disciplines there are those who are recognized as being exceptionally competent
practitioners. These people are sometimes called exceptional or exemplary. In the
educational realm, students remember these individuals at the teachers who most positively
influenced their learning. The commonality of these exemplary practitioners is that they do
their work in a remarkable way and their teaching strategies and interpersonal interactions
are regarded by their students as highly successful.
Although there has been a “virtual explosion of online education” the
literature remains lacking in terms of studies focused on what makes some online educators
more effective than others. This paper outlines the initial findings of a qualitative study that
asked students who study online their perspectives on why they recall certain online
educators as outstanding. The “Community of Inquiry” model developed by Garrison,
Anderson and Archer provides a framework for analysis of the findings of this study (n.d.).
Specifically, the data reveals that exemplary online teachers create a community of inquiry
that is comprised of a strong social, cognitive and teaching presence.
The outcomes of this study have implications for all those who teach online and for
administrators who are proposing to move their curriculum from class-room based to the
online method of delivery. In order to develop high quality online teachers, we need to
understand what makes online educators not only effective, but exemplary.
LITERATURE REVIEW
Although technology, especially the Internet, is revolutionizing the way people learn, there is
very little literature on the topic of effective teaching online. Recent studies such as the one
by Thiele focused on the learning patterns of online students. The particular focus of
Thiele’s study was on the effect of online courses on learning styles. Kenner, Androwich, and
Edwards concurred that distance education has grown over recent years. These
authors in writing about a particular program offered by Excelsior College to prepare nurse
executives again focus on elements of online education such as program cost and factors
that attract students to this mode of learning. Christner cautions that online
education should not be seen as the cure for higher education’s ills or as the ultimate in
educational technology. He observes that problems exist in this new format: balancing the
needs of students and faculty can be challenging and not all subjects work as online courses.
White, Roberts and Brannan focused particularly on course design in online
education. Their major premise is that “unless the course is reconceptualized using an
interactive learning pedagogy, the results are nothing more than a correspondence course
via e-mail and that simply transferring a traditional classroom-based course to an online
format is doomed to failure ” . However, the
unanswered question beyond course design is how does the instructor influence the learning
experienced by the student. White, Roberts and Brannan go on to describe an online nurse
refresher course provided by University of Wisconsin that promotes the following four
components - humanizing or creating a good learning environment; getting the learners to
participate; using the right message so that it is received, understood, and remembered; and
eliciting feedback from the learner . These
elements may provide some clues as to what makes online educators exemplary yet a major
gap remains in our understanding of effective online teaching.
Congruent with the White etal. model, Archer, Garrison, Anderson and Rourke 
have conducted research that shows that “creation of adequate levels of cognitive, social,
and teaching presence are associated with high levels of deep and meaningful learning.”
Garrison, Anderson and Archer (n.d.) situate their findings in a model they call the
“Community of Inquiry” (see figure 1). The Community of Inquiry features three major
elements: social presence, cognitive presence and teaching presence which overlap to form
the educational experience of the learner (Garrison, Anderson, & Archer, n.d.). The Garrison
etal. and White etal. models provide the framework for analysis for this study and provides
direction for further research possibilities.
Methodology
Narrative inquiry was the method used in this study. For centuries people have told stories to
convey values and explore life . Carter argues that stories as a mode of
knowing are “particularly suited to explicating the issues” that are relevant to educators (p.
6). As Carter explained stories capture and richness and nuances of meaning in human
affairs. We believe that the effective teacher-learner relationship is probably rooted, at least
in part, in the human interaction between the participants in this relationship. In designing
this study we were influenced by Elbaz who wrote, “story is the very stuff of teaching,
the landscape within which we live as teachers and researchers and within which the work of
teachers can be seen as making sense” (p. 3). This we began to understand exemplary online
education using narrative inquiry.
This initial study involved questioning graduates of the Masters in Health Study (MHS),
Masters in Nursing (MN) and the Advanced Nurse Practitioner (ANP) programs from
Athabasca University. These learners had all completed their degree requirements entirely
online. Specifically the goal was to ask their perspectives about what makes an online
educator exemplary.
Participants were asked the following question on a survey that was sent to all MHS, MN and
ANP graduates one month after convocation for the years 2002 and 2003. They were asked
to provide a narrative, that is to focus on specific interactions and experiences with their
exemplary teachers rather than on a list of characteristics or adjectives in the following
We seek to recruit and hire faculty who are exemplary online educators. In order to
achieve this, we need to have your perspective on what makes online educators
exceptional. Please tell us about an incident or interaction you had with a faculty
member during your Master's program that you would categorize as an exceptional
moment of learning. We are interested in going beyond a list of characteristics of
exceptional educators to look at the context and process of these learning moments.
Therefore please provide as much detail as possible regarding the interaction.
Perhaps you would be able to tell us the “story” of your learning moment.
The surveys were completed online and returned anonymously. The total number of
responses to the research questions was nine out of 17 graduates from 2002 and 14 out of
47 graduates from 2003 with a total of 23 participants in this initial study. This is a
participation rate of 36%.
Data Analysis
One of the most challenging aspects of qualitative method is the analysis and interpretation
of data . In this study we used what Priest, Robert and
Woods call narrative analysis. Narrative analysis is a method by which interpretation
of meaning may be made from data which is in story form. Narrative analysis allows
researchers to attempt to communicate what was experienced by the study participants. In
narrative analysis elements of the narratives (or stories) are organized into common themes.
The major themes that emerged from the study were exemplary online educators as
challengers, affirmers and influences. Theses themes were determined from narratives that
were rich in description of how the exemplary online educators affected the learners in these
ways. In the sections that follow each theme is reviewed and a verbatim excerpt from the
narrative that illustrates these themes is provided. Additional analysis is achieved by
applying the Community of Inquiry (Garrison, et.al. n.d.) and White et.al. models to the
EXEMPLARY ONLİNE EDUCATORS AS CHALLENGERS
Many of the narratives characterize the online educators as very demanding individuals with
high standards. The students illustrate how they came to value the teachers who had high
expectations for them, those who challenged them to perform at levels that were beyond
their own prospects for themselves. Consider three excerpts that illustrate the theme of
educators as challengers.
I once wrote a brief posting regarding common treatments patients sometimes use at
home that are harmless, but that may reflect outdated information and learning
needs. The instructor wrote to challenge what evidence I used to deem the
treatments harmless. I retrieved it, and never forgot her valuing of evidence, and of
basing even seemingly harmless statements on evidence to withstand relevant
challenges.
Online learning is limited by personal interaction; my best experiences with
instructors were those where the instructors challenged my thinking or perspective. A
couple of the instructors were particularly good at questioning my assumptions and
pointing out other views to broaden the perspective of the students.
I had one instance where the instructor explained that a paper that I had submitted
did not meet my "usual" standards. I had indeed had trouble with it and she
suggested a rewrite and a chance to submit it again. Initially, I was not looking
forward to the extra work but she challenged me to do a more professional job….I
was grateful eventually and expressed that to her. Her feedback was so encouraging
and you never wanted to let her down.
As Garrison et.al. (n.d.) point out, cognitive presence of the teacher is a core concept in
creating a community of inquiry. The responses of the participants in this study give
examples of how the online instructors challenged the student to think critically, provide
additional examples from practice, and improve the quality of their assignments. These
strategies might all be considered to enhance the cognitive presence in the online
environment.
In another study by Garrison and Cleveland-Innes of cognitive presence in online
learning, they concluded that teacher learner interaction is not sufficient on its own to create
effective learning. Rather they conclude that “structure and leadership are crucial for online
learners to take a deep and meaningful approach to learning.” In the White et.al. study the
theme of “using the right message” could be seen as a strategy for achieving cognitive
presence. These findings provide additional insight into how cognitive presence in the online
teaching environment might be manifested.
EXEMPLARY ONLINE EDUCATORS AS AFFIRMERS
The second major theme relates to exemplary online educators as affirmers. The students
identified instructors who found opportunities to let their students know that they were
succeeding in their studies and to encourage them in their learning. Specifically exemplary
educators affirmed students by recognizing their potential, treating learners with respect
and recognizing potential problems and taking actions to assist with this. In all of these ways
the teachers identified by the study participants demonstrated to the learners that they
valued them as individuals. This affirmation seemed to have a positive influence on the
learning experience. Here are two specific examples from the data to illustrate instructors
affirming learners by recognizing and acknowledging their potential.
The best part came when my instructor, whose expertise and wisdom I greatly
admire, noted that she had learned something new from the means by which I had
presented my understanding of the concepts of nursing theory. I also enjoy being
asked to share my work with future students or having input for improving courses.
The data also revealed that treating learners with respect provides positive affirmation and
enhanced the educational experience. For example,
Sometimes I thought my peers were rejecting or ignoring my ideas or focusing on
non-course content (e.g. seemingly unrelated work life issues). At these times,
encouragement and validation by the instructor was validating and uplifting.
Validation of student needs and respect helped me to stay committed to the long
hours of study.
The first was in a particularly difficult semester for me and I had to be away for ten
days and the instructor was very accepting of this fact and assured me that catching
up could be done later. At the time that I was to leave (several weeks after I had
notified her) she sent me an email to wish be well and to enjoy my time away and not
to worry about catching up. I was able to take the much needed break and came back
with renewed interest and enthusiasm. I felt that this demonstrated a true interest in
me in this otherwise seemingly cold impersonal learning. It gave me much more of a
feeling that she wasn’t just doing her job but that she cared about the students as
people and that our learning was also important to her.
Finally, here is an example of how the exemplary online educator recognized a potential
problem common in adult learners who are balancing competing priorities in their lives and
thus made the learner feel valued thus enhancing the learning experience.
I appreciated being able to ask for flexibility in scheduling of assignments and
deadlines on several occasions with different instructors to meet my personal needs.
This reduced stress and stress reduction certainly helps to improve readiness for
Applying the Community of Inquiry model to the educator as affirmer theme draws attention
to the concepts purposed by Garrison etal. (n.d.) of teaching presence and social presence.
The overlap of teaching presence and social presence as depicted in the model forms what
Garrison and his colleagues have labeled “setting climate” (see figure 1). We suggest that
the affirmation of the learner by the online educator assists in creating a positive, supportive
learning climate. When interactions between learner and instructor are one-on-one in a
private online venue, the climate may be student specific. Likewise affirming student-teacher
interactions in public fora would have the possibility of enhancing the virtual classroom
climate. In either case the educator by acknowledging student success, interacting in a
respectful manner and being astute to arising problems and taking appropriate action all
served to enhance the virtual classroom climate setting a positive tone that facilitated
learning. Likewise, White etal. conclude that one essential component of effective online
teaching is creating a humanizing learning environment which is was achieved in this study
by affirming the learners.
EXEMPLARY ONLINE EDUCATORS AS INFLUENCERS
The final theme is exemplary online educators as influencers. The stories told by the study
participants illustrated that the exceptional teachers had influenced them significantly. The
students recalled examples of how the expertise of the teacher in a particular subject area
and the strong online presence of the instructor were specific ways that they were
influenced. Consider these examples of the power of the content and process expertise of the
instructor.
My best "learning moments" often occurred as I was struggling to grasp a complex
concept and the instructors provided clarity through the use of practical examples.
Professor X’s feedback on my assignment--publication of article, stands out as a
"special learning occasion." Her method of putting together feedback in a positive
format would stay with me for the rest of my life. Although I received an exceptional
mark, the feedback was so well documented that I think Dr. X can instruct other
instructors on how to give feedback.
The following are examples of strategies online instructors used to convey their presence.
The study participants concluded that the sensed presence of their instructors contributed to
their success in the online course.
She would send you a little email just out of the blue to let you know you were on
Another instructor similarly demonstrated how she though of us as real people was in
the way that she would send thoughts of the day/week or season. These was closely
timed with times of high stress obvious by the type of conversation in the forums,
when the subject matter was more difficult to grasp or the times when assignments
were due. It lessened the stress, which for me, led to a better performance.
Linking these findings to the Community of Inquiry (Garrison, et.al., n.d.) model is obvious.
The narratives provide examples of how teachers can achieve what is documented in the
model as teaching presence. Further, the findings are congruent with results from study of
the influence of social presence of the instructor in online courses by Swan . She
found that social presence evidenced by teacher immediacy behaviors affected student, and
possibly instructor, satisfaction with a course. Specifically, Swan found that students with
high overall perceptions of social presence also scored high in terms of perceived learning
and perceived satisfaction with the instructor .
Perceived online presence of the instructor as recommended by Swan, combined with a
presence that is considered by the learners to be positive and influential as suggested by the
participants in this study, seems to be a necessary goal for online teachers who strive to be
effective. Further study to determine additional strategies that online instructors use to
successfully achieve online presence is desirable.
EMERGING THEMES
The analysis of the data in this study continues. There are still many themes beginning to
emerge that require additional data for support. For example, there is an emerging theme
related to the idea of “learning with.” Some narratives convey that students are motivated
when the teacher-learner relationship involves a mutual learning experience. This reciprocal
arrangement in the teacher-learner relationship will be explored more fully in the follow-up
to this initial study. One example of this emerging concept taken from the current study
In one of the courses the instructor was openly honest about how much she was
learning from each of us during our conference dialogues and assignments. What
struck me about this was how important it is for the instructors to guide, share and
participate and not to assume or present themselves as being the authority on a
In some ways the Community of Inquiry model speaks to this experience of mutuality
 . The educational experience that forms the center-piece of the model is
a convergence of the experiences of both the learner and the teacher. We propose that this
educational experience can be more or less positive situated along a continuum, but that it is
likely a similar experience for both the teacher and the learner. This proposition requires
further study in follow-up research where the perspectives of both teachers and learners are
gathered and compared.
CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
Technology is revolutionizing the way people learn. The heart of the challenge facing online
educators is “the need to create a critical community of inquiry- the hallmark of higher
education – within a virtual text-based environment” (Garrison, Anderson, & Archer, n.d., p.
1). This study focused on exemplary online educators with the goal of discovering what
teaching approaches and strategies used by the group students identify as being
exceptionally effective. In other words, how do outstanding online educators create a critical
community of inquiry? The research data provides rich examples of how students experience
the elements of social, cognitive and teaching presences within the virtual classroom. This
knowledge may assist those who teach courses online to improve their teaching
effectiveness thus creating exceptional learning environments that will enhance student
As the use of online as a method of delivery grows, the interest in effective delivery using
this method is also developing. The narratives and analysis of these that are the major
component of this study provide specific examples that can be situated into the Community
of Inquiry model of online learning proposed by Garrison et.al. (n.d.). This model also
stimulates additional areas for further research. For example, how can the educator further
enhance the online educational experience through interventions that promote a positive
climate? How does the online educator effectively support discourse and what content is
most appropriate for online learning? Further, there is much to learn about the studentteacher relationship in the virtual classroom. The findings of this study give rise to an
emerging theme of “learning with” with implications for the reciprocity of the teacherlearner relationship. Through further study we may discover that the effective teacherlearner relationship is probably rooted, at least in part, in the positive human interaction
between the participants in this relationship which was alluded to by White et al., 2003.
Further research to unveil the components of such a relationship and the contribution it
could make to learning is needed.
Online learning is not just a learning enhancement, it is an entirely new way of learning and
teaching that is likely here to stay, and thus additional research aimed at the largely
unanswered question of how the instructor can positively influence the learning experienced
by the student should be a priority. The next phase of this study is underway and it involves
a much larger sample of online students. A richer and fuller description of the phenomena
will be sought by augmenting the questionnaire with interviews of selected participants.
Perhaps some of what has been learned about excellence in online education is
encapsulated in this participant’s comments, “Having a good educator can be likened to the
experience of having a fine wine. Your senses are stirred but not assaulted leaving you
wanting more and recalling the experience with pleasure.” This study provided a beginning
description of the approaches and strategies used by effective online educators. This
knowledge can be used in the recruitment and selection of new faculty members and in the
ongoing coaching and development of current faculty with the overall goal of enhanced
quality of online education. But most importantly, online teaching, if done in an effective
way, has the potential to significantly enhance the intellectual quality of learning
environments and learning outcomes. Exemplary online teaching can create a true
community of inquiry.
Source: Garrison, D., Anderson, T. & Archer, W. (n.d.). p.16.
BIODATA AND CONTACT ADDRESSESS OF AUTHORS
Beth Perry RN, PhD is a member of the Athabasca University Center for Nursing and Health
Studies. Beth completed her undergraduate nursing degree at the University of Alberta in
1982 and was awarded her PhD from the Department of Educational Administration at the
same university in 1994. Her professional experience includes staff nurse and nurse educator
positions at the Cross Cancer Institute and the Grey Nuns Hospital in Edmonton. Beth loves
to teach and taught courses for the Faculties of Education and Nursing at the University of
Alberta and for Royal Roads University in their Master's of Leadership program before joining
Athabasca University. Beth also enjoys writing and has published two books, Moments in
Time: Images of Exemplary Nursing Care and Through the Valley: Intimate
Encounters With Grief .
Dr. Beth Perry
Centre for Nursing and Health Studies
Athabasca University
1 University Drive Athabasca, AB T9S 3A3 Canada
Telephone: 780.675.6647
Email: 
Dr. Margaret Edwards is the Coordinator, Graduate Programs in the Centre for Nursing and
Health Studies at Athabasca University in Canada. She is responsible for the online-delivered
Master of Health Studies and Master of Nursing programs.
Margaret Edwards, Ph.D., R.N.
Professor and Coordinator, Graduate Programs,
Centre for Nursing and Health Studies
Athabasca University
1 University Drive
Athabasca AB T9S 3A3 Canada
E-mail: