Cell Biology Education
Vol. 2, 117–121, Summer 2003
Evaluating a Science Diversity Program at UC Berkeley:
More Questions Than Answers
John Matsui,* Roger Liu, and Caroline M. Kane
Biology Scholars Program, Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, 2075 Valley Life Sciences
Building, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California 94720-3200
Submitted October 8, 2002; Revised December 10, 2002; Accepted January 8, 2003
Monitoring Editor: Anton Lawson
For the past three decades, much attention has been focused on developing diversity programs
designed to improve the academic success of underrepresented minorities, primarily in mathematics, science, and engineering. However, ethnic minorities remain underrepresented in science
majors and careers. Over the last 10 years, the Biology Scholars Program (BSP), a diversity program at the University of California (UC), Berkeley, has worked to increase the participation and
success of students majoring in the biological sciences. A quantitative comparison of students in
and out of the program indicates that students in BSP graduate with a degree in biology at significantly higher rates than students not in BSP regardless of race/ethnicity. Furthermore, students
who are in BSP have statistically lower high school grade point averages (GPAs) and Scholastic
Achievement Test (SAT) scores than students not in BSP. African-American and Hispanic students who join BSP graduate with signiﬁcantly higher UC Berkeley biology GPAs than non-BSP
African-American and Hispanic students, respectively. Majority (Asian and White) students in
BSP graduate with statistically similar UC GPAs despite having lower SAT scores than non-BSP
majority students. Although BSP students are more successful in completing a biology degree
than non-program members, the results raise a series of questions about why the program works
and for whom.
Keywords: science diversity program, University of California, Berkeley, Biology Scholars Program, minority
students, grade point average, Scholastic Achievement Test.
INTRODUCTION
The population of the United States is undergoing dramatic
demographical changes. In 2000, the U.S. population numbered over 280 million people, increasing 38% from 1990,
with dramatic increases in the numbers of racial/ethnic minorities. In 1999, the U.S. Department of Education reported
that approximately 44% of the population between 18 and
24 years of age was enrolled in a 4-year degree-granting institution. Although underrepresented minorities, including
African Americans, Hispanics, and Native Americans, constitute 25% of the U.S. population, they received a disproportionately low percentage (16%) of all bachelors degrees
awarded. The percentage decreases further when examining
DOI: 10.1187/cbe.02-10-0050
*Corresponding author. E-mail address: .
degrees awarded in the ﬁelds of math, science, and engineering. For example, of the 65,000 bachelors degrees awarded nationally in the biological sciences in 1999, underrepresented
minorities received less than 13%. Although the numbers
of academically successful underrepresented minorities have
grown over the past four decades, there still exists a signiﬁcant graduation gap between majority and minority students,
especially in the sciences.
For more than 30 years, much attention has been focused on
developing programs designed to improve academic success
for underrepresented minorities. A large percentage of these
programs has been designed for college students entering the
ﬁelds of math, science, and engineering. In 1999, a report commissioned by the College Board, a not-for-proﬁt educational
association, described and assessed 24 college and university programs involved in promoting the high achievement of
underrepresented minority students . Although the study describes “what works,” few
C⃝2003 by The American Society for Cell Biology
J. Matsui et al.
quantitative data are provided as to the effectiveness of the
programs in increasing graduates. In addition, a separate
study commissioned by the College Board in the same year
reported that only a few promising programs were found to
have undergone extensive external evaluation .
The University of California (UC), Berkeley, is well known
for both its academic programs and its diverse student population. However, between 1992 and 1999, of the students
majoring in the biological sciences, only 4% were African
American and 9% were Hispanic. In 1992, The Biology Scholars Program (BSP) was established in the Department of
Molecular and Cell Biology at UC Berkeley. Funded by the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, BSP is a program designed to promote the success of undergraduates from economic, gender, ethnic, and cultural groups historically underrepresented in the biological sciences. BSP is an academically
centered program administratively housed in UC Berkeley’s
Department of Molecular and Cell Biology. It is a continuum
of resources available to help its members address critical
transitions (e.g., making the high school-to-university academic and social adjustment, declaring a major, applying to
graduate or professional school) throughout their undergraduate years. Program components include academic support
for lower-division courses in the biology major, an academic
and career seminar series, social events, access to on- and offcampus paid research opportunities, academic and personal
advising,andmentoring.Bydesign,BSPalsoaddressesissues
that encompass students’ lives “beyond academics,” such as
the impact of family, ﬁnancial, personal, etc., issues on their
performance at Berkeley. Overall, the goal of BSP is to create
a community of scholars with both high academic expectations and high academic support, which allows its members
to network with culturally sensitive faculty, staff, more senior undergraduates, and graduate students in an academic
Any student admitted to the UC Berkeley undergraduate program expressing an interest in the biological sciences is qualiﬁed to join BSP. Underrepresented high school
students applying to UC Berkeley with an interest in the
biological sciences, as indicated on their application, are
mailed information including an invitation to apply to the
program. UC Berkeley students from low-income and/or
ﬁrst-generation college backgrounds are identiﬁed through
various on-campus programs, provided an informational
meeting, and encouraged to apply. Current students having
difﬁculties adjusting to the university are referred to BSP by
professors and college/major advisors. Finally, current BSP
members can recommend students for acceptance into the
program. Selection into the program is based on an informational one-on-one meeting with either the Director or the
Assistant Director of BSP that includes a written application
and a ﬁnal interview.
Between 1992 and 1999, African American and Hispanic
students made up 28 and 31% of the program participants, respectively. The goal of BSP is to diversify those participating
in science by targeting Berkeley undergraduates from these
underrepresented groups. Through collaborative academic
workshops, research opportunities, career/course advising,
and a student center located in the heart of the main science
buildingontheUCBerkeleycampus,studentsdevelopacommunity through academic as well as social activities.
The speciﬁc aims of this article are (1) to present the results
of a quantitative evaluation of the success of BSP students,
(2) to discuss programmatic research questions raised by
these results, and (3) to develop an outline for future studies.
To assess the impact of BSP on its members to date, we compared
program and nonprogram members in terms of the following.
I. Academic preparation—as measured by their uncapped high-school
GPA and their combined score for the math and verbal SAT tests.
II. Success—as measured by
(a) The percentage of intended biology majors who graduated
with a biology degree.
(b) Comparisons of ﬁnal UC GPA.
Data on biology graduates were taken from the Central Campus Student Database.
Research Participants
The data used for this analysis span the academic years 1992 through
1999, and using these data, we compare BSP and non-BSP students
graduating with a degree in the biological sciences between 1994 and
1999. Spring of 1994 saw the ﬁrst BSP graduates. Our comparison
data sets include all 1994–1999 BSP (n = 143) and non-BSP 
biology graduates (Table 1). In our study, “intended biology majors”
include those students who state on their admissions application that
they intend to major in 1 of 11 majors: bioengineering, conservation
and resource studies, environmental science, forestry, genetics and
plant biology, integrative biology, microbial biology, molecular and
cell biology, molecular environmental biology, nutritional sciences,
and resource management. It should be noted that intended majors
in biology who do not graduate with a biology degree have not necessarily left the university but may have switched to an alternative
In addition to Intended Major, the data sets of 1994–1999 BSP and
non-BSP graduates also include Ethnicity, Math–Verbal–Total SAT
Scores, Uncapped High School GPA (i.e., GPAs that exceed a maximum of 4.0 if a student takes honors and/or advanced placement
courses), and Final UC GPA at graduation.
All students in the study are “intended biology majors,” “All
Groups” includes “Majority” + “Minority” students, “Majority” includes Asian and White students, and “Minority” includes African-
AmericanandHispanic(Chicano/Latino)students.NativeAmerican
and Paciﬁc Island students were not included in this analysis because
of their small numbers.
Regarding graduates who were once transfer students, because
most of them completed their lower-division science and mathematics courses at their community colleges before their admission to the university, we cannot assume that their academic
experiences (e.g., lower-division class size, testing, workload) were
similar to those of students who entered Berkeley as freshmen.
Therefore, in this study students who transferred to the university
in advanced standing were omitted from the analyses. In a future
Table 1. Race/ethnicity of BSP and non-BSP students graduating
with a biology degree at UC Berkeley between 1994 and 1999
Race/ethnic category
African American
1283 (67%)
143 (100%)
1904 (100%)
Cell Biology Education
Evaluating a Science Diversity Program at UC Berkeley
paper, the success of BSP and non-BSP transfer students will be
Statistical Analysis
Uncapped high school GPA, SAT test scores, and ﬁnal UC GPA were
analyzed with the aid of Statview software. Data were analyzed via
ANOVA followed by Scheff´e’s F post hoc test to determine
signiﬁcance between groups. Statistical signiﬁcance was accepted at
Percentages of intended biology majors graduating with a biology
degree were analyzed using the G-statistic .
The percentages of non-BSP students graduating with a biology degree were used to generate expected values for the analysis of BSP
groups. P values were obtained from a χ 2 table and signiﬁcance was
accepted at P < 0.05.
The goal of this analysis was to determine if participation in
BSP had a positive effect on student success in biological sciences disciplines while at UC Berkeley. Thus, the evaluation
required an analysis of the students’ preparation on arrival
as well as their performance while at Berkeley.
Academic Preparation: SAT and High School Grade
Point Averages—BSP vs. Non-BSP Students
The purpose of this comparison was to determine if BSP members were comparable in academic preparation to students
not in BSP, where preparation is narrowly deﬁned by high
school GPA and performance on standardized tests. Table 2
summarizes the results. This analysis addressed the question of whether, in our selection of BSP members, we had
“socially engineered” a more academically prepared (and
therefore more likely to succeed) population of students by
“skimming” only those students with higher SAT scores and
high school GPAs.
Table 2. Mean (±s.e.m.) high school GPA and total SAT score of
BSP vs. non-BSP students graduating in biology at UC Berkeley
between 1994 and 1999
High school GPA
Total SAT score
All Groups
3.98 ± 0.04a (138)b
1145 ± 15a (137)
4.13 ± 0.08 (1791)
1251 ± 5 (1783)
4.16 ± 0.05 (71)
1200 ± 18a (71)
4.15 ± 0.008 (1661)
1264 ± 3 (1653)
3.92 ± 0.07 (40)
1096 ± 0.28 (40)
3.78 ± 0.04 (157)
1085 ± 0.15 (156)
African American
3.64 ± 0.08 (29)
1076 ± 31 (28)
3.65 ± 0.09 (27)
999 ± 34 (25)
3.92 ± 0.07 (38)
1092 ± 30 (38)
3.86 ± 0.04 (103)
1109 ± 15 (105)
aStatistically signiﬁcant differences using Scheff´e’s F post hoc
test; signiﬁcance is noted where P < 0.05.
bThe sample size for each group is given in parentheses.
Overall, BSP students had lower high school GPAs and total SAT scores than non-BSP members. Majority BSP students
had lower total SAT scores than non-BSP Majority students,
while African-American and Hispanic students had statistically similar high school GPAs and total SAT scores compared
to African-American and Hispanic students not in the program. These results suggest that BSP members are similar,
in terms of high school GPAs, or less prepared, in terms of
total SAT scores, compared to non-BSP students of the same
race/ethnicity.
First Measure of Success—Percentage of Intended
Biology Majors Who Graduate with a Biology Degree
One goal of BSP is to increase the number of students graduating with undergraduate degrees in the biological sciences.
Indeed, both Majority and Minority BSP members graduate
in signiﬁcantly higher percentages than majority and minority students, respectively, not in the program (Figure 1). Also,
when Minority is disaggregated into African-American and
Hispanic students, BSP members in each case graduate in
biology in signiﬁcantly higher percentages than non-BSP
members (Figure 1). The possible explanations for this ﬁrst
measure of BSP member success (e.g., the greater motivation
of BSP vs. non-BSP students, or a positive program effect, or
both) will be the focus of future research (see Discussion).
Second Measure of Success—Final UC Grade Point
Average of Graduates in Biology
While graduation per se is a goal for BSP students, graduating with academic excellence is an even more stringent
measure of success. The ﬁnal GPA upon graduation often
dramatically inﬂuences a student’s ability to continue into
graduate or professional school and is one measure of the
level of learning achieved during the undergraduate years.
Thus, ﬁnal UC GPAs were compared among BSP members
and nonmembers in biology. The data indicate that BSP Minority (African American and Hispanic) students graduated
with signiﬁcantly higher UC GPAs than students of similar
background not in the program (Figure 2). All Groups and
Majority students in BSP graduated with similar UC GPAs
Percentage of BSP and non-BSP intended majors graduating in biology at UC Berkeley between 1994 and 1999. *Statistically
signiﬁcant differences using the G test; signiﬁcance is noted where
P < 0.05. The sample size for each group is given in parentheses.
Vol. 2, Summer 2003
J. Matsui et al.
Final UC GPA of BSP vs. non-BSP students graduating in
biology at UC Berkeley between 1994 and 1999. *Statistically significant differences using Scheff´e’s F post hoc test; signiﬁcance
is noted where P < 0.05. The sample size for each group is given in
parentheses.
compared to non-BSP members. Thus, Minority BSP members are not only graduating at higher rates, but graduating
with statistically similar GPAs.
Summary of Results—BSP vs. non-BSP Comparisons
Table 3 and the accompanying text summarize a comparison
of BSP and non-BSP graduates in terms of their preparation
(SAT and High School GPA) and success (Completion of a
Biology Degree and Final UC GPA).
1. For All Graduates—While BSP members show signiﬁcantly
lower high school GPAs and total SAT scores upon entering UC Berkeley (Table 2), they graduate with a biology
degree in signiﬁcantly higher percentages than non-BSP
members regardless of race/ethnicity (Figure 1). For all
racial/ethnic groups combined (All Groups), there is no
statistical difference in ﬁnal UC GPA (Figure 2).
2. For Majority Graduates—BSP Majority students enter
UC Berkeley with signiﬁcantly lower total SAT scores
(Table 2) yet graduate with a higher percentage of biology
degrees and a UC GPA equivalent to that of non-BSP
majority students (Figures 1 and 2). BSP Majority students
have similar high school GPAs compared to non-BSP
Majority students.
3. For Minority Graduates—Minority BSP students enter UC
Berkeley with equivalent high school SAT scores and GPAs
Table 3. Summary of results: comparison of BSP vs. non-BSP students in terms of preparation (SAT and high school GPA) and success
(completion of a biology degree and ﬁnal UC GPA) at UC Berkeley between 1994 and 1999a
Race/ethnicity
High school GPA
Total SAT score
Completion of biology degree
Final UC GPA
All Groups
African American
a–No signiﬁcant differences. (↑↓) Statistically signiﬁcant differences using Scheff´e’s F post hoc test; signiﬁcance is noted where P < 0.05.
and graduate with a higher percentage of biology degrees
and a higher UC GPA than nonmembers (Figures 1 and 2).
African-American
Graduates—BSP
African-American students enter UC Berkeley with similar high school GPAs and SAT scores (Table 2), yet BSP
members graduate with a higher percentage of biology
degrees and a higher UC GPA than students not in the
program (Figures 1 and 2).
5. For Hispanic Graduates—BSP and non-BSP Hispanic students enter UC Berkeley with similar high school GPAs
and SAT scores (Table 2), yet BSP members graduate with
a higher percentage of biology degrees and a higher UC
GPA than students not in BSP (Figures 1 and 2).
DISCUSSION
Our analysis of student performance suggests that underrepresented students in BSP have attained parity with nonprogram majority students in terms of graduating with a biology degree and in terms of their GPA at graduation. In fact,
BSP Minority students graduate with statistically similar ﬁnal UC GPAs compared to non-BSP Majority students (data
not shown). In other words, by their success in biology at UC
Berkeley, BSP graduates have closed the minority–majority
gap. This raises the important questions of (1) What possible
role has BSP had in their success? and (2) What can other institutions do to help their undergraduates replicate this success?
What kinds of activities characterize BSP? Many are familiar to those with program goals similar to those of BSP,
including study groups, paid research opportunities, and
mentoring by culturally sensitive faculty and advisors who
teach students “how to think about” their major and career
choices and provide “reality checks” regarding their readiness to succeed in speciﬁc courses, research, and summer internships. In addition, the BSP Center is housed within the
academic biology community, and the students immediately
are part of that physical identiﬁcation with biology. Finally, a
student advisory committee has been integral in voicing the
needs and concerns of BSP members, planning activities each
semester that reﬂect their interests and needs.
However, no listing or description of components can explain the effectiveness of BSP. “Building community,” “mentoring,” “addressing critical transitions,” and “providing
research opportunities and academic support” are common
phrases used to describe what programs like BSP do to address underrepresentation in science (e.g., see the inventory
of common characteristics of successful science diversity programs in Gandara and Maxwell-Jolly ). If it is as simple
Cell Biology Education
Evaluating a Science Diversity Program at UC Berkeley
as providing students with this fairly agreed-upon list of conditions for their success, then why, after three decades of effort across the United States, is there still underrepresentation
in science at the undergraduate, graduate, and professional
It is within this context that we raise a number of questions
about the overall success of BSP for further study.
1. Are BSP students simply more motivated than Berkeley
students at large, and, if so, might this difference account
for the results in Figures 1 and 2?
2. In Figure 2, what is the “real-world” signiﬁcance of these
statistically signiﬁcant differences in ﬁnal UC GPA? At UC
Berkeley, undergraduates know their GPAs to the 1000th
decimal point: Might a 3.160 vs. a 2.949 GPA make a real
difference in students’ self-concept and their ability to succeed in science?
3. Many BSP members participate in research while at Berkeley. Is there a correlation among research, graduation rates,
and ﬁnal GPA for BSP members and/or nonmembers?
4. Is gender a signiﬁcant factor in the success of BSP vs.
non-BSP students? The majority of participants in BSP
are women, over 65%. Based on our current measures of
preparation and success, statistical analyses show no signiﬁcant differences between men and women within and
outside the program.
From nearly a decade of working successfully with BSP
members, it is our strong sense that our single greatest challenge is to go beyond simply describing what we have done
to explaining why it has worked, in applicable ways/formats
that we can share with our colleagues. Toward elevating BSP
to “the next level” as we go into the 11th year of the program,
we view this study as a formative step toward understanding
BSP in terms of what is working, what is not, and for whom.
Our next step will be to expand our quantitative analysis to
include a more in-depth look at student background, preparation, and performance using more available data elements
(e.g., parental income and education, SAT2 subject scores)
in our Central Campus Student Database. At the same time,
we will expand our assessment with assistance from qualitative researchers to help us understand (beyond the numbers)
those factors that affect student success in biology at Berkeley.
Our plan is to use both quantitative and qualitative data to
reﬁne the structure, operation, and effectiveness of BSP and,
through publications and presentations, to share our understandings with colleagues engaged in equity and access issues
in science across the country.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was funded by a grant to the University of California, Berkeley, from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute as part
of its Undergraduate Biological Sciences Education Program (Grant
52003034).