Bayesian inference analyses of the polygenic architecture of
rheumatoid arthritis
Eli A Stahl1,2,3, Daniel Wegmann4, Gosia Trynka5, Javier Gutierrez-Achury5, Ron Do2,6,
Benjamin F Voight7, Peter Kraft8, Robert Chen1,2,3, Henrik J Kallberg9, Fina A S
Kurreeman1,2,3, Diabetes Genetics Replication and Meta-analysis Consortium10,
Myocardial Infarction Genetics Consortium10, Sekar Kathiresan2,6, Cisca Wijmenga5, Peter
K Gregersen11, Lars Alfredsson9, Katherine A Siminovitch12, Jane Worthington13, Paul I W
de Bakker2,3,14,15, Soumya Raychaudhuri1,2,3,16, and Robert M Plenge1,2,3,16
1Division of Rheumatology Immunology and Allergy, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. 2Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, USA. 3Division of Genetics, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. 4Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California,
Los Angeles, California, USA. 5Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen
and University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. 6Center for Human Genetic Research
and Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA. 7Department of Pharmacology, Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. 8Department of Biostatistics,
Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. 9Institute of Environmental
Medicine, Karolinska Institutet Hospital Solna, Stockholm, Sweden. 10A full list of members is
provided in the Supplementary Note. 11The Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, North
Shore–Long Island Jewish Health System, Manhasset, New York, USA. 12Department of
Medicine, University of Toronto, Mount Sinai Hospital and University Health Network, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada. 13Arthritis Research UK Epidemiology Unit, Manchester Academic Health
Science Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. 14Department of Medical Genetics,
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands. 15Department of Epidemiology,
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands. 16These authors contributed equally
to this work.
Reprints and permissions information is available online at 
Correspondence should be addressed to E.A.S. ( ) or R.M.P. ( ).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Study design: R.M.P., E.A.S., S.R. and P.I.W.d.B. Analysis: E.A.S. (lead), D.W., G.T., J.G.-A., R.D., B.F.V. (primary contributors),
R.C., H.J.K. and F.A.S.K. Samples and data: C.W., S.K., B.F.V., the Myocardial Infarction Genetics Consortium, the Diabetes
Genetics Replication and Meta-analysis Consortium, J.W., L.A., P.K.G., K.A.S. and R.M.P. Writing: R.M.P., E.A.S. (leads), D.W.,
P.K. (primary contributors) and all other authors.
Note: Supplementary information is available on the Nature Genetics website.
COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 June 12.
 
Nat Genet. ; 44(5): 483–489. doi:10.1038/ng.2232.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
The genetic architectures of common, complex diseases are largely uncharacterized. We modeled
the genetic architecture underlying genome-wide association study (GWAS) data for rheumatoid
arthritis and developed a new method using polygenic risk-score analyses to infer the total
liability-scale variance explained by associated GWAS SNPs. Using this method, we estimated
that, together, thousands of SNPs from rheumatoid arthritis GWAS explain an additional 20% of
disease risk (excluding known associated loci). We further tested this method on datasets for three
additional diseases and obtained comparable estimates for celiac disease (43% excluding the major
histocompatibility complex), myocardial infarction and coronary artery disease (48%) and type 2
diabetes (49%). Our results are consistent with simulated genetic models in which hundreds of
associated loci harbor common causal variants and a smaller number of loci harbor multiple rare
causal variants. These analyses suggest that GWAS will continue to be highly productive for the
discovery of additional susceptibility loci for common diseases.
GWAS have led to the discovery of many common variants that are associated with complex
traits. Given the number of SNPs tested in GWAS, an association must achieve a stringent
threshold of statistical significance (P < 5 × 10−8) to be considered validated1, and
contemporary GWAS are underpowered to achieve this genome-wide significance for SNPs
with modest effects on disease risk2. Assuming that disease-associated SNPs follow the
distribution of effect sizes suggested by the validated associations, it is probable that many
more true positive associations reside within GWAS data3 that have only suggestive
statistical evidence of association. Indeed, as sample sizes have increased, many more
common variants of modest effect have been discovered for a variety of complex traits4–7.
However, validated SNP associations explain only a portion of the liability-scale genetic
variance or heritability of disease estimated from classical family studies, leading to the
concept of missing heritability8,9. Elucidating the remaining sources of heritability will
allow investigators to prioritize resources for future genetic studies, including acquisition of
additional samples, technology development for variant discovery and testing (for example,
next-generation genotyping arrays or sequencing) and analytical development for detecting
associations of causal variants across the allele frequency spectrum.
Recently, two statistical methods were developed to assess the contributions of common
SNPs that do not reach genome-wide significance: polygenic analysis10 and mixed linear
modeling11. Both methods test many SNPs in aggregate for a collective effect on phenotype.
In the first method, an additive polygenic risk score based on SNPs that are below a P value
threshold in a discovery GWAS is tested in an independent set of samples. Using this
approach, polygenic effects have been shown in schizophrenia10, multiple sclerosis12, heart
rate13, height4 and body mass index5. The second method estimates additive genetic
variance (heritability) caused by common SNPs using linear mixed-effect modeling
including a random effect that represents the polygenic component of trait variation11,14.
Applied to height11, endometriosis15, Parkinson’s disease16 and other complex traits14,17,
this method has provided estimates of the heritability caused by common SNPs that are
scattered throughout the genome. An additional third method3 uses power correction based
on validated SNP associations to estimate the number of additional SNPs with similar effect
sizes, but this method estimates the contribution of more modest associations only by
making strong assumptions about the distribution of effect sizes.
Stahl et al.
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 June 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Although these methods show that additional variance can be explained by common SNPs in
GWAS data, they have not offered meaningful estimates of the number and effect sizes of
associated SNPs in the context of a GWAS of a common complex disease. Here, we develop
a method integrating polygenic analysis10 and the simulation of GWAS data under a
polygenic disease model, using approximate Bayesian computation, to infer liability-scale
additive genetic variance and the numbers, allele frequencies and effect sizes of common
SNPs weakly associated with complex disease.
To understand the contribution of common SNPs to the heritability of rheumatoid arthritis,
we applied our method to published GWAS data on >28,000 samples from rheumatoid
arthritis case-control studies2,18. We compared the results of this analysis with those from
family based heritability studies, a linear mixed model analysis and a simulation study of
common or rare causal variant models. We then extended our analyses to published GWAS
data for three additional diseases: celiac disease19, myocardial infarction and coronary artery
disease (MI/CAD)20,21 and type 2 diabetes (T2D)22. Our results suggest that in all four of
these common diseases, many hundreds of common SNP associations remain to be
identified, with total genetic contributions accounting for the majority of the heritability of
disease. Our results further suggest that common causal variants of weak effect underlie the
vast majority of these genetic contributions.
Polygenic risk scores for rheumatoid arthritis
We used rheumatoid arthritis GWAS data from six independent case-control collections
including a total of 5,485 seropositive individuals with rheumatoid arthritis (cases) and
22,609 individuals without rheumatoid arthritis of European descent (Table 1)2,18. We
imputed the GWAS data genome wide using the HapMap2 European CEU reference panel
for a total of over 2.5 million SNPs. We used a study design in which one dataset was used
as the ‘test’ data and the other five datasets were used for ‘discovery’ so that case-control
batch effects, as well as population stratification, would not be consistent across the
discovery and test data.
For the polygenic analysis, we first performed a discovery GWAS using logistic regression
with five eigenvectors from the principal-component analysis as covariates within each
dataset and combined the results across the GWAS datasets using an inverse-variance–
weighted meta-analysis. We then removed all known rheumatoid arthritis risk loci
(Supplementary Table 1) to focus on previously unidentified SNP associations and pruned
SNPs by their linkage disequilibrium (LD, r2 < 0.1) (Online Methods), preferentially
retaining the SNPs with lower discovery GWAS P values (PGWAS), to obtain a set of
maximally associated independent SNPs with unknown status with respect to disease risk.
We selected sets of SNPs reaching nine different PGWAS threshold values (PGWAS < 10−4,
10−3, 0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4 and 0.5), and for each SNP set, we summed the log-odds–
weighted risk allele counts for each individual in an independent test dataset using
discovery-GWAS–estimated risk alleles and effect sizes. We tested the resulting polygenic
risk scores for association with case-control status using logistic regression with gender and
five principal component covariates.
Stahl et al.
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 June 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Polygenic risk scores based on large numbers of SNPs were significantly associated with
rheumatoid arthritis case-control status across a range of PGWAS threshold values (Fig. 1).
The most significant score was from SNPs with PGWAS < 0.05 (12,788 SNPs had P = 3 ×
10−9). We also analyzed scores based on SNPs with PGWAS in nonoverlapping intervals (for
example, 0.001 < PGWAS < 0.01) and found that significant polygenic risk score associations
were caused by SNPs with PGWAS ≤ 0.05 (Supplementary Table 2). These results were
consistent when we used alternative datasets for testing, alternative quality control and LD
pruning thresholds, or alternative strategies for removing previously known associations. In
addition, cases with non-autoimmune diseases in the Wellcome Trust Case Control
Consortium dataset served as the negative controls and did not have significant polygenic
risk score associations (Supplementary Fig. 1). Finally, we found the polygenic risk score
effects to be scattered diffusely throughout the genome; many chromosomes contributed to a
significant polygenic risk score (PGWAS < 0.05) signal (Supplementary Table 3), and,
consistent with the results using an independent method in other complex traits17, the
polygenic risk score effect sizes estimated here were correlated with chromosome size (R2 =
0.27, P = 0.007). Thus, polygenic risk score associations seemed to be genuinely caused by
polygenic effects that are specific to rheumatoid arthritis disease risk.
Polygenic risk scores in other common diseases
We continued testing our method using datasets for three additional diseases. We performed
a polygenic analysis on GWAS data for celiac disease19, MI/CAD20 and T2D22 (Table 1).
Again, we used the samples from the UK as test data, as these data had restricted geographic
origins relative to the discovery GWAS data and showed little stratification19,21. For celiac
disease, we removed the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) region, which has a very
strong effect on risk and on complex long-distance LD patterns; we did not remove any
other known risk loci.
We used published GWAS data to show that each disease has a strong polygenic signal. As
we saw in the rheumatoid arthritis data-sets, the polygenic risk scores were highly
significantly and specifically associated with all three of these additional common diseases
(Fig. 1 and Supplementary Fig. 1). Although known SNPs associated with disease risk may
underlie the polygenic risk score associations for the lowest significance threshold, PGWAS <
10−4 (celiac disease, 96 SNPs, polygenic risk score P = 2 × 10−16; MI/CAD, 82 SNPs, P = 1
× 10−6; T2D, 98 SNPs, P = 1 × 10−19), adding thousands of independent SNPs with the
marginally significant PGWAS < 0.1 did not dilute the significance of the polygenic risk score
associations (celiac disease, 21,108 SNPs, P = 3 × 10−16; MI/CAD, 22,723 SNPs, P = 3 ×
10−10; T2D, 20,297 SNPs, P = 7 × 10−20).
Disease-associated SNPs and total variance explained
Polygenic scores are made up of an unknown number of true-positive SNPs (signal) as well
as many unassociated SNPs (noise). To determine how much signal underlies our results,
and, specifically, to estimate the number of associated SNPs along with their total variance
explained, we conducted Bayesian inference analyses on our polygenic analysis results.
Briefly, we analyzed a polygenic disease model in which independent SNPs (NSNPs)
additively contributed a total liability-scale variance explained (Vtot), with additional
Stahl et al.
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 June 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
parameters included for the distributions of risk allele effect sizes and frequencies
(Supplementary Fig. 2). We simulated the discovery GWAS and polygenic analysis for
associated and null SNPs and used polygenic risk score logistic regression R2 values23
across nonoverlapping SNP sets, including scores stratified by risk-allele frequency
(Supplementary Table 2), as summary statistics to compare the simulated and observed
results. We used approximate Bayesian computation with rejection sampling and general
linear model post-sampling adjustment (ABC-GLM)24,25 to estimate the posterior densities
of polygenic disease model parameters given the polygenic analysis results (Supplementary
Fig. 3). See the Online Methods and the Supplementary Note for details.
Figure 2 shows the joint posterior probability densities of the two key polygenic disease
model parameters, NSNPs and Vtot. These densities are well restricted to within the range of
uniform priors for these two parameters (NSNPs, 10–10,000 on a log10 scale; Vtot, 0.01–0.5
for rheumatoid arthritis and 0.01–0.99 for the other diseases). For rheumatoid arthritis,
excluding all known risk loci, the posterior density mode provided estimates of 18% (95%
credible interval, 11–24%) of the total variance being explained by 2,231 independent
disease-associated SNPs (95% credible interval 846–4,608) (Fig. 2 and Table 2). Results
were robust to alternative prior distributions of the NSNPs and for the effect size paramater
βv, and validation analyses indicated that the parameters were inferred with reasonable bias
and precision under a wide range of models (Supplementary Fig. 4). We also applied the
previously developed linear mixed-effects modeling (LMM) method11,14,26. This
complementary approach yielded consistent results for the variance explained by common
SNPs (directly comparable to our Vtot results; Table 2). Given that rheumatoid arthritis
recurrence rates for relatives of affected individuals yield estimates of a narrow-sense
heritability of about 0.55 (refs. 27,28) and that previously validated risk loci contribute an
estimated heritability of 0.18 (refs. 2,29) (Supplementary Table 1), these results show that
roughly 65% of the heritability of rheumatoid arthritis can be accounted for by purely
additive effects of common SNPs in the GWAS data that tag causal alleles.
We applied the same polygenic-model inference method to celiac disease, MI/CAD and T2D
(Fig. 2 and Table 2). We found substantial total liability-scale variance (Vtot) explained by
GWAS SNPs (celiac disease, 0.43, outside of the MHC; MI/CAD, 0.48; T2D, 0.49). For a
comparison, validated common SNP associations explain 5% (celiac disease, 27 non-MHC
loci), 4% (25 MI/CAD loci)30 and 10% (44 T2D loci)31 of the total liability-scale disease
variance in these three diseases. Taking into account the uncertainty in both methods,
heritabilities caused by common SNPs estimated using LMM11,14,26 were consistent with
the Vtot values estimated using polygenic modeling and Bayesian inference, with no clear
pattern of overestimation seen by using one method compared to the other. Although family
based heritability estimates vary widely for these three diseases19,32–36, the majority of their
heritability is explained by common SNPs in GWAS data, without exception (Table 2): 83–
100% of the heritability for celiac disease (heritability of 0.5–0.87, with 0.35 caused by
HLA alleles in the MHC19,37), 80–100% of the heritability for MI/CAD and 70–100% of the
heritability for T2D is explained by common SNPs.
Stahl et al.
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 June 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Risk allele frequencies and effect sizes
Our Bayesian analysis generated a posterior distribution of polygenic disease model
parameters, which determine the minor allele frequencies (MAFs) and genotypic relative
risks (GRRs) of the inferred common SNP associations. We calculated the mean posterior
distributions of the MAFs and GRRs of the associated SNPs from 1,000 samples from the
joint posterior density (Fig. 3). We also determined the marginal prior distributions for the
MAFs and GRRs that were implied by the model parameters’ Bayesian priors
(Supplementary Fig. 2). For all four common diseases, the posterior distribution of the
MAFs of the associated SNPs was shifted from that of the prior distribution (all GWAS
SNPs after LD pruning) toward the SNPs of more intermediate frequency. The posterior
distribution of the GRRs indicates that the effect sizes of most of the disease-associated
SNPs ranged from almost 1 to approximately 1.05, with larger GRRs being seen for less
common MAFs (1–5%).
Notably, the number of SNPs with moderate effect sizes (measured by liability-scale
variance explained; GRR > 1.05 for SNPs with MAF = 0.5 and GRR > 1.1 for SNPs with
MAF = 0.05), and the total variance explained by these SNPs, varied markedly across the
four diseases. Substantial numbers of SNPs with moderate effect sizes contributed the
majority of the inferred total liability-scale variance explained for celiac disease (981 (95%
credible interval 663–1,417) SNPs of the 2,666 total NSNPs explained 0.33 (95% credible
interval 0.2–0.45) of the Vtot of 0.43) and MI/CAD (597 (95% credible interval 319–874)
SNPs of the total 1,766 NSNPs explained 0.34 (95% credible interval 0.13–0.5) of the Vtot of
0.48). Fewer SNPs of moderate effect size explained much smaller proportions of the total
disease variance in rheumatoid arthritis (212 (95% credible interval 0–492) SNPs of the total
2,231 NSNPs explained 0.05 (95% credible interval 0–0.14) of the Vtot of 0.18) and T2D
(298 (95% credible interval 0–588) SNPs of the total 2,919 NSNPs explained 0.14 (95%
credible interval 0–0.31) of the Vtot of 0.49).
Modeling causal variants
To assess what causal genetic models could explain our results, we performed simulations
with causal variants and the resulting tag-SNP associations. Recent theoretical studies have
posited that multiple rare causal variants may result in common SNP associations38. Such
‘synthetic associations’ probably do not account for most of the validated GWAS signals39,
but the contribution of these associations to weaker undiscovered common SNP associations
has not been previously considered. We used 1000 Genomes Project40 data and HAPGEN
software41 to simulate 10-Mb haplotypes in case-control populations under genetic models
with varying numbers and effect sizes of either common (MAF > 5%) or rare (MAF < 1%)
causal variants and determined the patterns of association at marker SNPs interrogated in the
GWAS data. This approach allowed us to identify causal variant models in which GWAS
marker SNPs were consistent with our polygenic modeling inference in terms of both their
number and total variance explained (Supplementary Table 4), as well as their allele
frequency and effect size distributions (Supplementary Fig. 5). Thus, we could directly
address allelic heterogeneity and rare causal variant hypotheses underlying weak, polygenic
effects in GWAS data.
Stahl et al.
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 June 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Only models with few (1–4) common causal variants per locus and those with many (8–16)
rare causal variants per locus resulted in associated GWAS SNPs that were consistent with
the Bayesian inference results (Supplementary Table 4 and Supplementary Fig. 5). We
emphasize that to explain weak undiscovered common SNP associations, causal variants
must themselves have weaker effects than have been studied previously, particularly for rare
causal variants10,38,39,42–45. For consistent causal variant models, we simulated the number
of loci genome wide that yielded our inferred total variance that was explained by the
associated marker SNPs and calculated the contribution of the causal variants themselves to
heritability (Fig. 4). Under genetic models with common causal variants, our simulations
suggested that many hundreds to thousands of common causal variants spread across
hundreds of loci would account for roughly the same proportion of heritability as their
GWAS marker SNP tags (Fig. 4) but would not account for all of the disease heritability. In
contrast, under models in which the causal variants are rare, only a small number of loci
explain all of the common disease heritability; with larger numbers of loci, heritability
owing to causal variants quickly exceeds realistic heritability estimates.
DISCUSSION
The biometrical model proposed by R.A. Fisher46 posited that a large number of additive
genetic factors inherited in a Mendelian fashion could account for the familial patterns of
complex traits. In 1916, Fisher’s model was criticized by Karl Pearson as being “out of the
range of experiment by Mendelian methods”47. With the advent of GWAS that interrogate
millions of common SNPs with high-throughput genotyping arrays and imputation, it is now
possible to test Fisher’s model of inheritance. In our study, we used polygenic analyses of
GWAS data to show that a substantial proportion of SNPs reaching at best suggestive levels
of statistical significance contribute to common disease risk when considered in aggregate
Our study extends a previously developed method10 by performing approximate Bayesian
computation (ABC-GLM) to estimate the credible region of polygenic disease model
parameters (for example, number of SNPs, effect size and allele frequency) that can account
for polygenic risk score associations. Bayesian inference, together with consistent results
obtained using the previously developed LMM method11,14, provide convincing evidence
that substantial variance in disease liability can be explained by common SNPs captured in
contemporary GWAS data (Table 2). For rheumatoid arthritis, the hidden heritability is on
par with the variance explained by the validated risk loci, such that a total of ~36% of the
overall disease liability, or ~65% of the total heritability, can be attributed to the purely
additive effects of common SNPs. For celiac disease, MI/CAD and T2D, our results suggest
that the true heritabilities are on the high sides of the ranges of the family based estimates
and that at least ~70% of the heritability of these diseases is explained by common GWAS
Bayesian analyses allow for computation of the posterior distribution of polygenic disease
model parameters, which can then be used to address questions relating to the genetic
architecture of common disease. Here, in addition to estimating the number of SNPs and
their total variance explained (Fig. 2), we generated the posterior distribution of the allele
Stahl et al.
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 June 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
frequencies and effect sizes of the inferred, risk-associated SNPs (Fig. 3) and investigated
plausible causal variant models (Fig. 4). Other potential applications of this type of analysis
include performing power calculations to predict the outcomes of future genetic studies,
developing future discovery efforts such as Bayesian and pathway-based GWAS48,49,
estimating the accuracy of the risk prediction that is attainable with additional validated or
unvalidated risk alleles50,51 and developing and testing hypotheses for the polygenic
adaptation52,53 that has affected the risk of complex disease.
Although our results were qualitatively similar across the four common diseases we studied,
the inferences did vary, with rheumatoid arthritis having a lower estimate (0.18) of total
liability-scale variance explained (Vtot) by GWAS SNPs than the other three common
diseases (which ranged from 0.43 to 0.49). This difference is largely a result of the exclusion
of known loci for rheumatoid arthritis (~30 risk loci that together explain ~18% of the
phenotypic variance). Furthermore, the inferred distributions of the effect sizes of the
associated SNPs (measured on the liability scale, implying larger genotypic relative risks for
lower minor allele frequencies) varied markedly across diseases: the ratios of the Vtot caused
by SNPs with moderate compared to weak liability-scale effect sizes (corresponding to GRR
> 1.05 compared to 1.01 < GRR < 1.05 for MAF = 0.5) ranged from roughly three for celiac
disease and MI/CAD to roughly one-third for rheumatoid arthritis and T2D. These
differences in our estimates between diseases may have implications for the genetics of these
diseases and will be validated and better characterized in future studies.
Our simulations incorporating causal variants and GWAS marker SNPs are consistent with
results from other recent studies10,42–45 and indicate that common causal alleles with weak
effects can explain most of the polygenic signal observed in GWAS data. Unlike previous
studies, we examined the impact of causal variant models on multiple weakly associated
GWAS SNPs rather than considering only the single most strongly associated SNP. We
found that relatively weak causal variant effect sizes (GRR ~ 1.04, 1.1, 1.5 or 3.5 for MAF =
50%, 5%, 1% or 0.1%, respectively) are required to be consistent with the polygenic
analysis of GWAS data.
We show that underlying genetic models with either common (MAF > 5%) or rare (MAF <
1%) causal variants can be consistent with the data in terms of the total number of associated
GWAS SNPs and the variance explained. However, under rare causal variant models for
complex traits, on the order of ten causal loci are required or the variance explained by
causal variants will exceed the heritability of disease38. This is because rare causal variants
result in many weakly associated GWAS SNPs (because they are not well tagged by any
single common SNP) with less total variance explained than the amount explained by the
causal variants themselves and because substantial allelic heterogeneity (eight or more rare
causal variants per locus) is required to induce associations throughout the common SNP
frequency spectrum38,39,45. As our polygenic analysis suggested that the associations are
diffuse throughout the genome, we conclude that the majority of the causal variants that
underlie the polygenic signal of association in the GWAS data are themselves common and
not rare. Common causal variants would account for a proportion of heritability only slightly
greater than that of the SNPs associated within GWAS, leaving some heritability still
unexplained.
Stahl et al.
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 June 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
We do not rule out the possibility of a contribution of rare causal variants. Indeed, a genetic
model positing a mixture of loci harboring common and/or rare causal variants would fit the
posterior distribution of associated GWAS SNPs better than any single model we simulated;
this conclusion is based on the observation that the common causal variant models generated
slightly fewer low-frequency, moderate-effect–size GWAS alleles compared to our posterior
distribution, whereas rare-variant models generated slightly more (Supplementary Fig. 5). A
genetic model that posits a mixture of common and rare causal variants could explain all of
the heritability of disease but would still be dominated by common causal variants (Fig. 3).
Finally, we note that many extremely rare causal variants that segregate privately within
families would not induce SNP associations within GWAS data and, therefore, could
contribute to the remaining estimated heritability under the causal variant models we
Even if a complex disease is highly polygenic, it is probable that risk loci will implicate a
limited number of disease-relevant biological pathways. Recent studies have shown that
genes in validated rheumatoid arthritis risk loci are functionally related in terms of their
descriptions in the literature29,54, their physical interactions55 and the tissues in which they
are specifically expressed56. Furthermore, larger sets of suggestive loci show an overrepresentation of broad functional categories57 and tissue-specific expression56 and
contribute to the disease associations of canonical molecular biological pathways49. By
extension, many additional validated risk loci would hold great promise for bioinformatic
analyses to be able to point to the mechanisms of common disease pathogenesis.
Our results have major implications for the design of future genetic association studies to
identify additional common disease risk loci. Ideally, whole-genome sequencing in large
case-control collections would capture all types of variants (SNPs, indels and copy number
variants) across the entire range of allele frequencies (common to low frequency to private).
However, such a study is prohibitively expensive at this time and comes with its own
challenges, both computationally and in the interpretation of the results. The polygenic
model posterior distributions for each of the four diseases examined here give expectations
of hundreds of SNPs with moderate effect sizes (GRR > 1.05), especially for celiac disease
and MI/CAD. Although the contributions of previously validated SNPs must be accounted
for in further analyses, the difference between the Vtot inferred here and the variance
explained by validated SNPs strongly suggests that there exist many associations that would
be detectable in larger GWAS. Therefore, our results indicate that the common variant
GWAS approach will continue to be a highly productive method of identifying additional
risk alleles for common disease.
Full SNP results from a previous rheumatoid arthritis meta-analysis2, http://
www.broadinstitute.org/ftp/pub/rheumatoid_arthritis/Stahl_etal_2010NG/; ABCtoolbox
software package, 
computer_programs/abctoolbox/index_eng.html; GCTA software package, http://
gump.qimr.edu.au/gcta/.
Stahl et al.
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 June 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Methods and any associated references are available in the online version of the paper at
 
ONLINE METHODS
GWAS data, quality control and filtering.
Quality control filtering, principal components analysis and genome-wide imputation were
conducted as previously reported for rheumatoid arthritis2, celiac disease19, MI/CAD20 and
T2D22. For this study, the rheumatoid arthritis Epidemiological Investigation of Rheumatoid
Arthritis (EIRA) I and II GWAS datasets2,18 were combined, quality-control filtered and
imputed. For MI/CAD, HapMap2 SNPs were extracted from data imputed into the 1000
Genomes European (CEU) reference panel (R.D. & S.K., data not
shown). See the Supplementary Note for further details.
Known rheumatoid arthritis risk loci were removed by excluding the extended MHC region
(chromosome 6, 25–35 Mb), 2 Mb across the PTPN22 region and 1-Mb regions centered on
other previously validated SNPs, extended to the furthest SNPs with LD with the known
SNPs (r2 > 0.1 in HapMap2 release 24) (Supplementary Table 1). The extended MHC region
(chromosome 6, 20–40 Mb) was removed from the celiac GWAS data.
Polygenic risk score analysis.
Polygenic analyses were conducted as described10. The discovery-set GWAS was conducted
as previously described (inverse-variance–weighted meta-analysis for rheumatoid
arthritis2,18 and T2D22, Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel tests for celiac celiac disease19 and a
combined analysis for MI/CAD20), excluding the samples used as test data (Table 1).
LD pruning by association was conducted to achieve a set of independent SNPs that retained
as much association signal as possible from the discovery GWAS. Starting with the most
strongly associated SNP, all SNPs in LD (r2 > 0.1) were excluded until no SNPs with r2 >
0.1 remained in the data. LD was calculated from HapMap2 release 24 data for all pairs of
SNPs less than 1 Mb away from each other or across long-distance LD regions (PTPN22,
chromosome 1: 113–115 Mb; MHC, chromosome 6: 25–35 Mb; chromosome 8: 6–10 Mb;
chromosome 17: 40–50 Mb). A Perl program to conduct LD pruning is available on request.
Polygenic risk scores were calculated for sets of SNPs that were selected based on nine
discovery-set GWAS statistical significance thresholds: PGWAS < 10−4, 10−3, 0.01, 0.05,
0.10, 0.20, 0.30, 0.40 and 0.50 or PGWAS = 0.01, 0.10 and 0.50 for the analyses stratified by
RAF quintile. For each SNP set, the additive weighted polygenic risk scores PRS were
calculated for validation set individual i as PRSi = ∑j ∈SNPs β⌢
jdij where β⌢
j > 0 is the
discovery GWAS log-odds ratio for the risk allele and dij is individual i’s dosage (0−2) of
that allele. Polygenic risk scores were tested for association with disease status by logistic
regression with gender and five principal component covariates.
Stahl et al.
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 June 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Polygenic disease modeling.
A polygenic disease model was parameterized in which a number of independent biallelic
polymorphisms (NSNPs) contributed additively to a total liability-scale variance explained
(Vtot). The relative per-SNP liability-scale variance explained was modeled by a βdistribution function, β(1, βv), allowing for a wide range of effect size heterogeneity
(Supplementary Fig. 2a). The RAF distribution was modeled by the product of the empirical
distribution (after LD pruning) and the β distribution β(αRAF, βRAF), allowing for mostly
rare or mostly common risk alleles (Supplementary Fig. 2b). Given a SNP’s variance
explained, v, and RAF, p, its genotypic relative risk was calculated according to the liability
threshold model10,58: GRR = 1 +
vI2/2p(1 −p), where I is the quotient of the standard
normal density at the disease liability threshold and the disease prevalence K. Thus,
polygenic disease was modeled by five parameters: NSNPs, Vtot, bv, αRAF and βRAF.
Polygenic analyses—from discovery GWAS to polygenic risk score association tests—were
simulated for comparison with observed results for associated and null SNPs roughly equal
in number to the total numbers of SNPs obtained after LD pruning of real data (80,000 SNPs
for rheumatoid arthritis and MI/CAD and 70,000 SNPs for celiac disease and T2D; Table 1).
Discovery GWAS results were directly simulated from the GRRs and RAFs of the
associated SNPs and were sampled from case-control–permutated, LD-pruned GWAS
replicates for null SNPs. Polygenic analysis simulations incorporated the exact study design
as was used for the real data, except that (i) gender or population stratification was not
modeled and covariates were not used in the simulated association tests, and (ii) independent
SNPs were simulated (for comparison with real data LD pruned to r2 < 0.1). See the
Supplementary Note for additional details.
Approximate Bayesian computation.
To infer the model parameters given the polygenic analysis results, we sampled parameter
values from prior distributions, simulated a polygenic analysis and performed an
approximate Bayesian computation with rejection sampling and general linear model postsampling adjustment (ABC-GLM)24. See the Supplementary Note for full details.
We sampled polygenic disease model parameters from wide-ranging priors that were as
‘uninformative’ as possible to consider a broad range of genetic architectures for disease
risk. For the primary analyses, Vtot values were sampled from a uniform prior on the interval
0.01–0.99 (0.01–0.5 for rheumatoid arthritis), and NSNPs values were sampled from a log10uniform prior on the interval 10–10,000 (that is, log10 NSNPs ~U(1, 4)). Prior distributions
for the parameters βv (~U(1, 10)), αRAF (~U(0.5, 10)) and βRAF (~U(0.5, 10)) were chosen
to generate a wide range of prior distributions of risk allele frequencies and effect sizes
(Supplementary Fig. 2), and we assessed the sensitivity of our inference to alternative priors
for NSNPs and βv.
We used ABC-GLM24 to perform rejection sampling and post-sampling adjustment to
estimate posterior probability densities of the model parameters given our observed
polygenic analysis results. We determined rejection-sampling–based Euclidean distances
between the simulated and observed transformed summary statistics based on 1,000,000
Stahl et al.
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 June 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
simulation replicates with a 0.2% acceptance rate for the primary analyses. The observed
polygenic analysis results were not significantly less likely under the polygenic model than
the accepted simulated results, and the marginal posterior densities of all the individual
parameters are shown in Supplementary Figure 3. We validated our analysis by performing
ABC-GLM with the simulated data and verified (i) that our method successfully inferred the
key properties of simple, intuitive underlying disease models and (ii) that the known
parameters were roughly uniformly distributed across their posterior probability density
quantiles (Supplementary Fig. 4).
We extended the ABC-GLM to estimate joint posterior densities and to sample from joint
posterior distributions using the Markov chain Monte Carlo method. Samples from the joint
posterior of all five parameters were generated by Markov chain Monte Carlo with a uniform
updating distribution, and convergence was assessed by comparing samples within and
between independent chains and by comparing the samples with marginal densities
estimated by AMC-GLM. Full joint posterior samples were used to obtain posterior
distributions of the allele frequencies and variances explained (v) for the associated SNPs,
which were truncated at a v corresponding to a minimum GRR of 1.01 (for MAF = 0.5; the
GRRs were larger for smaller MAFs) to generate posterior distributions of Vtot and NSNPs
and of MAF and GRR.
ABC-GLM and the supporting analyses were conducted using the ABCtoolbox software
package25. Extensions to this method are implemented in a new version of ABCtoolbox (see
Linear mixed-effects model heritability estimation.
Heritability caused by common SNPs was directly estimated from the GWAS datasets using
an LMM that regressed phenotype on a random-effects kinship matrix estimated from
genotyped SNPs, with gender as a fixed effect and including principal component covariates,
using the GCTA software11,14,26. Kinship matrices were estimated from genotyped SNPs
after stringent quality control (missing data rate <1%, case-control differential missing data
P > 0.01 and Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium P > 0.001) and adjusted for finite-SNPs
estimation; individuals showing low-level relatedness were removed, and the results were
converted to the population-liability scale.
Causal variant modeling.
We used 1000 Genomes Project40 data and HAPGEN software41 to simulate a case-control
population with a range of underlying causal genetic models varying by the allele frequency,
number and effect size of the causal variants (Supplementary Note, Supplementary Table 4
and Supplementary Fig. 5). We simulated 10-Mb regions with an average SNP density and
genetic length, and calculated case and control haplotype frequencies based on the numbers
of rare (MAF < 1%) or common (MAF > 5%) causal variants randomly selected from within
100-kb ‘loci’. We then calculated case and control allele frequencies at HapMap2 SNPs (an
average of ~8,000 SNPs per region) and LD pruned the SNPs by association (average of
~240 SNPs). These single-locus simulation results were extrapolated genome wide by
resampling with replacement until the expected total liability-scale variance explained of
Stahl et al.
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 June 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
induced GWAS SNP associations reached our polygenic modeling Bayesian inference
(Supplementary Table 4). We identified plausible causal variant models in which the
simulated marker SNPs and the inferred Bayesian posterior distributions were consistent in
terms of the number of associated marker SNPs and their allele frequencies and effect sizes.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
R.M.P. is supported by grants from the US National Institutes of Health (NIH) (R01-AR057108, R01-AR056768,
U01-GM092691 and R01-AR059648) and holds a Career Award for Medical Scientists from the Burroughs
Wellcome Fund. S.R. is supported by an NIH Career Development Award (K08AR055688–01A1). The Brigham
Rheumatoid Arthritis Sequential Study Registry is supported by a grant from Crescendo and Biogen-Idec. The
North American Rheumatoid Arthritis Consortium is supported by the NIH (NO1-AR-2–2263 and RO1-AR44422).
This research was also supported in part by the Intramural Research Program of the National Institute of Arthritis,
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases of the NIH and by a Canada Research Chair and grants to K.A.S. from the
Canadian Institutes for Health Research (MOP79321 and IIN-84042) and the Ontario Research Fund (RE01061).
We acknowledge S. Purcell, A. Price and N. Zaitlen for help with the design and implementation of the study and