Memory & Cognition
1983, Vol. 11(1),24·31
Constraints on access in a
problem solving context
GREG A. PERFETTO, JOHN D. BRANSFORD, and JEFFERY J. FRANKS
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee 37240
The effects of previously acquired information on a later problem solving task wereexplored.
Prior research has shown that the acquisition of potentially relevant information is not effeetive for cuing solutions in a later problem solving task unless subjeets are informed of the
conneetion. The present research extends these results and demonstrates that the problem
solving failure is not due to subjeets' rejeeting the potentially relevant information following
retrieval. Rather, the apparent failure to appropriately use previous information is a result
of uninformed subjeets' inability to spontaneously access such information. Furthermore,
the observed access failure is not reversible by simply informing the subjects of the task
conneetion prior to a seeond trial. Finally, the results indicate that problem solving failure
on a later informed trial is a problem-speeific phenomenon that does not generalize to new
problems. The implications for contemporary episodic memory paradigms and the role of
accessin learning theory are discussed.
Effective comprehension and problem solving require
more than the availability of potentially relevant information; people must access this information when it is
needed .
One method for investigating the processes involved in
accessing information is to first present subjects with
potentially relevant information and to then explore the
conditions necessary for them to utilize this information
in problem solving tasks .
Weisberg et a1. had subjects learn a list of
paired associates, one of which was candle-box, It was
expected that this association would later eue a solution
to the "eandle problem" . The eandle
problem involves attaching a candle to the wall so that it
will bum properly. The available materials are a box of
nails, a book ofmatches, a hammer, and the candle. The
solution sought by Weisberg et a1. was to attaeh the box
to the wall using the hammer and nails, and to then put
the eandle on top of or in the box. The eritieal manipulation was whether subjects were informed that one of
the paired associates acquired previously (Le., eandlebox) was relevant to the candle problem.
Weisberg et a1.'s 
candle-box association was effective in cuing the expeeted
solution only when subjects were explieitly informed
that previously acquired information was relevant to the
candle problem. Weisberg et al. interpreted their results
This research was supported in part by the National Institute
of Education (Grant NIE~-79-o0l7). The authors wish to thank
Jonathan Doner, Karen Mezynski, and Pam Auble for their helpful comments throughout the course of this research. Requests
for reprints should be addressed to Greg A. Perfetto, Department
of Psychology, Vanderbilt University, 134 Wesley Hall,Nashville,
Tennessee 37240.
as evidenee that transfer is a nonautomatie proeess.
However, the failure of uninformed subjects to solve the
eandle problem ean be aceounted for by two distinet
hypotheses.
First, subjects may
spontaneously
the appropriate eue when working on the
eandle problem but discarded it as irrelevant (note that
"candle-box" does
not eommunicate mueh
specific information). Altemately, subjects may have
failed to retrieve the appropriate eue. Although both of
the hypotheses provide plausible explanations for the
failure of uninformed subjects to utilize prior information, they do so in very different ways.
The first hypothesis argues that subjeets may have
spontaneously
"eandle-box," but
information
may have been insuffieient to
faeilitate
problem solving beeause subjeets did not pereeive the
information to be relevant. Since the information eonveyed by the eIue "eandle-box" is not very explieit,
it would not be surprising if subjeets who were not
informed that this information was useful failed to use it
to solve the eandle problem. In eontrast, subjeets who
were informed of the eonnection between the tasks
would expect the clue to provide relevant information
and hence might be more likely to realize the significance of this information. This hypothesis implies that
if clues were constructed that were highly related to
problems (i.e.,
that provided obvious solutions), subjects should be able to utilize this information to solve
problems even if the conneetion between the tasks was
not explieitly pointed out. The second hypothesis noted
above suggests that subjeets actually fail to retrieve the
relevant information in the absence of explicit instructions to do so. If this is the ease, then inereases in the
relevanee of the eIues may stilI be insufficient to facilitate problem solving by uninformed subjects.
Copyright 1983 Psychonomie Society, Ine.
The first experiment was designed to investigate the
former hypothesis by constructing obvious clues that
were relevant to problem solving. The problems chosen
for this experiment were 12 "insight" problems adapted
from Gardner . For each problem, a sentence clue
was constructed that blatantly suggested the solution to
the problem. For example, one problem was "A man
who lived in a small town in the U.S. married 20 different women of the same town. All are sti11living and he
has never divorced one of them. Yet, he has broken no
law. Can you explain?" The sentence constructed as a
clue to this problem's solutions was "A minister marries
several people each week." The relevance of the sentence
clues to the problems was verified by presenting 15
pilot subjects with each problem and its respective clue
sentence. In addition, the candle problem was presented
to subjects with the association "candle-box." The pilot
subjects were given approximately 40 sec to solve each
Overall, subjects solved an average of 96% of the
insight problems. The candle problem was solved by
only 46% of the subjects. Subjects were also asked to
rate the clues according to the obviousness with which
they pointed to a solution. The sentence clues had an
average rating of 1.6 (1 being extremely obvious to 5
being not at all obvious), whereas the candle-box association had an average rating of 2.5. An additional analysis
indicated that each of the 12 problem-sentence clue
pairs was solved by more subjects than was the candle
problem. Furthermore, each of the sentence clues was
rated as providing a more obvious solution than the
"candle-box" clue. Thus, the senten ce clues constructed
for the present study appear to meet the requirement
of indicating an obvious solution to their corresponding
EXPERIMENT 1
Experiment 1, all experimental
exposed to the sentence clues. The initial task required
subjects to rate the eIues on a scale of general truthfulness; this constituted an incidental acquisition. Subjects
then received the set of problems. One group of subjects
was explicitly told that the sentences they had rated
would help them solve the problems they were about to
receive. No mention of this connection was made to a
second group. A control group did not receive the acquisition
clues prior
problem solving
Subjects. Subjects were 60 undergraduate students enrolled
in an introductory psychology dass at Vanderbilt University.
They received course credit for their participation in the experiment.
Procedure.
experiment
included the 12 problem-sentencc clue pairs dcscribcd prcviously.
Subjects were introduced to the experiment by the experimenter,
CONSTRAINTS ON ACCESS
who told them that they would be given several tasks to cornplete. The subjects were told that the purpose of these tasks was
to gather normative data for future experiments.
Subjects were first asked to rate 14 statements on a 5-point
scale of truthfulness (e.g., never true, sometimes true, always
true). Twelve of the 14 statements were the sentences constructed to clue solutions to the experimental problems. The
first and last statements were fillers that were sirnilar in form to
the other statements but unrelated to the experimental problems.
Subjects were aIlowed 20 sec to read and rate each statement.
This rating task constituted an incidental acquisition for the
subsequent problem solving task.
Following the acquisition task, a delay of 3 min was provided by collecting the rating sheet and directing subjects to fill
out their attendance forms. All subjects were then told that they
were going to receive some problems to solve. Subjects in the
first group were told that the sentences they had just rated
would help them to answer most of the problems (informed
group). A second group was not made aware of the connection
between the tasks (uninformed group). Both groups were then
given problem booklets and answer sheets. The problem booklets
contained one of four randomized orders of the experimental
problems. In addition, prior to the 12 experimental problems,
all of the problem booklets included 3 additional problems taken
were included to reinforce the separation of the acquisition and
problem solving tasks, and to provide an additional delay (for a
total of 5 min) between the end of the acquisition task and the
first clue-related problem. Subjects were aIlowed 40 sec to read
each problem and write down a solution. They were not allowed
to turn the page to the next problem until the full 40 sec had
cxpired. A third group (baseline) did not receive the acquisition
(clue) sentences. Instead, these subjects were irnmediately given
the problems to solve.
After the problem solving task, all subjects were asked to fill
out a qucstionnaire. One purpose of the questionnaire was to
assess the degree to which informed and uninformed subjects
were aware that a relationship existed between the acquisition
task and the problem solving task. Subjects were also asked to
indicate which, if any, problems they had seen prior to the
experiment and to answer questions about the processes they
used during their problem solving attempts.
Subjects who had previously seen more than two of
experimental problems
were dropped from
study. By this criterion, data from three subjects in each
of the experimental groups (informed and uninformed)
and from four subjects in the baseline group were not
used in the analyses. In addition, four subjects in the
uninformed condition reported that they were aware of
the purpose of the experiment before they received any
of the problems. Because they were not actually uninformed, data from these subjects were not used in the
analyses. Additional subjects were tested to attain 20
subjects in each condition.
The primary data involved subjects' answers to the 12
problems. A preliminary analysis revealed that all subjects generated some sort of answer to each problem, but
that many answers were inadequate. For example, the
problem "Uriah Fuller, the famous Israeli superpsychic,
can tell you the score of any baseball game before the
game starts. What is his secret?' was often answered by
"He is a superpsychic." (The sentence clue was "Before
any game is played, there is no score.") Similarly, the
PERFETTO, BRANSFORD, AND FRANKS
problem ''Why are 1977 dollar bills worth more than
1976 dollar bills?" was often answered by a reference to
inflation, whereas the actual clue was "1,966 dollar bills
are worth more than a 1967 dollar bill."
The mean proportion of solutions that were congruent with the clue sentences (these clues suggest the
only appropriate answers that we have found for our
problems, Le., those that do not violate constraints on
the problem) were .19 (SD =.118), .29 (SD =.216), and
.54 (SD =.231) for subjects in the baseline, uninformed,
and informed groups, respectively. A one-way ANOVA
significant main
[F(2,57) = 16.80,
p< .001] . Pairwise comparisons using Dunn's procedure
 were performed to investigate the relative
performance of each group. Subjects in the uninformed
group were not superior to those in the baseline condition [t'D(3,57) = 1.57, p > .05]. In contrast, subjects in
the informed condition produced more correct solutions
than both baseline subjects [t'D(3,57) = 5.62, p< .01]
uninformed subjects
[t'D(3,57) = 4.06, n< .01].
An item analysis of the number of correct responses
made by each group to each problem was also performed
in order to determine if the observed data were consistent across the different problems or if the results might
be due to the effects of only a few problems. For each
of the 12 problems, subjects in the informed group produced more solutions than did subjects in either the
uninformed or baseline groups (N =12, P=12, Q=0;
p < .001). A comparison of the uninformed and baseline
groups revealed that uninformed subjects produced more
solutions to only 8 of the 12 problems; this was not significant by a sign test.
Subjects' responses to
questionnaire
two main results. First, subjects in the uninformed group
reported that it did not occur to them to try to use the
clues presented during acquisition when attempting to
solve the problems. They therefore did not appear to
spontaneously access these clues and then reject them
because the clues seemed to be irrelevant to the problems
they were trying to solve. Second, the comments of
subjects in the informed group seemed to indicate that
problems tended either to cue the appropriate acquisition clue or to cue no specific acquisition information.
None of the subjects in the informed group indicated
that they attempted to free recall the acquisition clues
until they found one that helped them solve a particular
Instead, the
problems frequently acted as
retrieval cues that permitted access to the relevant clue.
Discussion
The results of the first experiment replicate those
reported by Weisberg et al. . In the present study,
subjects who were not explicitly told that the sentences
they had rated were useful problem solving clues did not
use this information when presented with the experimental problems. In contrast, the identical clues were
used by subjects in the informed group. Due to the
nature of the sentence clues, it is unlikely that subjects
would have failed to solve a problem had they retrieved
the relevant clue. Furthermore, subjects' reports indicated that they did not attempt to recall the clue information while uninformed. Thus, the uninformed subjects' problem solving failure does not appear to be due
to their actually retrieving the appropriate cluesbut then
recognize the
relevance of these clues to
problem solutions.
Our initial belief before conducting Experiment 1 was
that even subjects in our uninformed condition would
spontaneously
acquisition
because the latter seemed so obviously relevant to the
problems that the subjects were asked to solve. However,
the results of Experiment 1 indicate that subjects in fact
failed to spontaneously access obviously relevant information unless they were explicitly informed of the relationship between the acquisition task and the problemsolving task. The use of informed and uninformed conditions therefore seems to be an important manipulation
for exploring the
conditions necessary for access to
The results of Experiment 1 provide an additional
opportunity to explore possible constraints on the processes involved in accessing relevant information. As we
noted earlier, subjects in all conditions (baseline, uninformed, informed) generated some sort of answer to
problems they were asked to solve. The present
design therefore allows us to explore the consequences
of producing an inappropriate answer to a problem. In
particular, what if subjects who are initially uninformed
are given a second trial in which they are informed that
their acquisition experiences are relevant to the problems
they are trying to solve? Will they now be able to access
relevant information or will they be hurt by the fact that
they initially generated answers that were incorrect?
This issue is explored in Experiment 2.
EXPERIMENT 2
Subjects. Subjects were 60 undergraduate students enrolled
in an introductory psychology c1ass at Vanderbilt University.
They received course credit for their participation in the experiment.
Materials and Procedure. Materials for Experiment 2 were the
same as those used in Experiment 1. However, unlike Experiment 1, subjects were given two attempts to solve the problems
(Trial 1 and Trial 2). The procedures for the first trial were the
same as those described in the first experiment. That is, informed
and uninformed groups were first given the acquisition rating
sheet. After completion of the acquisition task, the relationship
between the rated clues and the problems was pointed out to
subjects in the informed condition. Uninformed subjects did
not receive these instructions. Both groups were then given the
problems to solve. Subjects in the baseline condition solved the
problems without having seen the acquisition items. Allsubjects
then completed a questionnaire. These procedures constituted a
replication of Experiment 1. Following this, both informed and
uninformed subjects were told of the connection between the
acquisition items and the problems.
In order to make the connection between acquisition an.d
problem solving clear, subjects were given
a~ example.
example consisted of the experimenter readmg. the marnag.e
problem and its corresponding clue from the ratmg sheet. This
illustration problem was the same for all subjects and .w~s not
included in the Trial 2 analyses conducted on the remaimng 11
problems. Subjects were then administered a second ~rial on.all
problems. This was done in the same manner as Trial I, with
subjects being given 40 sec to answer each problem.
Subjects who had previously seen more than two of
the experimental problems were dropped
study. By this criterion, data from four subjects in each
of the experimental groups (informed and uninformed)
and three subjects in the baseline group were not
ineIuded in the analyses. In addition, three subjects in
the uninformed condition reported that they were aware
of the purpose of the experiment before they received
any of the problems. Because they were not
uninformed
data from these subjects were not used m
the analyses, Additional subjects were tested to attain
20 subjects in each condition.
Since one of the problems and eIues was used as an
example prior to Trial 2, data from Experiment 2 were
transformed into proportions prior to being analyzed.
The mean percentage of correct solutions for each of the
six conditions is presented in Table 1.
The data were analyzed in a 2 (trials) by 3 (time of
informed) ANOVA. There were significant main effects
for both trials [F(l,57) =23.8, r-< .001]
subjects were informed [F(2,57) = 30.6, p< .001] . The
interaction was also significant [F(2,57) = 5.1, P < .01].
Tests of simple main effects were conducted by meansof
Dunn's procedure in order to investigate the relative
performance of subjects on Trials 1 and 2. The Trial 1
data replicated Experiment 1. Uninformed subjects did
not solve a significantly greater proportion of problems
than did baseline subjects [t'D(4,57) = 1.29, p > .05].
However, the informed subjects produced a greater proportion of correct solutions than did those in the uninformed condition [t'D(4,57) =4.67, P < .01].
The pattern of resuIts for Trial 2 wassimilar.Informed
subjects produced a significantly greater proportio? of
solutions than did subjects in the uninformed condition
[t'D(4,57) = 2.62, p< .05]. The difference between t~e
uninformed and the baseline groups approached but did
significance
[t'D(4,57) = 2.25,
Discussion
The resuIts for the first trial of Experiment 2 repli-
Mean Percentage andStandard Deviations of
Problems Solved in Experiment 2
Uninformed
CONSTRAINTSON ACCESS
cate those found in Experiment 1. That is, subjects in
the informed group were more likely to produce eorrect
solutions to the problems than were subjects in the uninformed or baseline groups.
The major purpose of Experiment 2 was to explore
an additional question: What would happen if subjects
in the uninformed group were told that their initial
acquisition experiences provided information that .was
relevant to each problem's solution and were then grven
a second chance to solve the problems? The resuIts for
the second trial of Experiment 2 indicate that these subjects still perform at a level that is inferior to that of
subjects in the group informed at Trial 1.
There are several possible reasons for the mfenor
performance of subjects who were not informed until
Trial 2. One is that they may have forgotten much of
the information that was presented during acquisition.
subjects who were initially informed on
Trial 1 had the chance to activate previously experienced
clues on Trial 1. This activation of relevant information
could retard the forgetting process. Some sort of differential forgetting hypothesis may therefore account for
the Trial 2 resuIts found in Experiment 2.
There is a second possible reason for the inferior
Trial 2 performance of subjects who were not informed
until Trial 2. We noted in Experiment 1 that subjects in
all groups generated some answer to each problem. The
same was true in Experiment 2. It is possible that subjects who were uninformed on Trial 1 feIt that most of
their Trial 1 answers were correct, They may therefore
have decided to provide the same answers on Trial 2. We
will refer to this hypothesis as the "myanswer is better
than yours" hypothesis.
The purpose of Experiment 3 is to evaluate both of
hypotheses
differential
forgetting hypothesis can be evaluated by adding an
additional control group that solves different kinds of
problems during Trial 1 and then becomes informed
(with respect to the original set of experimental problems) on Trial 2. If subjects in this group perform as
well on the second trial as those who were informed on
the first trial, we can conelude that the initial elue
information is still available.
The "my answer is better than yours" hypothesis
can be evaluated by changing the task requirements on
the second trial. In particular, subjects can be told that
their task is to remember the elue sentences presented
during acquisition and that they can use the problems
as retrieval cues. These instructions specify a goal that
should prompt subjects to attempt to remember the
information
acquisition
EXPERIMENT3
Subjects. Subjects were 60 undergraduate students enrolled
in an introductory psychology class at Vanderbilt University.
They received course credit for their participation in theexperiment.
Procedure. The methods were identical to those used in
PERFETTO, BRANSFORD, AND FRANKS
Experiments 1 and 2 except for the test instructions on Trial 2.
Three groups participated in the study: An informed group,
an uninformed group, and an activity control group. All groups
rated the acquisition sentences and were then given two trials
to solvethe problems.
On the first problem solving trial, the procedure for subjects in the informed and uninformed groups was identical to
that of Experiments 1 and 2. Subjects in the activity control
condition did not receive the experimental problems on the first
trial. Instead, they received a sheet of 15 "incomprehensible"
sentences to solve. They were
allotted the same amount of time to solve these problems as
were subjects in the informed and uninformed groups.
During the second test, all groups received the experimental
problems. However, instead of being asked merely to solve the
problems as on Trial 2 of Experiment 2, all subjects were asked
to try to recall the initial acquisition clues and were told they
could use the presented problems as retrieval cues.
All subjects in this experiment met the criteria of
being naive with respect to the purpose of the study and
being familiar with no more than two problems. Thus,
the data from all subjects were inc1uded in the analysis.
Means and standard deviations for the three groups
are displayed in Table 2. The proportion of experimental
problems solved correctly on Trial 1 was .22 (SD = .161)
for the uninformed group and .65 (SD = .222) for the
informed group. (Note that the activity control group
solved a different set of problems on Trial 1.) Informed
subjects solved a greater proportion of problems than
did uninformed subjects
[T(1,38) = 7.14, p< .001].
These results replicated those found in Experiments
On Trial 2, all subjects were asked to recall the c1ue
sentences presented during acquisition and were told
that the problems could serve as retrieval cues. Paraphrases of the acquisition sentences were counted as
correct, and the c1ue information did not have to be
paired with the appropriate problem in order to be
counted as correct (although all but three acceptable
responses were correctly paired with the appropriate
problems). The cued recall data for Trial 2 (see !able 2)
were initially analyzed as a one-way ANOVA with three
levels. The main effect was significant [F(2,57) = 28.77,
Comparisons between
three groups,
calculated by Dunn's procedure, revealed that subjects
in both the informed and the activity control conditions
recalled a significantly greater proportion of c1ues than
did subjects in the uninformed condition [t'D(3,57) =
5.93, p<.Ol, and t'D(3,57)=7.05, p<.Ol, respectively]. There was no difference between
MeanPercentageand Standard Deviationsof
Problems Solved (Trial 1) and Cues
Recalled (Trial 2) in Experiment 3
Uninformed
formance of subjects in the informed and activity control conditions [t'D(3,57) = 1.12, p> .05] .
Discussion
The results of Experiment 3 rule out several possible
explanations for the findings in Experiment 2. In Experiment 2, uninformed subjects received a second chance
to solve the problems after being informed that the
information presented during acquisition was relevant
to the problems' solutions. Their performance on the
second trial was nevertheless inferior to the performance
of subjects who were in the informed group (informed
during Trial 1). One possible explanation for this deficit
was that the general act of attempting to solve problems
during Trial 1 may have hindered subjects' abilities to
remember the acquisition information on Trial 2. In
Experiment 3, however, subjects in the activity control
group also attempted to solve problems during Trial 1.
Nevertheless, their performance on Trial 2 was as good
as the group who had been informed on both Trial 1
and Trial 2.
possible explanation
results of
Experiment 2 was that subjects in the uninformed group
may not have attempted to access acquisition information during Trial 2 because they were content with the
answers they had produced during Trial 1. In Experiment 3, however, the Trial 2 task was changed from
problem solving to one of memory for the acquisition
information. Even under these conditions, subjects who
were not informed until Trial 2 performed more poorly
than did those in the informed and activity control
There is a third possible explanation for the Trial 2
results of Experiments 2 and 3 that has not yet been
evaluated:
namely, that the inability of uninformed
subjects to perform well on the second trial (when they
become informed) may be problem specific. The act
of providing an incorrect answer to a particular problem
on the first trial may hamper subjects' abilities to provide a correct answer to that problem on the second
trial. This hypothesis is investigated in Experiment 4
by having subjects attempt only one half of the problems on Trial 1 and then givingthem all of the problems
(plus informing the uninformed subjects on Trial 2). If
there are constraints on access that are problem specific,
we would expect the following pattern of Trial 2 data.
Subjects who were not informed until Trial 2 should do
as weil as the initial informed group on those problems
that were not presented during Trial 1 (on new problems). For old problems (those that did occur on Trial 1),
however, the deficits found in Experiments 2 and 3
should still occur.
EXPERIMENT 4
Subjects. Subjects were 40 undergraduate students enrolled
in an introductory psychology course at Vanderbilt University.
They received course credit for their participation.
CONSTRAINTS ON ACCESS
Mean Percentage and Standard Deviations of
Problems Solved in Experiment 4
Uninformed
Subjects who had previously seen more than two of
the problems were dropped from the study. By this
criterion, data from two subjects in the informed group
were not used in the analyses. Additional subjects were
tested to attain 20 subjects in each condition.
initially analyzed
differences
Lists A and B. There were no differences
between the number of solutions produced to the lists,
either overall or by subjects within the two conditions.
the following analyses are collapsed across the
list factor.
Data for Trials 1 and 2 were analyzed separately.
Informed subjects solved more problems on Trial I than
uninformed
[t(1,38) =8.55, p<.OOI).
These findings replicated those reported in Experiments
1,2, and 3.
Trial 2 data were analyzed in a 2 (time of informed)
by 2 (old-new) ANOVA, with the old-new factor being
within-subjects (note that old problems are those that
appeared on Trials 1 and 2, whereas new problems
appeared only on Trial 2). Means are presented in Table 3.
Procedure. The design of Experiment 4 was slightly modified from that of the previous experiments. The two subject
conditions (uninformed and informed) each received an equivalent acquisition, which was identical to that of the previous
experiments. The procedures for the administration of Trials 1
and 2 were also the same as in prior experiments, with the following modifications. During Trial 1 problem solving, subjects
attempted only 9 problems: the 3 initial fillers and 6 of the 12
experimental problems. Subjects then were given a second trial
that consisted of al1 15 problems: the 3 fillers, 6 old problems
(attempted on Trial 1), and 6 new problems.
The materials for this experiment were constructed from the
problems used in the previous experiments. On the basis of prior
data, the 12 experimental problems were divided into two lists,
each eontaining 6 problems. This was done by using the data
from Experiment 2 to rank order the problems in terms of the
total number of eorreet solutions produeed. The problems that
had even-numbered ranks were then grouped into List A and
the problems with odd-numbered ranks formed List B. Five
random orderings of eaeh list were then constructed and made
into problem booklets, with eaeh booklet beginning with the
three foil problems. The resulting 10 booklets eonstituted the
material for Trial 1.
Materials for Trial 2 were eonstructed by making 10 random
orders of all 12 problems, with the constraint that no more than
two items from a given list eould appear eonsecutively. These
10 orderings were then made into booklets, which again were
prefaced with the three foil problems.
Discussion
In Experiments 2 and 3, uninformed subjects who
received a second chance to solve the experimental problems (after being informed of the relevance of information presented duirng acquisition) still performed more
poorly than did subjects who had been informed on the
first trial. The resuIts of Experiment 4 provide important
information about reasons for those resuIts. In partieular
the resuIts illustrate conditions in which the Trial 2
perforrnance of subjects who were not informed until
the second trial was as good as the performance of subjects who were informed on the first trial. These resuIts
conditions
attempted to solve Trial 2 problems that had not been
attempted during Trial I (i.e., under conditions when
the problems were new). These data suggest that subjects who
were not informed until Trial 2 did not
experience
in performance due to
Trial I problem solving (see also the results for the
activity control group in Experiment 3). Instead, deficits
in performance seemed to be problem specific; they
occurred only on old problems that uninformed subjects
had already tried to solve on Trial I.
Why were subjects who attempted Trial I problerns
while uninformed unable to access acquisition information relevant to these specific problems during Trial 2?
One approach to this question is to note that these subjects actually did generate answers to these problems
very adequate answers; thus,
these self-generated answers would be an integral part
of the original encoding context for these problerns. In
Une with the reasoning from the encoding specificity
1973), later
re-presentation of the
during Trial 2 would be expected to resuIt in retrieval of
these previously encoded answers. Furthermore, research
such as that of Bobrow and Bower and Slamecka
Graf , which
demonstrated superior
memory for self-generated materials, suggests that the
significant
[F(1 ,38) = 1.01, r > .05]. A significant main effect was
found for the time-of-inforrned factor [F(1,38) = 14.9,
p< .001]. Most important, there
was an interaction
between the factors
[F(1 ,38) = 17.1, p< .001]. The
source of this interaction was investigated by an analysis
main effects. Informed subjects produced
more correct solutions to old problems (those seen on
Trial I) than to new problems [t(1,38) = 2.33, P < .05].
This pattern was reversed for the uninformed subjects,
with more solutions being produced for new problems
than old problems [t(1,38) = 3.29, p<.OI]. The performance
of informed and uninformed subjects was
statistically equivalent on the new problems [t(1,38) =
.917, p > .05], but informed subjects solved more old
problems [t(1,38) = 5.79, P < .001].
PERFETTO, BRANSFORD, AND FRANKS
tendency to
retrieve these prior answers would be
were self-generated.
it seems plausible that Trial 1 answers were
retrieved during Trial 2 and that this retrieval interfered
with access to the information presented during the
acquisition task. The present design does not allow us
to state whether subjects must actually generate an
inappropriate answer on Trial 1 in order to show a decrement for old items on Trial 2 problem solving.Additional
experiments must be designed in order to address this
question. For present purposes, the important point is
that initial failures to access potentially relevant information (e.g., during Trial 1) can cause problem-specific
deficits that are not easily eradicated simply by becoming informed.
GENERAL DISCUSSION
Two major fmdings emerged from the present experiments. First, the results of all four experiments indicate
that subjects did not spontaneously utilize previously
acquired information to solve problems unless they were
explicitly
relationship
initial acquisition and the later problem solving. These
results replicate those found by Weisberg et al. .
Weisberg et al. had subjects learn associations such as
"candle-box" and demonstrated that this did not help
them solve Dunker's candle problem unless they
were explicitly informed about the relationship between
acquisition and test. We argued that the clue "candlebox" was not particularly informative and hence devised
materials in which the clues provided information that
was more likely to lead to problem solution (see the
initial assessment of clue effectiveness described prior to
Experiment 1). Even under these conditions, the present
results show that subjects who were informed about the
acquisition-test relationship were much more likely to
utilize the acquisition information than were subjects
who were not informed about this relationship. Furthermore, uninformed subjects did not solve a significantly greater number of problems than did subjects in
the baseline groups.
The results discussed above are also consistent with
investigations by Gick and Holyoak of the ability
to transfer solutions between analogical problems. Gick
and Holyoak found that subjects typically failed to
transfer a solution read in conjunction with one problem
to an analogous problem unless they were given a hint to use the prior
story to help them solve the problem. However, Gick
and Holyoak's task required an abstract matehing of
the target problem and solution to the analogous problem. The direct nature of the materials in the present
experiment demonstrates that this phenomenon is not
the result of subjects' inability to "see the analogy" but
a more general nature. Furthermore, neither
Weisberg et al. nor Gick and Holyoak consider
the effects attributable to the initial spontaneous transfer failure. These effects are discussed below.
A second major result of the present experiments
involves the consequences of initial failures to access
potentially relevant information. In Experiment 2, for
example, uninformed subjects were not told that their
acquisition experiences were relevant to the problems
they were about to solve on Trial 1 and hence performed
more poorly than informed subjects. However, even
when uninformed subjects were informed on Trial 2,
they were still less likely to use relevant acquisition
information to generate solutions than were subjects in
the informed group. The results of Experiments 3 and 4
indicated that this decrement was not due to the general
attempting to solve problems during Trial 1.
Instead, the decrement occurred only for Trial 2 problems that had actually been attempted during Trial 1.
Thus, initial failures to access relevant information can
lead to problem-specific deficits in later problem solving
performance. As discussed previously, these deficits
can be seen as resulting from retrieval processes operating under constraints due to encoding specificity and
possibly to the self-generated nature of the answers
encoded during Trial I,
The present results are similar to findings of research
conducted in an educational setting. For example, Howe
 found that the contents of weekly attempts at
written reproduction were very closely related to previous recall attempts. The contents of a given recall
attempt, even when incorrect, were more likely to recur
in the succeedingweeks than were correct but nonrecalled
items. This was true despite an intervening presentation
of the correct material.
The importance of the present findings can be seen
when one notes
many, if not most, ordinary
problem solving situations involve cases in which the
problem solver is essentially uninformed and is engaged
in self-generation of potential answers to the problem.
To have any chance of solving such problems, one must
presume that the problem solver has previously acquired
infornation that is relevant to the problem solution. A
major aspect of problem solving involves accessing this
relevant information. However, usually the problem
solver does not have someone telling him what information is relevant or when it was acquired (i.e., the problem solver is uninformed). The present work indicates
that this uninformed state can lead to serious difficulties in accessing previously acquired, relevant information. Furthermore, in attempting to solve problems in
this uninformed state, the problem solver will probably
generate at least partial answers, which are inadequate
solutions to the problem. The present work indicates
that these inadequate self-generated answers may lead
to even greater deficits in accessingrelevant information
and problem solving in any future attempts to solve the
same or similar problems. Given such possible difficulties, one important area for future research involves
investigations of types of acquisition experiences (and/or
of access or
strategies) that can be
engaged during problem solving. Specifically, researchers
might investigate the types of experiences that are effective in overcoming deficits that stern from being uninformed
information
Although the present work was primarily concemed
with problem solving, the present findings also may have
implications for the study of a broad range of psychological phenomena. For example, the present results suggest that some traditional experimental paradigms may
lead to an overestimation of the accessibility of relevant
information. Consider, for example, typical episodic
memory experiments. In such experiments, subjects are
presented with acquisition information and are then
asked to remember this information, perhaps with the
of various retrieval cues. Of necessity in such
experiments, subjects are "informed" concerning the
relationship between the acquisition and test.
the present findings, a major question concems the
generalization of the findings from such typical memory
experiments to cases of more spontaneous remembering or recollection (i.e., to cases in which the rememberer
is essentially uninformed). It seems obvious that much
remembering, in ordinary circumstances, involves such
uninformed spontaneity. Furthermore, even in circumstances in which one is asked to remember some particular information, the asker often does not or cannot
inform the rememberer about where the rememberer
acquired the relevant information. Both of these circumstances differ from the procedures involved in typical
memory studies. In general, many typical experimental
paradigms prompt access of information under explicitly
informed conditions. The present findings suggest that
studies may
often seriously underestimate the
potential problems involved in accessing such information.
Finally, the finding that access to relevant information is strongly influenced by whether one is informed
or uninformed has important implications for educational practice. Many c1assroom tests designed to assess
learning seem to be episodic in nature. That is, students
know that the correct answers to problems were provided by a particular professor, set of readings, and so
therefore informed
CONSTRAINTS ON ACCESS
sources of information that are relevant to the test
question they receive. Imagine that a student performs
very well on a test such as this yet, when leaving the
c1assroom,
information from the course would be useful. Will the
student spontaneously utilize
information? The
present experiments suggest that the
answer may weIl be no. It seems c1ear that theories of
learning and instruction must address the question of
information
accessible under conditions in which students are not explicitly informed
about the particular acquisition context that is relevant
to the problems they confront.