typeset using JPSJ.sty <ver.1.0b>
Critical Temperature of Ferromagnetic Transition in
Three-Dimensional Double-Exchange Models
Yukitoshi Motome and Nobuo Furukawa1
Institute of Materials Science, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0006
1Department of Physics, Aoyama Gakuin University, Setagaya, Tokyo 157-8572
(Received )
Ferromagnetic transition in three-dimensional double-exchange models is studied by the Monte
Carlo method. Critical temperature Tc is precisely determined by ﬁnite-size scaling analysis.
Strong spin ﬂuctuations in this itinerant system signiﬁcantly reduce Tc from mean-ﬁeld estimates.
By choosing appropriate parameters, obtained values of Tc quantitatively agree with experiments
for the ferromagnetic metal regime of (La,Sr)MnO3, which is a typical perovskite manganite
showing colossal magnetoresistance. This indicates that the double-exchange mechanism alone
is suﬃcient to explain Tc in this material. Critical exponents are also discussed.
KEYWORDS: double-exchange model, colossal magnetoresistance manganites, ferromagnetic transition, critical temperature, ﬁnite-size scaling, Monte Carlo method
Colossal magnetoresistance near the ferromagnetic
transition has attracted much attention to the strong interplay between transport and magnetism in perovskite
manganese oxides.1, 2) This feature has been attributed
to the double-exchange (DE) mechanism3) in the Hamiltonian
iσcjσ + h.c.) −JH
σi · Si, (1)
where ciσ (c†
iσ) annihilates (creates) a σ-spin electron at
site i, and JH is the Hund’s-rule coupling between itinerant eg electrons with σi spin and localized t2g moments
Recently this simple DE scenario has been reexamined from the viewpoint of whether model (1) quantitatively describes thermodynamics in a typical material
La1−xSrxMnO3 (LSMO), or whether another mechanism
is necessary. Based on mean-ﬁeld (MF) arguments, Millis
et al.4) claimed that the DE mechanism alone is insuﬃcient to reproduce experiments. In particular, their estimate for the critical temperature Tc is one order of magnitude higher than experimental results. On the other
hand, the validity of the DE scenario has been claimed
by dynamical mean-ﬁeld (DMF) studies.2) Magnetism
as well as transport and optical properties in the LSMO
compound is well reproduced by model (1).
The DMF method includes dynamical ﬂuctuations
which were completely neglected in the MF study. DMF
results suggest the importance of the ﬂuctuations in this
itinerant system. At the same time, the DMF method is
not suﬃcient on its own since it takes into account only
local ﬂuctuations. In order to settle the controversy of
whether the DE mechanism alone explains the thermodynamics of LSMO, it is necessary to make calculations
which include all ﬂuctuation eﬀects.
A numerical study is one of the promising candidates
for including the ﬂuctuation eﬀects appropriately. Many
surveys based on the Monte Carlo (MC) method have
been performed. However, their results have not yet converged mainly due to ﬁnite-size eﬀects. Table I summarizes the values of Tc from the MC studies as well as by
other approximations. MC calculations are performed
for the system on ﬁnite-size clusters. In order to discuss
critical phenomena, it is necessary to apply ﬁnite-size
scaling analysis. However, such a systematic study has
not been performed thus far since it has been diﬃcult to
study large-size clusters in three dimensions (3D) due to
the rapid increase of the cpu time with the system size.
In this work we investigate the ferromagnetic transition in model (1) by ﬁnite-size scaling analysis of MC
A new MC algorithm11) is applied to reduce
the cpu time markedly, which enables us to study larger
clusters than ever. Our results elucidate eﬀects of thermal and spatial ﬂuctuations quantitatively. Our estimate
for Tc agrees with those for LSMO in the ferromagnetic
metal regime when parameters are chosen appropriately.
Critical exponents are also examined in comparison with
experimental results.
Model (1) is studied with a classical treatment of the
localized moments S, as in other surveys listed in Table I. Then the fermion Hamiltonian deﬁned for a given
conﬁguration of {Si} becomes quadratic in the fermion
operators and can be diagonalized with the matrix size
proportional to the system size. Conﬁgurations of {Si}
are stochastically sampled in a MC fashion. The bottleneck of the standard MC technique7) is the cost of the
cpu time required to diagonalize the fermion Hamiltonian in each MC sample. The cost of cpu time is of the
order of N 3 where N is the system size.
We apply a
new algorithm11) which replaces the exact diagonalization by a moment expansion of the density of states.12, 13)
Calculations of the moments can be easily performed on
parallel computers. The cpu time is reduced to the order
of (N 2 log N)/NPE where NPE is the number of nodes in
the parallel calculation. For details of the method, read-
Yukitoshi Motome and Nobuo Furukawa
ers are referred to ref. 11.
The critical temperature Tc of ferromagnetic transition
in the DE model (1) estimated by various methods. (MF: mean-
ﬁeld approximation, HTE: high-temperature expansion, DMF:
dynamical mean-ﬁeld theory, MC: Monte Carlo calculation) The
results are for x = 0.5 and JH = ∞except for noted cases.
Errors in the last digit are shown in parentheses. W is the half
bandwidth of noninteracting electrons. The third column is Tc
when W is taken as 1 eV. The experimental result (EXP) is also
denoted for comparison. See text for details.
0.0714(1)b
0.0362(8)d
0.022(3)b,c
260(40)b,c
0.0210(7)b,d
a. x = 0.3 and JH = ∞,
b. x = 0.5 and JH = 4W
c. without assumption for the exponent β
d. with assumption β = 0.365
e. x = 0.3
We consider the hopping tij = t only between nearestneighbor sites on a 3D cubic lattice.
In the following
we study the ferromagnetic transition for two parameters, JH = ∞and 4W, where W is the half bandwidth of noninteracting electrons (W = 6t in 3D). For
the case of JH = ∞, components of conduction electrons with spins antiparallel to localized moments are
projected out, and therefore model (1) simply takes
the spinless form of H = −˜t P
icj + h.c.), where
˜t = t[cos(θi/2) cos(θj/2)+sin(θi/2) sin(θj/2)ei(φj−φi)].14)
The matrix dimension of the Hamiltonian is halved and
the cpu time is reduced. Moreover, the moment expansion converges rapidly due to the simple band structure.
In the following calculations, we perform the moment
expansion up to the order of M = 20 for JH = ∞and
M = 40 for JH = 4W in order to ensure suﬃcient precision for MC updates.11) For both values of JH, we control the chemical potential so that the electron density
iσcjσ⟩becomes 0.5. Here, the bracket denotes
the thermal average for the grand canonical ensemble.
The critical temperature Tc in model (1) is known to
have a maximum at x ≃0.5. A closed-shell condition is
necessary to obtain full polarization in the ground state
(T = 0). We chose the system size N = Nx × Ny × Nz
as 4 × 4 × 4, 6 × 6 × 4, 6 × 6 × 8 and 8 × 8 × 8 under
the periodic boundary conditions for the x and y directions and the antiperiodic boundary condition for the z
direction. We have typically run 10, 000 MC samplings
for measurements after 1, 000 MC steps for thermalization. Measurement is divided into ﬁve bins to estimate
the statistical error by the variance among the bins.
We determine the critical temperature Tc by two quantities. One is the Binder parameter15) deﬁned by
g = 1 −⟨q4⟩/3⟨q2⟩2,
where q is the order parameter which is taken as P
in this case. For T > Tc (T < Tc), the Binder parameter decreases (increases) as the system size N increases.
Thus Tc is determined by a crossing point of g for various
N. The other quantity is the magnetization deﬁned by
m = [S(k = 0)/N]1/2,
where the spin structure factor S(k) is given by
⟨SiSj⟩eik·rij/N.
The thermodynamic limit of m is obtained from the
system-size extrapolation of S(0).
The case of JH = ∞is discussed ﬁrst. Figure 1 shows
the Binder parameter for this case. The Binder parameters for diﬀerent system sizes cross at T ∼0.035W although it is diﬃcult to determine Tc precisely due to the
statistical error bars.
We next study the magnetization. Figure 2(a) displays
the system-size extrapolation of S(0)/N. The data for
T ≤0.035W scale well with N −2/3, and are extrapolated
to ﬁnite values in the limit of N = ∞. This scaling is
consistent with k2-dependence of the energy cutoﬀfor
magnons.16) The extrapolated values are summarized as
the magnetization in Fig. 2(b). The onset of the ﬁnite
magnetization m agrees well with the crossing point of
the Binder parameter in Fig. 1. The estimate for Tc is
Tc ≃(0.037 ± 0.003)W.
Binder parameter for JH = ∞. The lines are guides to
To determine the value of Tc precisely, we ﬁt the magnetization data by assuming the scaling law of m ∝
(Tc −T )β. The value of the exponent β has not been determined thus far. At present, our data are insuﬃcient to
make estimates for both Tc and β simultaneously within
the desired accuracy. Instead we assume the exponent in
3D Heisenberg models β = 0.365,17) and determine the
value of Tc. The data are well ﬁtted, as shown in Fig. 2
(b). The ﬁt gives Tc = (0.0362 ± 0.0008)W.
The assumption of β in the universality class of 3D
Heisenberg models is tested by ﬁnite-size scaling analysis.
The scaling hypothesis gives the scaling relation for the
spin structure factor (4) in the form
S(0) = L2−ηf(L|T −Tc|ν),
where L = N 1/3 and f is the scaling function. The critical exponents are predicted to be η = 0.034 and ν =
0.705 in this universality class.17) We plot S(0)/L2−0.034
as a function of L|T −Tc|0.705 with Tc = 0.0362W in Fig.
3. The data appear to follow a universal function (there
are two branches for T > Tc and T < Tc) in this temperature range. This is consistent with the assumption of
β = 0.365 in the ﬁt in Fig. 2(b). Later we will discuss the
critical exponents in comparison with the experimental
(a) System-size extrapolation of the spin structure factor
and (b) magnetization in the thermodynamic limit for JH = ∞.
The curve in the ﬁgure is the least-squares-ﬁt to m ∝(T −Tc)β.
See text for details.
Finite-size scaling for JH = ∞.
We now turn to the case of JH = 4W.
case of JH = ∞, an estimate for Tc is obtained more
accurately by the magnetization measurement. Figure 4
shows (a) the system-size extrapolation of S(0)/N and
(b) the magnetization in the thermodynamic limit. We
have Tc ≃(0.022±0.003)W from Fig. 4(b). If we assume
the scaling m ∝(Tc −T )β with the 3D Heisenberg exponent β = 0.365 as in Fig. 2(b), the ﬁt for T ≤0.02W
gives Tc = (0.0210 ± 0.0007)W in this case.
(a) System-size extrapolation of the spin structure factor
and (b) magnetization in the thermodynamic limit for JH = 4W .
The curve in the ﬁgure is the least-squares-ﬁt to m ∝(T −Tc)β.
See text for details.
We compare the results of Tc with the other theoretical estimates listed in Table I. Our results are one order
of magnitude lower than the MF estimates. This elucidates the importance of the strong ﬂuctuations in this
The MF approximation neglects all the ﬂuctuations, i.e., the thermal and spatial ones. The DMF
theory gives an intermediate approximation in the sense
that it includes only the thermal ﬂuctuation and neglects
the spatial one. Comparison among MF, DMF and our
MC results clariﬁes the ﬂuctuation eﬀects quantitatively:
the thermal ﬂuctuation signiﬁcantly suppresses Tc from
0.3W to ∼0.08W, and moreover the spatial ﬂuctuation
reduces Tc by more than half from ∼0.08W to ∼0.04W
in the case of JH = ∞. Both ﬂuctuations are important
and cannot be neglected in a discussion of the phase transition.
The previous MC results listed in Table I deviate considerably from our results. These deviations arise from
the ﬁnite-size eﬀects and the method used to determine
the transition temperature. Tc has been estimated by
spin correlation between the farthest sites,7) the second
derivative of the magnetization8) and the scaling ﬁt for
the data of a ﬁnite-size cluster.9) In order to discuss the
phase transition in the strict sense, these methods are
uncontrolled in the absence of system-size extrapolation.
The values of Tc are compared with the experimental
result in Table I. Here, we take the half bandwidth W
to be 1 eV, which is typical for 3d transition metal ox-
Yukitoshi Motome and Nobuo Furukawa
ides. The bandwidth W = 1 eV is also consistent with
band calculations.18, 19, 20) Thus our results, Tc ≃430 K
for JH = ∞and Tc ≃260 K for JH = 4W, agree well
with the experimental values of Tc in the ferromagnetic
metal regime, for instance, Tc = 369 K at x = 0.3. More
quantitative agreement will be obtained by tuning the
value of JH/W and the doping concentration x. We conclude that once the ﬂuctuation eﬀects are fully taken into
account, the DE mechanism gives a quantitative description of Tc in LSMO as a major origin.
Our results strongly support a view of LSMO in the
ferromagnetic metal regime around x = 0.3 as a canonical DE system, which has been pointed out by the DMF
studies.2) Note that the compound is far from an antiferromagnetic/ferromagnetic insulator at x <∼0.1521)
and an A-type antiferromagnetic metal at x >∼0.5.22)
These instabilities are beyond the scope of model (1).
Detailed comparison between experiments involving this
compound and theories in model (1) provides a good
starting point to understanding not only the above instabilities but physical properties in other related materials. MC study of other physical properties in 3D is a
subject for further study.
In our analysis, the universality class of 3D Heisenberg models is assumed. We also analyze the data by
assuming the universality class of the mean-ﬁeld theory,
i.e., β = ν = 0.5 and η = 0. In this case, the ﬁnite-size
scaling plot (5) does not show good convergence compared to the data in Fig. 3. Our data ﬁt better with the
3D Heisenberg exponents than do the mean-ﬁeld ones.
However, the present data are not suﬃciently precise to
either conﬁrm the universality class of the DE model as
that of the 3D Heisenberg model, or to identify it as a
new universality class with similar exponents.
Concerning the experiments, values of the critical exponents for LSMO remain controversial. Estimates for β
are scattered in the range of 0.3 <∼β <∼0.5.23, 24, 25, 26, 27)
A recent study claims that the estimate for the critical exponent may depend on the range of the critical
region assumed for ﬁtting:28) β ≃0.5 is obtained for
the relatively narrow critical region (Tc −T )/Tc <∼0.1
while β ≃0.3 is found for the relatively wide critical region (Tc −T )/Tc >∼0.2. In our calculation, data
of the magnetization are ﬁtted over the wide range of
(Tc −T )/Tc <∼0.4. Considering the experimental situation, we cannot exclude the possibility that the results
for the exponents in the DE model may be modiﬁed when
the system further approaches to the critical point. Further investigation is required to determine the value of
the exponents with precision.
To summarize, we have investigated ferromagnetic
transition in the three-dimensional double-exchange
model by Monte Carlo calculations. The new algorithm
based on the moment expansion method has been applied to study large clusters. The critical temperature is
determined precisely by ﬁnite-size scaling analysis. Comparison with other theoretical surveys quantitatively elucidates the importance of thermal and spatial ﬂuctuations in this itinerant system.
The critical temperature estimated with appropriate parameters agrees well
with experiments in the ferromagnetic metal regime of
(La,Sr)MnO3. The double-exchange mechanism alone is
suﬃcient to reproduce the ferromagnetic transition temperature in this material. The critical exponent in our
analysis is consistent with experimental trends although
more detailed study is necessary both theoretically and
experimentally.
The authors thank H. Nakata for helpful support in developing parallel-processing systems. The computations
have been performed mainly using the facilities in the
AOYAMA+ project ( 
aoyama+). This work is supported by “a Grant-in-Aid
from the Ministry of Education, Science, Sports and Culture”.
 A. P. Ramirez: J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 9 8171, and
references therein.
 N. Furukawa: in Physics of Manganites, eds. T. Kaplan and
S. Mahanti , and references therein.
 C. Zener: Phys. Rev. 82 403.
 A. J. Millis, P. B. Littlewood and B. I. Shraiman: Phys. Rev.
Lett. 74 5144.
 H. R¨oder, R. R. P. Singh and J. Zang: Phys. Rev. B 56 
 N. Furukawa: J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 64 2754. The values
of Tc in Table I are calculated for the density of states in 3D
in the thermodynamic limit.
 S. Yunoki, J. Hu, A. Malvezzi, A. Moreo, N. Furukawa and
E. Dagotto: Phys. Rev. Lett. 80 845.
 M. J. Calder´on and L. Brey: Phys. Rev. B 58 3286.
 H. Yi , N. H. Hur and J. Yu: Phys. Rev. B 61 9501.
 Y. Tokura, A. Urushibara, Y. Moritomo, T. Arima, A.
Asamitsu, G. Kido and N. Furukawa: J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 63
 3931.
 Y. Motome and N. Furukawa: J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 68 
 L. W. Wang: Phys. Rev. B 49 10154.
 R. N. Silver and H. R¨oder: Int. J. Mod. Phys. C 5 735.
 P. W. Anderson and H. Hasegawa: Phys. Rev. 100 
 K. Binder: Z. Phys. B 43 119.
 N. Furukawa: J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 65 1174.
 J. C. Le Guillou and J. Zinn-Justin:
Phys. Rev. Lett. 39
 95.
 N. Hamada, H. Sawada and K. Terakura:
in Proc. 17th
Taniguchi International Conference, eds. A. Fujimori and Y.
Tokura .
 W. E. Pickett and D. J. Singh: Phys. Rev. B 55 8642.
 D. A. Papaconstantopoulos and W. E. Pickett: Phys. Rev. B
57 12751.
 A. Urushibara, Y. Moritomo, T. Arima, A. Asamitsu, G. Kido
and Y. Tokura: Phys. Rev. B 51 14103.
 T. Akimoto, Y. Maruyama, Y. Moritomo and A. Nakamura:
Phys. Rev. B 57 5594.
 R. H. Heﬀner, L. P. Le, M. F. Hundley, J. J. Neumeier, G.
M. Luke, K. Kojima, B. Naomichi, Y. J. Uemura, D. E.
MacLaughlin and S-W. Cheong: Phys. Rev. Lett. 77 
 M. C. Martin, G. Shirane, Y. Endoh, K. Hirota, Y. Moritomo
and Y. Tokura: Phys. Rev. B 53 14285.
 S. E. Loﬂand, V. Ray, P. H. Kim, S. M. Bhagat, M. A. Manheimer and S. D. Tyagi: Phys. Rev. B 55 2749.
 K. Ghosh, C. J. Lobb, R. L. Greene, S. G. Karabashev, D. A.
Shulyatev, A. A. Arsenov and Y. Mukovskii: Phys. Rev. Lett
81 4740.
 L. Vasiliu-Doloc, J. W. Lynn, Y. M. Mukovskii, A. A. Arsenov
and D. A. Shulyatev: J. Appl. Phys. 83 7342.
 A. Schwartz, M. Scheﬄer and S. M. Anlage: Phys. Rev. B 61
 870. Note that this experiment is for x = 0.2.