Entropy-Based Active Learning for Object Recognition
Alex Holub, Pietro Perona
1200 E. California Blvd. Pasadena, CA 91106
 , 
Michael C. Burl
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Caltech
1200 E. California Blvd. Pasadena, CA 91106
 
Most methods for learning object categories require
large amounts of labeled training data. However, obtaining
such data can be a difﬁcult and time-consuming endeavor.
We have developed a novel, entropy-based “active learning” approach which makes signiﬁcant progress towards
this problem. The main idea is to sequentially acquire labeled data by presenting an oracle (the user) with unlabeled
images that will be particularly informative when labeled.
Active learning adaptively prioritizes the order in which the
training examples are acquired, which, as shown by our experiments, can signiﬁcantly reduce the overall number of
training examples required to reach near-optimal performance. At ﬁrst glance this may seem counter-intuitive: how
can the algorithm know whether a group of unlabeled images will be informative, when, by deﬁnition, there is no
label directly associated with any of the images? Our approach is based on choosing an image to label that maximizes the expected amount of information we gain about the
set of unlabeled images. The technique is demonstrated in
several contexts, including improving the efﬁciency of web
image-search queries and open-world visual learning by an
autonomous agent. Experiments on a large set of 140 visual object categories taken directly from text-based web
image searches show that our technique can provide large
improvements (up to 10x reduction in the number of training
examples needed) over baseline techniques.
1. Introduction
There are many situations in computer vision where the
cost of obtaining labeled data is extremely high. Consider
the problem of obtaining sufﬁcient training data to build
recognizers for thousands of image categories; clearly, one
needs to be as efﬁcient as possible when confronted with
such a large number of categories and images. By intelligently choosing the subset of images to be labeled, we
may be able to dramatically reduce the number of images
needed for the labeled training set. Work on support vector machines , relevance vector machines , and other
sparse classiﬁers has shown that not all examples are created equal, as these classiﬁers express their solutions (decision surfaces) in terms of a small subset of the full set of
Num Imgs Labeled (Entropy)
Num Imgs Labeled (Rand)
Entropy vs Rand
Mean=2.74 (Median=2.27)
Log2 ( srand / sent )
Figure 2. Comparison of Minimum Expected Entropy (MEE) active learning against passive learning (random sampling) over 137
categories of image search data (see an example category in Figure 1). (Left) Scatter plot showing the number of labeling rounds
to reach 85% of asymptotic maximum performance for MEE (xaxis) versus random sampling (y-axis). Points above the diagonal
indicate that MEE reaches near-optimal performance with fewer
labeling rounds than passive learning. Each point represents a different object category and is the result of averaging over 50 experiments for the category. All experiments used an unlabeled pool of
250 images. (Right) Histogram of the log2 speedup (multiplicative improvement) of MEE versus passive learning. We indicate
the mean and median increase in performance in title, i.e., a mean
of 4, indicates that on average active learning reached target performance 4× faster than random learning.
Figure 1 shows that similar issues arise when performing text-based searches for a particular object class. A basic
search may return a high percentage of images that do not
match the target concept. If we could reﬁne these searches
by acquiring user input, we could drastically increase the
precision of the returned results. However, since user time
is precious, it is critical that we attempt to squeeze as much
information as possible from a minimum amount of feedback.
U.S. Government work not protected by U.S. copyright
Random Selection
Active Learning
Classifier
Figure 1. Web image search for category ‘Cougar’. The user is allowed to label images to reﬁne the image search query. (Top) Images the user needs to label in passive learning (randomly choosing images for the user to label) in order to achieve 82% of maximum performance. (Middle) Images sequentially selected by active learning for the user to label. The blue boxes indicate images
the user has marked as ‘Good’. Note that the user is required to
rate over 4× fewer images when active learning is used compared
to passive learning. In this example, the user prefers images that
show the head of a cougar. (Bottom) The top 8 returns of the resulting classiﬁer trained using the active learning images. Blue boxes
indicate images which are ‘Good’ according to the user. Figure 2
shows similar performance gains for 137 image search categories.
Finally, consider an autonomous agent traversing a world
and encountering new object classes. The agent is allowed
to query an oracle (e.g., a human) regarding information
found in the world, but, as the oracle’s time is valuable, the
number of queries must be kept to a minimum (e.g., consider a Mars rover, which must consume precious resources
and time to query human ‘oracles’ back on Earth).
In this paper we employ active learning to more quickly
and efﬁciently learn visual object categories. In general active learning paradigms have 4 key components: (1) a set
of labeled training examples, (2) a set of unlabeled examples for which labels can be obtained at some cost, (3) an
oracle (e.g., a human) that can provide correct labels, and
(4) a methodology for deciding which unlabeled examples
to request labels for given the current state of knowledge.
Typically, this process occurs iteratively so that unlabeled
examples are selected and then labeled by the oracle. Given
the new information from the oracle, additional unlabeled
examples are selected for labeling. Colloquially, we refer to
the image selected for labeling at each iteration as the “Most
Informative Unlabeled Point” (the MIUP). This formulation
of active learning is similar to that described in .
The main issue then is determining how to select the next
image to label given what is currently known. Many heuristics have been developed; one of the most common is to
choose examples which are the “most confused” with respect to the current classiﬁer being used. For instance a confused point might be the point which lies closest to the decision surface separating two classes. Tong and Koller 
develop this idea for Support Vector Machines (SVMs) by
looking at the closest point to the current separating hyperplane. This idea has been further developed for image retrieval experiments . Seung et al. take a different approach to selecting the most-confused point by generating
numerous viable classiﬁers based on the known labels and
choosing the point to label as the one that is most-confused
by these classiﬁers. The authors of compare yet another
“most confused” point approach and apply it to image retrieval experiments.
Relevance feedback, a related method, has been studied
for content-based image retrieval (CBIR) systems since the
mid-1990’s. Many of these techniques focus on learning
similarity measures between images or on weighting the
importance of low-level features such as shape, color, and
texture in deﬁning the user’s target concept. See for a
We take a different approach to active learning in the
hopes of improving performance and improving the ﬂexibility of the active learning approach. Given the multitude of
image classiﬁers available, we would like our active learning approach to be agnostic w.r.t. the underlying image classiﬁer being used. We suggest to choose the MIUP which results in acquiring the most information about the unlabeled
images (similar to , but in a classiﬁcation rather than regression setting), or, expressed another way, which minimizes the expected uncertainty of the unlabeled set of images. Our algorithm, in the same spirit as , generates numerous viable classiﬁers in order to identify the MIUP and
is well-deﬁned for any underlying classiﬁer being used (in
this paper we demonstrate the technique on SVMs, Nearest
Neighbor, and Kernel Nearest Neighbor classiﬁers).
A recent paper uses active learning and Pyramid
Match Kernels to improve object category recognition.
They employ a Gaussian Process (GP) model to place a
prior probability on the spatial correlation of the underlying
labels. Their algorithm then estimates a posterior probability distribution over the label of any unlabeled point given
the currently labeled points. They use a variation of Most
Confused Point (MCP) taking into account the posterior
variance to choose the MIUP.
In Section 2 we describe our algorithm. In Section 3,
we describe the data-sets used and show that our technique
provides substantial speedup over competing methods on
a large set of 137 image categories. We also consider the
important question of deciding automatically when enough
labeled data has been acquired. Finally in Section 4, we
conclude and discuss implications of this work. Two technical appendices are included, which provide a brief overview
of several alternative active learning approaches that were
tested and the Lazebnik Spatial Pyramid Match Kernel 
(used as the underlying classiﬁcation method in our experiments).
2. Active Learning
We formalize our discussion of active learning as follows. Suppose we have a set of N images with each image belonging to one of L possible classes. Initially we assume that the class labels for all images are unknown. Active learning begins by choosing one or more of the N images; these images are presented to an oracle that provides
the correct class label(s). In subsequent rounds, the active
learning algorithm considers both the the currently labeled
images and the remaining unlabeled images and chooses additional images from the unlabeled set that would be particularly informative if their labels were known.
Let U(t) be the pool of unlabeled images at the start of
round t and let L(t) be the corresponding pool of labeled
images. Initially, we have U(0) containing all N images
and L(0) = ∅. For simplicity of notation, we will assume
that one unknown image is to be chosen in each round and
assigned a label, although see Section 2.4 for a discussion
of the multi-return case.
To admit both deterministic and random algorithms,
we suppose that an active learning algorithm outputs an
(M × 1) vector w that speciﬁes a probability distribution
over the images in the unlabeled pool, where M is the number of unlabeled images available in the current round. A
deterministic algorithm simply sets all the elements of w to
zero, except for one element which is set to 1. (This element is then guaranteed to be picked.) Random sampling
(equivalent to passive learning) sets w to 1/M · 1, where 1
is an (M × 1) vector of ones. Given w, the oracle chooses
an image according to this distribution and returns its label.
This process leads to new labeled and unlabeled sets for the
next round.
L(t) ∪{x(t), y(t)}
U(t) \ x(t)
where x(t) ∈U(t) is the example chosen in round t and y(t)
is its label assigned by the oracle.
2.1. Minimum Expected Entropy
The usual goal with active learning is to learn, as quickly
as possible, a decision function g(·) that accurately assigns
class labels y to test images x. However, given the uncertainties involved (even the form of the underlying classconditional probability distributions is unknown), it is dif-
ﬁcult to directly optimize this criterion. Instead, we have
developed a novel active learning approach that attempts to
sequentially minimize the expected entropy (uncertainty) of
the labels for the unlabeled images given the current labeled
Let H(·) represent the entropy of a set of images. In
round t, we want to choose the image that produces the
maximum reduction in entropy (equivalently, maximum
gain in information) once its label is known.
x(t) = arg max
U(t)|L(t)
U(t+1)|L(t+1)
Since only the second term depends1 on x ), we can instead
solve the following minimization:
x(t) = arg min
U(t+1)|L(t+1)
There is a problem with our formulation so far. In both
Equations 3 and 4, we have an entropy conditional on
L(t+1), which presumes we know the label that the oracle
will assign to x. Since this label information is unknown
before we consult the oracle, H
U(t+1)|L(t+1)
calculated. To resolve this issue, we instead compute an entropy conditional on each possible result the oracle might
give for the label of x. We then average these conditional
entropies weighted by the probability that x takes on a particular label to generate an expected entropy:
P(Y =j|L(t)) · H
U(t+1)|L(t)∪{x, j}
where Y is a random variable representing the label of x.
The Minimum Expected Entropy (MEE) algorithm chooses
the image that results in the minimum value for Hx.
The main difﬁculty in implementing MEE is to estimate
H (U|L). (The superscripts that indicate the epoch number
have been dropped to simplify the notation.) This quantity is the joint entropy over the random variables Yk representing the labels of the unlabeled images conditional on L.
1The dependence is implicit; x is the new image from U(t) to be labeled.
The joint entropy, of course, depends on the full joint probability distribution over the vector of Y variables, which is
difﬁcult to estimate. Therefore, we make use of the subadditivity property of entropy: H (Y1, Y2, . . . , YM|L) ≤
k=1 H (Yk|L) to replace the joint entropy by a sum over
the individual (marginal) entropies; this new quantity serves
as an upper bound for the joint entropy. (The bound is tight
if the Yk’s are independent.)
To estimate H(Yk|L), we simply need to know the probability distribution over the possible label values that Yk can
take, then the entropy is given by:
H(Yk|L) = −
P(Yk = l|L) · log2 P(Yk = l|L)
Estimation of the label probabilities is discussed in the next
subsection. Algorithm 2.1 provides a pseudocode summarization of the Minimum Expected Entropy approach.
for each round t do
for each unlabeled image xi ∈U(t) do
for each possible class label j ∈{1, . . . , L} do
Estimate P
Yi = j|L(t)
for each unlabeled image xk ∈
for each possible class label l ∈{1, . . . , L} do
Estimate P
Yk = l|L(t) ∪{xi, j}
Calculate conditional entropy Hj
Combine conditional entropies Hj for j = 1, . . . , L
into an expected entropy Hxi
Set w to δi∗where xi∗yields lowest expected entropy.
2.2. Look-ahead Estimate of Class Probabilities
Here we consider how to estimate class probabilities
for the unlabeled images given a set of labeled images L
when we have classiﬁers, such as kernel nearest neighbor or
SVM, that only return hard class decisions2. The key idea
is to use a one step look-ahead scheme to construct a committee of classiﬁers. The predictions of the committee are
then used to derive the desired label probabilities. The lookahead step considers each of the M currently unlabeled images in U and each possible value for its class label. Let
{xm, n} be a look-ahead image and its hypothesized label.
Next we construct a classiﬁer from L ∪{xm, n}. Repeating this process for each unlabeled image and each possible
2Although the SVM hyperplane distance can be used to construct
pseudo-probabilities, this approach cannot be applied to other types of
classiﬁers.
Order Chosen
Next Point Chosen
Figure 3. (Left) Illustration of minimum expected entropy (MEE)
active learning for a set of N = 20 points from L = 2 classes.
The numbers show the order in which MEE presents points to the
oracle with the colored circles showing the resulting label. With its
ﬁrst four queries, MEE visits each of the “clusters” providing for
the quickest reduction in the uncertainty of the labels of the other
points. This experiment was run using a Nearest Neighbor classi-
ﬁer. (Right) Comparison of different active learning approaches.
The red and green points are currently labeled, while the black
points are unlabeled. The dotted line shows the SVM hyperplane
found with the current set of labeled points. The next query to
the oracle is shown for three different active learning approaches:
(E) MEE, (C) closest to the current hyperplane as in , and (M)
most confused point based on lookahead estimates for the label
probabilities. Observe that MEE chooses a point that sits next to
many other unlabeled points and is in a relatively unexplored region of space. Note that our MEE framework allows us to use any
underlying classiﬁer: Nearest Neighbor classiﬁers are used in the
left ﬁgure while SVMs are used in the right.
value for its label yields M · L classiﬁers, which we apply
to each of the images in U.
The classiﬁer results can be collected into a blockstructured matrix B consisting of L blocks by L blocks with
each block being an (M × M) matrix. (As usual, L is the
number of class labels and M is the number of currently
unlabeled images.) The (l, n) block contains an indicator
matrix of 0’s and 1’s. The (k, m) position within a block
is a 1 if the classiﬁer trained with L ∪{xm, n} says that
example xk belongs in class l. We can then use B to write:
M · B · P(Ym = n)
(The notation is such that the probability vectors P(·) on
the LHS and RHS are stacked up in “label-major” order.)
The RHS probability vector acts like a prior probability on
the labels of points. The LHS is analogous to a posterior,
re-estimated after we see the predictions of the committee
of look-ahead classiﬁers. This equation can be understood
from either a histogram viewpoint or an expectation viewpoint. From the histogram viewpoint, we are accumulating
the probability that a classiﬁer selected randomly from the
committee says “1” to the event (Yk = l). From the expectation viewpoint, we are computing over the entire committee an expectation for the binary-valued classiﬁer conﬁdence in the event (Yk = l). (This duality exists because
the expectation of a binary-valued random variable E[X] is
the same as P(X = 1).)
From Equation 8, we can obtain an estimate for the class
probabilities by taking P(Ym = n) = 1/L · 1 on the RHS
and multiplying by 1/M · B.
In principle, this process
can be iterated to reﬁne the probabilities. In the limit, the
probabilities satisfy the solution of a ﬁxed point problem
p = 1/M · Bp. Solving this equation amounts to ﬁnding the eigenvector of B/M corresponding to eigenvalue
1. (Since the (1 × M · L) vector 1T is a left eigenvector
of B/M with (left) eigenvalue 1, we know that there exists
a right eigenvector of B/M with eigenvalue 1.) Although
the iterative and ﬁxed point approaches are elegant, in practice we have found from a limited set of experiments that
a single iteration of Equation 8 with uniform probabilities
on the RHS yields better results. We are still studying this
issue, but believe the main cause is that Equation 8 does
not adequately reﬂect the possibility that look-ahead classi-
ﬁers trained from a ﬁnite amount of data are simply wrong.
Iterating causes the estimation procedure to develop unwarranted certainty about the class labels.
2.3. Computational Cost
The MEE algorithm described above, although intuitively appealing, is somewhat expensive computationally.
In particular, the algorithm is O(L3N 3) with N the number
of unlabeled images and L the number of classes. A typical run on 2Ghz Pentium using N = 250 and L = 2 and a
combination of Matlab and C code takes about 30 minutes.
We consider how the beneﬁts of active learning change
with the size of the pool of unlabeled images. Figure 4 addresses this point and shows that increasing the pool tends
to constantly increase the performance of Entropy-based active learning over random sampling.
Given the beneﬁt of increasing pool size, we consider
methods of reducing the computational cost. One possibility is to use only a ﬁxed number of images M when calculating the expected entropy for a particular images, such
that we reduce the O(L3N 3) to O(L3N ˜N 2) for some constant ˜N < N. In particular, we randomly sample a set M
unlabeled images from the entire pool of unlabeled images
to compute the entropy with. Figure 5 illustrates the effects
of this sub-sampling of the unlabeled pool and shows that
performance tends to drop off fast when subsets are used.
There are many other methods for increasing speed and we
leave these open as topics for further research. However we
note that we were able to easily run experiments using 250
unlabeled images and a non-optimized code.
2.4. Multi-Return Active Learning
So far, we have viewed active learning as presenting a
single image (or a probability distribution w for selecting a
single image) to the oracle for each round of labeling. In
Changing Number Unlabelled
Number Unlabelled Points
Iters (Rand − Entropy)
Figure 4. Results from four categories showing how the difference
in time (iterations) required for random and MEE to reach 85% of
maximum performance varies as the size of the unlabeled pool is
increased. The relative advantage of active learning is clearly more
pronounced when the unlabeled pool is larger.
Subsampling CD
Test Performance
Entropy 100
Entropy 250
Figure 5. Here we consider the effects of only using a subset of the
available images to compute the entropy. X-axis: the number of
images labeled. Y-axis: performance on a separate test set of data.
There are a total of 250 unlabeled images available, and each line
represents using a subset of those points. Red represents randomly
choosing images. Note that performance falls off quickly as less
images are used to compute entropy, i.e. best performance results
from using all 250 images in the unlabeled pool. Results shown
are using the category ‘CD’, but are typical of other categories as
practice, it will often be preferable to return a set of images
rather than the single most informative image. Consider
web image search. The interaction with the user would be
cumbersome if they were asked to label only a single image at a time; instead, it would be preferable for the user to
label a set of images. There are also technical reasons for
returning multiple images at once as illustrated in Figure 6.
Analogous to greedy forward feature selection algorithms,
single-return active learning picks three images that do not
cover the space as well as if the three images were picked at
once as a unit.
Multi-return active learning using the minimum expected entropy principle requires only a minor modiﬁcation
to Algorithm 2.1. In particular, the loop over unlabeled images (xi) is replaced by a loop over subsets of unlabeled
images of size s. For each subset, we consider the Ls possible assignments of labels to the elements in the subset and
Comparison: Single Return
Comparison: Multiple Return
Figure 6. (Left) Single-return active learning applied three times.
(Right) Multi-return active learning applied once with subsets of
size 3. Clearly, the multi-return approach is able to generate a
more optimal covering of the space.
# Categories
93 (82/134)
178 (56/402)
Table 1. Table detailing the large collection of images obtained
from web image searches. The total number of categories, the total
number of images, the mean and min / max number of images in
each of the categories labeled as ‘Good’ and the same for ‘Bad’.
compute an expected entropy as before. The subset that results in the lowest expected entropy is then presented to the
oracle for labeling. Exhaustively considering all subsets of
size s in each active learning round is clearly only feasible
for small s; however, given that the information value of a
proposed subset can be easily evaluated (using the expected
entropy), other heuristics can be incorporated to focus consideration onto a smaller number of promising subsets.
3. Experiments
There are two key sets of experiments we performed.
The ﬁrst is inspired by Figure 1 and involves increasing the
precision of web image searches. This is essentially a twocategory task, discriminating images that match the target
concept from those that do not. The second set of experiments considers many (up to 10) categories and is inspired
by an autonomous agent exploring a world.
3.1. Web Image Searching
Consider again Figure 1 in which the user typed
‘Cougar’ into an image search engine. The idea is that the
user must label a set of images in order to reﬁne the search
as most of the returned images do not contain the category
of interest. In this case active learning can provide a drastic
increase in speed by choosing the MIUP. In this section we
explore experiments designed to mimic just such situations.
Image Search Dataset
Our goal in this set of experiments was to mimic as closely
as possible a real image search on the web. We collected
images returned from actual text-based web image searches
with Google and PicSearch.
In order to obtain comprehensive statistics we collected images using 137 keywords.
We next asked 3 sorters to label the images as one of three
classes: ‘Good’, ‘Ok’, ‘Bad’. The ‘Good’ images contain
images of the class of interest while the ‘Bad’ images do
not contain the object of interest 3. We removed all duplicate images using software which ﬁrst extracts features using the Lowe Difference of Gaussian detector and SIFT descriptors and then compares these sets of features across
all images in the category. If there are more than 100 good
matches between two images, the images are considered to
be identical and one is removed. For our experiments we
only used images from the ‘Good’ and ‘Bad’ categories.
This is the largest data-set of its type to our knowledge. Table 1 gives some statistics on the data-set we collected. The
full set of category names are too numerous to list here, but
are provided in the Supplementary Materials.
Our experiments were conducted as follows. For each category we combined the ‘Good’ and ‘Bad’ images into a
single large pool.
From this pool we randomly selected
a set of 75 testing images. The rest of the images were
used as the pool of unlabeled data for active learning. We
then followed Algorithm 2.1 and iteratively chose images
to label using MEE active learning. We also considered alternative approaches including: (1) random sampling (passive learning) choosing a image, (2) choosing the most confused image, and (2) choosing the unlabeled image with
highest kernel density (see Appendix 1 for an overview
of these alternative-methods. In all cases, kernel nearest
neighbor using the Spatial Pyramid Match Kernel of Lazebnik was used as the classiﬁer in our experiments (see
Appendix 2 for an overview or for full details).
How do we quantify performance? In these experiments
we are interested in the precision for the top 25 closest images. In other words what percentage of the 25 closest returned images are in the ‘Good’ class? Let pmax be the
maximum possible performance on the test set (this occurs
when all images in the initial unlabeled pool get labeled).
Now consider the number of images, si, i ∈(0, 1, 2, 3)
which need to be labeled to achieve 85% of pmax where
i indexes over the various active learning methods. Results
showing the performance of MEE active learning versus the
alternative methods are presented in Figures 2 and 7. Note
that MEE signiﬁcantly outperforms all of these competing
methods. In fact we reach 85% of pmax up to 10× faster
using MEE to pick the MIUP when compared to random
and perform on average close to 3× better than random on
these data-sets.
3We will make both the positive images and negative images publicly
available pending acceptance.
Num Imgs Labeled (Entropy)
Num Imgs Labeled (MCP)
Entropy vs MCP
Mean=2.92 (Median=2.20)
Log2 ( srand / sent )
Num Imgs Labeled (Entropy)
Num Imgs Labeled (Parzen)
Entropy vs Parzen
Mean=2.27 (Median=1.59)
Log2 ( srand / sent )
Figure 7. Comparison of MEE active learning with: (top) choosing
the Most Confused Point and (bottom) the Maximum Unlabeled
Density (sampling the highest density of unlabeled points.
3.2. Exploration Agent
The next set of experiments looks at multiple classes.
We motivate this experiment by considering an agent traveling through a real or virtual world (for instance a mobile
robot exploring the environment or a web-crawler). This
agent will be confronted with a wealth of visual information. With minimal supervision can the agent discover and
learn to recognize multiple categories of objects? Given that
there is a considerable cost associated with obtaining a label
for any particular image (e.g., the agent must ask a human
observer whose time is precious), for which images should
the agent request labels?
Open-World Learning Experiments
In these experiments, the unlabeled pool has examples from
many object categories. Initially our agent has no knowledge of the world and assumes there is only a single object class. The agent chooses informative images via active
learning and asks an oracle to label these images; the oracle returns the true label of the unknown image. As new
classes are encountered the agent updates its knowledge of
the number of classes which exist in its world (L) increases.
Here, we use a slightly different criteria from the Image
Search experiments to assess performance. Consider that in
this scenario the agent is seeking to build the best classiﬁers
for visual categorization, and thus we consider the classiﬁcation performance on a separate set of test data. Our ex-
Entropy Iters
Rand Iters
Entropy vs Rand (Mult−Class)
Figure 8. Similar to Fig. 2 but multi-class experiments. Each point
represents an experiment indicated by the legend. The legend indicates two numbers: the ﬁrst is the number of classes used and the
second is the size of the pool of unlabeled data. Each point is the
average over 25 iterations, where each iteration involves choosing
a random set of categories and training data for each category.
periments were conducted as follows. First we selected the
Good examples from L different categories. From these we
randomly choose a set of N images to form U, the pool of
unlabeled examples. The rest of the images are used as a
test set with which to evaluate the performance of our algorithm.
When Have Enough Images Been Labeled?
A natural question which arises is: when has the agent
learned enough about the environment? Or, when should
the agent stop querying the oracle? Our MEE framework allows us to estimate the entropy H(t) after each active learning iteration and hence the amount of information gained
after each active learning iteration can be approximated by:
I(t) = H(t) −H(t−1). In Figure 9 we consider the relationship between I(t) and the performance gains on the test
set. A strong relationship exists between the change in information and the change in performance of the system. We
can use MEE to estimate when we have acquired sufﬁcient
information about the unlabeled images.
4. Discussion
We have developed a novel ”active learning” algorithm
that enables hundreds of complex object categories to be
recognized with a minimal amount of labeled training data.
Our approach uses a principled, information-theoretic criteria to select the most informative images to be labeled.
The technique is well-deﬁned for any underlying classi-
ﬁer (kernel nearest neighbor, SVM, etc.), extends naturally
to multi-class and multi-return settings, and can automatically determine when enough labeled training data has been
acquired to insure near-maximal recognition performance.
Against passive learning and a variety of alternative active learning approaches, our method consistently achieves
near-maximal performance with one-half to one-third the
Expected Entropy Slope
Remaining Possible Perf
Stopping Criteria?
Num. Iters to Reach 0.05 Slope
Figure 9. Can we use MEE to determine when to stop learning?
(Left) Scatter plot. X-axis: the slope of the MEE at a particular iteration t. Y-axis: the remaining performance gain possible
at the same iteration t (the difference between the current performance and the maximum possible performance). Dotted black line
is a regression over all the points. A steep entropy slope correlates with large potential increases in performance, indicating we
should keep learning. A shallow entropy slope (near zero) correlates with little potential for performance increase indicating we
should stop sampling. (Right) Histogram for different 5 class 200
unlabeled image experiments. The x-axis is the time taken to reach
a particular slope value less than .05. It takes different experiments
longer to reach a shallow slope, and from the left ﬁgure, a shallow
slope indicates very little potential for performance increase, we
can label substantially fewer images for some experiments using
MEE as a stopping criteria.
number of training and in some cases the improvement is
10x or more.
Appendix 1: Other Active Learning Methods
We compare the MEE approach to two other approaches:
the Most-Confused-Point (MCP) and Maximum Unlabeled
Density (MUD). MCP follows the spirit of , choosing
the image which is most confused between the different
classes. To calculate the most confused image, we follow
the paradigm of Sec 2.2 to estimate class probabilities for
each image. The MCP based on these probability estimates
is selected. The MUD technique estimates a probability
density p(x|U) over the unlabeled points using Parzen Window kernel density estimation. The unlabeled point with the
maximum probability density is selected for labeling, i.e.,
x(t) = arg maxj
N K(xj, xi) where i and j are indices for unlabeled images. The MUD technique is comparable to clustering the unlabeled data and choosing a point
near the center of the most prominent cluster. The drawback is that we do not distinguish between high densities of
unlabeled points and high densities of unlabeled points with
uncertain labels. Figure 7 compares these approaches.
Appendix 2: Pyramid Match Kernel
Spatial Pyramid Matching was used as it performs
well on data-sets similar to those in this paper and is
fast. For each image, we extract a set of SIFT features .
10,000 features are chosen at random from a training set of
images in order to form a vocabulary of M = 200 words,
and the vocabulary is used to map each subsequent feature
to one of the 200 words. The image is split into a 4 × 4 grid
and the number of times each of the 200 features is found
in each of the 16 bins is counted. The matching kernel is
computed using the above set of 4 × 4 × M histograms.
Matching means ﬁnding the number of common elements
in any two bins. If the counts in two bins are n1 and n2 the
match is min(n1, n2). Matching is computed with spatial
information and appearance.
Acknowledgements
This research has been carried out in part at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, under contract
with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA).
Funding provided under the Applied Information Systems Research Program. A.H. and P.P. were supported by N00014-06-1-