GCTA: A Tool for Genome-wide Complex Trait Analysis
Jian Yang,1,* S. Hong Lee,1 Michael E. Goddard,2,3 and Peter M. Visscher1
For most human complex diseases and traits, SNPs identiﬁed by genome-wide association studies (GWAS) explain only a small fraction
of the heritability. Here we report a user-friendly software tool called genome-wide complex trait analysis (GCTA), which was developed
based on a method we recently developed to address the ‘‘missing heritability’’ problem. GCTA estimates the variance explained by all
the SNPs on a chromosome or on the whole genome for a complex trait rather than testing the association of any particular SNP to the
trait. We introduce GCTA’s ﬁve main functions: data management, estimation of the genetic relationships from SNPs, mixed linear
model analysis of variance explained by the SNPs, estimation of the linkage disequilibrium structure, and GWAS simulation. We focus
on the function of estimating the variance explained by all the SNPs on the X chromosome and testing the hypotheses of dosage
compensation. The GCTA software is a versatile tool to estimate and partition complex trait variation with large GWAS data sets.
Despite the great success of genome-wide association
studies (GWAS), which have identiﬁed hundreds of SNPs
conferring the genetic variation of human complex
diseases and traits,1 the genetic architecture of human
complex traits still remains largely unexplained. For most
traits, the associated SNPs from GWAS only explain a small
fraction of the heritability.2,3 There has not been any
consensus on the explanation of the ‘‘missing heritability.’’
Possible explanations include a large number of common
variants with small effects, rare variants with large effects,
and DNA structural variation.2,4 We recently proposed a
method of estimating the total amount of phenotypic
variance captured by all SNPs on the current generation
of commercial genotyping arrays and estimated that
~45% of the phenotypic variance for human height can
be explained by all common SNPs.5 Thus, most of the
heritability for height is hiding rather than missing
because of many SNPs with small effects.5,6 In contrast to
single-SNP association analysis, the basic concept behind
our method is to ﬁt the effects of all the SNPs as random
effects by a mixed linear model (MLM),
y ¼ Xb þ Wu þ 3 with varðyÞ ¼ V ¼ WW0s2
(Equation 1)
where y is an n 3 1 vector of phenotypes with n being the
sample size, b is a vector of ﬁxed effects such as sex, age,
and/or one or more eigenvectors from principal component analysis (PCA), u is a vector of SNP effects with
u  Nð0; Is2
uÞ, I is an n 3 n identity matrix, and 3 is a vector
of residual effects with 3  Nð0; Is2
3Þ. W is a standardized
genotype matrix with the ijth element wij ¼ ðxij  2piÞ=
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2pið1  piÞ
, where xij is the number of copies of the reference allele for the ith SNP of the jth individual and pi is the
frequency of the reference allele. If we deﬁne A ¼ WW0=N
and deﬁne s2
g as the variance explained by all the SNPs,
u, with N being the number of SNPs, then
Equation 1 will be equivalent to:7–9
y ¼ Xb þ g þ 3 with V ¼ As2
(Equation 2)
where g is an n 3 1 vector of the total genetic effects of the
individuals with g  Nð0; As2
gÞ, and A is interpreted as the
genetic relationship matrix (GRM) between individuals.
We can therefore estimate s2
g by the restricted maximum
likelihood (REML) approach,10 relying on the GRM estimated from all the SNPs. Here we report a versatile tool
called genome-wide complex trait analysis (GCTA), which
implements the method of estimating variance explained
by all SNPs, and extend the method to partition the genetic
variance onto each of the chromosomes and also to estimate the variance explained by the X chromosome and
test for dosage compensation in females. We developed
GCTA in ﬁve function domains: data management, estimation of the GRM from a set of SNPs, estimation of the variance explained by all the SNPs on a single chromosome or
the whole genome, estimation of linkage disequilibrium
(LD) structure, and simulation.
Estimation of the Genetic Relationship
from Genome-wide SNPs
One of the core functions of GCTA is to estimate the
genetic relationships between individuals from the SNPs.
relationship
between individuals j and k can be estimated by the
following equation:
(Equation 3)
We provide a function to iteratively exclude one individual of a pair whose relationship is greater than a speci-
ﬁed cutoff value, e.g., 0.025, while retaining the maximum
number of individuals in the data. For data collected from
family or twin studies, we recommend that users estimate
the genetic relationships with all of the autosomal SNPs
and then use this option to exclude close relatives. The
1Queensland Statistical Genetics Laboratory, Queensland Institute of Medical Research, 300 Herston Road, Brisbane, Queensland 4006, Australia;
2Department of Food and Agricultural Systems, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia; 3Biosciences Research Division, Department
of Primary Industries, Bundoora, Victoria 3086, Australia
*Correspondence: 
DOI 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.11.011. 2011 by The American Society of Human Genetics. All rights reserved.
The American Journal of Human Genetics 88, 76–82, January 7, 2011
reason for exclusion is that the objective of the analysis is
to estimate genetic variation captured by all the SNPs, just
as GWAS does for single SNPs. Including close relatives,
such as parent-offspring pairs and siblings, would result
in the estimate of genetic variance being driven by the
phenotypic correlations for these pairs (just as in pedigree
analysis), and this estimate could be a biased estimate of
total genetic variance, for example because of common
environmental effects. Even if the estimate is not biased,
its interpretation is different from the estimate from ‘‘unrelated’’ individuals: a pedigree-based estimator captures the
contribution from all causal variants (across the entire
allele frequency spectrum), whereas our method captures
the contribution from causal variants that are in LD with
the genotyped SNPs.
As a by-product, we provide a function in GCTA to
calculate the eigenvectors of the GRM, which is asymptotically equivalent to those from the PCA implemented in
EIGENSTRAT11 because the GRM (Ajk) deﬁned in GCTA is
approximately half of the covariance matrix (Jjk) used in
EIGENSTRAT. The only purpose of developing this function is to calculate eigenvectors and then include them
in the model as covariates to capture variance due to
population structure. More sophisticated analyses of the
population structure can be found in programs such as
EIGENSTRAT11 and STRUCTURE.12
Estimation of the Variance Explained by Genomewide SNPs by REML
The GRM estimated from the SNPs can be ﬁtted subsequently in an MLM to estimate the variance explained
by these SNPs via the REML method.10 Previously, we
included only one genetic factor in the model. Here we
extend the model in a general form as
where gi is a vector of random genetic effects, which could
be the total genetic effects for the whole genome or for
a single chromosome. In this model, the phenotypic variance (s2
P) is partitioned into the variance explained by
each of the genetic factors and the residual variance,
i is the variance of the ith genetic factor with its
corresponding GRM, Ai.
In GCTA, we provide ﬂexible options to specify different
genetic models. For example:
(1) To estimate the variance explained by all autosomal
SNPs, we can specify the model as y ¼ Xb þ g þ 3 with
3, where g is an n 3 1 vector of the aggregate
effects of all the autosomal SNPs for all of the individuals
and Ag is the GRM estimated from these SNPs. This model
is the same as Equation 2.
(2) To estimate the variance of genotype-environment
interaction effects (s2
ge), we can specify the model as
y ¼ Xb þ g þ ge þ 3 with V ¼ Ags2
ge is a vector of genotype-environment interaction effects
for all of the individuals with Age ¼ Ag for the pairs of individuals in the same environment and with Age ¼ 0 for the
pairs of individuals in different environments.
(3) To partition genetic variance onto each of the
22 autosomes, we can specify the model as y ¼ Xbþ
i¼1gi þ 3 with V ¼ P22
3 , where gi is a vector
of genetic effects attributed to the ith chromosome and
Ai is the GRM estimated from the SNPs on the ith chromosome.
GCTA implements the REML method via the average
information (AI) algorithm.13 In the REML iteration process, the estimates of variance components from the tth
iteration are updated by qðtþ1Þ ¼ qðtÞ þ ðAIðtÞÞ1vL=vqjqðtÞ,
where q is a vector of variance components (s2
3); L is the log likelihood function of the MLM
(ignoring the constant), L ¼ 1=2ðlogjVj þ logjX0V1Xjþ
y0PyÞ with P ¼ V1  V1XðX0V1XÞ1X0V1; AI is the
information
y0PA1PA1Py / y0PA1PArPy
y0PArPA1Py / y0PArPArPy
and vL=vq is a vector of ﬁrst derivatives of the log likelihood function with respect to each variance component,
vL=vq ¼ 1=2
trðPA1Þ  y0PA1Py
trðPArÞ  y0PArPy
trðPÞ  y0PPy
775.13 At the beginning
of the iteration process, all of the components are initialized
by an arbitrary value, i.e., s2ð0Þ
P=ðr þ 1Þ, which is subsequently updated by the expectation maximization (EM)
algorithm, s2ð1Þ
y0PAiPy þ trðs2ð0Þ
The EM algorithm is used as an initial step to determine
the direction of the iteration updates because it is robust
to poor starting values. After one EM iteration, GCTA
switches to the AI algorithm for the remaining iterations
until the iteration converges with the criteria of L(t þ 1) –
L(t) < 104, where L(t) is the log likelihood of the tth iteration.
In the iteration process, any component that escapes from
the parameter space (i.e., its estimate is negative) will be
set to 106 3 s2
P. If a component keeps escaping from the
parameter space, it will be constrained at 106 3 s2
From the REML analysis, GCTA has an option to provide
the best linear unbiased prediction (BLUP) of the total
genetic effect for all individuals. BLUP is widely used by
plant and animal breeders to quantify the breeding value
of individuals in artiﬁcial selection programs14 and also
by evolutionary geneticists.15 Consider Equations 1 and
2, i.e., y ¼ Xb þ Wu þ 3 and y ¼ Xb þ g þ 3. Because these
two models are mathematically equivalent,7–9 the BLUP of
g can be transformed to the BLUP of u by bu ¼ W0A1 bg=N.
Here the estimate of ui corresponds to the coefﬁcient
The American Journal of Human Genetics 88, 76–82, January 7, 2011
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2pið1  piÞ
. We could obtain the BLUP of SNP
effects in a discovery set by GCTA and predict genetic
values of the individuals in a validation set (bgnew ¼
Wnew bu). For example, GCTA could be used to predict
SNP effects in a discovery set, and the SNP effects could
be used in PLINK to predict whole-genome proﬁles via
the scoring approach in a validation set. If the predictions
are unbiased, then the regression slope of the observed
phenotypes on the predicted genetic values is 1.14 In that
case, the genetic value calculated based on the BLUP of
SNP effects is an unbiased predictor of the true genetic
value in the validation set (gnew), in the sense that
EðgnewjbgnewÞ ¼ bgnew.16,17 Prediction analyses of human
complex traits have demonstrated that many SNPs that
do not pass the genome-wide signiﬁcance level have
substantial contribution to the prediction.18,19 This option
is therefore useful for the whole-genome prediction analysis with all of the SNPs, irrespective of their association
Estimation of the Variance Explained by the SNPs
on the X Chromosome
The method of estimating the genetic relationship from
the X chromosome is different to that for the autosomal
SNPs, because males have only one X chromosome. We
modiﬁed Equation 3 for the X chromosome as:
for a male-male pair;
for a female-female pair; and
for a male-female pair;
ij are the number of copies of the reference
allele for an X chromosome SNP for a male and a female,
respectively.
Assuming the male-female genetic correlation to be 1,
the X-linked phenotypic covariance between a pair of individuals is:20
XðMÞ for a male-male pair;
XðFÞ for a female-female pair; and
sXðMÞsXðFÞ for a male-female pair;
XðMÞ and s2
XðFÞ are the genetic variance attributed to
the X chromosome for males and females, respectively.
The relative values of s2
XðMÞ and s2
XðFÞ depend on the
assumption made regarding dosage compensation for X
chromosome genes. There are two alleles per locus in
females, but only one in males. If we assume that each
allele has a similar effect on the trait (i.e., no dosage compensation), the genetic variance on the X chromosome for
females is twice that for males: i.e., s2
XðFÞ ¼ 2s2
X for a male-male pair;
X for a female-female pair; and
X for a male-female pair:
This can be implemented by redeﬁning GRM for the X
chromosome
¼ AX for female-female pairs, and AND
for male-female pairs. If we assume that each allele in
females has only half the effect of an allele in males (i.e.,
full dosage compensation), the X-linked genetic variance
for females is half that for males: i.e., s2
XðMÞ. Thus,
X for a male-male pair;
X for a female-female pair; and
X for a male-female pair:
Therefore, the raw AX matrix should be parameterized as
X ¼ 2AX for male-male pairs, AFD
X ¼ AX for femalefemale pairs, and AND
AX for male-female pairs.
The third possibility is to assume equal genetic variance
on the X chromosome for males and females, i.e., s2
XðMÞ, in which case the AX matrix is not redeﬁned
y ¼ Xb þ gX þ g þ 3, where gX is a vector of genetic
attributable
chromosome,
varðgXÞ ¼ AND
compensation,
varðgXÞ ¼ AFD
assuming full dosage compensation,
and varðgXÞ ¼ AXs2
X assuming equal X-linked genetic variance for males and females. Test of dosage compensation
can be achieved by comparing the likelihoods of model
ﬁtting under the three assumptions.
Estimation of the Variance Explained
by Genome-wide SNPs for a Case-Control Study
The methodology described above is also applicable for
case-control data, for which the estimate of variance explained by the SNPs corresponds to variation on the
observed 0–1 scale. Under the assumption of a thresholdliability model for a disease, i.e., disease liability on the
underlying scale follows standard normal distribution,21
the estimate of variance explained by the SNPs on the
The American Journal of Human Genetics 88, 76–82, January 7, 2011
observed 0–1 scale can be transformed to that on the unobserved continuous liability scale by a linear transformation.22 The relationship between additive genetic variance
on the observed 0–1 and unobserved liability scales was
proposed more than a half century ago,23,24 and we
recently extended this transformation to account for ascertainment bias in a case-control study, i.e., a much higher
proportion of cases in the sample than in the general population (unpublished data). We provide options in GCTA
to analyze a binary trait and to transform the estimate on
the 0–1 scale to that on the liability scale with an adjustment for ascertainment bias. There is an important caveat
in applying the methods described herein to case-control
data. Any batch, plate, or other technical artifact that
causes allele frequencies between case and control on
average to be more different than that under the null
hypothesis stating that the samples come from the same
population will contribute to the estimation of spurious
genetic variation, because cases will appear to be more
related to other cases than to controls. Therefore, stringent
quality control is essential when applying GCTA to casecontrol data. Quantitative traits are less likely to suffer
from technical genotyping artifacts because they will
generally not lead to spurious association between continuous phenotypes and genotypes.
Estimation of the Inbreeding Coefﬁcient
from Genome-wide SNPs
Apart from estimating the genetic relatedness between
individuals, GCTA also has a function to estimate the
inbreeding coefﬁcient (F) from SNP data, i.e., the relationship between haplotypes within an individual. Two estimates have been used: one based on the variance of additive genetic values (diagonal of the SNP-derived GRM)
and the other based on SNP homozygosity (implemented
in PLINK).25 Let (1 – pi)2 þ pi(1 – pi)F, 2pi(1 – pi)(1 – F),
2 þ pi(1 – pi)F be the frequencies of the three genotypes of a SNP i and let hi ¼ 2pi(1 – pi). The estimate based
on the variance of additive genotype values is
i ¼ ½xi  EðxiÞ2=hi  1 ¼
2=hi  1 and var
¼ ð1  hiÞ=hi þ 7ð1  2hiÞF=hi  F2;
where xi is the number of copies of the reference allele for
the ith SNP. This is a special case of Equation 3 for a single
SNP when j ¼ k. The estimate based upon excess homozygosity is
i ¼ ½Oð#homÞ  Eð#homÞ=½1  Eð#homÞ
¼ 1  xið2  xiÞ=hi and var
¼ ð1  hiÞ=hi
 ð1  2hiÞF=hi  F2;
where O(# hom) and E(# hom) are the observed and expected number of homozygous genotypes in the sample,
respectively. Both estimators are unbiased estimates of F
in the sense that EðbF
ijFÞ ¼ EðbF
i jFÞ ¼ F, but their sampling
variances are dependent on allele frequency, i.e., varðbF
i Þ ¼ (1 – hi) / hi if F ¼ 0. In addition, the covariance
between the two estimators is (3hi – 1) / hi þ (1 – 2hi)F /
hi – F2, so that the sampling covariance between the estimators is (3hi – 1) / hi and the sampling correlation is
(3hi – 1) / (1 – hi) when F ¼ 0. We proposed an estimator
based upon the correlation between uniting gametes:5
hi and var
¼ 1 þ 2ð1  2hiÞF=hi  F2:
is also an unbiased estimator of F in the sense that
i jFÞ ¼ F. If F ¼ 0, varðbF
i Þ ¼ 1 regardless of allele
frequency, which is smaller than the sampling variance
i , i.e., 1 % (1 – hi) / hi. When 0 < F < 1/3, bF
also has a smaller variance than bF
i . In GCTA, we
use 1 þ bF
rather than 1 þ bF
i to calculate the diagonal
of the GRM. For multiple SNPs, we average the estimates
over all of the SNPs, i.e., bF ¼ 1=NPN
Estimating LD Structure
In a standard GWAS, particularly with a large sample size,
the mean (lmean) or median (lmedian) of the test statistics
for single-SNP associations often deviates from its expected
value under the null hypothesis of no association between
any SNP and the phenotype, which is usually interpreted
as the effect due to population stratiﬁcation and/or cryptic
relatedness.11,26,27 An alternative explanation is that polygenic variation causes the observed inﬂated test statistic.18
To predict the genomic inﬂation factors, lmean and lmedian,
from polygenic parameters such as the total amount of
variance that is explained by all SNPs, we need to quantify
the LD structure between SNPs and putative causal variants
(unpublished data). GCTA provides a function to search for
all the SNPs in LD with the ‘‘causal variants’’ (mimicked by
a set of SNPs chosen by the user). Given a causal variant, we
use simple regression to test for SNPs in LD with the causal
variant within d Mb distance in either direction. PLINK has
an option (‘‘show targets’’) to select SNPs in LD with a set of
target SNPs with LD r2 larger than a user-speciﬁed cutoff
value. This function is very useful to distinguish independent association signals but less suited to predict lmean and
lmedian, because the test statistics of the SNPs in modest LD
with causal variants (SNPs at Mb distance with low r2) will
also be inﬂated to a certain extent, and these test statistics
will contribute to the genomic inﬂation factors.
GWAS Simulation
We provided a function to simulate GWAS data based on the
observed genotype data. For a quantitative trait, the phenotypes are simulated by the simple additive genetic model
y ¼ Wu þ 3, where the notation is the same as above. Given
a set of SNPs assigned as causal variants, the effects of the
causal variants are generated from a standard normal distribution, and the residual effects are generated from a normal
distribution with mean of 0 and variance of s2
gð1=h2  1Þ,
The American Journal of Human Genetics 88, 76–82, January 7, 2011
g is the empirical variance of Wu and h2 is the user
speciﬁed heritability. For a case-control study, assuming
a threshold-liability model, disease liabilities are simulated
in the same way as that for the phenotypes of a quantitative
trait. Any individual with disease liability exceeding
a certain threshold T is assigned to be a case and a control
otherwise, where T is the threshold of normal distribution
truncating the proportion of K (disease prevalence). The
only purpose of this function is to do a simple simulation
based on the observed genotype data. More complicated
simulation can be performed with programs such as ms,28
GENOME,29 FREGENE,30 and HAPGEN.31
Data Management
We chose the PLINK25 compact binary ﬁle format (*.bed,
*.bim, and *.fam) as the input data format for GCTA because
of its popularity in the genetics community and its efﬁciency of data storage. For the imputed dosage data, we
use the output ﬁles of the imputation program MACH32
(*.mldose.gz and *.mlinfo.gz) as the inputs for GCTA. For
the convenience of analysis, we provide options to extract
a subset of individuals and/or SNPs and to ﬁlter SNPs based
on certain criteria, such as chromosome position, minor
allele frequency (MAF), and imputation R2 (for the imputed
data). However, we do not provide functions for a thorough
quality control (QC) of the data, such as Hardy-Weinberg
equilibrium test and missingness, because these functions
have been well developed in many other genetic analysis
packages, e.g., PLINK, GenABEL,33 and SNPTEST.34 We
assume that the data have been cleaned by a standard QC
process before entering into GCTA.
Estimating Total Heritability
The method implemented in GCTA is to estimate the variance explained by chromosome- or genome-wide SNPs
rather than the trait heritability. Estimating the heritability
(i.e., variance explained by all the causal variants), however,
relies on the genetic relationship at causal variants that is
predicted with error by the genetic relationship derived
from the SNPs as a result of imperfect tagging. We have
previously established that the prediction error is c þ 1 / N,
with c depending on the distribution of the MAF of causal
variants. We therefore developed a method based on simple
regression to correct for the prediction error by
bAjk; jsk;
where b ¼ 1  ðc þ 1=NÞ=varðAjkÞ. The estimate of variance
explained by all of the SNPs after such adjustment is an
unbiased estimate of heritability only if the assumption
about the MAF distribution of causal variants is correct.
Efﬁciency of GCTA Computing Algorithm
GCTA implements the REML method based on the variance-covariance matrix V and the projection matrix P.
In some of the mixed model analysis packages, such as
ASREML,35 to avoid the inversion of the n 3 n V matrix,
people usually use Gaussian elimination of the mixed
model equations (MME) to obtain the AI matrix based
on sparse matrix techniques. The SNP-derived GRM
matrix, however, is typically dense, so the sparse matrix
technique will bring an extra cost of memory and CPU
time. Moreover, the dimension of MME depends on the
number of random effects in the model, whereas the V
matrix does not. For example, when ﬁtting the 22 chromosomes simultaneously in the model, the dimension of
MME is 22n 3 22n (ignoring the ﬁxed effects), whereas
the dimension of V matrix is still n 3 n. We compared
the computational efﬁciency of GCTA and ASREML.
When the sample size is small, e.g., n < 3000, both
GCTA and ASREML take a few minutes to run. When the
sample size is large, e.g., n > 10,000, especially when ﬁtting
multiple GRMs, it takes days for ASREML to ﬁnish the analysis, whereas GCTA needs only a few hours.
System Requirements
We have released executable versions of GCTA for the
three major operating systems: MS Windows, Linux/
Unix, and Mac OS. We have also released the source codes
so that users can compile them for some speciﬁc platforms.
GCTA requires a large amount of memory when calculating the GRM or performing an REML analysis with
multiple genetic components. For example, it requires
~4.8 GB memory to calculate the GRM for a data set with
3925 individuals genotyped by 294,831 SNPs, and it takes
~4 CPU hours (AMD Opteron 2.8 GHz) to ﬁnish the
computation. We therefore recommend using the 64-bit
version of GCTA for large memory support.
Nonadditive Genetic Variance
The analysis approach we have adapted is a logical extension of estimation methods based on pedigrees. It allows
estimation of additive genetic variation that is captured
by SNP arrays and is therefore informative with respect
to the genetic architecture of complex traits. The estimate
of variance captured by all of the SNPs obtained in GCTA is
directly comparable to the heritability estimated from
pedigree analysis in family and twin studies, as well as
the variance explained by GWAS hits, so that missing
and hiding heritability can be quantiﬁed.5 Other sources
of genetic variations such as dominance, gene-gene interaction, and gene-environment interaction are also important for complex trait variation but are less relevant to
the ‘‘missing heritability’’ problem if the total heritability
refers to the narrow-sense heritability, i.e., the proportion
of phenotypic variance due to additive genetic variance.
The current version of GCTA only provides functions to
estimate and partition the variances of additive and
additive-environment interaction effects. It is technically
feasible to extend the analysis to include dominance
interaction
However, the power to detect the high-order genetic
The American Journal of Human Genetics 88, 76–82, January 7, 2011
variation will be limited, i.e., the sampling variance of estimated variance components will be very large. Future
developments will also include options to do multivariate
analyses, to read genotype or imputed probability data in
different formats, and to implement other applications of
whole-genome or chromosome segment approaches.
In summary, we have developed a versatile tool to estimate genetic relationships from genome-wide SNPs that
can subsequently be used to estimate variance explained
by SNPs via a mixed model approach. We provide ﬂexible
options to specify different genetic models to partition
genetic variance onto each of the chromosomes. We developed methods to estimate genetic relationships from the
SNPs on the X chromosome and to test the hypotheses
of dosage compensation. GCTA is not limited to the analysis of data on human complex traits, but in this report we
only use examples and speciﬁcations (e.g., the number of
autosomes) for humans.
Acknowledgments
We thank Bruce Weir for discussions on the sampling variance of
estimators of inbreeding coefﬁcients. We thank Allan McRae and
David Duffy for discussions and Anna Vinkhuyzen for software
testing. We acknowledge funding from the Australian National
Health and Medical Research Council (grants 389892 and
613672) and the Australian Research Council (grants DP0770096
and DP1093900).
Received: August 30, 2010
Revised: November 23, 2010
Accepted: November 29, 2010
Published online: December 16, 2010
Web Resources
The URLs for data presented herein are as follows:
Genome-wide Complex Trait Analysis (GCTA), 
edu.au/gcta
MACH 1.0: A Markov Chain-based haplotyper, 
umich.edu/csg/yli/mach
PLINK,