Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2016
VISUALIZING
UNDERSTANDING
Andrej Karpathy∗
Justin Johnson∗
Li Fei-Fei
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
{karpathy,jcjohns,feifeili}@cs.stanford.edu
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), and speciﬁcally a variant with Long Short-
Term Memory (LSTM), are enjoying renewed interest as a result of successful
applications in a wide range of machine learning problems that involve sequential
data. However, while LSTMs provide exceptional results in practice, the source
of their performance and their limitations remain rather poorly understood. Using character-level language models as an interpretable testbed, we aim to bridge
this gap by providing an analysis of their representations, predictions and error
types. In particular, our experiments reveal the existence of interpretable cells that
keep track of long-range dependencies such as line lengths, quotes and brackets.
Moreover, our comparative analysis with ﬁnite horizon n-gram models traces the
source of the LSTM improvements to long-range structural dependencies. Finally,
we provide analysis of the remaining errors and suggests areas for further study.
INTRODUCTION
Recurrent Neural Networks, and speciﬁcally a variant with Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)
Hochreiter & Schmidhuber , have recently emerged as an effective model in a wide variety of applications that involve sequential data. These include language modeling Mikolov et al.
 , handwriting recognition and generation Graves , machine translation Sutskever et al.
 ; Bahdanau et al. , speech recognition Graves et al. , video analysis Donahue
et al. and image captioning Vinyals et al. ; Karpathy & Fei-Fei .
However, both the source of their impressive performance and their shortcomings remain poorly
understood. This raises concerns of the lack of interpretability and limits our ability design better
architectures. A few recent ablation studies analyzed the effects on performance as various gates
and connections are removed Greff et al. ; Chung et al. . However, while this analysis
illuminates the performance-critical pieces of the architecture, it is still limited to examining the
effects only on the global level of the ﬁnal test set perplexity alone. Similarly, an often cited advantage of the LSTM architecture is that it can store and retrieve information over long time scales
using its gating mechanisms, and this ability has been carefully studied in toy settings Hochreiter
& Schmidhuber . However, it is not immediately clear that similar mechanisms can be effectively discovered and utilized by these networks in real-world data, and with the common use of
simple stochastic gradient descent and truncated backpropagation through time.
To our knowledge, our work provides the ﬁrst empirical exploration of the predictions of LSTMs
and their learned representations on real-world data. Concretely, we use character-level language
models as an interpretable testbed for illuminating the long-range dependencies learned by LSTMs.
Our analysis reveals the existence of cells that robustly identify interpretable, high-level patterns
such as line lengths, brackets and quotes. We further quantify the LSTM predictions with comprehensive comparison to n-gram models, where we ﬁnd that LSTMs perform signiﬁcantly better
on characters that require long-range reasoning. Finally, we conduct an error analysis in which we
“peel the onion” of errors with a sequence of oracles. These results allow us to quantify the extent
of remaining errors in several categories and to suggest speciﬁc areas for further study.
∗Both authors contributed equally to this work.
 
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2016
RELATED WORK
Recurrent Networks. Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) have a long history of applications in
various sequence learning tasks Werbos ; Schmidhuber ; Rumelhart et al. . Despite their early successes, the difﬁculty of training simple recurrent networks Bengio et al. ;
Pascanu et al. has encouraged various proposals for improvements to their basic architecture. Among the most successful variants are the Long Short Term Memory networks Hochreiter &
Schmidhuber , which can in principle store and retrieve information over long time periods
with explicit gating mechanisms and a built-in constant error carousel. In the recent years there has
been a renewed interest in further improving on the basic architecture by modifying the functional
form as seen with Gated Recurrent Units Cho et al. , incorporating content-based soft attention mechanisms Bahdanau et al. ; Weston et al. , push-pop stacks Joulin & Mikolov
 , or more generally external memory arrays with both content-based and relative addressing
mechanisms Graves et al. . In this work we focus the majority of our analysis on the LSTM
due to its widespread popularity and a proven track record.
Understanding Recurrent Networks. While there is an abundance of work that modiﬁes or extends
the basic LSTM architecture, relatively little attention has been paid to understanding the properties
of its representations and predictions. Greff et al. recently conducted a comprehensive study
of LSTM components. Chung et al. evaluated GRU compared to LSTMs Chung et al. . Jozefowicz et al. conduct an automated architecture search of thousands of RNN architectures.
Pascanu et al. examined the effects of depth . These approaches study recurrent network
based only on the variations in the ﬁnal test set cross entropy, while we break down the performance
into interpretable categories and study individual error types. Most related to our work is Hermans
& Schrauwen , who also study the long-term interactions learned by recurrent networks in
the context of character-level language models, speciﬁcally in the context of parenthesis closing and
time-scales analysis. Our work complements their results and provides additional types of analysis.
Lastly, we are heavily inﬂuenced by work on in-depth analysis of errors in object detection Hoiem
et al. , where the ﬁnal mean average precision is similarly broken down and studied in detail.
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
We ﬁrst describe three commonly used recurrent network architectures (RNN, LSTM and the GRU),
then describe their used in sequence learning and ﬁnally discuss the optimization.
RECURRENT NEURAL NETWORK MODELS
The simplest instantiation of a deep recurrent network arranges hidden state vectors hl
t in a twodimensional grid, where t = 1 . . . T is thought of as time and l = 1 . . . L is the depth. The bottom
row of vectors h0
t = xt at depth zero holds the input vectors xt and each vector in the top row {hL
is used to predict an output vector yt. All intermediate vectors hl
t are computed with a recurrence
formula based on hl
t−1 and hl−1
. Through these hidden vectors, each output yt at time step t
becomes a function of all input vectors up to t, {x1, . . . , xt}. The precise mathematical form of the
recurrence (hl
t−1 , hl−1
t varies from model to model and we describe these details next.
Vanilla Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) has a recurrence of the form
t = tanh W l
where we assume that all h ∈Rn. The parameter matrix W l on each layer has dimensions [n × 2n]
and tanh is applied elementwise. Note that W l varies between layers but is shared through time.
We omit the bias vectors for brevity. Interpreting the equation above, the inputs from the layer below
in depth (hl−1
) and before in time (hl
t−1) are transformed and interact through additive interaction
before being squashed by tanh. This is known to be a weak form of coupling Sutskever et al. .
Both the LSTM and the GRU (discussed next) include more powerful multiplicative interactions.
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) Hochreiter & Schmidhuber was designed to address
the difﬁculties of training RNNs Bengio et al. . In particular, it was observed that the backpropagation dynamics caused the gradients in an RNN to either vanish or explode. It was later
found that the exploding gradient concern can be alleviated with a heuristic of clipping the gradients
at some maximum value Pascanu et al. . On the other hand, LSTMs were designed to mitigate the vanishing gradient problem. In addition to a hidden state vector hl
t, LSTMs also maintain a
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2016
memory vector cl
t. At each time step the LSTM can choose to read from, write to, or reset the cell
using explicit gating mechanisms. The precise form of the update is as follows:
t−1 + i ⊙g
t = o ⊙tanh(cl
Here, the sigmoid function sigm and tanh are applied element-wise, and W l is a [4n × 2n] matrix.
The three vectors i, f, o ∈Rn are thought of as binary gates that control whether each memory cell
is updated, whether it is reset to zero, and whether its local state is revealed in the hidden vector,
respectively. The activations of these gates are based on the sigmoid function and hence allowed to
range smoothly between zero and one to keep the model differentiable. The vector g ∈Rn ranges
between -1 and 1 and is used to additively modify the memory contents. This additive interaction
is a critical feature of the LSTM’s design, because during backpropagation a sum operation merely
distributes gradients. This allows gradients on the memory cells c to ﬂow backwards through time
uninterrupted for long time periods, or at least until the ﬂow is disrupted with the multiplicative
interaction of an active forget gate. Lastly, note that an implementation of the LSTM requires one
to maintain two vectors (hl
t) at every point in the network.
Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) Cho et al. recently proposed as a simpler alternative to the
LSTM that takes the form:
t = tanh(W l
t = (1 −z) ⊙hl
t−1 + z ⊙˜hl
r are [2n × 2n] and W l
x are [n × n]. The GRU has the interpretation of computing
a candidate hidden vector ˜hl
t and then smoothly interpolating towards it gated by z.
CHARACTER-LEVEL LANGUAGE MODELING
We use character-level language modeling as an interpretable testbed for sequence learning. In this
setting, the input to the network is a sequence of characters and the network is trained to predict
the next character in the sequence with a Softmax classiﬁer at each time step. Concretely, assuming
a ﬁxed vocabulary of K characters we encode all characters with K-dimensional 1-of-K vectors
{xt}, t = 1, . . . , T, and feed these to the recurrent network to obtain a sequence of D-dimensional
hidden vectors at the last layer of the network {hL
t }, t = 1, . . . , T. To obtain predictions for the next
character in the sequence we project this top layer of activations to a sequence of vectors {yt}, where
t and Wy is a [K × D] parameter matrix. These vectors are interpreted as holding the
(unnormalized) log probability of the next character in the sequence and the objective is to minimize
the average cross-entropy loss over all targets.
OPTIMIZATION
Following previous work Sutskever et al. we initialize all parameters uniformly in range
[−0.08, 0.08]. We use mini-batch stochastic gradient descent with batch size 100 and RMSProp
Dauphin et al. per-parameter adaptive update with base learning rate 2 × 10−3 and decay
0.95. These settings work robustly with all of our models. The network is unrolled for 100 time
steps. We train each model for 50 epochs and decay the learning rate after 10 epochs by multiplying
it with a factor of 0.95 after each additional epoch. We use early stopping based on validation
performance and cross-validate the amount of dropout for each model individually.
EXPERIMENTS
Datasets. Two datasets previously used in the context of character-level language models are the
Penn Treebank dataset Marcus et al. and the Hutter Prize 100MB of Wikipedia dataset Hutter
 . However, both datasets contain a mix of common language and special markup. Our goal is
not to compete with previous work but rather to study recurrent networks in a controlled setting and
on both ends on the spectrum of degree of structure. Therefore, we chose to use Leo Tolstoy’s War
and Peace (WP) novel, which consists of 3,258,246 characters of almost entirely English text with
minimal markup, and at the other end of the spectrum the source code of the Linux Kernel (LK). We
shufﬂed all header and source ﬁles randomly and concatenated them into a single ﬁle to form the
6,206,996 character long dataset. We split the data into train/val/test splits as 80/10/10 for WP and
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2016
War and Peace Dataset
1.449 1.442 1.540 1.446 1.401 1.396 1.398 1.373 1.472
1.277 1.227 1.279 1.417 1.286 1.277 1.230 1.226 1.253
1.189 1.137 1.141 1.342 1.256 1.239 1.198 1.164 1.138
1.161 1.092 1.082
1.170 1.201 1.077
Linux Kernel Dataset
1.355 1.331 1.366 1.407 1.371 1.383 1.335 1.298 1.357
1.149 1.128 1.177 1.241 1.120 1.220 1.154 1.125 1.150
1.026 0.972 0.998 1.171 1.116 1.116 1.039 0.991 1.026
0.952 0.840 0.846
0.943 0.861 0.829
GRU­2 (512)
GRU­3 (256)
GRU­1 (128)
LSTM­2 (512)
LSTM­1 (64)
GRU­1 (64)
LSTM­2 (256)
GRU­3 (128)
RNN­2 (256)
RNN­3 (128)
GRU­1 (512)
RNN­3 (64)
RNN­1 (64)
GRU­2 (128)
LSTM­2 (64)
RNN­1 (128)
LSTM­3 (512)
RNN­2 (64)
GRU­2 (256)
GRU­3 (64)
LSTM­1 (256)
LSTM­1 (128)
LSTM­3 (128)
GRU­2 (64)
LSTM­3 (256)
LSTM­1 (512)
LSTM­3 (64)
GRU­1 (256)
RNN­2 (128)
RNN­1 (256)
RNN­3 (256)
LSTM­2 (128)
GRU­3 (512)
Figure 1: Left: The test set cross-entropy loss for all models and datasets (low is good). Models
in each row have nearly equal number of parameters. The test set has 300,000 characters. The
standard deviation, estimated with 100 bootstrap samples, is less than 4 × 10−3 in all cases. Right:
A t-SNE embedding based on the probabilities assigned to test set characters by each model on War
and Peace. The color, size, and marker correspond to model type, model size, and number of layers.
90/5/5 for LK. Therefore, there are approximately 300,000 characters in the validation/test splits in
each case. The total number of characters in the vocabulary is 87 for WP and 101 for LK.
COMPARING RECURRENT NETWORKS
We ﬁrst train several recurrent network models to support further analysis and to compare their
performance in a controlled setting. In particular, we train models in the cross product of type
(LSTM/RNN/GRU), number of layers (1/2/3), number of parameters (4 settings), and both datasets
(WP/KL). For a 1-layer LSTM we used hidden size vectors of 64,128,256, and 512 cells, which with
our character vocabulary sizes translates to approximately 50K, 130K, 400K, and 1.3M parameters
respectively. The sizes of hidden layers of the other models were carefully chosen so that the total
number of parameters in each case is as close as possible to these 4 settings.
The test set results are shown in Figure 1. Our consistent ﬁnding is that depth of at least two is
beneﬁcial. However, between two and three layers our results are mixed. Additionally, the results
are mixed between the LSTM and the GRU, but both signiﬁcantly outperform the RNN. We also
computed the fraction of times that each pair of models agree on the most likely character and use
it to render a t-SNE Van der Maaten & Hinton embedding (we found this more stable and
robust than the KL divergence). The plot (Figure 1, right) further supports the claim that the LSTM
and the GRU make similar predictions while the RNNs form their own cluster.
INTERNAL MECHANISMS OF AN LSTM
Interpretable, long-range LSTM cells. An LSTMs can in principle use its memory cells to remember long-range information and keep track of various attributes of text it is currently processing. For
instance, it is a simple exercise to write down toy cell weights that would allow the cell to keep track
of whether it is inside a quoted string. However, to our knowledge, the existence of such cells has
never been experimentally demonstrated on real-world data. In particular, it could be argued that
even if the LSTM is in principle capable of using these operations, practical optimization challenges
(i.e. SGD dynamics, or approximate gradients due to truncated backpropagation through time) might
prevent it from discovering these solutions. In this experiment we verify that multiple interpretable
cells do in fact exist in these networks (see Figure 2). For instance, one cell is clearly acting as a
line length counter, starting with a high value and then slowly decaying with each character until the
next newline. Other cells turn on inside quotes, the parenthesis after if statements, inside strings or
comments, or with increasing strength as the indentation of a block of code increases. In particular,
note that truncated backpropagation with our hyperparameters prevents the gradient signal from directly noticing dependencies longer than 100 characters, but we still observe cells that reliably keep
track of quotes or comment blocks much longer than 100 characters (e.g. ∼230 characters in the
quote detection cell example in Figure 2). We hypothesize that these cells ﬁrst develop on patterns
shorter than 100 characters but then also appropriately generalize to longer sequences.
Gate activation statistics. We can gain some insight into the internal mechanisms of the LSTM
by studying the gate activations in the networks as they process test set data. We were particularly
interested in looking at the distributions of saturation regimes in the networks, where we deﬁne a
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2016
Figure 2: Several examples of cells with interpretable activations discovered in our best Linux Kernel and War and Peace LSTMs. Text color corresponds to tanh(c), where -1 is red and +1 is blue.
Left three: Saturation plots for an LSTM. Each circle is a gate in the LSTM and its
position is determined by the fraction of time it is left or right-saturated. These fractions must add to
at most one (indicated by the diagonal line). Right two: Saturation plot for a 3-layer GRU model.
gate to be left or right-saturated if its activation is less than 0.1 or more than 0.9, respectively, or
unsaturated otherwise. We then compute the fraction of times that each LSTM gate spends left or
right saturated, and plot the results in Figure 3. For instance, the number of often right-saturated
forget gates is particularly interesting, since this corresponds to cells that remember their values
for very long time periods. Note that there are multiple cells that are almost always right-saturated
(showing up on bottom, right of the forget gate scatter plot), and hence function as nearly perfect
integrators. Conversely, there are no cells that function in purely feed-forward fashion, since their
forget gates would show up as consistently left-saturated (in top, left of the forget gate scatter plot).
The output gate statistics also reveal that there are no cells that get consistently revealed or blocked
to the hidden state. Lastly, a surprising ﬁnding is that unlike the other two layers that contain gates
with nearly binary regime of operation (frequently either left or right saturated), the activations in
the ﬁrst layer are much more diffuse (near the origin in our scatter plots). We struggle to explain this
ﬁnding but note that it is present across all of our models. A similar effect is present in our GRU
model, where the ﬁrst layer reset gates r are nearly never right-saturated and the update gates z are
rarely ever left-saturated. This points towards a purely feed-forward mode of operation on this layer,
where the previous hidden state is barely used.
UNDERSTANDING LONG-RANGE INTERACTIONS
Good performance of LSTMs is frequently attributed to their ability to store long-range information.
In this section we test this hypothesis by comparing an LSTM with baseline models that can only
utilize information from a ﬁxed number of previous steps. In particular, we consider two baselines:
1. n-NN: A fully-connected neural network with one hidden layer and tanh nonlinearities. The
input to the network is a sparse binary vector of dimension nK that concatenates the one-of-K
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2016
War and Peace Dataset
Linux Kernel Dataset
Table 2: The test set cross-entropy loss on both datasets for n-gram models (low is good). The
standard deviation estimate using 100 bootstrap samples is below 4 × 10−3 in all cases.
Mean probability
Mean probability
Left: Overlap between test-set errors between our best 3-layer LSTM and the n-gram
models (low area is good). Middle/Right: Mean probabilities assigned to a correct character (higher
is better), broken down by the character, and then sorted by the difference between two models.
“<s>” is the space character. LSTM (red) outperforms the 20-gram model (blue) on special characters that require long-range reasoning. Middle: LK dataset, Right: WP dataset.
encodings of n consecutive characters. We optimize the model as described in Section 3.3 and
cross-validate the size of the hidden layer.
2. n-gram: An unpruned (n + 1)-gram language model using modiﬁed Kneser-Ney smoothing
Chen & Goodman . This is a standard smoothing method for language models Huang et al.
 . All models were trained using the popular KenLM software package Heaﬁeld et al. .
Performance comparisons. The performance of both n-gram models is shown in Table 2. The
n-gram and n-NN models perform nearly identically for small values of n, but for larger values
the n-NN models start to overﬁt and the n-gram model performs better. Moreover, we see that on
both datasets our best recurrent network outperforms the 20-gram model (1.077 vs. 1.195 on WP
and 0.84 vs.0.889). It is difﬁcult to make a direct model size comparison, but the 20-gram model
ﬁle has 3GB, while our largest checkpoints are 11MB. However, the assumptions encoded in the
Kneser-Ney smoothing model are intended for word-level modeling of natural language and may
not be optimal for character-level data. Despite this concern, these results already provide weak
evidence that the recurrent networks are effectively utilizing information beyond 20 characters.
Error Analysis. It is instructive to delve deeper into the errors made by both recurrent networks
and n-gram models. In particular, we deﬁne a character to be an error if the probability assigned
to it by a model on the previous time step is below 0.5. Figure 4 (left) shows the overlap between
the test-set errors for the 3-layer LSTM, and the best n-NN and n-gram models. We see that the
majority of errors are shared by all three models, but each model also has its own unique errors.
To gain deeper insight into the errors that are unique to the LSTM or the 20-gram model, we compute
the mean probability assigned to each character in the vocabulary across the test set. In Figure 4
(middle,right) we display the 10 characters where each model has the largest advantage over the
other. On the Linux Kernel dataset, the LSTM displays a large advantage on special characters that
are used to structure C programs, including whitespace and brackets. The War and Peace dataset
features an interesting long-term dependency with the carriage return, which occurs approximately
every 70 characters. Figure 4 (right) shows that the LSTM has a distinct advantage on this character.
To accurately predict the presence of the carriage return the model likely needs to keep track of
its distance since the last carriage return. The cell example we’ve highlighted in Figure 2 (top,
left) seems particularly well-tuned for this speciﬁc task. Similarly, to predict a closing bracket
or quotation mark, the model must be aware of the corresponding open bracket, which may have
appeared many time steps ago. The fact that the LSTM performs signiﬁcantly better than the 20-
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2016
Distance between "{" and "}"
Mean P("}")
LSTM epoch
LSTM epoch
Figure 5: Left: Mean probabilities that the LSTM and 20-gram model assign to the “}” character,
bucketed by the distance to the matching “{”. Right: Comparison of the similarity between 3-layer
LSTM and the n-NN baselines over the ﬁrst 3 epochs of training, as measured by the symmetric KLdivergence (middle) and the test set loss (right). Low KL indicates similar predictions, and positive
∆loss indicates that the LSTM outperforms the baseline.
gram model on these characters provides strong evidence that the model is capable of effectively
keeping track of long-range interactions.
Case study: closing brace. Of these structural characters, the one that requires the longest-term
reasoning is the closing brace (“}”) on the Linux Kernel dataset. Braces are used to denote blocks
of code, and may be nested; as such, the distance between an opening brace and its corresponding
closing brace can range from tens to hundreds of characters. This feature makes the closing brace
an ideal test case for studying the ability of the LSTM to reason over various time scales. We group
closing brace characters on the test set by the distance to their corresponding open brace and compute
the mean probability assigned by the LSTM and the 20-gram model to closing braces within each
group. The results are shown in Figure 5 (left). First, note that the LSTM only slightly outperforms
the 20-gram model in the ﬁrst bin, where the distance between braces is only up to 20 characters.
After this point the performance of the 20-gram model stays relatively constant, reﬂecting a baseline
probability of predicting the closing brace without seeing its matching opening brace. Compared
to this baseline, we see that the LSTM gains signiﬁcant boosts up to 60 characters, and then its
performance delta slowly decays over time as it becomes difﬁcult to keep track of the dependence.
Training dynamics. It is also instructive to examine the training dynamics of the LSTM by comparing it with trained n-NN models during training using the (symmetric) KL divergence between
the predictive distributions on the test set. We plot the divergence and the difference in the mean loss
in Figure 5 (right). Notably, we see that in the ﬁrst few iterations the LSTM behaves like the 1-NN
model but then diverges from it soon after. The LSTM then behaves most like the 2-NN, 3-NN,
and 4-NN models in turn. This experiment suggests that the LSTM “grows” its competence over
increasingly longer dependencies during training. This insight might be related to why Sutskever
et al. Sutskever et al. observe improvements when they reverse the source sentences in their
encoder-decoder architecture for machine translation. The inversion introduces short-term dependencies that the LSTM can model ﬁrst, and then longer dependencies are learned over time.
ERROR ANALYSIS: BREAKING DOWN THE FAILURE CASES
In this section we break down LSTM’s errors into categories to study the remaining limitations, the
relative severity of each error type, and to suggest areas for further study. We focus on the War
and Peace dataset where it is easier to categorize the errors. Our approach is to “peel the onion”
by iteratively removing the errors with a series of constructed oracles. As in the last section, we
consider a character to be an error if the probability it was assigned by the model in the previous
time step is below 0.5. Note that the order in which the oracles are applied inﬂuences the results.
We tried to apply the oracles in order of increasing difﬁculty of removing each error category and
believe that the ﬁnal results are instructive despite this downside. The oracles we use are, in order:
n-gram oracle. First, we construct optimistic n-gram oracles that eliminate errors that might be
ﬁxed with better modeling of short dependencies. In particular, we evaluate the n-gram model
(n = 1, . . . , 9) and remove a character error if it is correctly classiﬁed (probability assigned to that
character greater than 0.5) by any of these models. This gives us an approximate idea of the amount
of signal present only in the last 9 characters, and how many errors we could optimistically hope to
eliminate without needing to reason over long time horizons.
Dynamic n-long memory oracle. To motivate the next oracle, consider the string “Jon yelled at
Mary but Mary couldn’t hear him.” One interesting and consistent failure mode that we noticed in
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2016
1-gram to 5-gram
Punctuation
Up to 500 memory
Less than 3 training examples of word
After space or quote
After newline
0.4 to 0.5 boost
LSTM-3 (512)
LSTM-2 (64)
Figure 6: Left: LSTM errors removed one by one with oracles, starting from top of the pie chart
and going counter-clockwise. The area of each slice corresponds to fraction of errors contributed.
“n-memory” refers to dynamic memory oracle with context of n previous characters. “Word t-train”
refers to the rare words oracle with word count threshold of t. Right: Concrete examples of text from
the test set for each error type. Blue color highlights the relevant characters with the associated error.
For the memory category we also highlight the repeated substrings with red bounding rectangles.
the predictions is that if the LSTM fails to predict the characters of the ﬁrst occurrence of “Mary”
then it will almost always also fail to predict the same characters of the second occurrence, with
a nearly identical pattern of errors. However, in principle the presence of the ﬁrst mention should
make the second much more likely. The LSTM could conceivably store a summary of previously
seen characters in the data and fall back on this memory when it is uncertain. However, this does
not appear to take place in practice. This limitation is related to the improvements seen in “dynamic
evaluation” Mikolov ; Jelinek et al. of recurrent language models, where an RNN is
allowed to train on the test set characters during evaluation as long as it sees them only once. In this
mode of operation when the RNN trains on the ﬁrst occurrence of “Mary”, the log probabilities on
the second occurrence are signiﬁcantly better. We hypothesize that this dynamic aspect is a common
feature of sequence data, where certain subsequences that might not frequently occur in the training
data should still be more likely if they were present in the immediate history. However, this general
algorithm does not seem to be learned by the LSTM. Our dynamic memory oracle quantiﬁes the
severity of this limitation by removing errors in all words (starting with the second character) that
can found as a substring in the last n characters (we use n ∈{100, 500, 1000, 5000}).
Rare words oracle. Next, we construct an oracle that eliminates errors for rare words that occur
only up to n times in the training data (n = 0, . . . , 5). This estimates the severity of errors that could
optimistically be eliminated by increasing the size of the training data, or with pretraining.
Word model oracle. We noticed that a large portion of the errors occur on the ﬁrst character of each
word. Intuitively, the task of selecting the next word in the sequence is harder than completing the
last few characters of a known word. Motivated by this observation we constructed an oracle that
eliminated all errors after a space, quote or a newline. Interestingly, a high portion of errors can be
found after a newline, since the models have to learn that newline has semantics similar to a space.
Punctuation oracle. The remaining errors become difﬁcult to blame on one particular, interpretable
aspect of the modeling. At this point we construct an oracle that removes errors on all punctuation.
Boost oracles. The remaining errors that do not show salient structures or patterns are removed by
an oracle that boosts the probability of the correct letter by a ﬁxed amount. These oracles allow us
to understand the distribution of the difﬁculty of the remaining errors.
We now subject two LSTM models to the error analysis: First, our best LSTM model and second,
the best LSTM model in the smallest model category (50K parameters). The small and large models
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2016
allow us to understand how the error break down changes as we scale up the model. The error
breakdown after applying each oracle for both models can be found in Figure 6.
The error breakdown. In total, our best LSTM model made a total of 140K errors out of 330K
test set characters (42%). Of these, the n-gram oracle eliminates 18%, suggesting that the model
is not taking full advantage of the last 9 characters. The dynamic memory oracle eliminates 6% of
the errors. In principle, a dynamic evaluation scheme could be used to mitigate this error, but we
believe that a more principled approach could involve an approach similar to Memory Networks
Weston et al. , where the model is allowed to attend to a recent history of the sequence while
making its next prediction. Finally, the rare words oracle accounts for 9% of the errors. This
error type might be mitigated with unsupervised pretraining Dai & Le , or by increasing the
size of the training set. The majority of the remaining errors (37%) follow a space, a quote, or a
newline, indicating the model’s difﬁculty with word-level predictions. This suggests that longer time
horizons in backpropagation through time, or possibly hierarchical context models, could provide
improvements. See Figure 6 (right) for examples of each error type. We believe that this type of error
breakdown is a valuable tool for isolating and understanding the source of improvements provided
by new proposed models.
Errors eliminated by scaling up. In contrast, the smaller LSTM model makes a total of 184K
errors (or 56% of the test set), or approximately 44K more than the large model. Surprisingly, 36K
of these errors (81%) are n-gram errors, 5K come from the boost category, and the remaining 3K are
distributed across the other categories relatively evenly. That is, scaling the model up by a factor 26
in the number of parameters has almost entirely provided gains in the local, n-gram error rate and
has left the other error categories untouched in comparison. This analysis provides some evidence
that it might be necessary to develop new architectural improvements instead of simply scaling up
the basic model.
CONCLUSION
We have used character-level language models as an interpretable test bed for analyzing the predictions, representations training dynamics, and error types present in Recurrent Neural Networks. In
particular, our qualitative visualization experiments, cell activation statistics and comparisons to ﬁnite horizon n-gram models demonstrate that these networks learn powerful, and often interpretable
long-range interactions on real-world data. Our error analysis broke down cross entropy loss into
several interpretable categories, and allowed us to illuminate the sources of remaining limitations
and to suggest further areas for study. In particular, we found that scaling up the model almost
entirely eliminates errors in the n-gram category, which provides some evidence that further architectural innovations may be needed to address the remaining errors.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We gratefully acknowledge the support of NVIDIA Corporation with the donation of the GPUs used
for this research.