CHEX: CHannel EXploration for CNN Model Compression
Zejiang Hou1*
Minghai Qin2
Xiaolong Ma3†
Yen-Kuang Chen2
Sun-Yuan Kung1
1Princeton University 2Alibaba Group 3Northeastern University 4Dalian University of Technology
Channel pruning has been broadly recognized as an effective technique to reduce the computation and memory
cost of deep convolutional neural networks. However, conventional pruning methods have limitations in that: they
are restricted to pruning process only, and they require a
fully pre-trained large model. Such limitations may lead to
sub-optimal model quality as well as excessive memory and
training cost. In this paper, we propose a novel Channel
Exploration methodology, dubbed as CHEX, to rectify these
problems. As opposed to pruning-only strategy, we propose
to repeatedly prune and regrow the channels throughout the
training process, which reduces the risk of pruning important channels prematurely. More exactly: From intra-layer’s
aspect, we tackle the channel pruning problem via a wellknown column subset selection (CSS) formulation. From
inter-layer’s aspect, our regrowing stages open a path for
dynamically re-allocating the number of channels across
all the layers under a global channel sparsity constraint .
In addition, all the exploration process is done in a single
training from scratch without the need of a pre-trained large
model. Experimental results demonstrate that CHEX can
effectively reduce the FLOPs of diverse CNN architectures
on a variety of computer vision tasks, including image classiﬁcation, object detection, instance segmentation, and 3D
vision. For example, our compressed ResNet-50 model on
ImageNet dataset achieves 76% top-1 accuracy with only
25% FLOPs of the original ResNet-50 model, outperforming
previous state-of-the-art channel pruning methods.
checkpoints and code are available at here .
1. Introduction
Albeit the empirical success of deep convolutional neural networks (CNN) on many computer vision tasks, the
excessive computational and memory cost impede their deployment on mobile or edge devices. Therefore, it is vital to
*Work done during an internship at DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group.
†Work partially done during an internship at Alibaba Group.
‡Work partially done during working period at Alibaba Group.
Figure 1. Comparison of the accuracy-FLOPs Pareto curve of the
compressed ResNet-50 models on ImageNet. CHEX shows the
top-performing Pareto frontier compared with previous methods.
And we obtain the sub-models without pre-training a large model.
explore model compression, which reduces the redundancy
in the model while maximally maintaining the accuracy.
Among various model compression approaches, channel pruning has been recognized as an effective tool to
achieve practical memory saving and inference acceleration on general-purpose hardware. To derive a sub-model,
channel pruning removes the redundant channels along with
all the associated ﬁlters connected to those channels.
Most existing channel pruning methods adopt a progressive
pruning-training pipeline: pre-training a large model until
convergence, pruning a few unimportant channels by the
pre-deﬁned criterion, and ﬁnetuning the pruned model to
restore accuracy. The last two stages are usually executed in
an interleaved manner repeatedly, which suffers from long
training time. Various attempts have been made to improve
the pruning efﬁciency. Training-based channel pruning methods impose sparse regularization such
as LASSO or group LASSO to the model parameters during
training. However, these commonly adopted regularization
may not penalize the parameters to exactly zero. Removing
 
Figure 2. An illustration of our CHEX method, which jointly optimizes the weight values and explores the sub-model structure in one
training pass from scratch. In CHEX, both retained and regrown channels in the sub-model are active, participating in the training iterations.
many small but non-zero parameters inevitably damages the
model accuracy. Although this problem can be addressed by
applying specialized optimizers or model reparameterization tricks , these methods require a well-pretrained
large model, which counters our goal of improving pruning
efﬁciency. Sampling-based methods 
directly train sparse models. However, these methods may
suffer from training instability and converge to sub-optimal
points . shorten or eliminate the pretraining phase, and extract the sub-model at an early stage
or even from random initialization. These methods are incapable to recover prematurely pruned important channels,
which limits the model capacity and leads to unacceptable
accuracy degradation.
To rectify the aforementioned limitations, we propose
a channel exploration methodology called CHEX to obtain high accuracy sub-models without pre-training a large
model or ﬁnetuning the pruned model. In contrast to the traditional pruning approaches that permanently remove channels , we dynamically adjust the importance
of the channels via a periodic pruning and regrowing process, which allows the prematurely pruned channels to be
recovered and prevents the model from losing the representation ability early in the training process. From intra-layer’s
perspective, we re-formulate the channel pruning problem
into the classic column subset selection (CSS) problem in
linear algebra, leading to a closed-form solution. From interlayer’s perspective, rather than sticking to a ﬁxed or manually
designed sub-model structure, our approach re-evaluates the
importance of different layers after each regrowing stage.
This leads to a sub-model structure exploration technique to
dynamically re-allocate the number of channels across all
the layers under a given budget. With only one training pass
from scratch, our obtained sub-models yield better accuracy
than the previous methods under the same FLOPs reductions.
Moreover, the simplicity of our method allows us to derive a
theoretical analysis on the training behaviour of CHEX, to
provide further insights and interpretation.
The contributions of this paper are highlighted as follows:
• We propose a channel exploration method CHEX with
three novel features: (1) a periodic channel pruning and
regrowing process, (2) a pruning criterion (i.e., leverage
score) based on column subset selection, and (3) a submodel structure exploration technique.
• Our method obtains the sub-model in one training pass
from scratch, effectively reducing the training cost,
because it circumvents the expensive pretrain-prune-
ﬁnetune cycles.
• Experimentally, CHEX exhibits superior accuracy under different FLOPs constraints (as shown in Figure 1),
and is applicable to a plethora of computer vision tasks.
For image classiﬁcation on ImageNet, our compressed
ResNet-50 model yields 4× FLOPs reduction while
achieving 76% top-1 accuracy, improving previous best
result by 0.7%. For object detection on COCO
dataset, our method achieves 2× FLOPs reduction on
the SSD model while improving 0.7% mAP over the unpruned baseline. For instance segmentation on COCO
dataset and 3D point cloud segmentation on ShapeNet
dataset, our method achieves 2× and 11× FLOPs reductions on the Mask R-CNN and PointNet++ models
with negligible quality loss compared to the unpruned
models, respectively.
• We provide a theoretical convergence guarantee of our
CHEX method from the view of non-convex optimization setting, which is applicable to deep learning.
2. Methodology
Our method takes an existing CNN model as our channel
exploration space, which provides the maximum number of
explored channels. As illustrated in Figure 2, we describe
the training ﬂow of CHEX using a 3-layer CNN model as
an example, in which we set the target channel sparsity1 to
50%. From top to bottom, the three layers contain 6, 8, and
10 channels, respectively, denoted as Conv −6 −8 −10.
Our method starts with a randomly initialized sub-model.
During training, at periodically spaced training iterations
(e.g., pre-determined ∆T iterations), a channel pruning and
regrowing process is performed, which is referred to as one
step in CHEX. A total of N steps are applied, and each step
is composed of the following stages:
• A pruning stage removes the unimportant channels to
the target sparsity. The number of channels are reallocated across all different layers via the sub-model
structure exploration technique. For example, in Figure 2, the pruned sub-model in step 1 has an architecture
Conv −3 −4 −5, retaining 12 out of 24 channels. It
may be adjusted later to Conv−2−3−7 in step 2. Such
adaptations continue in the loop across the N steps.
• Immediately after pruning, a channel regrowing stage
regrows back a fraction of the previously pruned channels, whose weight values are restored to their most
recently used values before being pruned. Note that the
regrown channels may be pruned multiple steps before.
A decay scheduler is adopted to gradually reduce the
number of regrown channels across the N steps. For example, in Figure 2, the channel regrowing stage in step
1 re-activates six channels, while it only re-activates
four channels in step 2.
Our method interleaves the model training and the periodic pruning-regrowing stages. Since the total number of
regrown channels is reduced at each step, the sub-model
under training enjoys gradually decreased computation cost
and converges to the target channel sparsity in the end. As an
algorithm guideline, the pseudo-code of CHEX is provided
in Algorithm 1.
2.1. Channel pruning stage
Suppose a CNN contains L layers with parameters
{w1, ..., wL}, with wl ∈RHlW lCl−1×Cl denoting the reshaped2 convolution weight matrix. Cl−1, Cl, Hl × W l
represent the number of input channels, the number of output channels, and the kernel size, respectively. The j-th
channel in the l-th layer is denoted as wl
:,j. That is, a column
in wl represents one channel in the convolution. For notation
simplicity, we use Kl = HlW lCl−1 in the following text,
i.e., wl ∈RKl×Cl.
1We follow the notion of structured sparsity introduced in . Our
sub-model is a slimmer dense CNN model.
2For ease of derivation, we convert the convolution weight tensor of size
Hl × W l × Cl−1 × Cl to the matrix of size HlW lCl−1 × Cl, where
the channels are listed as columns in the reshaped weight matrix.
Algorithm 1: Overview of the CHEX method.
1 Input: An L-layer CNN model with weights
W = {w1, ..., wL}; target channel sparsity S; total
training iterations Ttotal; initial regrowing factor δ0;
training iterations between two consecutive steps ∆T;
total pruning-regrowing steps Tmax; training set D ;
2 Output: A sub-model satisfying the target sparsity S and
its optimal weight values W∗;
3 Randomly initialize the model weights W;
4 for each training iteration t ∈[Ttotal] do
Sample a mini-batch from D and update the model
weights W ;
if Mod(t, ∆T) = 0 and t ≤Tmax then
Re-allocate the number of channels for each layer
in the sub-model {κl, l ∈[L]} by Eq.(4) ;
Prune {κlCl, l ∈[L]} channels by CSS-based
pruning in Algorithm 2 ;
Compute the channel regrowing factor by a decay
scheduler function ;
Perform importance sampling-based channel
regrowing in Algorithm 3 ;
Suppose κl denotes the channel sparsity of the l-th layer.
For each layer, channel pruning identiﬁes a set of important
channels with index set T l (|T l| = ⌈(1 −κl)Cl⌉), which
retains the most important information in wl, such that the
remaining ones {wl
:,j, j /∈T l} may be discarded with minimal impact to model accuracy. In other words, channel
pruning selects the most “representative” columns from wl
that can reconstruct the original weight matrix with minimal error. From this perspective, channel pruning can be
naturally represented as the Column Subset Selection (CSS)
problem in linear algebra . This provides us a new theoretical guideline for designing channel pruning criterion in
a principled way, rather than depending on heuristics. To
rigorously characterize the most “representative" columns
of a matrix, we formally deﬁne CSS as follows:
Deﬁnition 2.1 (Column Subset Selection). Given a matrix
wl ∈RK×Cl, let c ≤Cl be the number of columns to select.
Find c columns of wl, denoted by wl
c, that would minimize:
or ∥wl −wl
where † stands for the Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse, ∥· ∥F
and ∥·∥2 represent matrix Frobenius norm and spectral norm,
respectively.
Since channel pruning and CSS share the same goal of
best recovering the full matrix by a subset of its columns,
we can leverage the rich theoretical foundations of CSS to
derive a new pruning criterion. Our channel pruning stage
is conducted periodically during training, thus we employ a
computationally efﬁcient deterministic CSS algorithm, referred to as the Leverage Score Sampling . The core
Algorithm 2: CSS-based channel pruning.
1 Input: Model weights wl; pruning ratios κl ;
2 Output: The pruned layer l ;
3 Compute the number of retained channels
˜Cl = ⌈(1 −κl)Cl⌉;
4 Compute the top ˜Cl right singular vectors Vl
Cl of wl ;
5 Compute the leverage scores for all the channels in layer l
2 for all j ∈[Cl] ;
6 Retain the important channels identiﬁed as
T l = ArgTopK({ψl
j}; ˜Cl) ;
7 Prune channels {wl
:,j, j /∈T l} from layer l ;
Algorithm 3: Sampling-based channel regrowing.
1 Input: Indices of active channels T l in the sub-model;
regrowing factor δt;
2 Output: The regrown layer l ;
3 Compute the importance sampling probabilities by Eq.(2)
j = exp(ϵl
j′) for all j ∈[Cl]\T l ;
4 Compute the number of regrown channels kl = ⌈δtCl⌉;
5 Perform importance sampling Gl=Multinomial({pl
6 Restore the MRU weights of the chosen channels
j, j ∈Gl} ;
7 Regrow channels { ˆwl
j, j ∈Gl} to layer l ;
of this algorithm involves the leverage scores of matrix wl,
which are deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 2.2 (Leverage Scores). Let Vc ∈RCl×c be the
top-c right singular vectors of wl (c represents the number
of selected columns from wl). Then, the leverage score of
the j-th column of wl is given as: ψj = ∥[Vc]j,:∥2
[Vc]j,: denotes the jth row of Vc.
The leverage score sampling algorithm samples c
columns of wl that corresponds to the largest c leverage
scores of wl. Despite its simplicity, theoretical analysis
in has shown that this deterministic solution provably obtains near optimal low-rank approximation error for Eq.(1).
Based on the above analysis, we propose a CSS-based
channel pruning method with leverage score sampling, as
shown in Algorithm 2. When given a pruning ratio κl for
layer l, we need to select and retain ⌈(1 −κl)Cl⌉important channels. We ﬁrst compute the top ⌈(1 −κl)Cl⌉right
singular vectors of the weight matrix wl. Then, we calculate the leverage scores of all the channels in this layer
as Deﬁnition 2.2, and rank them in descending order. Finally, we identify the set of important channels to retain as
T l = ArgTopK({ψl
j}; ⌈(1 −κl)Cl⌉), which gives the indices of channels with the top ⌈(1 −κl)Cl⌉leverage scores
of wl. The remaining bottom-ranking channels are pruned.
2.2. Channel regrowing stage
Since the method trains from a randomly initialized model
and the pruning stage may be based on the weights that are
not sufﬁciently trained. In the early stage of training, the
pruning decisions may not be optimal and some important
channels are prematurely pruned. Therefore, after each pruning stage, our method regrows a fraction of the previously
pruned channels back to the model. The regrown channels
are updated in the subsequent training. If they are important
to the model, they may survive the future pruning stages after
a number of iterations of training. Moreover, the channel
regrowing stage enables the model to have better representation ability during training, since the model capacity is not
permanently restricted as the one-shot pruning methods.
To complete the regrowing stage, we need to assign
proper weight values to the newly activated channels. One
straightforward choice is to assign zero values for stable
training, since the regrown channels do not affect the output
of the model. However, we ﬁnd that regrowing channels with
zeros would receive zero gradients in the subsequent training
iterations. This is undesirable because the regrown channels
would remain deactivated and the method degenerates to the
one-shot early-bird pruning . Based on our ablations,
we ﬁnd the best scheme is that the newly activated channels
restore their most recently used (MRU) parameters, which
are the last values before they are pruned. We constantly
maintain a copy of the weight values of the pruned channels, in case that they may get regrown back in the future
regrowing stages. Note that the regrowing stage may regrow channels that are pruned multiple steps before, instead
of just re-activating what are pruned at the pruning stage
immediately before the current regrowing stage.
To determine the channels to regrow, a naive way is to
perform uniform sampling from the candidate set {j|j ∈
[Cl] \ T l}. However, uniform sampling does not consider
the possible inter-channel dependency between the active
channels survived in the sub-model and the candidate channels to regrow. Instead, we propose an importance sampling
strategy based on channel orthogonality for regrowing, as
shown in Algorithm 3. Channel orthogonality automatically
implies linear independency, which helps avoid trivial regrowing where the newly regrown channels lie in the span
of the active channels. Channel orthogonality also encourages the channel diversity and improves model accuracy .
Formally, we denote the active channels in layer l by matrix
T l. The orthogonality ϵl
j of a channel wl
j in the candidate
set with respect to the active channels can be computed by
the classic orthogonal projection formula :
A higher orthogonality value indicates that the channel is
harder to approximate by others, and may have a better
chance to be retained in the CSS pruning stage of the future
steps. Thus, the corresponding channel may be sampled
with a relatively higher probability. We use the orthogonality
values to design our importance sampling distribution, and
the probability pl
j to regrow a channel wl
j is given as:
j = exp(ϵl
Then, the channels to regrow are sampled according to the
distribution Multinomial({pl
j|j ∈[Cl] \ T l}; ⌈δtCl⌉) without replacement, where δt is the regrowing factor introduced
as follows.
In the regrowing stage, we employ a cosine decay scheduler to gradually reduce the number of regrown channels so
that the sub-model converges to the target channel sparsity at
the end of training. Speciﬁcally, the regrowing factor at t-th
step is computed as: δt = 1
where δ0 is the initial regrowing factor, Tmax denotes the
total exploration steps, and ∆T represents the frequency to
invoke the pruning-regrowing steps.
2.3. Sub-model structure exploration
The starting model architecture may not have balanced
layer distributions. Some layers are more important to the
model accuracy and more channels need to be preserved,
while some other layers may contain excessive number of
channels. To better preserve model accuracy, our method
dynamically re-distributes the surviving channels across different layers in each pruning stage. Such re-distribution is
called sub-model structure exploration.
Inspired by , we use the learnable scaling factors in
batch normalization (BN) 3 to reﬂect the layer importance. Denote the BN scaling factors of all channels across
all layers by Γ = {γ1, ..., γL}, γl ∈RCl, and the overall
target channel sparsity by S. We calculate the layer-wise
pruning ratios by ranking all scaling factors in descending
order and preserving the top 1 −S percent of the channels.
Then, the sparsity κl for layer l is given as:
j∈[Cl] 1{γl
/Cl, l ∈[L],
where 1{γl
j≤q(Γ,S)} is 0 if γl
j > q(Γ, S) and 1 if γl
q(Γ, S). q(Γ, S) represents the S-th percentile of all the
scaling factors Γ. Accordingly, the number of channels in
each layer of the sub-model is obtained as ⌈(1 −κl)Cl⌉.
 relies on LASSO regularization to identify the insigniﬁcant channels, it extracts the sub-model from a fully
pre-trained model in one-shot manner, and the subsequent
ﬁnetuning procedure ﬁxes the architecture without adaptation. In contrast, our method proposes a CSS-based pruning
criterion without requiring any sparse regularization. And
we advocate a repeated pruning and regrowing paradigm as
opposed to the pruning-only strategy. We use BN scaling
factors only for re-allocating the number of channels. We
3BN applies afﬁne transformations to standardized input feature-maps:
Xout = γ ˜
Xin + β, where γ / β are learnable scaling / shifting factors.
perform such re-allocation repeatedly at each step to take
into account the changing layer importance during training.
Thanks to our regrowing stages which help maintain the
exploration space, our method can dynamically re-distribute
channels from the less crucial layers to the more important
ones, leading to a better sub-model structure.
3. Theoretical Justiﬁcation
We now provide the convergence guarantee for the CHEX
method. Let F(W) = Ex∼D[f(W; x)] be the loss function
of the deep learning task where x is the data following a
distribution D and E[·] is the expectation. In addition, let
Wt ∈Rd be the model parameter at the t-th training iteration, and mt ∈{0, 1}d be a binary channel mask vector for
t = 1, · · · , T. Apparently, quantity Wt ⊙mt ∈Rd is a submodel pruned from Wt where ⊙denotes the element-wise
product. The following proposition shows that the CHEX
will converge to a neighborhood around the stationary solution at rate O(1/
T) when learning rate is set properly.
Due to the space limitation, we put its proof in the Appendix.
Proposition 1 (Convergence Guarantee). Suppose the loss
function F(W) is L-smooth, the sampled stochastic gradient is unbiased and has bounded variance, and the relative
error introduced by each mask is bounded, i.e., ∥W −W ⊙
mt∥2 ≤δ2∥W∥2 and ∥∇F(W) −∇F(W) ⊙mt∥2 ≤
ζ2∥∇F(W)∥2 for constants δ ∈ and ζ ∈ . If
learning rate η =
L(T +1) in which C0 = E[F(W0)],
the sub-models obtained by CHEX will converge as follows:
E[∥∇F(Wt ⊙mt)∥2]
(T + 1)(1 −ζ)2
Remark. If there is no pruning (i.e., mt = 1 ∈Rd) in the
training process, it holds that δ = 0 and ζ = 0. Substituting
it into (5), we ﬁnd that the CHEX method can converge
exactly to the stationary solution, i.e., E[∥∇F(WT )∥2] →0
as T increases to inﬁnity. When a sparse channel mask is
utilized, it holds that δ ̸= 0 and ζ ̸= 0. In this scenario, the
mask-induced error will inevitably inﬂuence the accuracy of
the trained sub-model, i.e., constants δ and ζ will inﬂuence
the magnitude of the second term in the upper bound (5).
4. Experiments
To evaluate the efﬁcacy and generality of CHEX, we experiment on a variety of computer vision tasks with diverse
CNN architectures. All experiments run on PyTorch framework based on DeepLearningExamples with NVIDIA
PT FLOPs Top-1 Epochs Method
PT FLOPs Top-1 Epochs
1.27G 67.4%
1.10G 69.2%
1.04G 67.1%
1.04G 68.4%
1.04G 69.0%
1.03G 69.6%
Hrank 
Taylor 
Taylor 
CafeNet 
2.0G 77.4%
Hinge 
CafeNet N
AdaptDCP Y
2.0G 73.5%
ResNet-101
ResRep 
Polarize 
DSNet 
MetaPrune N
EagleEye 
3.4G 78.8%
CafeNet 
1.9G 77.6%
1.0G 76.0%
AP AP50 AP75 APS APM APL
SSD object detection
Baseline 
25.2 42.7 25.8 7.3 27.1 40.8
24.1 41.2 24.7 6.7 25.6 39.2
25.9 43.0 26.8 7.8 27.8 41.7
24.3 41.0 24.9 7.1 25.6 40.1
Mask R-CNN object detection
Baseline 
37.3 59.0 40.2 21.9 40.9 48.1
37.3 58.5 40.4 21.7 39.0 49.5
Mask R-CNN instance segmentation
Baseline 
34.2 55.9 36.2 15.8 36.9 50.1
34.5 55.7 36.7 15.9 36.1 51.2
3D shape classiﬁcation (Quality is accuracy)
Baseline 
3D part segmentation (Quality is class/instance mIoU)
Baseline 
82.5%/85.4%
77.1%/84.0%
82.3%/85.2%
Table 1. (a): Results of ResNet on ImageNet dataset. “PT”: require pre-training. “Y”: Yes, “N”: No. (b): Results of SSD on COCO2017 and
Mask R-CNN on COCO2014. For objection detection, we evaluate the bounding box AP. For instance segmentation, we evaluate the mask
AP. (c): Results of PointNet++ for 3D point clouds classiﬁcation on ModelNet40 dataset and segmentation on ShapeNet dataset.
Tesla V100 GPUs. We set δ0 = 0.3 and ∆T = 2 epoch,
where δ0 means the initial regrowing factor, and ∆T is
the number of training iterations between two consecutive
pruning-regrowing steps. To keep our method simple and
generic, the above hyper-parameters are kept constant for
our experiments. We set the rest of the hyper-parameters in
the default settings and specify them in the Appendix. In
this paper, FLOPs is calculated by counting multiplication
and addition as one operation by following .
4.1. Image recognition
For image recognition, we apply CHEX to ResNet 
with different depths on ImageNet . The baseline ResNet-
18/34/50/101 models have 1.8/3.7/4.1/7.6 GFLOPs with
70.3%/73.9%/77.8%/78.9% top-1 accuracy, respectively.
As shown in Table 1(a), CHEX achieves noticeably higher
accuracy than the state-of-the-art channel pruning methods under the same FLOPs. For example, compared with
MetaPruning , DCMP and CafeNet , our pruned
ResNet-50 model with 4× FLOPs reduction achieves 2.6%,
1.6%, and 0.7% higher top-1 accuracy, respectively. On the
other hand, at the same target accuracy, CHEX achieves
higher FLOPs reduction. For example, CHEX achieves 4×
FLOPs reduction on ResNet-101 model with 77.6% top-1
accuracy, compared to the latest work NPPM which
yields 2.2× FLOPs reduction.
The results in Table 1(a) also show an interesting property
of our CHEX method. When we search a sub-model with
a small FLOPs target, it is better to start our method on a
larger model than on a smaller one. For instance, pruning
a ResNet-50 model to 1 GFLOPs yields an accuracy 6.6%
higher than pruning a ResNet-18 model to 1 GFLOPs. This
indicates that CHEX performs training-time structural exploration more effectively when given a larger parametric
space. To illustrate this point further, we conduct an additional experiment by applying CHEX to a model with twice
the number of channels as the ResNet-50 model, with the
goal of reducing its FLOPs to the same level as the original
ResNet-50 model. Notably, this sub-model achieves 78.9%
top-1 accuracy at 4.1 GFLOPs. This suggests that CHEX
has the potential to optimize existing CNNs.
4.2. Object detection
For object detection, we apply CHEX to the SSD
model on COCO2017 dataset . Table 1(b) summarizes the performance with different FLOPs reductions.
Our pruned model outperforms the baseline model by 0.7%
AP (25.9 vs. 25.2) while achieving 2× FLOPs reduction.
+ Periodic pruning and regrowing
+ Dynamic sub-model structure exploration
+ Importance sampling-based regrowing
Table 2. Ablation study of different components in CHEX.
Compared with previous SOTA channel pruning method
 , our method achieves 1.8% higher AP (25.9 vs. 24.1)
with 2× FLOPs reduction. Moreover, our method achieves
4× FLOPs reduction with less than 1% AP loss.
4.3. Instance segmentation
For instance segmentation, we apply CHEX to the Mask
R-CNN model on COCO2014 dataset. Since Mask
R-CNN is a multi-task framework, we evaluate both the
bounding box AP for object detection and the mask AP for
instance segmentation. As shown in Table 1(b), the models
pruned using our method achieve 2× FLOPs reduction without AP loss, even for the challenging instance segmentation
task where the model needs to detect all objects correctly in
an image while precisely segmenting each instance.
4.4. 3D point cloud
Apart from 2D computer vision problems, we also apply
CHEX to compress PointNet++ for 3D shape classiﬁcation on ModelNet40 dataset and 3D part segmentation
on ShapeNet dataset. The results are shown in Table
1(c). On shape classiﬁcation, the model pruned using our
method achieves around 7.5× FLOPs reduction while improving the accuracy slightly compared to the unpruned
baseline. On part segmentation, the model pruned using our
method achieves 11× FLOPs reduction while maintaining
similar mIoU compared with the unpruned baseline.
5. Ablation Analysis
We investigate the effectiveness of different components
in the CHEX method through ablation studies. All the following results are based on pruning the ResNet-50 model to
1 GFLOPs (4× reduction) on ImageNet dataset.
Ablation study. In Table 2, we study the effectiveness of
different components in CHEX, namely the periodic channel pruning and regrowing process, the sub-model structure
exploration technique, and the importance sampling-based
regrowing. The baseline is one-shot early-stage pruning ,
where the model is pruned by CSS very early after 6% of
the total training epochs, and there is no regrowing stage.
The sub-model architecture is based on the BN scaling factors and kept ﬁxed in the subsequent training. The periodic pruning and regrowing process repeatedly samples the
important channels and prevents the channels from being
pruned prematurely. This brings in 0.9% accuracy improvement. When the number of channels in each layer is also
Prune criterion
Magnitude 
CSS (Ours)
Pretrain-prune-ﬁnetune
Table 3. Inﬂuence of the pruning criterion to the top-1 accuracy in
pretrain-prune-ﬁnetune framework and our CHEX method.
Initialization of regrown channels
Design choices
Regrowing factor
Design choices δ0 = 0.1 δ0 = 0.2 δ0 = 0.3
Scheduler for channel regrowing
Design choices Constant
Linear decay
Cosine decay
Pruning-regrowing frequency
Design choices ∆T = 1
∆T = 5 ∆T = 10 ∆T = 20
Table 4. Compare different design choices in the regrowing stages
of the CHEX method.
dynamically adjusted instead of sticking to the ﬁxed structure determined very early in training, we can obtain a more
optimal sub-model structure, which further improves the
accuracy by 0.8%. Finally, using the importance sampling
strategy described in Eq.(3) instead of uniform sampling in
the regrowing stages improves the top-1 accuracy to 76%.
Inﬂuence of pruning criterion. We study the inﬂuence of
pruning criterion to the ﬁnal accuracy by comparing CSS
versus ﬁlter magnitude and BN pruning in Table
3. As suggested by , pruning criterion is an
important factor in the traditional pretrain-prune-ﬁnetune
(PPF) approach. Indeed, when the PPF approach is used,
our proposed CSS shows the best accuracy, outperforming
magnitude and BN pruning by 0.8% and 1.5%, respectively.
On the other hand, we observe that CHEX is more robust
to the pruning criterion, as it improves the accuracy for all
three criteria and the accuracy gap among them becomes
smaller: CSS outperforms magnitude and BN pruning by
0.3% and 0.7%, respectively. We suspect that this is because
CHEX can dynamically adjust the channel importance and
can recover from sub-optimal pruning decisions.
Design choices for the regrowing stage. In Table 4, we
investigate the impact of different schemes in the channel
regrowing stage of CHEX:
(1) Different initialization schemes for the regrown channels affect model quality critically. We have experimented
several methods by initializing the regrown channels with
random normal distribution , zero weights, the exponential moving average (EMA) weights, and most recently used
(MRU) weights. The results show that MRU yields the best
top-1 accuracy, outperforming the other three initialization
schemes by 0.5% ∼1.9%.
(2) The initial regrowing factor δ0 also affects the model
quality. Intuitively, a large regrowing factor can maintain
relatively larger model capacity in the early stage of training,
and involve more channels into the exploration steps. As
shown, the accuracy is improved by 0.8% as the δ0 increases
from 0.1 to 0.3, at the price of more training cost. However,
we did not observe further improvement when the regrowing factor increases from δ0 = 0.3 to full model size, in
which case one step in CHEX consists of pruning to target
channel sparsity and regrowing all pruned channels. This
suggests that regrowing a fraction of the previously pruned
channels may be enough for a comprehensive exploration of
the channels if we also aim more training cost savings.
(3) We decay the number of regrown channels in each
regrowing stage to gradually restrict the scope of exploration.
We compare several decay schedulers, including constant,
linear, and cosine. The cosine decay scheduler performs better than the other two schemes by 0.7% and 0.4% accuracy,
respectively. With a decay scheduler, the sub-model under
training will enjoy gradually decreased computation cost.
(4) The training iterations between two consecutive
pruning-regrowing steps, ∆T, also affects the model quality.
A smaller ∆T incurs more frequent pruning-regrowing steps
in CHEX, leading to better accuracy in general. We use
∆T = 2 epoch, as it gives the best accuracy.
6. Related Works
Channel pruning methods can be roughly categorized into
three classes.
(1) Pruning after training approaches follow a threestage pipeline: pre-training a large model, pruning the unimportant channels, and ﬁnetuning the pruned model. Prior
arts in this category mainly focus on comparing different
pruning criteria. Exemplary metrics for evaluating channel importance include weight norm ,
geometric median , Taylor expansion of cross-entropy
loss , discrepancy of ﬁnal response layer ,
feature-maps reconstruction error , feature-maps
rank , KL-divergence , greedy forward selection
with largest loss reduction , feature-maps discriminant
information . Our method differs substantially
from these approaches that we do not pre-train a large model.
Instead, the compact sub-model is explored during a normal
training process from scratch.
(2) Pruning during training approaches perform channel selection
and model training jointly, usually by imposing sparse regularizations to the channel-wise scaling factors and adopting
specialized optimizers to solve it. Although these methods usually yield good acceleration due to joint optimization, many of them perform
the sparse regularization training on fully pre-trained large
models. Therefore, these approaches still suffer from the
expensive training cost. In contrast, our method does not rely
on sparse regularization. Instead, the periodic channel pruning and regrowing processes adaptively explore the channel
importance during training.
(3) Pruning at early stage methods compress the model
at random initialization or early stage of training . Although the training cost is reduced,
one-shot pruning based on under-trained model weights may
not properly reﬂect the channel importance and the model
representation ability is prematurely reduced at the very beginning, resulting in signiﬁcant accuracy loss. In contrast,
the proposed method can recover prematurely pruned channels and better maintain the model capacity.
AutoML or NAS based pruning methods automatically
search the optimal number of channels in each layer of CNN.
 uses reinforcement learning to search a compression
policy in a layer-wise manner. MetaPruning pre-trains
a hyper-network to predict the weights for candidate pruned
models, and adopts evolutionary search to ﬁnd a good candidate. NetAdapt progressively adapts a pre-trained
model to a mobile platform until a resource budget is met.
DMCP proposes a differentiable search method by modeling channel pruning as a Markov process. CafeNet 
proposes locally free weight sharing for the one-shot model
width search. proposes a Gaussian process search for
optimizing the multi-dimensional compression policy. These
approaches usually rely on a pre-trained supernet, and require a separate search process involving substantial searchevaluation iterations. In contrast, CHEX performs sub-model
structure learning together with weights optimization, making it more efﬁcient than the search-based methods. Channel
pruning has also been incorporated into NAS to further tune
the searched architecture for different latency targets .
Since CHEX does not increase the training time, it can be
potentially used as a step in AutoML.
7. Conclusion
We propose a novel channel exploration methodology,
CHEX, to reduce the computation cost of deep CNNs in
both training and inference. CHEX (1) dynamically adjusts
the channel importance based on a periodic pruning and
regrowing process, which prevents the important channels
from being prematurely pruned; (2) dynamically re-allocates
the number of channels under a global sparsity constraint to
search for the optimal sub-model structure during training.
We design the components in the pruning and regrowing
process by proposing a column subset selection based criterion for pruning and a channel orthogonality based importance sampling for regrowing. This enables us to obtain
a sub-model with high accuracy in only one training pass
from scratch, without pre-training a large model or requiring
extra ﬁne-tuning. Experiments on multiple deep learning
tasks demonstrate that our method can effectively reduce
the FLOPs of diverse CNN models while achieving superior
accuracy compared to the state-of-the-art methods.
Acknowledgment
This work was supported by Alibaba
Group through Alibaba Research Intern Program.