Construction of a Sentimental Word Dictionary
Eduard C. Dragut
Purdue University
 
Clement Yu, Prasad
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Chicago
{yu, sistla}@cs.uic.edu
Weiyi Meng
Dept. of Computer Science
Binghamton University
 
The Web has plenty of reviews, comments and reports about
products, services, government policies, institutions, etc. The
opinions expressed in these reviews inﬂuence how people regard these entities. For example, a product with consistently
good reviews is likely to sell well, while a product with numerous bad reviews is likely to sell poorly. Our aim is to
build a sentimental word dictionary, which is larger than
existing sentimental word dictionaries and has high accuracy. We introduce rules for deduction, which take words
with known polarities as input and produce synsets (a set
of synonyms with a deﬁnition) with polarities. The synsets
with deduced polarities can then be used to further deduce
the polarities of other words.
Experimental results show
that for a given sentimental word dictionary with D words,
approximately an additional 50% of D words with polarities
can be deduced. An experiment is conducted to ﬁnd the accuracy of a random sample of the deduced words. It is found
that the accuracy is about the same as that of comparing
the judgment of one human with that of another.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3 [INFORMATION STORAGE AND RETRIEVAL]:
Content Analysis and Indexing—Dictionaries
General Terms
Algorithm, Experimentation
Sentimental word dictionary, Deduction, WordNet
INTRODUCTION
Opinions aﬀect people from all walks of life. A person who
wants to buy a product would choose one having excellent
reviews and stay away from a product with poor reviews.
Our objective is to build a dictionary of sentimental words,
which facilitates the analysis and retrieval of opinionated
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
CIKM’10, October 26–30, 2010, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-4503-0099-5/10/10 ...$10.00.
texts. The proposed dictionary has the following majority
sentiment property: each word with a given part of speech
has polarity p (positive or negative) if the majority sense of
the word with that part of speech has polarity p. Existing
sentimental word dictionaries do not possess this property.
This property is signiﬁcant, because it is rather natural for
humans to classify the polarity of a word in such a manner.
More importantly, it permits the deduction of other
sentimental words with the same property.
Opinion mining (e.g., and opinion retrieval
(e.g., ) have signiﬁcant practical interest. We aim
to construct a sentimental word dictionary, which is of high
quality and has a large coverage of sentimental words. Such
a dictionary is essential, because it facilitates both opinion mining and opinion retrieval. Most existing sentimental
word dictionaries (General Inquirer , Appraisal Lexicon , Opinion Finder ) are far from being exhaustive and do not possess the majority sentiment property.
SentiWordNet gives a score of positivity, a score of negativity and a score of objectivity to each synset, with the sum
of scores = 1. Since these scores are obtained by classiﬁers
and through several iterations of extending the seed sets of
data, its accuracy is not high. For example, for the synset
{iniquity, immorality, evil, wickedness} (morally objectionable behavior),
SentiWordNet assigns the degrees P = 0.75, N = 0, O =
0.25, where P stands for positive polarity, N stands for negative polarity and O stands for neutral polarity. Most people
would agree that it has a negative instead of a positive polarity. Quite a few such examples exist in SentiWordNet.
Other researchers consider words to have degrees of
positivity/negativity. We choose to have a single polarity
associated with each word for the reason explained earlier.
The contributions of this paper are:
• By using a deduction approach, the resulting sentimental
word dictionary contains approximately 50% more words
than a given sentimental word dictionary;
• The accuracy of the deduced polarities is reasonably high;
it is comparable to that of human judgment.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 de-
ﬁnes the problem of constructing a sentimental word dictionary. Section 3 describes our approach of constructing the
dictionary. Section 4 is the experimental results. Related
works are given in section 5. Section 6 is the conclusion.
SENTIMENTAL WORD DICTIONARY
Our approach of constructing a sentimental word dictionary is as follows. We start from a seed dictionary D, i.e.,
a small dictionary of sentimental words where each word in
the dictionary has the majority sentiment property. Second,
we attempt to deduce the polarities of as many additional
sentimental words as possible, based on D.
In practice, we construct the sentimental dictionary on
top of the electronic dictionary WordNet . The goal is to
annotate each word (and its synsets) in WordNet with their
corresponding polarities. The idea is to start from a small
number of words whose polarities are known and to use the
relationships between words in the dictionary to deduce the
polarities of the rest of the words. In this work two words
are related if they share at least a synset. The deduction
process is the main contributions of this paper.
WordNet distinguishes between four part of speeches: noun,
verb, adjective and adverb. It groups words into sets of synonyms called synsets. Each word with a part of speech has
a set of senses, with each sense deﬁned by a synset. A sense
has a short, general deﬁnition and some examples. An example synset with a deﬁnition is:
(1)S: (adj) {bland, ﬂat, ﬂavorless, ﬂavourless, insipid, savorless, savourless, vapid} (lacking taste or ﬂavor or tang)“a
bland diet”; “insipid hospital food”; “ﬂavorless supermarket
tomatoes”; “vapid beer”; “vapid tea”
This is one of the three senses of the word bland. “1” is
the frequency count of the synset w.r.t. bland. The part
delimited by { and } is the synset, that delimited by ( and
) is the deﬁnition and the rest are the examples.
Note that the synset in the example is shared by all the
words present in the synset. Hence, the words flat, flavorless, etc.
have the synset among their synsets.
synset may however have diﬀerent frequency counts with
respect to each word. For instance, its frequency count is 0
with respect to the word flat. Whenever a synset has a 0
frequency count we replace it with 0.1. Usually the senses
with rare usages of a word have a 0 count. Increasing their
frequency counts by a small constant is a standard smoothing technique. If two senses of a word have the same synset,
then they can be diﬀerentiated by their deﬁnitions. To ease
the presentation, we will not mention the part of speech and
the deﬁnition of a word, and assume that the sense of each
word is characterized by its synset.
We assume that each synset has a unique polarity. For
example, the word bland has three senses, with the ﬁrst two
senses being negative and the last sense being positive. A
synset of a word has a frequency of use, indicating the“probability” that the word is used in the sense conveyed by the
synset. Suppose the frequencies of use of the word bland in
the three senses are f1, f2 and f3 respectively. For instance,
the frequency of the sense of the word bland described above
is 1. Then, the relative frequency of the synset in the ﬁrst
sense, which denotes the probability that the word is used in
the ﬁrst sense is f1/(f1 + f2 + f3). The probability that the
word expresses a negative sentiment is (f1+f2)/(f1+f2+f3).
If this probability is greater than .5, then the majority sense
of the word is negative. This property allows the polarities
of other words to be automatically deduced. The following
deﬁnition formally states this property.
Definition 1. (Polarity) Let w be a word and S its set
of synsets. Each synset in S has an associated polarity and a
relative frequency with respect to w. The word w has polarity
p, p ∈{positive, negative} if there is a subset of synsets
S′ ⊆S such that each synset s ∈S′ has polarity p and the
sum of the frequencies of the synsets in S′ is larger than 0.5.
S′ is called a polarity dominant subset. If there does not
exist any such subset then the word has a neutral polarity.
POLARITY INFERENCE FRAMEWORK
Given a seed dictionary D, the inference process can be
classiﬁed into two categories: (1) determine the polarities of
as many synsets as possible and (2) determine the polarities
of as many additional words not in D as possible. Once the
polarities of synsets are determined we employ Deﬁnition
1 (and other techniques) to determine the polarities of additional words. We ﬁrst describe how the polarities of the
synsets are inferred from the polarities of the words and then
cover the deduction of polarities for words.
Synset Polarity Inference
We classify the synset inference rules into single word and
multi-word inference rules. We ﬁrst introduce three single
word rules.
A synset of a word is called dominant if its relative frequency with respect to the word is larger than 0.5. Synsets
enjoying this property are important because, if a synset is
of polarity p and is dominant for the word w, then the word
has polarity p. Conversely, if the word w is known to have
polarity p and it has a dominant synset s, and possibly some
other synsets, then s must have polarity p. This rule is one
of the basic means of deducing the polarities of the synsets
given the polarities of the words.
Inference Rule 1. Let w be a word having a dominant
synset s. If w has polarity p ∈{positive, negative} then s
has polarity p, too.
Inference Rule 2. Let w be a word with polarity p and
exactly two synsets. The synsets have the same relative frequency with respect to w (i.e., 0.5). If p is either positive or
negative polarity then both synsets have polarity p.
In inference rule 2, if either synset does not have polarity
p, then the word w cannot have polarity p.
Thus, both
synsets must have polarity p.
As an illustration, the adjective advance has positive polarity in General Inquirer and it has two senses with identical relative frequencies in WordNet. Hence, we deduce that
both its synsets have positive polarities.
The next rule is for words with an arbitrary number of
synsets. It partitions the set of synsets of a word into those
whose polarities are known and those whose polarities are
unknown. If the two sets satisfy certain constraints the polarities of all those synsets whose polarities are unknown can
be determined.
Definition 2. Let w be a word and S be its set of synsets.
A subset S′ of S is a minimally dominant subset of synsets
if the sum of the relative frequencies of the synsets in S′ is
larger than 0.5 and the removal of any synset s from S′ will
make the sum of the relative frequencies of the synsets in
S′ −{s} smaller than 0.5.
For example, the word consummate has three synsets in
WordNet, each of them with the same relative frequency
1/3. It is easy to check that any two of its synsets form a
minimally dominant subset (their sum of frequencies is 2/3
and 2/3 > 1/2).
Inference Rule 3. Let w be a word with polarity p, negative or positive, and S be its set of synsets. Suppose S can
be partitioned into two sets, S1 and S2.
S1 is the set of
the synsets whose polarities are known and are all diﬀerent
from p. S2 is the set of the synsets whose polarities are either unknown or known but equal to p. If S2 is a minimally
dominant subset then all its synsets must have polarity p.
The word consummate has positive polarity in Opinion
Finder dictionary. Suppose one of its synsets has negative
polarity. Since the other two synsets form a minimally dominant subset, they must each have positive polarity.
We give an example of an inference rule that involves two
words sharing a number of synsets. We have deﬁned and
implemented 11 multi-word rules.
Inference Rule 4. Let w and v be two words, with polarities ∼p (∼is the negation symbol) and p, respectively,
where p ∈{ positive, negative}.
Neither w nor v have a
dominant synset. w has n ≥3 synsets {s1, s2, ..., sn}. v has
3 synsets {s0, s1, s2} (i.e., the two words share {s1, s2}). If
the sum of the relative frequencies of s1 and s2 with respect
to w is greater than 0.5, then the polarity of synset s0 is p.
Most of our rules involve words with up to four synsets.
The explanation lies in the fact that more than 95% of the
words in WordNet have up to four synsets. Additionally,
all the words with ﬁve or more synsets share many of their
synsets with words having up to four synsets.
Word Polarity Inference
The inference of polarities for words is as follows. The
polarity of a word w ̸∈D may be determined (i) from its
underlying synsets, using Deﬁnition 1 and (ii) by comparing
the subsets of synsets of w and those of a word with known
polarity. The latter case is useful when there are not enough
synsets with known polarities so that Deﬁnition 1 can be
applied. This section covers this case.
Proposition 1. Let w and v be two words. Let Sw and
Sv be the sets of synsets of w and v, respectively. Suppose
that Sw ⊆Sv.
If every minimal dominant subset Sw is
also a dominant subset in Sv then, if word w has polarity
p, p ∈{positive, negative}, then word v has polarity p, too.
We noticed that this statement is satisﬁed in many instances by words with multiple spellings (e.g., British vs.
American English): e.g., brutalise vs. brutalize, the two
words have identical sets of synsets, i.e., Sw = Sv. Besides
the multi-lingual spelling examples, there are also other motivating examples, e.g, the verbs dehydrate and desiccate.
These two words have identical sets of synsets.
Proposition 2. Let w and v be two words. Let Sw and
Sv be the sets of synsets of w and v, respectively. Suppose
that S = Sw ∩Sv ̸= ∅and S′ = Sw −Sv ̸= ∅. The polarity
of w is p, p ∈{positive, negative}, and the polarities of all
the synsets in S′ are known and all are diﬀerent from p. S
must contain some dominant subset of w. If every minimal
dominant subset of w in S is also a dominant subset w.r.t.
v, then the polarity of word v is p, too.
The results can be used to derive clusters of words with
the same polarity.
Suppose that there are pairs of words
(w, v1), (w, v2), .., (w, vn) such that each pair satisﬁes the
conditions of Proposition 1. If w has polarity p, then v1, v2, .., vn
have polarity p. The same principle applies to word pairs
satisfying the conditions of Proposition 2. This increases the
number of words whose polarities can be determined.
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The data sets used in our experiments consist of: WordNet
 and the sentimental dictionaries General Inquirer ,
Appraisal Lexicon and Opinion Finder . We use
Words Synsets Op. Finder Gen. Inq. App. Lex.
117,798 82,115
11,529 13,767
Adjective 21,479 18,156
155,287117,659
Table 1: Distribution of words and synsets
Input WordsInferred WordsInferred Synsets
Table 2: Inference result using the union dictionary.
WordNet 3.0, whose statistics are given in Table 1. The table
shows the distribution of the words and synsets per part of
speech. Columns 2 and 3 pertain to WordNet. For example,
there are 21,479 adjective words, which have 18,156 synsets.
In total WordNet 3.0 has 155,287 words and 117,659 synsets.
Data cleaning
The three sentimental dictionaries are organized in triplets
of the form ⟨word, pos, polarity⟩(where pos stands for part
of speech), e.g., ⟨bland, Adjective, negative⟩. General Inquirer has 3,994 distinct triplets, Appraisal Lexicon as
1,888 distinct triplets and Opinion Finder has 8,223 distinct triplets. But not all their original entries are useable.
The main reason is that a triplet ⟨w, pos, p⟩is present in a
sentimental word dictionary, but (1) the word w does not
appear in WordNet (regardless of pos) or (2) w with pos is
not present in WordNet.
After cleaning, as shown in Table 1, there are 3,724 entries in General Inquirer, 1,759 entries in Appraisal Lexicon and 6,791 entries in Opinion Finder which appear in
WordNet. Herein, whenever we refer to theses dictionaries
we refer to their cleaned versions.
Automatic Discovery of Sentimental Words
One of the main experimental results is the deduction of
polarities for additional words using the polarities of the
words in the disagreement-free union of the three dictionaries. A triplet ⟨w, pos, p⟩is included into the disagreementfree union dictionary if (1) ⟨w, pos, p⟩is in one of the three
dictionaries and there does not exist another triplet ⟨w, pos, p′⟩
in another dictionary such that p ̸= p′ or (2) ⟨w, pos, x⟩is
in one of the three dictionaries, but in a diﬀerent dictionary
there is ⟨w, pos, y⟩such that x ̸= y; in which case, we determine the polarity of ⟨w, pos⟩to be p by consulting WordNet
and applying Deﬁnition 1.
The result of inferring the polarities of new words and
synsets using the union dictionary is summarized in Table
2. The table breaks down the outcome by part of speeches.
For example, we are given the polarities of 2,315 nouns (out
of 7,794 words) and we deduce the polarities of 1,460 new
In the process we deduce the polarities of 1,683
synsets. Overall, we are given the polarities of 7,794 words
and we are able to deduce the polarities of 4,075 additional
words and the polarities of 5,099 synsets. In other words, an
additional 52.2% of the number of input words with polarities are deduced. This percentage seems to be a fair estimate
of the inference power of our environment as conﬁrmed by
running the inference rules on the individual dictionaries.
Speciﬁcally, we obtain 55% for Opinion Finder, 68% for
General Inquirer and 54% for Appraisal Lexicon.
While from a practical point of view this number seems to
be a fair characterization of our inference framework, analytically it is not quite fair. The ability to infer the polarities
of new words is dependent on two aspects: (1) the structure
of WordNet and (2) the distribution of the words in an input
dictionary. We brieﬂy discuss these issues next.
There are 40,077 isolate words in WordNet whose polarities cannot be automatically determined. These words have
the property that their synsets are not shared with any other
word in WordNet. In addition, the input words are badly
distributed over WordNet, both per part of speech as well
as overall. For instance, in WordNet there are 3,554 nontrivial connected components for the adjective part of speech
and the input words fall into only 563 of them, which is less
than 16%. A non-trivial connected component has at least
two words and any two words (synsets) are connected to
each other by paths. Overall, the distribution is far poorer.
The words fall into less than 5% (1,443 of 33,015) of the
non-trivial connected components. This has a negative implication: even if more rules are developed a large portion of
WordNet still remains inaccessible to polarity inferencing.
Polarity Inference Accuracy
In Table 2, 4075 additional words with polarities were
deduced. 100 words are randomly chosen from these 4075
words according to their distributions among nouns (22.2%),
adjectives (37.5%), adverbs (11.5%) and verbs (28.8%). These
100 words are shown to 3 humans. They are asked to determine their polarities. If they are familiar with a word,
they can determine its polarity directly using their experience; otherwise, they can utilize WordNet and Deﬁnition 1
to determine its polarity. The Kappa statistic is used to
measure the agreement, denoted agreement A-H (Automatic
versus Human), between the deduced polarities of the words
and those given by the humans. It is also used to measure
the agreement, denoted H-H (Human versus Human), between the polarities of the words given by diﬀerent humans.
The agreement A-H is 63.3%, which is slightly larger than
that of H-H, which is 62%. It should be noted that the deduction process does not give rise to errors. The “errors”
only illustrate the discrepancies among the dictionaries.
If the Kappa statistics is over 75% the agreement is assumed to be excellent. The reason why the agreement accuracy among humans is relatively low, 62%, is that people
have preconceived notions of the polarities of words/phrases.
As an example, a phrase to be judged by humans is the verb
eat at. A human may associate the phrase to mean “eating
at a restaurant” and assigns either a neutral or a positive
polarity. However, this phrase means “become deteriorate”,
according to WordNet. Thus a human who consults Word-
Net assigns a negative polarity to it.
RELATED WORK
The problem of determining the polarities of words has
been studied by many researchers (e.g., ).
The general theme is that there are sets of seed words that
have known polarities; e.g., the seed word “good” is positive
and the seed word“bad”is negative. These sets of seed terms
are grown by various means. For example, synonyms and
antonyms are used to expand the sets of seeds. Another
technique to expand the seed sets is to apply the pointwise
mutual information measure to each target word t w.r.t.
each seed word ti. The pointwise mutual information measure is obtained from the co-occurrence frequency of t and ti
in documents retrieved by a search engine and the frequencies of the individual words in those documents. Machine
learning algorithms can be employed to classify words
into diﬀerent polarities. According to , the performance
of is comparable or better than those in .
Unlike SentiWordNet, our view is that each synset does
not have a degree associated with each polarity.
each synset is 100% positive, 100% negative or 100% neutral.
CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we introduce the concept of deducing the
polarities of words based on the polarities of other words.
Experimental results show that the number of new words
with polarities deduced is approximately 50% of the size of
the original sentimental word dictionary. There are quite a
few operators such as hyponym, antonym and similar-to in
WordNet, which can be used for deduction, as pointed out
in . Intuitively, a hyponym synset of a synset with polarity p also has polarity p and an antonym of a word with
polarity p has polarity ∼p. However, we found numerous
exceptions to the intuition.
We believe that we can ﬁnd
remedies to these situations. Operators such as antonyms
and hyponyms behave diﬀerently from the inference rules
described in Section 3. Speciﬁcally, the former type of operations do not require the words and synsets to be within
a connected component for deductions to operate properly.