Time Series Data Augmentation for Deep Learning: A Survey
Qingsong Wen1, Liang Sun1, Fan Yang2, Xiaomin Song1, Jingkun Gao3∗, Xue Wang1, Huan Xu2
1DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group, Bellevue, WA, USA
2Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
3Twitter, Seattle, WA, USA
{qingsong.wen, liang.sun, fanyang.yf, xiaomin.song, xue.w, huan.xu}@alibaba-inc.com,
 
Deep learning performs remarkably well on many
time series analysis tasks recently.
The superior
performance of deep neural networks relies heavily
on a large number of training data to avoid over-
ﬁtting. However, the labeled data of many realworld time series applications may be limited such
as classiﬁcation in medical time series and anomaly
detection in AIOps. As an effective way to enhance
the size and quality of the training data, data augmentation is crucial to the successful application
of deep learning models on time series data.
this paper, we systematically review different data
augmentation methods for time series.
We propose a taxonomy for the reviewed methods, and
then provide a structured review for these methods
by highlighting their strengths and limitations. We
also empirically compare different data augmentation methods for different tasks including time series classiﬁcation, anomaly detection, and forecasting. Finally, we discuss and highlight ﬁve future
directions to provide useful research guidance.
Introduction
Deep learning has achieved remarkable success in many
ﬁelds, including computer vision (CV), natural language processing (NLP), and speech processing, etc. Recently, it is
increasingly embraced for solving time series related tasks,
including time series classiﬁcation [Fawaz et al., 2019], time
series forecasting [Han et al., 2019], and time series anomaly
detection [Gamboa, 2017]. The success of deep learning relies heavily on a large number of training data to avoid over-
ﬁtting. Unfortunately, many time series tasks do not have
enough labeled data. As an effective tool to enhance the size
and quality of the training data, data augmentation is crucial
to the successful application of deep learning models. The basic idea of data augmentation is to generate synthetic dataset
covering unexplored input space while maintaining correct labels. Data augmentation has shown its effectiveness in many
applications, such as AlexNet [Krizhevsky et al., 2012] for
ImageNet classiﬁcation.
∗The work was done when Jingkun Gao was at Alibaba Group.
However, less attention has been paid to ﬁnd better data
augmentation methods speciﬁcally for time series data. Here
we highlight some challenges arising from data augmentation
methods for time series data. Firstly, the intrinsic properties
of time series data are not fully utilized in current data augmentation methods. One unique property of time series data
is the so-called temporal dependency.
Unlike image data,
the time series data can be transformed into the frequency
and time-frequency domains and effective data augmentation
methods can be designed and implemented in the transformed
domain. This becomes more complicated when we model
multivariate time series where we need to consider the potentially complex dynamics of these variables across time. Thus,
simply applying those data augmentation methods from image and speech processing may not result in valid synthetic
data. Secondly, the data augmentation methods are also task
dependent. For example, the data augmentation methods applicable for time series classiﬁcation may not be valid for time
series anomaly detection. In addition, data augmentation becomes more crucial in many time series classiﬁcation problems where class imbalance is often observed. In this case,
how to effective generate a large number of synthetic data
with labels with less samples remains a challenge.
Unlike data augmentation for CV [Shorten and Khoshgoftaar, 2019] or speech [Cui et al., 2015], data augmentation
for time series has not yet been comprehensively and systematically reviewed to the best of our knowledge. One work
closely related to ours is [Iwana and Uchida, 2020] which
presents a survey of existing data augmentation methods for
time series classiﬁcation. However, it does not review the
data augmentation methods for other common tasks like time
series forecasting [Bandara et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2020;
Lee and Kim, 2020] and anomaly detection [Lim et al., 2018;
Zhou et al., 2019; Gao et al., 2020]. Furthermore, the potential avenues for future research opportunities of time series
data augmentations are also missing.
In this paper, we aim to ﬁll the aforementioned gaps by
summarizing existing time series data augmentation methods
in common tasks, including time series forecasting, anomaly
detection, classiﬁcation, as well as providing insightful future directions. To this end, we propose a taxonomy of data
augmentation methods for time series, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
Based on the taxonomy, we review these data augmentation
methods systematically. We start the discussion from the sim-
Proceedings of the Thirtieth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-21)
Survey Track
Time Series
Data Augmentation
Approaches
Approaches
Decomposition
Statistical
Generative Models
Cropping, Flipping, Jittering, …
Generative Models
Data Augmentation
Figure 1: A taxonomy of time series data augmentation techniques.
ple transformations in time domain ﬁrst. And then we discuss more transformations on time series in the transformed
frequency and time-frequency domains. Besides the transformations in different domains for time series, we also summarize more advanced methods, including decomposition-based
methods, model-based methods, and learning-based methods.
For learning-based methods, we further divide them into embedding space, deep generative models (DGMs), and automated data augmentation methods. To demonstrate effectiveness of data augmentation, we conduct preliminary evaluation
of augmentation methods in three typical time series tasks,
including time series classiﬁcation, anomaly detection, and
forecasting. Finally, we discuss and highlight ﬁve future directions: augmentation in time-frequency domain, augmentation for imbalanced class, augmentation selection and combination, augmentation with Gaussian processes, and augmentation with deep generative models.
Basic Data Augmentation Methods
Time Domain
The transforms in the time domain are the most straightforward data augmentation methods for time series data. Most
of them manipulate the original input time series directly, like
injecting Gaussian noise or more complicated noise patterns
such as spike, step-like trend, and slope-like trend. Besides
this straightforward methods, we will also discuss a particular
data augmentation method for time series anomaly detection,
i.e., label expansion in the time domain.
Window cropping or slicing has been mentioned in [Le
Guennec et al., 2016]. Introduced in [Cui et al., 2016], window cropping is similar to cropping in CV area. It is a subsample method to randomly extract continuous slices from
the original time series. The length of the slice is a tunable parameter. For classiﬁcation problem, the labels of sliced samples are the same as the original time series. During test time,
each slice from a test time series is classiﬁed using majority
voting. For anomaly detection problem, the anomaly label
will be sliced along with value series.
Window warping is a unique augmentation method for time
series. Similar to dynamic time warping (DTW), this method
selects a random time range, then compresses (down sample)
or extends (up sample) it, while keeps other time range unchanged. Window warping would change the total length of
the original time series, so it should be conducted along with
window cropping for deep learning models.
This method
contains the normal down sampling which takes down sample
through the whole length of the original time series.
Flipping is another method that generates the new sequence x
1, · · · , x
N by ﬂipping the sign of original time series
x1, · · · , xN, where x
t = −xt. The labels are still the same,
for both anomaly detection and classiﬁcation, assuming that
we have symmetry between up and down directions.
Another interesting perturbation and also ensemble based
method is introduced in [Fawaz et al., 2018]. This method
generates new time series with DTW and then ensembles
them by a weighted version of the Barycentric Averaging
(DBA) algorithm. It shows improvement of classiﬁcation in
some of the UCR datasets.
Noise injection is a method by injecting small amount
of noise/outlier into time series without changing the corresponding labels. This includes injecting Gaussian noise,
spike, step-like trend, and slope-like trend, etc. For spike,
we can randomly pick index and direction, randomly assign
magnitude but bounded by multiples of standard deviation of
the original time series. For step-like trend, it is the cumulative summation of the spikes from left index to right index.
The slope-like trend is adding a linear trend into the original
time series. These schemes are mostly mentioned in [Wen
and Keyes, 2019]
In time series anomaly detection, the anomalies generally
last long enough during a continuous span so that the start and
end points are sometimes “blurry”. As a result, a data point
close to a labeled anomaly in terms of both time distance and
value distance is very likely to be an anomaly. In this case,
the label expansion method is proposed to change those data
points and their labels as anomalies (by assign it an anomaly
score or switch its label), which brings performance improvement for time series anomaly detection as shown in [Gao et
al., 2020].
Frequency Domain
While most of the existing data augmentation methods focus
on time domain, only a few studies investigate data augmentation from frequency domain perspective for time series.
A recent work in [Gao et al., 2020] proposes to utilize perturbations in both amplitude spectrum and phase spectrum
in frequency domain for data augmentation in time series
anomaly detection by convolutional neural network. Speciﬁcally, for the input time series x1, · · · , xN, its frequency spectrum F(ωk) through Fourier transform is calculated as:
xte−jωkt = A(ωk) exp[jθ(ωk)]
where ωk = 2πk
N is the angular frequency, A(ωk) is the amplitude spectrum, and θ(ωk) is the phase spectrum. For perturbations in amplitude spectrum A(ωk), the amplitude values of randomly selected segments are replaced with Gaussian noise by considering the original mean and variance in
the amplitude spectrum.
While for perturbations in phase
spectrum θ(ωk), the phase values of randomly selected segments are added by an extra zero-mean Gaussian noise in
the phase spectrum. The amplitude and phase perturbations
(APP) based data augmentation combined with aforementioned time-domain augmentation methods bring signiﬁcant
Proceedings of the Thirtieth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-21)
Survey Track
time series anomaly detection improvements as shown in the
experiments of [Gao et al., 2020].
Another recent work in [Lee et al., 2019] proposes to
utilize the surrogate data to improve the classiﬁcation performance of rehabilitative time series in deep neural network. Two conventional types of surrogate time series are
adopted in the work: the amplitude adjusted Fourier transform (AAFT) and the iterated AAFT (IAAFT) [Schreiber and
Schmitz, 2000]. The main idea is to perform random phase
shufﬂe in phase spectrum after Fourier transform and then
perform rank-ordering of time series after inverse Fourier
transform. The generated time series from AAFT and IAAFT
can approximately preserve the temporal correlation, power
spectra, and the amplitude distribution of the original time
series. In the experiments of [Lee et al., 2019], the authors
conducted two types of data augmentation by extending the
data by 10 then 100 times through AAFT and IAAFT methods, and demonstrated promising classiﬁcation accuracy improvements compared to the original time series without data
augmentation.
Time-Frequency Domain
Time-frequency analysis is a widely applied technique for
time series analysis, which can be utilized as an appropriate
input features in deep neural networks. However, similar to
data augmentation in frequency domain, only a few studies
considered data augmentation from time-frequency domain
for time series.
The authors in [Steven Eyobu and Han, 2018] adopt short
Fourier transform (STFT) to generate time-frequency features
for sensor time series, and conduct data augmentation on the
time-frequency features for human activity classiﬁcation by a
deep LSTM neural network. Speciﬁcally, two augmentation
techniques are proposed. One is the local averaging based on
a deﬁned criteria with the generated features appended at the
tail end of the feature set. Another is the shufﬂing of feature
vectors to create variation in the data. Similarly, in speech
time series, recently SpecAugment [Park et al., 2019] is proposed to make data augmentation in Mel-Frequency (a timefrequency representation based on STFT for speech time series), where the augmentation scheme consists of warping the
features, masking blocks of frequency channels, and masking
blocks of time steps. They demonstrate that SpecAugment
can greatly improve the performance of speech recognition
neural networks and obtain state-of-the-art results.
For illustration, we summarize several typical time series
data augmentation methods in time, frequency, and timefrequency domains in Fig. 2.
Advanced Data Augmentation Methods
Decomposition-based Methods
Decomposition-based time series augmentation has also been
adopted and shown success in many time series related tasks,
such as forecasting and anomaly detection. Common decomposition method like STL [Cleveland et al., 1990] or Robust-
STL [Wen et al., 2019b] decomposes time series xt as
xt = τt + st + rt,
t = 1, 2, ...N
Down-sampling
Adding slope
(a) time domain
AAFT augmented
IAAFT augmented
APP augmented
STFT augmented
(b) (time-)frequency domain
Figure 2: Illustration of several typical time series data augmentations in time, frequency, and time-frequency domains.
where τt is the trend signal, st is the seasonal/periodic signal,
and the rt denotes the remainder signal.
In [Kegel et al., 2018], authors discussed the decomposition method to generate new time series. After STL, it recombines new time series with a deterministic component
and a stochastic component. The deterministic part is reconstructed by adjusting weights for base, trend, and seasonality.
The stochastic part is generated by building a composite statistical model based on residual, such as an auto-regressive
model. The summed generated time series is validated by examining whether a feature-based distance to its original signal is within certain range. Meanwhile, authors in [Bergmeir
et al., 2016] proposed to apply bootstrapping on the STL decomposed residuals to generate augmented signals, which are
then added back with trend and seasonality to assemble a new
time series. An ensemble of the forecasting models on the
augmented time series has outperformed the original forecasting model consistently, demonstrating the effectiveness of
decomposition-based time series augmentation approaches.
Recently, in [Gao et al., 2020], authors showed that applying time-domain and frequency-domain augmentation on
the decomposed residual that is generated using robust decomposition [Wen et al., 2020; Wen et al., 2019a] can help
increase the performance of anomaly detection signiﬁcantly,
compared with the same method without augmentation.
Statistical Generative Models
Time series augmentation approaches based on statistical
generative models typically involve modelling the dynamics
of the time series with statistical models. In [Cao et al., 2014],
authors proposed a parsimonious statistical model, known as
mixture of Gaussian trees, for modeling multi-modal minority class time series data to solve the problem of imbalanced
classiﬁcation, which shows advantages compared with existing oversampling approaches that do not exploit time series
correlations between neighboring points. Authors in [Smyl
and Kuber, 2016] use samples of parameters and forecast
paths calculated by a statistical algorithm called LGT (Local
and Global Trend). More recently, in [Kang et al., 2020] researchers use mixture autoregressive (MAR) models to simulate sets of time series and investigate the diversity and cover-
Proceedings of the Thirtieth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-21)
Survey Track
age of the generated time series in a time series feature space.
Essentially, these models describe the conditional distribution of time series by assuming the value at time t depends
on previous points. Once the initial value is perturbed, a new
time series sequence could be generated following the conditional distribution.
Learning-based Methods
Time series data augmentation methods should be capable of
not only generating diverse samples, but also mimicking the
characteristics of real data. In this section, we summarize
some recent learning based schemes that have such potentials.
Embedding Space
In [DeVries and Taylor, 2017], the data augmentation is proposed to perform in the learned embedding space (aka., latent
space). It assumes that simple transforms applied to encoded
inputs rather than the raw inputs would produce more plausible synthetic data due to the manifold unfolding in feature
space. Note that the selection of the representation model
in this framework is open and depends on the speciﬁc task
and data type.
When the time series data is addressed, a
sequence autoencoder is selected in [DeVries and Taylor,
2017]. Speciﬁcally, the interpolation and extrapolation are
applied to generate new samples. The ﬁrst k nearest labels
in the transformed space with the same label are identiﬁed.
Then for each pair of neighboring samples, a new sample is
generated which is the linear combination of them. The difference of interpolation and extrapolation lies in the weight
selection in sample generation. This technique is particular
useful for time series classiﬁcation as demonstrated in [De-
Vries and Taylor, 2017]. Recently, another data augmentation
method in the embedding space named MODALS (Modalityagnostic Automated Data Augmentation in the Latent Space)
is proposed in [Cheung and Yeung, 2021]. Instead of training
an autoencoder to learn the latent space and generate additional synthetic data for training, the MODALS method train
a classiﬁcation model jointly with different compositions of
latent space augmentations, which demonstrates superior performance for time series classiﬁcation problems.
Deep Generative Models
Deep generative models (DGMs) have recently been shown to
be able to generate near-realistic high-dimensional data objects such as images and sequences. DGMs developed for
sequential data, such as audio and text, often can be extended
to model time series data. Among DGMs, generative adversarial networks (GANs) are popular methods to generate synthetic samples and increase the training set effectively. Although the GAN frameworks have received signiﬁcant attention in many ﬁelds, how to generate effective time series data
still remains a challenging problem. In this subsection, we
brieﬂy review several recent works on GANs for time series
data augmentation.
In [Esteban et al., 2017], a Recurrent GAN (RGAN) and
Recurrent Conditional GAN (RCGAN) are proposed to produce realistic real-valued multi-dimensional time series data.
The RGAN adopts RNN in the generator and discriminator,
while the RCGAN adopts both RNNs conditioned on auxiliary information. Besides desirable performance of RGAN
and RCGAN for time series data augmentation, differential
privacy can be used in training the RCGAN for stricter privacy guarantees like medicine or other sensitive domains.
Recently, [Yoon et al., 2019] proposed TimeGAN, a natural
framework for generating realistic time series data in various
domains. TimeGAN is a generative time series model, trained
adversarially and jointly via a learned embedding space with
both supervised and unsupervised losses. Speciﬁcally, a stepwise supervised loss is introduced to learn the stepwise conditional distributions in data. It also introduces an embedding
network to provide a reversible mapping between features
and latent representations to reduce the high-dimensionality
of the adversarial learning space. Note that the supervised
loss is minimized by jointly training both the embedding and
generator networks.
Automated Data Augmentation
The idea of automated data augmentation is to automatically
search for optimal data augmentation policies through reinforcement learning, meta learning, or evolutionary search
[Ratner et al., 2017; Cubuk et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020;
Cheung and Yeung, 2021]. The TANDA (Transformation Adversarial Networks for Data Augmentations) scheme in [Ratner et al., 2017] is designed to train a generative sequence
model over speciﬁed transformation functions using reinforcement learning in a GAN-like framework to generate realistic transformed data points, which yields strong gains over
common heuristic data augmentation methods for a range
of applications including image recognition and natural language understanding tasks.
[Cubuk et al., 2019] proposes
a procedure called AutoAugment to automatically search
for improved data augmentation policies in a reinforcement
learning framework. It adopts a controller RNN network to
predicts an augmentation policy from the search space and
another network is trained to achieve convergence accuracy.
Then, the accuracy is used as reward to update the RNN controller for better policies in the next iteration. The experimental results show that AutoAugment improves the accuracy of modern image classiﬁers signiﬁcantly in a wide range
of datasets.
For time series data augmentation, the MODALS [Cheung
and Yeung, 2021] is designed to ﬁnd the optimal composition of latent space transformations for data augmentation using evolution search strategy based on population based augmentation (PBA) [Ho et al., 2019], which demonstrates superior performance on classiﬁcation problems in continuous and
discrete time series data. Another recent work on automated
data augmentation is proposed in [Fons et al., 2021], where
two sample-adaptive automatic weighting schemes are designed speciﬁcally for time series data: one learns to weight
the contribution of the augmented samples to the loss, and
the other selects a subset of transformations based on the
ranking of the predicted training loss. Both adaptive policies demonstrate improvement on classiﬁcation problems in
multiple time series datasets.
Preliminary Evaluation
In this section, we demonstrate preliminary evaluations in
three common time series tasks to show the effectiveness of
data augmentation for performance improvement.
Proceedings of the Thirtieth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-21)
Survey Track
Time Series Classiﬁcation
In this experiment, we compare the classiﬁcation performance with and without data augmentation. Speciﬁcally, we
collect 5000 time series of one-week long and 5-min interval
samples with binary class labels (seasonal or non-seasonal)
from Alibaba Cloud monitoring system.
The data is randomly splitted into training and test sets where training contains 80% of total samples. We train a fully convolutional
network [Wang et al., 2017] to classify each time series in the
training set. In our experiment, we inject different types of
outliers, including spike, step, and slope, into the test set to
evaluate the robustness of the trained classiﬁer. The data augmentations methods applied include cropping, warping, and
ﬂipping. Table 1 summarizes the accuracies with and without data augmentation when different types of outliers are
injected into the test set. It can be observed that data augmentation leads to 0.1% ∼1.9% accuracy improvement.
Outlier injection
Improvement
Table 1: Accuracy improvement from data augmentation under outlier injection in time series classiﬁcation.
Time Series Anomaly Detection
Given the challenges of both data scarcity and data imbalance in time series anomaly detection, it is beneﬁcial by
adopting data augmentation to generate more labeled data.
We brieﬂy summarize the results in [Gao et al., 2020], where
a U-Net based network is designed and evaluated on public Yahoo!
dataset [Laptev et al., 2015] for time series
anomaly detection. The performance comparison under different settings are summarized in Table 2, including applying the model on the raw data (U-Net-Raw), on the decomposed residuals (U-Net-DeW), and on the residuals with data
augmentation (U-Net-DeWA). The applied data augmentation methods include ﬂipping, cropping, label expansion, and
APP based augmentation in frequency domain. It can be observed that the decomposition helps the increase of the F1
score and the data augmentation further boosts the performance.
U-Net-DeWA (w/ aug)
Table 2: Time series anomaly detection improvement from data augmentation based on precision, recall, and F1 score.
Time Series Forecasting
In this subsection we demonstrate the practical effectiveness
of data augmentation in two popular deep models DeepAR
[Salinas et al., 2019] and Transformer [Vaswani et al., 2017].
In Table 3, we report the performance improvement on mean
absolute scaled error (MASE) on several public datasets:
electricity and trafﬁc from UCI Learning Repository1 and
1 
3 datasets from the M4 competition2. We consider the basic augmentation methods including cropping, warping, ﬂipping, and APP based augmentation in frequency domain. In
Table 3, we summarize average MASE without augmentation, with augmentation and average relative improvement
(ARI) which is computed as the mean of (MASEw/o aug −
MASEw aug)/MASEw aug. We observe that the data augmentation methods bring promising results for all models in average sense. However, the negative results can still be observed
for speciﬁc data/model pairs. As a future work, it motivates
us to search for advanced automated data augmentation policies that stabilize the inﬂuence of data augmentation speciﬁcally for time series forecasting.
Transformer
electricity
Table 3: Time seires forecasting improvement from data augmentation based on MASE.
Discussion for Future Opportunities
Augmentation in Time-Frequency Domain
As discussed in Section 2.3, so far there are only limited studies of time series data augmentation methods based on STFT
in the time-frequency domain. Besides STFT, wavelet transform and its variants including continuous wavelet transform
(CWT) and discrete wavelet transform (DWT), are another
family of adaptive time–frequency domain analysis methods to characterize time-varying properties of time series.
Compared to STFT, they can handle non-stationary time series and non-Gaussian noises more effectively and robustly.
Among many wavelet transform variants, maximum overlap discrete wavelet transform (MODWT) is especially attractive for time series analysis [Percival and Walden, 2000;
Wen et al., 2021] due to the following advantages: 1) more
computationally efﬁciency compared to CWT; 2) ability to
handle any time series length; 3) increased resolution at
coarser scales compared with DWT. MODWT based surrogate time series have been proposed in [Keylock, 2006],
where wavelet iterative amplitude adjusted Fourier transform
(WIAAFT) is designed by combining the iterative amplitude
adjusted Fourier transform (IAAFT) scheme to each level of
MODWT coefﬁcients. In contrast to IAAFT, WIAAFT does
not assume sationarity and can roughly maintain the shape of
the original data in terms of the temporal evolution. Besides
WIAAFT, we can also consider the perturbation of both amplitude spectrum and phase spectrum as [Gao et al., 2020]
at each level of MODWT coefﬁcients as a data augmentation
It would be an interesting future direction to investigate
how to exploit different wavelet transforms (CWT, DWT,
MODWT, etc.) for an effective time-frequency domain based
time series data augmentation in deep neural networks.
2 
Proceedings of the Thirtieth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-21)
Survey Track
Augmentation for Imbalanced Class
In time series classiﬁcation, class imbalance occurs very
frequently.
One classical approach addressing imbalanced classiﬁcation problem is to oversample the minority class as the synthetic minority oversampling technique
(SMOTE) [Fern´andez et al., 2018] to artiﬁcially mitigate the
imbalance. However, this oversampling strategy may change
the distribution of raw data and cause overﬁtting. Another approach is to design cost-sensitive model by using adjust loss
function [Geng and Luo, 2018]. Furthermore, [Gao et al.,
2020] designed label-based weight and value-based weight in
the loss function in convolution neural networks, which considers weight adjustment for class labels and the neighborhood of each sample. Thus, both class imbalance and temporal dependency are explicitly considered.
Performing data augmentation and weighting for imbalanced class together would be an interesting and effective direction. A recent study investigates this topic in the area of
CV and NLP [Hu et al., 2019], which signiﬁcantly improves
text and image classiﬁcation in low data regime and imbalanced class problems. In future, it is interesting to design
deep network by jointly considering data augmentation and
weighting for imbalanced class in time series data.
Augmentation Selection and Combination
Given different data augmentation methods summarized in
Fig. 1, one key strategy is how to select and combine various augmentation methods together. The experiments in [Um
et al., 2017] show that the combination of three basic timedomain methods (permutation, rotation, and time warping)
is better than that of a single method and achieves the best
performance in time series classiﬁcation. Also, the results
in [Rashid and Louis, 2019] demonstrate substantial performance improvement for a time series classiﬁcation task when
using a deep neural network by combining four data augmentation methods (i.e, jittering, scaling, rotation and timewarping). However, considering various data augmentation
methods, directly combining different augmentations may result in a huge amount of data, and may not be efﬁcient and
effective for performance improvement. Recently, RandAugment [Cubuk et al., 2020] is proposed as a practical way for
augmentation combination in image classiﬁcation and object
detection. For each random generated dataset, RandAugment
is based on only two interpretable hyperparameters N (number of augmentation methods to combine) and M (magnitude for all augmentation methods), where each augmentation is randomly selected from K=14 available augmentation
methods. Furthermore, this randomly combined augmentation with simple grid search can be used in the reinforcement
learning based data augmentation as [Cubuk et al., 2019] for
efﬁcient space searching.
An interesting future direction is how to design effective
augmentation selection and/or combination strategies suitable
for time series data in deep learning. Customized reinforcement learning and meta learning optimized for time series
could be potential approaches. Furthermore, algorithm efﬁciency is another important consideration in practice.
Augmentation with Gaussian Processes
Gaussian Processes (GPs) [Rasmussen and Williams, 2005]
are well-known Bayesian non-parametric models suitable for
time series analysis [Roberts et al., 2013]. From the functionspace view, GPs induce a distribution over functions, i.e., a
stochastic process. Time series can be viewed as functions
with time as input and observation as output, and thus can
be modeled with GPs.
A GP f(t) ∼GP(m(t), k(t, t′))
is characterized by a mean function m(t) and a covariance kernel function k(t, t′). The choice of the kernel allows to place assumptions on some general properties of the
modeled functions, such as smoothness, scale, periodicity
and noise level.
Kernels can be composed through addition and multiplication, resulting in compositional function
properties, such as pseudo-periodicity, additive decomposability, and change point. GPs are often applied to interpolation and extrapolation tasks, which correspond to imputation
and forecasting in time series analysis. Furthermore, deep
Gaussian processes(DGPs) [Damianou and Lawrence, 2013;
Salimbeni and Deisenroth, 2017], which are richer models
with hierarchical composition of GPs and often exceed standard (single-layer) GPs signiﬁcantly in many cases, have not
been well studied for time series. We believe GPs and DGPs
are future directions as they allow to sample time series with
those properties mentioned above through the design of kernels, and to generate new data instances from existing ones
by exploiting their interpolation/extrapolation abilities.
Augmentation with Deep Generative Models
Current DGMs adopted for time series data augmentation are
mainly GANs. However, other DGMs also have great potentials for time series modeling. For example, deep autoregressive networks (DARNs) exhibit a natural ﬁt for time series
because they generate data in a sequential manner, obeying
the causal direction of physical time series data generating
process. DARNs like Wavenet [Oord et al., 2016] and Transformer [Vaswani et al., 2017] have demonstrated promising performance in time series forecasting tasks [Alexandrov et al., 2020]. Another example is normalizing ﬂows
(NFs) [Kobyzev et al., 2020], which recently have shown
success in modeling time series stochastic processes with
excellent inter-/extrapolation performance given observed
data [Deng et al., 2020]. Most recently, variational autoencoders (VAEs) based data augmentation [Fu et al., 2020] are
investigated for human activity recognition.
In summary, besides the common GAN architectures, how
to leverage other deep generative models like DARNs, NFs,
and VAEs, which are less investigated for time series data
augmentation, remain exciting future opportunities.
Conclusion
As deep learning models are becoming more popular on time
series data, the limited labeled data calls for effective data
augmentation methods. In this paper, we give a comprehensive survey on time series data augmentation methods in various tasks. We organize the reviewed methods in a taxonomy
consisting of basic and advanced approaches, summarize representative methods in each category, compare them empirically in typical tasks, and highlight future research directions.
Proceedings of the Thirtieth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-21)
Survey Track