Xception: Deep Learning with Depthwise Separable Convolutions
Franc¸ois Chollet
Google, Inc.
 
We present an interpretation of Inception modules in convolutional neural networks as being an intermediate step
in-between regular convolution and the depthwise separable
convolution operation (a depthwise convolution followed by
a pointwise convolution). In this light, a depthwise separable
convolution can be understood as an Inception module with
a maximally large number of towers. This observation leads
us to propose a novel deep convolutional neural network
architecture inspired by Inception, where Inception modules
have been replaced with depthwise separable convolutions.
We show that this architecture, dubbed Xception, slightly
outperforms Inception V3 on the ImageNet dataset (which
Inception V3 was designed for), and signiﬁcantly outperforms Inception V3 on a larger image classiﬁcation dataset
comprising 350 million images and 17,000 classes. Since
the Xception architecture has the same number of parameters as Inception V3, the performance gains are not due
to increased capacity but rather to a more efﬁcient use of
model parameters.
1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks have emerged as the master algorithm in computer vision in recent years, and developing recipes for designing them has been a subject of
considerable attention. The history of convolutional neural
network design started with LeNet-style models , which
were simple stacks of convolutions for feature extraction
and max-pooling operations for spatial sub-sampling. In
2012, these ideas were reﬁned into the AlexNet architecture , where convolution operations were being repeated
multiple times in-between max-pooling operations, allowing
the network to learn richer features at every spatial scale.
What followed was a trend to make this style of network
increasingly deeper, mostly driven by the yearly ILSVRC
competition; ﬁrst with Zeiler and Fergus in 2013 and
then with the VGG architecture in 2014 .
At this point a new style of network emerged, the Inception architecture, introduced by Szegedy et al. in 2014 
as GoogLeNet (Inception V1), later reﬁned as Inception V2
 , Inception V3 , and most recently Inception-ResNet
 . Inception itself was inspired by the earlier Network-
In-Network architecture . Since its ﬁrst introduction,
Inception has been one of the best performing family of
models on the ImageNet dataset , as well as internal
datasets in use at Google, in particular JFT .
The fundamental building block of Inception-style models is the Inception module, of which several different versions exist. In ﬁgure 1 we show the canonical form of an
Inception module, as found in the Inception V3 architecture. An Inception model can be understood as a stack of
such modules. This is a departure from earlier VGG-style
networks which were stacks of simple convolution layers.
While Inception modules are conceptually similar to convolutions (they are convolutional feature extractors), they
empirically appear to be capable of learning richer representations with less parameters. How do they work, and
how do they differ from regular convolutions? What design
strategies come after Inception?
1.1. The Inception hypothesis
A convolution layer attempts to learn ﬁlters in a 3D space,
with 2 spatial dimensions (width and height) and a channel dimension; thus a single convolution kernel is tasked
with simultaneously mapping cross-channel correlations and
spatial correlations.
This idea behind the Inception module is to make this
process easier and more efﬁcient by explicitly factoring it
into a series of operations that would independently look at
cross-channel correlations and at spatial correlations. More
precisely, the typical Inception module ﬁrst looks at crosschannel correlations via a set of 1x1 convolutions, mapping
the input data into 3 or 4 separate spaces that are smaller than
the original input space, and then maps all correlations in
these smaller 3D spaces, via regular 3x3 or 5x5 convolutions.
This is illustrated in ﬁgure 1. In effect, the fundamental hypothesis behind Inception is that cross-channel correlations
and spatial correlations are sufﬁciently decoupled that it is
preferable not to map them jointly 1.
1A variant of the process is to independently look at width-wise correarXiv:1610.02357v3 [cs.CV] 4 Apr 2017
Consider a simpliﬁed version of an Inception module that
only uses one size of convolution (e.g. 3x3) and does not
include an average pooling tower (ﬁgure 2). This Inception module can be reformulated as a large 1x1 convolution
followed by spatial convolutions that would operate on nonoverlapping segments of the output channels (ﬁgure 3). This
observation naturally raises the question: what is the effect of the number of segments in the partition (and their
size)? Would it be reasonable to make a much stronger
hypothesis than the Inception hypothesis, and assume that
cross-channel correlations and spatial correlations can be
mapped completely separately?
Figure 1. A canonical Inception module (Inception V3).
Figure 2. A simpliﬁed Inception module.
1.2. The continuum between convolutions and separable convolutions
An “extreme” version of an Inception module, based on
this stronger hypothesis, would ﬁrst use a 1x1 convolution to
map cross-channel correlations, and would then separately
map the spatial correlations of every output channel. This
is shown in ﬁgure 4. We remark that this extreme form of
an Inception module is almost identical to a depthwise separable convolution, an operation that has been used in neural
lations and height-wise correlations. This is implemented by some of the
modules found in Inception V3, which alternate 7x1 and 1x7 convolutions.
The use of such spatially separable convolutions has a long history in image processing and has been used in some convolutional neural network
implementations since at least 2012 (possibly earlier).
Figure 3. A strictly equivalent reformulation of the simpliﬁed Inception module.
Figure 4. An “extreme” version of our Inception module, with one
spatial convolution per output channel of the 1x1 convolution.
network design as early as 2014 and has become more
popular since its inclusion in the TensorFlow framework 
A depthwise separable convolution, commonly called
“separable convolution” in deep learning frameworks such as
TensorFlow and Keras, consists in a depthwise convolution,
i.e. a spatial convolution performed independently over each
channel of an input, followed by a pointwise convolution,
i.e. a 1x1 convolution, projecting the channels output by the
depthwise convolution onto a new channel space. This is
not to be confused with a spatially separable convolution,
which is also commonly called “separable convolution” in
the image processing community.
Two minor differences between and “extreme” version of
an Inception module and a depthwise separable convolution
• The order of the operations: depthwise separable convolutions as usually implemented (e.g. in TensorFlow)
perform ﬁrst channel-wise spatial convolution and then
perform 1x1 convolution, whereas Inception performs
the 1x1 convolution ﬁrst.
• The presence or absence of a non-linearity after the
ﬁrst operation. In Inception, both operations are followed by a ReLU non-linearity, however depthwise
separable convolutions are usually implemented without non-linearities.
We argue that the ﬁrst difference is unimportant, in particular because these operations are meant to be used in a
stacked setting. The second difference might matter, and we
investigate it in the experimental section (in particular see
ﬁgure 10).
We also note that other intermediate formulations of Inception modules that lie in between regular Inception modules and depthwise separable convolutions are also possible:
in effect, there is a discrete spectrum between regular convolutions and depthwise separable convolutions, parametrized
by the number of independent channel-space segments used
for performing spatial convolutions. A regular convolution
(preceded by a 1x1 convolution), at one extreme of this
spectrum, corresponds to the single-segment case; a depthwise separable convolution corresponds to the other extreme
where there is one segment per channel; Inception modules
lie in between, dividing a few hundreds of channels into 3
or 4 segments. The properties of such intermediate modules
appear not to have been explored yet.
Having made these observations, we suggest that it may
be possible to improve upon the Inception family of architectures by replacing Inception modules with depthwise separable convolutions, i.e. by building models that would be
stacks of depthwise separable convolutions. This is made
practical by the efﬁcient depthwise convolution implementation available in TensorFlow. In what follows, we present a
convolutional neural network architecture based on this idea,
with a similar number of parameters as Inception V3, and
we evaluate its performance against Inception V3 on two
large-scale image classiﬁcation task.
2. Prior work
The present work relies heavily on prior efforts in the
following areas:
• Convolutional neural networks , in particular
the VGG-16 architecture , which is schematically
similar to our proposed architecture in a few respects.
• The Inception architecture family of convolutional neural networks , which ﬁrst demonstrated
the advantages of factoring convolutions into multiple
branches operating successively on channels and then
• Depthwise separable convolutions, which our proposed
architecture is entirely based upon. While the use of spatially separable convolutions in neural networks has a
long history, going back to at least 2012 (but likely
even earlier), the depthwise version is more recent. Laurent Sifre developed depthwise separable convolutions
during an internship at Google Brain in 2013, and used
them in AlexNet to obtain small gains in accuracy and
large gains in convergence speed, as well as a signiﬁcant
reduction in model size. An overview of his work was
ﬁrst made public in a presentation at ICLR 2014 .
Detailed experimental results are reported in Sifre’s thesis, section 6.2 . This initial work on depthwise separable convolutions was inspired by prior research from
Sifre and Mallat on transformation-invariant scattering
 . Later, a depthwise separable convolution was
used as the ﬁrst layer of Inception V1 and Inception
V2 . Within Google, Andrew Howard has
introduced efﬁcient mobile models called MobileNets
using depthwise separable convolutions. Jin et al. in
2014 and Wang et al. in 2016 also did related
work aiming at reducing the size and computational
cost of convolutional neural networks using separable
convolutions. Additionally, our work is only possible
due to the inclusion of an efﬁcient implementation of
depthwise separable convolutions in the TensorFlow
framework .
• Residual connections, introduced by He et al. in ,
which our proposed architecture uses extensively.
3. The Xception architecture
We propose a convolutional neural network architecture
based entirely on depthwise separable convolution layers.
In effect, we make the following hypothesis: that the mapping of cross-channels correlations and spatial correlations
in the feature maps of convolutional neural networks can be
entirely decoupled. Because this hypothesis is a stronger version of the hypothesis underlying the Inception architecture,
we name our proposed architecture Xception, which stands
for “Extreme Inception”.
A complete description of the speciﬁcations of the network is given in ﬁgure 5. The Xception architecture has
36 convolutional layers forming the feature extraction base
of the network. In our experimental evaluation we will exclusively investigate image classiﬁcation and therefore our
convolutional base will be followed by a logistic regression
layer. Optionally one may insert fully-connected layers before the logistic regression layer, which is explored in the
experimental evaluation section (in particular, see ﬁgures
7 and 8). The 36 convolutional layers are structured into
14 modules, all of which have linear residual connections
around them, except for the ﬁrst and last modules.
In short, the Xception architecture is a linear stack of
depthwise separable convolution layers with residual connections. This makes the architecture very easy to deﬁne
and modify; it takes only 30 to 40 lines of code using a highlevel library such as Keras or TensorFlow-Slim , not
unlike an architecture such as VGG-16 , but rather unlike architectures such as Inception V2 or V3 which are far
more complex to deﬁne. An open-source implementation of
Xception using Keras and TensorFlow is provided as part of
the Keras Applications module2, under the MIT license.
4. Experimental evaluation
We choose to compare Xception to the Inception V3 architecture, due to their similarity of scale: Xception and
Inception V3 have nearly the same number of parameters
(table 3), and thus any performance gap could not be attributed to a difference in network capacity. We conduct
our comparison on two image classiﬁcation tasks: one is
the well-known 1000-class single-label classiﬁcation task on
the ImageNet dataset , and the other is a 17,000-class
multi-label classiﬁcation task on the large-scale JFT dataset.
4.1. The JFT dataset
JFT is an internal Google dataset for large-scale image
classiﬁcation dataset, ﬁrst introduced by Hinton et al. in ,
which comprises over 350 million high-resolution images
annotated with labels from a set of 17,000 classes. To evaluate the performance of a model trained on JFT, we use an
auxiliary dataset, FastEval14k.
FastEval14k is a dataset of 14,000 images with dense
annotations from about 6,000 classes (36.5 labels per image on average). On this dataset we evaluate performance
using Mean Average Precision for top 100 predictions
(MAP@100), and we weight the contribution of each class
to MAP@100 with a score estimating how common (and
therefore important) the class is among social media images.
This evaluation procedure is meant to capture performance
on frequently occurring labels from social media, which is
crucial for production models at Google.
4.2. Optimization conﬁguration
A different optimization conﬁguration was used for ImageNet and JFT:
• On ImageNet:
– Optimizer: SGD
– Momentum: 0.9
– Initial learning rate: 0.045
– Learning rate decay: decay of rate 0.94 every 2
– Optimizer: RMSprop 
– Momentum: 0.9
– Initial learning rate: 0.001
2 
– Learning rate decay: decay of rate 0.9 every
3,000,000 samples
For both datasets, the same exact same optimization con-
ﬁguration was used for both Xception and Inception V3.
Note that this conﬁguration was tuned for best performance
with Inception V3; we did not attempt to tune optimization
hyperparameters for Xception. Since the networks have different training proﬁles (ﬁgure 6), this may be suboptimal, especially on the ImageNet dataset, on which the optimization
conﬁguration used had been carefully tuned for Inception
Additionally, all models were evaluated using Polyak
averaging at inference time.
4.3. Regularization conﬁguration
• Weight decay: The Inception V3 model uses a weight
decay (L2 regularization) rate of 4e −5, which has
been carefully tuned for performance on ImageNet. We
found this rate to be quite suboptimal for Xception
and instead settled for 1e −5. We did not perform
an extensive search for the optimal weight decay rate.
The same weight decay rates were used both for the
ImageNet experiments and the JFT experiments.
• Dropout: For the ImageNet experiments, both models
include a dropout layer of rate 0.5 before the logistic
regression layer. For the JFT experiments, no dropout
was included due to the large size of the dataset which
made overﬁtting unlikely in any reasonable amount of
• Auxiliary loss tower: The Inception V3 architecture
may optionally include an auxiliary tower which backpropagates the classiﬁcation loss earlier in the network,
serving as an additional regularization mechanism. For
simplicity, we choose not to include this auxiliary tower
in any of our models.
4.4. Training infrastructure
All networks were implemented using the TensorFlow
framework and trained on 60 NVIDIA K80 GPUs each.
For the ImageNet experiments, we used data parallelism
with synchronous gradient descent to achieve the best classi-
ﬁcation performance, while for JFT we used asynchronous
gradient descent so as to speed up training. The ImageNet
experiments took approximately 3 days each, while the JFT
experiments took over one month each. The JFT models
were not trained to full convergence, which would have
taken over three month per experiment.
Figure 5. The Xception architecture: the data ﬁrst goes through the entry ﬂow, then through the middle ﬂow which is repeated eight times,
and ﬁnally through the exit ﬂow. Note that all Convolution and SeparableConvolution layers are followed by batch normalization (not
included in the diagram). All SeparableConvolution layers use a depth multiplier of 1 (no depth expansion).
4.5. Comparison with Inception V3
Classiﬁcation performance
All evaluations were run with a single crop of the inputs
images and a single model. ImageNet results are reported
on the validation set rather than the test set . JFT results are reported after 30 million iterations
(one month of training) rather than after full convergence.
Results are provided in table 1 and table 2, as well as ﬁgure
6, ﬁgure 7, ﬁgure 8. On JFT, we tested both versions of our
networks that did not include any fully-connected layers, and
versions that included two fully-connected layers of 4096
units each before the logistic regression layer.
On ImageNet, Xception shows marginally better results
than Inception V3. On JFT, Xception shows a 4.3% relative improvement on the FastEval14k MAP@100 metric.
We also note that Xception outperforms ImageNet results
reported by He et al. for ResNet-50, ResNet-101 and ResNet-
Table 1. Classiﬁcation performance comparison on ImageNet (single crop, single model). VGG-16 and ResNet-152 numbers are
only included as a reminder. The version of Inception V3 being
benchmarked does not include the auxiliary tower.
Top-1 accuracy
Top-5 accuracy
ResNet-152
Inception V3
The Xception architecture shows a much larger performance improvement on the JFT dataset compared to the
ImageNet dataset. We believe this may be due to the fact
that Inception V3 was developed with a focus on ImageNet
and may thus be by design over-ﬁt to this speciﬁc task. On
the other hand, neither architecture was tuned for JFT. It is
likely that a search for better hyperparameters for Xception
on ImageNet (in particular optimization parameters and reg-
Table 2. Classiﬁcation performance comparison on JFT (single
crop, single model).
FastEval14k MAP@100
Inception V3 - no FC layers
Xception - no FC layers
Inception V3 with FC layers
Xception with FC layers
Figure 6. Training proﬁle on ImageNet
Figure 7. Training proﬁle on JFT, without fully-connected layers
ularization parameters) would yield signiﬁcant additional
improvement.
Size and speed
Table 3. Size and training speed comparison.
Parameter count
Steps/second
Inception V3
23,626,728
22,855,952
In table 3 we compare the size and speed of Inception
Figure 8. Training proﬁle on JFT, with fully-connected layers
V3 and Xception. Parameter count is reported on ImageNet
(1000 classes, no fully-connected layers) and the number of
training steps (gradient updates) per second is reported on
ImageNet with 60 K80 GPUs running synchronous gradient
descent. Both architectures have approximately the same
size (within 3.5%), and Xception is marginally slower. We
expect that engineering optimizations at the level of the
depthwise convolution operations can make Xception faster
than Inception V3 in the near future. The fact that both
architectures have almost the same number of parameters
indicates that the improvement seen on ImageNet and JFT
does not come from added capacity but rather from a more
efﬁcient use of the model parameters.
4.6. Effect of the residual connections
Figure 9. Training proﬁle with and without residual connections.
To quantify the beneﬁts of residual connections in the
Xception architecture, we benchmarked on ImageNet a modiﬁed version of Xception that does not include any residual
connections. Results are shown in ﬁgure 9. Residual connections are clearly essential in helping with convergence,
both in terms of speed and ﬁnal classiﬁcation performance.
However we will note that benchmarking the non-residual
model with the same optimization conﬁguration as the residual model may be uncharitable and that better optimization
conﬁgurations might yield more competitive results.
Additionally, let us note that this result merely shows the
importance of residual connections for this speciﬁc architecture, and that residual connections are in no way required
in order to build models that are stacks of depthwise separable convolutions. We also obtained excellent results with
non-residual VGG-style models where all convolution layers
were replaced with depthwise separable convolutions (with
a depth multiplier of 1), superior to Inception V3 on JFT at
equal parameter count.
4.7. Effect of an intermediate activation after pointwise convolutions
Figure 10. Training proﬁle with different activations between the
depthwise and pointwise operations of the separable convolution
We mentioned earlier that the analogy between depthwise separable convolutions and Inception modules suggests
that depthwise separable convolutions should potentially include a non-linearity between the depthwise and pointwise
operations. In the experiments reported so far, no such nonlinearity was included. However we also experimentally
tested the inclusion of either ReLU or ELU as intermediate non-linearity. Results are reported on ImageNet in ﬁgure
10, and show that the absence of any non-linearity leads to
both faster convergence and better ﬁnal performance.
This is a remarkable observation, since Szegedy et al. report the opposite result in for Inception modules. It may
be that the depth of the intermediate feature spaces on which
spatial convolutions are applied is critical to the usefulness
of the non-linearity: for deep feature spaces (e.g. those
found in Inception modules) the non-linearity is helpful, but
for shallow ones (e.g. the 1-channel deep feature spaces
of depthwise separable convolutions) it becomes harmful,
possibly due to a loss of information.
5. Future directions
We noted earlier the existence of a discrete spectrum between regular convolutions and depthwise separable convolutions, parametrized by the number of independent channelspace segments used for performing spatial convolutions. Inception modules are one point on this spectrum. We showed
in our empirical evaluation that the extreme formulation of
an Inception module, the depthwise separable convolution,
may have advantages over regular a regular Inception module. However, there is no reason to believe that depthwise
separable convolutions are optimal. It may be that intermediate points on the spectrum, lying between regular Inception
modules and depthwise separable convolutions, hold further
advantages. This question is left for future investigation.
6. Conclusions
We showed how convolutions and depthwise separable
convolutions lie at both extremes of a discrete spectrum,
with Inception modules being an intermediate point in between. This observation has led to us to propose replacing
Inception modules with depthwise separable convolutions in
neural computer vision architectures. We presented a novel
architecture based on this idea, named Xception, which has
a similar parameter count as Inception V3. Compared to
Inception V3, Xception shows small gains in classiﬁcation
performance on the ImageNet dataset and large gains on the
JFT dataset. We expect depthwise separable convolutions
to become a cornerstone of convolutional neural network
architecture design in the future, since they offer similar
properties as Inception modules, yet are as easy to use as
regular convolution layers.