Patterns of Search Result Examination: Query to First Action
Mustafa Abualsaud
School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo
 
Mark D. Smucker
Department of Management Sciences
University of Waterloo
 
To determine key factors that affect a user’s behavior with search
results, we conducted a controlled eye-tracking study of users completing search tasks using both desktop and mobile devices. We
focus our investigation on users’ behavior from their query to the
first action they take with the search engine results page (SERP):
either a click on a search result or a reformulation of their query.
We found that a user deciding to reformulate a query rather than
click on a result is best understood as being caused by the user’s
examination pattern not including a relevant search result. If a user
sees a relevant result, they are very likely to click it. Of note, users
do not look at all search results and their examination may be influenced by other factors. The key factors we found to explain a user’s
examination pattern are: the rank of search results, the user type,
and the query quality. While existing research has identified rank
and user types as important factors affecting examination patterns,
to our knowledge, query quality is a new discovery. We found that
user queries can be understood as either of weak or strong quality.
Weak queries are those that the user may believe are more likely to
fail compared to a strong query, and as a result, we find that users
modify their examination patterns to view fewer documents when
they issue a weak query, i.e. they give up sooner.
Query abandonment; Requery behavior; User behavior; User study
ACM Reference Format:
Mustafa Abualsaud and Mark D. Smucker. 2019. Patterns of Search Result Examination: Query to First Action. In The 28th ACM International
Conference on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM ’19), November 3–7, 2019, Beijing, China. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 10 pages.
 
INTRODUCTION
Given a set of search results, we know that as the rank of the
topmost relevant result increases, the probability increases that a
user will not click on the relevant result and will instead reformulate
and requery to get fresh search results . In this paper, we use
eye tracking to better understand the underlying causes of these
requeries without clicks and direct our study to user behavior from
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from .
CIKM ’19, November 3–7, 2019, Beijing, China
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6976-3/19/11...$15.00
 
the query to the user’s first action: either a click on a search result
or a requery.
Our study is motivated by Zhang et al. . Like Zhang et al., we
allow users to freely query our search engine and control the search
results to allow either only one relevant result at ranks 1-10 or no
relevant results in response to a user’s first query. If a user requeries,
the search engine defaults to a commercial search engine’s results.
We include eye-tracking in our study to be able to know what users
do and do not examine. We also investigate an important part that
was missing from Zhang et al. and others, that is, user queries and
their influence to examination behavior and decisions to requery.
While it is well known that users are less likely to examine lower
ranked search results, we show that regardless of rank, if a user
sees a relevant result, the user will click it with high probability. We
confirm Zhang et al.’s hypothesis that the exhaustive and economic
user types as characterized by Aula et al. play a significant role
in understanding requeries without clicks. What drives a user’s
examination to end their search process at certain ranks in the
search result? We find that certain ranks and display issues affect
user examination patterns, but most interestingly we found that the
quality of a user’s query appears to be known to the user and the
user will modify their examination pattern based on query quality.
This gives us an understanding of how likely are people going to
examine certain ranks under different types of query quality and
can be seen as motivation to design effectiveness measures that
include factors other than the relevance of search results.
In particular, we show that:
●The first three search results are special. If a user issues a
query unlikely to produce good results, the user is more
likely to requery after finding the top three results to be
non-relevant than if the user had issued a query expected to
produce good results. If a relevant document is in the first
three search results, the user will click on it.
●If the user is an exhaustive user, they are less influenced
by the quality of their queries and are more persistent than
economic users. Rank has much less effect on their likelihood
of viewing a relevant result than it does for economic users.
●Economic users, are unlikely to scroll and view search results
off of the page, and thus are likely to requery when the
topmost relevant result is below the page fold.
In addition to these findings, we also show that for mobile search,
users are likely to scroll to view the first five results, but if a relevant
result is not seen, they will then requery. We also show a decision
tree model that uses the factors of rank, user type, and query quality
and demonstrates the importance of these factors to understanding
a user’s decision to click or requery as their first action. The decision tree provides a holistic view of users interactions with search
RELATED WORK
Query abandonment, or the decision to not click at any search result,
can be seen as negative signals that indicate failure or dissatisfaction
 . In an effort to understand why people abandon their queries,
Stamou and Efthimiadis employed a survey to study search
tasks without clickthroughs. The authors categorized the causes of
abandonment as intentional and unintentional. Intentional causes
are encountered with a predetermined intention to look for answers
in the search results’ snippets and unintentional causes can be due
to irrelevant results, already seen result or interrupted search. The
authors conducted a follow up study where they collected queries
from users conducting their daily searches in the web . Their
study focused on determining the impact of query abandonment to
users clicking behaviour and satisfaction. Stamou and Efthimiadis
show that approximately 50% of the queries that did not trigger any
clicks are queries with non-relevant results negatively influenced
Diriye et al. extended previous work by conducting a much
larger user study that collected abandonment rationals at abandonment time by using a browser plugin that prompts participants
with survey questions right after a query is abandoned. The authors reported that 7% of abandonments were due to unintentional
causes and around 5% of the abandonments were due to the participants deciding to reformulate their query to a better query i.e. a
better query came to their mind. Both Diriye et al.’s and Stamou
and Efthimiadis’ work is focused on providing reasons why users
abandon their queries. Our paper is focused connecting different
patterns of user examination with query abandonment.
In another body of work, Wu et al. and others used
information forging theory to better understand how users seek
information in the web. Wu et al. manipulated the number of
the relevant documents in the search results of users first 3 queries’,
and asked users to search for relevant documents to open-ended
question. The authors have found that the number of relevant
documents in the SERP can affect the rate of search abandonment
and the number of query reformulations users perform. This was
due to the nature of their search tasks, as some of the topics are
opinion-based and require multiple queries to complete. Ong et al.
 used the same tasks and manipulation technique as in 
to study differences between desktop and mobile search behavior.
Information forging theory, as others have shown, can be a useful
technique to study search behavior.
Several studies have used eye-tracking as a tool to better understand behavior . Klöckner et al. , Dumais
et al. and Aula et al. looked at individual differences in user
examination patterns. Based on eye-tracking data, Aula et al. classified users as either economic: users who examine few items and are
quick to make decisions or exhaustive: users who examine more
items and even scroll below the page fold to view more items.
Cutrell and Guan looked at how varying the amount of information in the search snippet affects user examination in both
informational and navigational tasks. In particular, they found that
increasing the amount of information in the snippets helps with
informational queries but can hurt performance for navigational
tasks. They also manipulated the search results to include what
the authors describe as “best” search result item and looked at the
fraction of times participants looked at it . The placement of
the “best” search result was either at the top, mid or bottom of the
list. They report that as the rank of the target “best” search result
decreases from the top to the bottom of the list, the chances of users
clicking at it decreases and may be related to their probability of
examining it.
Of particular interest is the study of Joachims et al. , where
users were provided Google results to answer informational and
navigational questions. Subjects were assigned to one of three experiment conditions. Either the results were not manipulated, manipulated by swapping the first two results, or by reversing the
results order. They found that users are likely to click on higher
ranking items irrespective of relevance and the performance of
the search engine. The number of relevant results in the search
list, however, is not controlled and could contain multiple relevant
documents, which could be a possible influence to which document
a user clicks.
Our work differs from previous work as follows:
●Unlike Joachims et al. and others where
many of their search tasks include multiple relevant documents in the SERP, our focus is not in investigating which
document among those that are relevant should the user
click at, but on understanding possible causes to how far are
users are willing to examine SERPs with either no relevant
document or one relevant document placed at different ranks
and what motivates users to continue or stop their examination. We aim to understand how different reasons to query
abandonment can affect examination and vice-versa, i.e. how
examination patterns can influence a person to abandon their
●Guan and Cutrell concluded that the low click probability
on what the authors described as the “best” search result is
caused by their probability of examining it. We investigate
factors that influence their examination and cause them not
to look at the “best” search result when it is placed in any of
the 10 ranks of the search result, as opposed to two ranks
from the top, mid and bottom areas of the search results as
in their study.
●Our work extends the work of Diriye et al. and Aula et al. by
not only integrating different types of users’ examination
behavior, but also integrating queries, an essential part to
the search process, into its influence on users’ examination
behavior and decisions to requery.
●We provide a holistic view of the search process and abandonment, encompassing three important parts, users, queries
and search results, and show the influence of users and
queries to each other at specific ranks in the search result.
This has important implications on designing a more comprehensive effectiveness measures that also include users
and queries into the evaluation.
We focus on negative search abandonment, where users abandon
search results without achieving their intended search goal and use
eyetracking interaction data to help us understand the behavior
exhibited during query abandonment.
Google Pixel 2
Task Question
Figure 1: The search interface fits seven results on the desktop monitor and three on our mobile device, a Pixel 2. The
Pixel 2’s actual size relative to the desktop’s size is as shown.
METHODS AND MATERIALS
In this section, we describe the study procedure, search tasks, search
interface, the method of controlling the quality of search results,
and other details of our experiment.
Search tasks
Participants were asked to complete 12 search tasks each comprising
of a single factoid question. To complete a search task, a user needed
to use our custom search engine to find an answer to a question.
Participants were allowed to enter as many queries as they wished
and were told to search as long as they needed. We instructed
participants to stop once they were confident they had found an
answer and to say the answer out loud to the researcher. Each task
ended once a participant said their answer.
Table 1 shows the complete list of search task questions and
their answers. We used the same questions as in except for one
question which we replaced with Q12. Many participants were not
able to provide the correct answer for that particular question in
Search interface
Figure 1 shows the search interface for desktop and mobile. For
both interfaces, the search task question is shown at the top of the
page and a search box is provided to allow users to query the search
engine. The search box does not provide query suggestions. After
a user submits a query, both interfaces show 10 results with no
pagination, i.e. users cannot click to view a second page of results.
For the desktop interface, the page fold line is after the seventh
SERP result, and for the mobile interface, the page fold is after the
third result. The page fold line represents the point below which
the search results are off the screen and the user must scroll to see
those results.
Controlling Search Results Quality
For each search task a participant performed, we returned a manipulated SERP, i.e. treatment. Each treatment consists of a different
manipulation of SERP quality:
●For ten of the treatments, the SERP contained 1 relevant result and 9 non-relevant results. A relevant result contains the
correct answer in the corresponding web page. We placed the
relevant results at ranks 1-10 and denote these tasks as Correct@1, ... Correct@10.
●For one treatment, the SERP contained 10 non-relevant results
and we denote this task as NoCorrect (NC for short).
●For one treatment, the SERP result contained results returned
by the Bing API1 without any manipulation, denoted as Bing.
When are manipulated SERPs shown? We returned a manipulated SERP result to a participant once they submitted a query
with any terms that we deemed to be relevant to the current search
task’s question. For example, Q8 in Table 1 asks for the number of
chapters in the Art of War book by Sun Tzu. The relevant query
terms for this question Q8 are: Art, War, Sun, Tzu. Similarly, for
question Q3, the query terms are: Earth and Day. We constructed
relevant terms for each question prior to the study. A manipulated
SERP was shown only once per search task and all other submitted
queries returned results from the Bing search API.
How are manipulated SERPs constructed? The manipulated
SERP results for each question were constructed prior to the study.
For each question, we manually used the Bing API to search for a
document that contains the correct answer and is easy for readers
to extract. We selected this document as our relevant document for
the question, but we made sure not to show the correct answer in
the snippet. We did the same to find 10 non-relevant documents.
For non-relevant documents, we looked for documents that contain relevant words but their content is obviously not relevant to
the question. For example, for Q8 (the Art of War chapters), nonrelevant documents can be about books with similar titles and by
different authors. Such documents contain relevant words but their
content is not relevant to the question.
With our single relevant document and our set of non-relevant
documents, we constructed manipulated SERPs as follows:
●For treatments Correct@1, ... Correct@10, we placed the
relevant document at the corresponding rank, and randomly
filled the rest of the results with our non-relevant documents.
●For the NoCorrect treatment, we randomly positioned the
10 non-relevant documents.
For the Bing treatment, we did not manipulate the results and
directly returned the Bing API results. Throughout this paper, we
use the term relevant and correct SERP result interchangeably to
indicate the relevant document with the correct answer.
Study Design, Methods and Procedure
The study was conducted in a private office with a desktop computer
and a mobile phone (Figure 2). We used a standard 23.5" desktop
monitor and a Google Pixel 2 phone.
1azure.microsoft.com/services/cognitive-services/bing-web-search-api/
Table 1: Search task questions and their answers.
What is the colour of Hope Diamond?
Fancy Dark Grayish Blue.
How long is the Las Vegas monorail in miles?
3.9 Miles.
Find out the name of the album that the Mountain Goats band released in 2004.
We Shall All Be Healed.
Which year was the first Earth Day held?
Which year was the Holes (novel) written by Louis Sachar first published?
Find the phone number of Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory located in Ottawa, ON.
(613) 241-1091
What is the name of opening theme song for Mister Rogers’ Neighborhood?
Won’t You Be My Neighbor?
Which album is the song Rain Man by Eminem from?
How many chapters are in The Art of War book written by Sun Tzu?
13 Chapters.
What is the scientific name of Mad cow disease?
Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy, or BSE
How many campuses does the University of North Carolina have?
17 Campuses.
Which Canadian site was selected as one of United Nations World Heritage Sites in 1999?
Miguasha National Park.
What is the first studio album Rihanna has released?
Music of the Sun.
Eye Tracker
Desktop Setup
(a) Desktop eye tracking.
Calibration
Eye Tracker
Tobii External
Processing Unit
Mobile Setup
(b) Mobile phone eye tracking.
Figure 2: Desktop and Mobile phone eye tracking setup.
Balanced design. In total, there are 12 different treatments
and 12 different topics. We used a 12×12 Graeco-Latin square to
balance search topics and treatments across task order. The 12×12
Graeco-Latin square forms a single block where each row represents
the order of tasks a participant undergo. By randomizing the rows
and columns of the block, we created three separate blocks for
our participants. Each study participant saw each search topic and
treatment once.
Eye tracking. The eye tracker used was Tobii Pro X3-120.
The eye tracker is screen-based (Figure 2a) but can be mounted in
a custom Tobii Mobile Device Stand as shown in Figure 2b. The
sampling rate of the eye tracker is 120 Hz, which allows detailed
research into the timing and duration of fixations. The eye tracker
also comes with Tobii Studio2/Pro Lab3 software that enables the
use of the eye tracker in the Internet Explorer web browser, which
we used for the desktop. We used the Google Chrome browser on
the mobile device. We used Tobii Studio Lab and Tobii Pro software
to calibrate the eye tracks for each participant and for analyzing
fixation data.
2tobiipro.com/product-listing/tobii-pro-studio
3tobiipro.com/product-listing/tobii-pro-lab
Implementation. The web application used in the study was
implemented in Python and JavaScript. JavaScript was used to
record various user behavior such as clicks and mouse moves. The
web server was hosted locally and accessed with a web browser.
Procedure. Before the participants started the study, we asked
them to sign an informed consent form. We then began by calibrating the eye tracker. If the calibration was not successful, the
participant was given $5 for their time. We started the study by
collecting demographics and general information on participants’
experience with search engines. We provided participants with a
tutorial on the study and how to use our search engine. Participants
were asked to turn off their phone, sit comfortably and try not to
make strong body movements as it would prevent the eye tracker
from capturing their eyes. Each participant began with the practice
question (question P in Table 1). The SERPs during the practice task
are not manipulated. After the practice task, participants continue
with the main study of twelve tasks. A study task is comprised of a
pre-task questionnaire, a search task, and a post-task questionnaire.
We provided the current search task question to the participant
during the pre-task and asked the participant their perceived difficulty and familiarity of the question and whether they already
know the correct answer. We also showed the question to the participant in the search interface (Figure 1). We repeated this process
12 times, each for a different search task question. After completing
the twelve tasks, each participant filled out an exit questionnaire
about their experience.
Participants
After receiving ethics approval from our university’s Office of Research Ethics, we recruited people through posters posted across
our university. We began by collecting data for the mobile search
setup. We recruited 22 people, 3 of whom were for pilot testing.
We successfully calibrated and ran the study for 11 people on the
mobile device. We did not use the remaining participants because
of poor eye tracker calibration for tall participants, participants
with eyeglasses, or participants with some eye condition or disorder. After noticing these issues and to prevent such scenarios, we
added extra requirements to participate in the study including an
overlooked requirement that participants should be fluent English
speakers. To avoid calibration problems, we required future participants to not wear eyeglasses, to not have long eye lashes, to not
wear mascara, and to not have any eye condition or disorder.
For desktop search, we recruited 30 participants, but we used
only 24 participants’ data in our study. We were unable to calibrate
the eye tracker for 5 participants, and one participant was for pilot
testing the setup.
Our participants were university students: 15 females, 19 males
and 1 who prefers another term. 27 students were enrolled in an
undergraduate program and 8 in a graduate program. Their average
age is 20.48, with a minimum age of 17 and a maximum age of 30.
Their majors are 3 in art, 1 in environment, and 31 in a STEM major.
We advertised that participants would be remunerated $10 for
their time and $15 if they were able to answer 10 out of the 12
questions correctly. However, each participant was given $15 dollars
regardless of how many correct answers they have provided. This
was done to add some incentive to participants to engage more in
the study. After analyzing the participants’ data, 29 participants
answered the 12 questions correctly and the lowest score was 10
correct answers.
Collected Measurements
Submitted queries: All queries submitted to the search engine by
the participants during their 12 tasks.
Action: The action made by the user once they are shown the
manipulated/Bing SERP. An action could be a requery, a document
click, or a snippet answer. For document clicks during manipulated
SERPs, we record whether or not the clicked search result was
relevant. A snippet answer indicates a participant has announced
their answer to the question by reading the snippet of a search
result without clicking on the result. The items in our manipulated
SERPs do not contain the correct answer in their snippet, but the
Bing search results can directly contain answers.
Time to action: Time to action is measured from the moment the
result is shown to the user to the moment the action is triggered (e.g.
clicking a document, clicking the search bar, or time of announcing
the answer from a snippet). In few cases, participants clicked the
search bar then started looking at SERP results. In these cases, the
end time of the action is their first keystroke in the search bar.
The time period between time to action is important as it involves
the decision making process by the user. Measurements described
below are recorded within this time period.
Mouse moves: The number of mouse moves the participant has
made. Two consecutive mouse moves include a ≥200 ms idle period
between each other.
Number of Fixations: The total number of fixations made by a
participant during a task.
Fixation Duration at SERP items: We create 10 areas of interest
(AOI) using the Tobii software, one for each search result in the
SERP. We record the total fixation duration a user looked at a search
result using the fixation data.
Eye Fixation Sequence: The complete sequence of fixations at
each search result. An example sequence is 1→2→1, which indicates
a user has looked at the first search result, the second result then
back to the first result. We define Unique Fixation Sequence as the
sequence of unique search results fixated by the user.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
We have learned from Zhang et al. that user type is important to understand probability of an immediate, zero-click requery.
Zhang et al. also hypothesized that their study participants
could possibly be economic and exhaustive users as described in previous eye-tracking studies , but they lacked eye-tracking data
to confirm their hypothesis. While observing our users complete
their tasks, we indeed noticed economic and exhaustive behavior described in previous eye-tracking studies . Economic users tend
to examine fewer results and give up quicker than exhaustive users.
This observation motivated us to classify users as either economic
or exhaustive using our eye tracking fixation data, as we describe
in Section 4.2.
During our observation of users completing their tasks, we also
noticed unique behavior users seem to follow. In many cases, we
saw participants enter a query, examine few of the top results
but not click on any, and then make a decision to requery. We
hypothesize that a possible reason behind the requery decision
is due to the quality of their queries. To illustrate, in one case
during question Q4 (Publication date of Holes by Louis Sachar), a
participant entered the query “holes novel” and examined, without
clicking, the first three search results and then reformulated their
query. We think that after the user examined a few search results,
the user might have realized their query is under-specified and
likely to fail and therefore decided to stop their SERP examination.
The user’s reformulated query included the author’s name. This
motivated us to assess query quality in terms of specificity to the
question and check whether it affects user behavior (see Section 4.3).
From our observations, we understood that user type, query
quality, and rank of the topmost relevant result are factors that
likely affect how people examine search results and their decision
to click or requery. The question then arises: given a search result
and our knowledge of users and queries, when and where do these
factors start to matter?
We used decision trees to aid in understanding the overall behavior of users. Decision trees are known for capturing interactions
between variables while providing a simple interpretation of the
data . We model users’ first action, i.e. whether users click a
search result or requery. Input to the decision tree consists of the
rank of the topmost relevant result (1-10, No Correct), user type
(economic or exhaustive, see Section 4.2), and query quality (weak
or strong, see Section 4.3). We built decision trees using the recursive partitioning algorithm as implemented in the rpart 
package in R. The rpart algorithm works by recursively partitioning
the data into multiple nodes and selecting splits based on node
impurity. We used information gain as our splitting index. Bing
treatments were excluded from the decision tree modeling for we
do not control the quality of the SERP and thus do not know the
rank of the topmost correct result.
Figure 3A shows the decision tree produced for desktop search.
The model selects whether or not a relevant result is above or below
the page fold (task type = Correct@1, ..., or 7) as the root of the
decision tree, which means this is the most important information
to predict whether a user will click or requery. When the topmost
relevant result is below the page fold, economic users will requery
A) Decision tree model on desktop users data
False (task_type = 8, 9, 10, NoCorrect)
task_type = Correct@rank 1, 2, .. , or 7 ?
False (task_type = Correct@rank 4, 5, 6, 7)
%Click=71 %Req.= 29
query_quality
Predict: Click
%Click=57 %Requery=43
task_type = Correct@rank 1, 2, 3 ?
Predict: Click
%Click=27 %Req.=73
Predict: Req.
%Click=43 %Requery=57
task_type = Correct@rank 8, 9, 10 ?
Predict: Req.
False (task_type = NoCorrect)
%Click = 79
%Req. = 21
%Click = 09
%Req. = 91
%Click = 55
%Req. = 45
%Click = 71
%Req. = 29
Exhaustive
Economic Exhaustive
%Click=49 %Req.=51
Predict: Req.
%Click = 39
%Req. = 61
%Click = 59
%Req. = 41
B) Decision tree model on mobile users data
(action ~ task_type + user_type + query_quality)
(action ~ task_type + query_quality)
%Click = 30
%Req. = 70
%Click = 80
%Req. = 20
task_type = Correct@rank 1, 2, 3, 4, 5?
%Click = 13
%Req. = 87
action: Whether a user clicks at a document or requery without any clicks.
task_type: Determines the position of the correct result in the SERP. NoCorrect means there are no correct result in the SERP.
user_type: A user is classified is either economic or exhaustive based on fixation data (Section 4.2).
query_quality: A query can be either weak or strong. Weak queries are under-specified to the task question (Section 4.3).
Figure 3: Decision tree models on desktop and mobile.
87% of the time, while exhaustive users are more likely to click on
When the topmost relevant result is above the page fold, query
quality becomes important to predicting a click or requery. A strong
query means that 79% of the time a user will click. In contrast, a
user’s behavior changes for a weak query based on whether or not
the topmost relevant result is found in the top 3 ranks. With weak
queries, if the topmost result in the top 3 ranks, users are likely
to click (71%). For weak queries and results at ranks 4-7, behavior
again depends on user type. Economic users are more likely to
requery (61%) than click on a result at ranks 4-7 if they issue a
weak query, while exhaustive users are more like to click (59%)
than requery.
Because query quality affects user behavior, researchers should
consider whether it is appropriate to supply queries to users in
studies as opposed to allowing users to interactively query the
search engine. Many controlled user studies make use of a fixed set
of results produced from a fixed “query”, but such fake queries hide
that users appear to have an internal sense of the quality of their
query and thus modify their behavior appropriately.
Figure 3B shows the decision tree for mobile search. In mobile,
the position of the correct SERP items is the only important factor
determining a user’s action, with rank 1 to 5 being most important.
Our smaller amount of user data for mobile search may limit the
usefulness of the decision tree for understanding mobile search
Next, we look at requeries and examination, how we classified
users and queries, and how users and queries influence examination.
Requeries and Examination
Figure 4 and Table 2 show the requery probability across ranks
and during NoCorrect tasks, where there is no correct item in the
SERP and Bing tasks, where the results are not manipulated. The
probability of requery is high when we place the correct item at
ranks 8 to 10 in desktop and in 6 to 10 in mobile. While increasing
rank means an increasing probability of requerying rather than
clicking, the question arises whether or not users are viewing results
at higher ranks, viewing but ignoring documents at higher ranks,
or some combination of the two. This question was raised by Guan
and Cutrell who concluded that in some cases users fail to look
at results and in some cases they discount lower ranked results. An
important difference between Guan and Cutrell’s work and ours
is that we more tightly controlled the search results to only have
non-relevant and relevant results while they manipulated the rank
of the “best” result while allowing the search engine to provide
other results, which we presume may have also appeared somewhat
relevant to the users.
To address this question, we measured how many times a user
decided to requery when they have not seen the correct item. If it is
the case that users requery often, this serves as a suggestive piece
of evidence that an examination sequence, that does not include
the correct item, causes users to requery. We used our eye tracking
data to determine how much time users spent fixating at correct
items and what their resulting action was.
Table 3 shows the frequency of requeries, clicks, and snippet
answers (answers provided by reading the snippet alone) grouped
by the duration of fixation at the correct item. The table also shows
the frequencies during NoCorrect tasks and Bing tasks. We first
notice that only two people clicked on wrong documents when
there is no relevant document in the SERP and that the majority of
users decided to requery. We also notice that 85% of the time a user
would requery if they have not seen the correct item or quickly
glanced over it, and that 88% of the time, a user would click at
the correct document if they have examined it for ≥1 seconds. In
summary, if a user sees the correct item, they click it, if they have
not seen it, they requery.
To what extent does rank matter when they see the correct item?
Table 4 shows the probability of a requery or clicking at a correct
result when it has been seen (≥1 second), across the 10 ranks. The
table shows that no matter where the correct item is, if the user
sees it, they are more likely to click on it than requery. The results
are also similar when we set the threshold to ≥200ms. Our results
indicate that if a user sees the correct answer, rank does not seem
to have an influence on their clicking decision.
Of note, we do not dispute previous research claiming that there
exists a position bias or that searchers trust the ranking of search
engines as Joachims et al. have shown. When there are multiple
relevant documents, as in Joachims et al. study, the authors
show that users trust and click higher ranking items irrespective
of actual relevance. Users seem to trust the ranking presented by
the search engine and click on what the search engine has chosen
to be higher in the list. When the number and position of relevant
documents in the SERP are controlled, as in our study, users are
most likely to stop their examination and click on the relevant
document once they see it. Figure 5 shows the mean number of
items a user examines after seeing the correct item, clearly showing
how examination stops.
User Types
Motivated by our observations of users and previous research , we investigated the possibility of different user types in
our study. Previous research has indicated that exhaustive users
tend to be slower and spend more time analyzing search results
than economic users. Using the fixation data we collected, we plot
the distribution of the average total number of fixations during the
search tasks. If there exist two types of users, we should be able to
see a bimodal distribution of total fixations. While a strong bimodal
Probability
Figure 4: Prob. of a requery in desktop and mobile. X-axis indicates the position of the relevant item in the manipulated
SERP. B indicates Bing and N indicates NoCorrect tasks.
Probabilities
wrong/correct SERP items, and average time to requery.
Wrong Click
Correct Click
Avg. Seconds
to Requery
Table 3: Frequency table of actions grouped by duration of
fixation at the correct item. Data is for desktop users.
Time fixating at
correct document
≥200ms, <1sec
Frequencies in NoCorrect and Bing tasks
Total Clicks: 16
distribution is missing, Figure 6 does show that the distribution of
total fixations for desktop users has a large spread, and we selected
those users with more than 650 fixations to be labeled exhaustive
users while those with fewer than 650 fixations to be economic
users. In total, we have 11 exhaustive users and 13 economic users.
For mobile, we were unable to see a difference in the distribution,
and we treat mobile users as equal in our analysis.
Table 4: Probability of requery or click on a correct (corr.)
item when it has been seen (≥1 sec). SE reported in brackets.
Desktop Users
Probability
Rank of Correct Item
Corr. Click .7[.2] .9[.1] .8[.2] .9[.2] 1 
.9[.1] .9[.2] .9[.2] 1 
.3[.2] .1[.1] .2[.2] .1[.2] 0 
.1[.1] .1[.2] .1[.2] 0 
Mobile Users
Corr. Click .9[.3] .9[.3] 1 .8[.4] 1 0.8[.4] 1 
.1[.3] .1[.3] 0 .2[.4] 0 0.2[.4] 0 
Rank Above
Figure 5: Mean number of unique SERP items looked at (fixated ≥200ms) after the user has seen the correct result and
before they clicked on it. Bars above/below the rank indicate the mean number of items whose rank is above/below
the correct result’s rank. Users tend to stop their examination after seeing the correct result, and in the first two ranks
in desktop, users stop their examination after examining
about 1 more non-relevant document.
1000 1200 1400
Total Fixations
Figure 6: Total fixations histogram on desktop users.
Given the two types of user in desktop search, how different
are their examination patterns when presented with our controlled
SERPs? Given that exhaustive users tend to spend more time analyzing the SERP, we expect that they are more likely to see the
correct result in the SERP. Figure 7 shows the probability of seeing
the correct result when placed at different ranks for the different
user types and for mobile. Indeed, exhaustive users’ probability
of seeing the correct result is higher than that of economic users.
Their probability stays high and decreases a little when the correct
result is placed below the fold (ranks 8 to 10). Economic users, on
the other hand, are less likely to see the correct result as its position
decreases in the list. Previous research has shown that people tend
to examine search results in a linear fashion and the time required
to reach a specific rank increases linearly . As economic users
Probability
Rank of correct item
Rank of correct item
Prob. Correct Seen (>= 200ms)
Exhaustive User
Economic User
Rank of correct item
Figure 7: Probability of correct result seen.
spend more and more of their time examining non-relevant items,
they are more likely to stop their examination and thus not see
the correct result. The result also explains why the page fold is an
important factor: economic users rarely examine beyond the page
fold but exhaustive users do. In mobile, it seems that people are
willing to scroll beyond the page fold to look at more items, and
the decrease of probability after the 5th result explains why the
decision model picked tasks as the decision criterion.
We investigated other differences of behavior in the two groups.
Table 5:left shows the averages of different recorded measures
and their statistical significance. Statistical significance was computed using generalized linear-mixed models as implemented in
the lme4 package for R , with study subjects and search
questions treated as random effects. Total number of fixations, sequence length, and duration of fixation on top, middle, and bottom
ranks are statistically significant. Exhaustive users tend to read 1.5
more unique results than economic users and produce 2.96 longer
sequence lengths. The time spent fixating at different ranking areas is significantly less for economic users. The time to action is
statistically significant with economic users showing a faster time
to make a decision.
Query Analysis
As we explained earlier, we noticed that some users would examine
only a few results and then requery with a more specific query.
This motivated us to look into user queries and evaluate them
based on specificity to the search task questions. We looked at all
users’ queries and noticed that there exists a number of queries we
consider to be under-specified and that could possibly return nonrelevant results if entered in a real search engine. For example, in Q4,
one participant entered “holes novel” as their first query without
any mention of the author name and possibly assumed that the
search engine would know. Similarly, “art of war chapters” on Q8,
“mad cow” on Q9, “mountain goats” on Q2, or “UN world heritage
sites”, “rain man album” on Q7, “north carolina campus” on Q10,
and “canada united nations 1999” on Q11. All of these queries are
missing important terms such as author name or location. We do
not consider these queries to be completely bad, but we believe that
they are of weak quality in terms of specificity and can be improved
by including some of the most important or specific terms.
Based on preliminary analysis of queries, we decided to assess
all queries based on their specificity/generality to the question. We
consider a query to be either weak or strong. We wrote a short
description and a tutorial of what we considered to be a weak or
strong query and provided it to assessors that we hired for query
Table 5: Left: Averages and significant testing of different measures between the two user groups in the desktop setup (*/**/***
indicates statistical significance at p<0.05/0.01/0.001). Right: Averages grouped by user type and under different query types.
Exhaustive
All Queries
Weak Queries
Strong Queries
Both Users
Exhaustive
Exhaustive
# of fixations
Seq. length
Unique Seq. length>0ms
Unique Seq. length>=200ms
top_ranks_duration1,2,3
mid_ranks_duration4,5,6,7
bottom_ranks_duration8,9,10
correct_item_duration>0ms
Time to action
Time to requery
Time to click
# Mouse moves
# Query terms
assessment. In the description, we mentioned that a strong query
“includes important terms in the question and you consider specific
enough to the question. The query is not ambiguous.” And a weak
query is “is not specific enough, can lead to off topic results, can
be considered ambiguous or contain any misspellings.” The tutorial
included examples of different questions and what would be considered weak and strong. After the first assessor completed their
judging, we hired a second assessor for verification and to test
agreement. The two assessors were fluent in English and had good
experience in using search engines. Both assessors had not participated in the study nor were aware of the purpose of the study.
We asked assessors to be careful assessing the queries and take as
much time as needed. The assessors were given $20 for their time.
The total number of queries is 12 × 24 (tasks × participants) for
desktop and 12 × 11 for mobile. The two assessors took about 1 hour
to finish assessing all queries. The Krippendorff’s alpha for
inter-rater reliability of the two assessors is 0.80, which indicates
substantial agreement . Our two assessors judged 27% and 28%
of the submitted queries as weak, accordingly. Since both assessors
have substantial agreements, we use the first assessor’s judgments
as the final judgment for the query type.
The percentages of weak queries made by economic and exhaustive users are 52% and 48%, accordingly. Only 18% of the weak
queries were queries with a misspelling. Table 6 shows the percentages of weak and strong queries among different groups. Exhaustive
users are less likely to requery regardless of query type.
Figure 8 shows the probability of seeing the correct result under
weak and strong query quality for both user types. Interestingly,
query quality seems to have a stronger influence on economic
users than exhaustive users, as we have shown in Figure 3. Under
weak queries, if the correct result is placed at the top of the list,
economic users’ probability of seeing the correct result is high.
Their probability of seeing the correct result quickly drops as the
correct result is placed lower in the list. Exhaustive users, on the
other hand, are willing to examine more results in weak queries. In
strong quality queries, economic users are willing to go further in
the list than if they have entered a weak query. If an economic user
Table 6: Percentages of query types for queries ended with a
requery, and for diff. user types. Data is for desktop users.
Query Type %
In requeries where correct not
In user type
seen and task type != {NC, Bing}
47% (80% are by Economic users)
53% (71% are by Economic users)
enters a weak query and the correct result happens to be not in the
top of the list, they stop their examination and requery.
Table 5:right shows the averages of our measures grouped by the
type of query and user. We do not compute the number of query
terms by query type as different questions may require different
number of terms. Although query type is not a controlled variable,
we notice that weak queries have fewer fixations and shorter time
to action on average. The average time to requery for weak queries
(excluding NoCorrect tasks) is 5.16 seconds and 7.42 for strong
queries, and the result is statistically significant using unpaired two
sided Student’s t-test (p = 0.017).
Limitations
One of the limitations of our study is that we only investigated a
single type of search task. Our participants were asked to search for
simple factoid questions and were presented with tightly controlled
SERPs. Our findings are based on such search tasks, but we do
acknowledge that different types of search tasks, such as searching
for answers to more complex questions , or having multiple
relevant documents in the SERP as in Wu et al. might result
in different examination behavior. We choose simple factoid questions because we wanted to capture search behavior of participants
searching for answers as they would normally do for topics they
are familiar with. Asking participants to search for answers to more
complex questions or questions they are unfamiliar with may result
in different patterns of SERP examination, which could be interesting to further study but is not in the scope of our experiment. We
purposely controlled our SERP to have a single relevant result for a
Probability
Rank of correct item
Probability
Rank of correct item
Prob. Correct Seen (>= 200ms) - Desktop
Strong Queries
Weak Queries
Exhaustive User
Economic User
Figure 8: Probability of correct result seen under weak and
strong queries for different user types.
reason: we wanted to understand how far people look before they
decide to requery, and having multiple relevant documents in the
SERP could be a complicating factor that we wanted to avoid. Our
participant are young university students. Certainly older people
might be different in their behavior in some way.
CONCLUSION
Our work investigates how rank, user type, and query quality influence a user’s first action to be a click on a search result or to
abandon the search results and requery. We controlled the position
of a single relevant result in the search results and asked participants to search for answers to simple factoid questions. Doing so
allowed us to understand how people examine search results and
when they decide to requery.
With regard to user type, we confirm previous research showing
different examination behavior among people . The difference
in user type allowed us to better understand how people examine
and whether or not they see the correct result. Looking through
how participants completed their task, we were motivated to understand how the quality of query can influence their examinations.
We assessed queries based on specificity to the search question
and investigated how query quality affects users’ decisions and
examination patterns. A new discovery from analyzing user data is
unfolded. We noticed that the quality of the query appears to influence examination pattern and therefore query abandonment. We
found that the first three search results are special. A weak quality
query, a query that is under-specified to the question, influences
users’ examination patterns and particularly economic users. After
entering a weak quality query, economic users examine the first
three results and if a relevant document is not there, they reformulate their query to a stronger query that is not under-specified.
The use of a decision tree model (Figure 3) with user type, query
quality and position of the correct result as variables to our model,
helped us to understand which factors are important to users’ click
and requery decisions, and where each factor starts to matter in
From our analysis, we understood that a strong factor influencing
users’ examination is the page fold, though its influence differs
between user types, with economic users mostly examining what
is shown above the fold. Most importantly, users seem to have an
internal sense of the quality of their query, which starts to matter
when the correct result is placed above the fold. The first 3 results
are important to economic users when they submit a weak query.
If the correct result is not there, they are more likely to abandon
the search results.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Charles Clarke for his feedback. This work was supported
in part by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council
of Canada , in
part by Google, and in part by the University of Waterloo.