Behavioral/Systems/Cognitive
Uncovering the Neural Signature of Lapsing Attention:
Electrophysiological Signals Predict Errors up to 20 s before
They Occur
Redmond G. O’Connell,1,2 Paul M. Dockree,1 Ian H. Robertson,1 Mark A. Bellgrove,2 John J. Foxe,3,4 and
Simon P. Kelly3,4,5
1School of Psychology and Trinity College Institute of Neuroscience, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland, 2School of Psychology and Queensland Brain
Institute, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland 4067, Australia, 3The Cognitive Neurophysiology Laboratory, Nathan S. Kline Institute for
Psychiatric Research, New York, New York 10962, 4Program in Cognitive Neuroscience, Department of Psychology, City College of the City University of
New York, New York, New York 10031, and 5Center for Neurobiology and Behavior, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032
The extent to which changes in brain activity can foreshadow human error is uncertain yet has important theoretical and practical
implications. The present study examined the temporal dynamics of electrocortical signals preceding a lapse of sustained attention.
Twenty-one participants performed a continuous temporal expectancy task, which involved continuously monitoring a stream of regularly alternating patterned stimuli to detect a rarely occurring target stimulus whose duration was 40% longer. The stimulus stream
flickered at a rate of 25 Hz to elicit a steady-state visual-evoked potential (SSVEP), which served as a continuous measure of basic visual
processing.Increasingactivityintheband(8–14Hz)wasfoundbeginning20sbeforeamissedtarget.Thiswasfollowedbydecreases
in the amplitude of two event-related components over a short pretarget time frame: the frontal P3 (3–4 s) and contingent-negative
variation (during the target interval). In contrast, SSVEP amplitude before hits and misses was closely matched, suggesting that the
efficacy of ongoing basic visual processing was unaffected. Our results show that the specific neural signatures of attentional lapses are
registered in the EEG up to 20 s before an error.
Introduction
The human capacity to sustain attention to behaviorally relevant
stimuli is strongly challenged during highly routine task scenarios
in which demands are low and external attention-grabbing events
are few. Performance errors arising from transient inattention in
real life can have catastrophic consequences, and an increased
frequency of lapses characterizes a number of clinical syndromes,
but our knowledge of their neural underpinnings remains
The majority of EEG and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies have adopted block-design approaches that
average across extended periods of behavior or event-related approaches that focus on the downstream consequences of attentional failures on transient target processing. The intertrial period
before a target, when continuous attentional control is critical,
has received far less investigation. Recently, Eichele et al. 
conducted a single-trial analysis of fMRI data and identified several patterns of hemodynamic activity that appeared to predict
errors 6 s before they occurred with linear trends emerging up to
30 s beforehand. It remains to be seen whether such signatures are
detectable in more direct measures of cortical activity. EEG provides a high-temporal-resolution measure of postsynaptic cortical activity and represents an ideal technique for tracing the temporal evolution of maladaptive brain states. However, only a
handful of studies to date have explored electrophysiological
changes before a performance error, and their analyses have been
limited to periods of just 1 or 2 s . Adopting analysis strategies that
can trace internally driven EEG changes over a broader timescale
may prove fundamental to our understanding of the spatiotemporal evolution of attentional control.
Here, we report a comprehensive and systematic analysis of
the psychophysiological precursors of lapses of sustained attention, defined here by the failure to detect a readily perceivable
target stimulus, presented at fixation, during a novel continuous
temporal monitoring task. First, we wished to establish how far
back in time a lapse is foreshadowed in the EEG. To accurately
gauge the timing of these error-predictive changes, EEG data
were analyzed on three distinct timescales relative to the target:
posttarget processing (1 s), immediate pretarget processing
(4 s) and long-term pretarget processing (30 s). Second, we
sought to establish whether lapsing attention produces effects at
all stages of stimulus processing, including “bottom-up” sensory
processing or bears only on endogenous, higher-order processes.
To provide a continuous measure of basic visual processing, task
stimuli were presented at a 25-Hz flicker, thus eliciting a steadystate visual-evoked potential (SSVEP). By comparing SSVEP am-
Received Dec. 16, 2008; revised April 17, 2009; accepted May 5, 2009.
We thank Shani Shalgi for her assistance during data collection and the initial stages of analysis.
Correspondence should be addressed to Dr. Redmond O’Connell, Trinity College Institute of Neuroscience, Lloyd
Building, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland. E-mail: .
DOI:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5967-08.2009
Copyright © 2009 Society for Neuroscience
0270-6474/09/298604-08$15.00/0
8604 • The Journal of Neuroscience, July 1, 2009 • 29(26):8604–8611
plitude as well as early visual components of the transient eventrelated potentials (ERP) within the
30 s preceding a hit/miss, we were able to assess the long-term
effects of attentional lapses on bottom-up stimulus-evoked processes. Late higher-order transient ERP components and ongoing
EEG rhythms were analyzed to explore the effects of lapsing attention on endogenous processes.
Materials and Methods
Participants
Twenty-nine participants volunteered for this experiment. One participant was excluded because that person was unable to consistently identify targets during practice, while seven were excluded because they made
an insufficient number of hits or misses across all blocks (20 after
artifact removal) to generate reliable ERP averages, leaving a final sample
of 21 participants (7 female, 3 left handed). All participants reported
normal or corrected-to-normal vision and no current psychiatric diagnosis or history of head injury. All participants gave written informed
consent, and all procedures were approved by the ethical review boards of
the School of Psychology, Trinity College Dublin. Ethical guidelines were
in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Ages ranged from 19 to
31 years (mean, 25.67; SD, 2.53).
Continuous temporal expectancy task
In the continuous temporal expectancy task (CTET) (Fig. 1), a centrally
presented patterned stimulus underwent a change at regular intervals,
resulting in a continuous stream of “frames.” The key requirement of the
task was to monitor the temporal duration of each stimulus frame and to
identify the minority of “target” frames with a duration that was 40%
longer than the standard. The CTET was designed such that the temporal
judgments that were required were unchallenging when performed in isolation but demanding when participants were asked to continuously
extended period. It was predicted that this task
scenario would lead to more frequent lapses
than the more common stimulus classification
tasks that are used in attention research, thus
facilitating EEG analysis. The pattern stimulus
consisted of a single 8 cm 2 large square divided
into a 10  10 grid of identical square tiles (0.8
mm 2), each one diagonally split into black and
white halves. The tile orientation shifted by 90°
in a random direction (clockwise or counterclockwise) on each frame change yielding four
distinct patterns. To reduce eye movement,
participants were instructed to fixate on a white
cross that was continuously presented at the
center of the large square. All stimuli were presented on a gray background.
Standard (nontarget) stimuli were presented
for 800 ms, and target stimuli were presented
for 1120 ms. Stimuli were pseudo-randomly
presented such that there were between 7 and
15 (average of 11) standard trials or 5.6–12 s
(average 8.8 s) between each target presentation. To generate an SSVEP, the stimulus
stream flickered on and off at a constant rate of
25 Hz. The SSVEP represents synchronous neuronal activity in early visual areas elicited by
repetitive visual stimulation . Here, the SSVEP provided us with a
continuous measure of basic visual stimulus
processing. Participants were required to press
a response key as quickly as possible when they
detected a frame of longer duration (target).
Each block consisted of 225 trials (frames) with
a total duration of 3 min and 5 s. The number
of targets varied between 18 and 22 per block.
All participants completed 10 blocks of the task and were given a rest
break in between each block.
To verify that the target/standard comparison was well above individual detection thresholds, all participants were required to exhibit 100%
accuracy during an initial practice session. The practice session consisted
of two separate practice blocks. In the first block, three targets were
randomly interspersed among 25 standard stimuli. At this early stage, the
stimuli were presented without the 25 Hz flicker to facilitate target identification. In the second practice block, an identical number of stimuli
were presented, this time with the 25 Hz flicker. Participants were required to identify all target stimuli before advancing to the experimental
trials. If participants missed one or more target stimuli, the practice was
performed again. If the participant still failed to identify all the targets, they
were excluded from the experiment. Only one participant was excluded on
this basis, and they reported difficulty focusing on stimuli because of dry
contact lenses. The duration of the target frame was made shorter (1060 ms)
for one participant whose initial accuracy over the 10 blocks was close to
ceiling (20 errors in total). Hence, one participant performed the task
twice, but only the data from the second attempt were analyzed.
Data analysis
Continuous EEG was acquired through the ActiveTwo Biosemi electrode
system from 128 scalp electrodes, digitized at 512 Hz. Vertical eye movements were recorded with two vertical electrooculogram (EOG) electrodes placed below the left and right eye, while electrodes at the outer
canthus of each eye recorded horizontal movements. Data were analyzed
in Matlab R2007a. Data were re-referenced off-line to the nasion and
low-pass filtered up to 40 Hz. All electrode channels were subjected to an
artifact criterion of 90 mV to reject trials with excessive EOG or other
noise transients. To exclude errors that may have arisen from blinking
CTET.Participantsmonitoredacontinuousstreamofpatternedstimulicentrallypresentedandflickeringatarateof
25Hz.Standardstimuliwerepresentedfor800ms,andparticipantswererequiredtomonitorfortheoccurrenceoftargetstimuli
definedbytheirlongerduration(1120ms)relativetootherstimuli.Targetdetectionwasindicatedbyaspeededbuttonpress.All
participants were practiced to a criterion level of performance.
O’Connell et al. • Error-Predicting Electrophysiology
J. Neurosci., July 1, 2009 • 29(26):8604–8611 • 8605
rather than true failures of attention, a 4 s window before each target trial was scanned, and
any trial that included an artifact (90 mV)
that was evident across eight or more channels
was excluded from all analyses. In all analyses of
transient ERP, baseline and component intervals of a multiple of 40 ms were used, encapsulating an integer number of SSVEP cycles, to
protect against contamination by residual SS-
VEP power remaining after notch-filtering.
The analysis proceeded in three stages: examining
target-related
processing,
short-term epochs preceding targets (4 s), and
long-term epochs preceding targets (30 s). In all
stages, we examined activity in a specific time
interval relative to target trials (onset of longerduration frame), comparing correctly detected
trials (hits) to undetected trials (misses). For
participants whose sweep count for hits versus
misses was not matched, we randomly selected
trials for inclusion from the overrepresented
condition. It was also important to rule out the
possibility that any differences between the two
conditions could be attributed to a difference in
the length of the average intertarget interval
(ITI) associated with each condition. For example, previous work has demonstrated that the
amplitude of the P3 component increases with
ITI . Analysis of our own data in
fact indicated that miss trials were associated
with shorter ITI than hit trials (8.8 s vs 9.17 s;
t(20)  3.46; p  0.01). To control for this, random selection of trials in the overrepresented
condition was carried out for each ITI separately, with the result that ITI of each length were equally represented in
both conditions.
Immediate target processing. We examined the discrete event-related
activity elicited by the detection of a target by deriving ERP for an epoch
encapsulating the target interval (800–1120 ms) and beyond. A notch
filter centered on 25 Hz was applied to eliminate the SSVEP activity in
transient ERP. Stimulus-locked data were segmented into epochs of
100 ms before to 1800 ms after target frame onset and averaged separately for correctly detected targets and missed targets. Artifact rejection
was based on a much broader preceding time frame starting from 3200,
so that trials that were missed on account of preceding blinks or eye
movement, as opposed to lapsing attention, were excluded. Target epochs were baseline corrected relative to the interval 560–640 ms, i.e., an
80 ms window centered on contingent negative variation (CNV) onset.
The single subject for whom target frame duration was shorter was excluded
from this analysis.
ERP component structure was confirmed by visual inspection of
grand-average waveforms and associated scalp maps. The width of the
latency window used to measure component amplitudes was based on
the duration and spatial extent of each component. The target interval
elicited the following components (Fig. 2): a strong negative shift over
central scalp sites with onset 600 ms and peaking at 1000 ms (CNV)
and a late positive wave with frontocentral (1200 ms; frontal target P3)
and parietal maxima (1400 ms; parietal target P3).
WemeasuredtheCNVfromaclusterofsixelectrodescenteredoncentral
(Cz) within the interval of 900–1100 ms (i.e., up until onset of the first
posttarget standard frame). The late positive wave was measured around its
dominant peak in the interval of 1300–1450 ms at both frontal and parietal
sites. We tested for latency differences in the frontal target P3 by computing
theonsetandpeaklatencyasfollows:foreachsubject,welocatedthepositive
peakbyfindingthemaximumwithinawindowof1120–1620(or0–500ms
relativetothetransitionfromthetargetframetothefollowingstandard).We
then located the preceding “trough” as the minimum within a window extending from the beginning of the target interval (800 ms) to the positive
peak just located. We defined the onset as that time point lying between the
troughandpeakatwhichthepotentialroseabovethetroughlevelby20%of
the peak-trough difference.
Short-term pretarget processing. In the next step of our analysis, the goal
was to look for divergences in electrophysiological markers within a relatively discrete time frame of 4 s. This window was selected to isolate
activity that would be uncontaminated by the occurrence of other preceding target trials since the minimum intertarget interval was 5.6 s. For
this time frame, we examined both the broadband transient ERP and
spectral measures.
For the broadband ERP analysis, stimulus-locked data were segmented into epochs of 3200 ms before to 800 ms after target stimulus
onset (i.e., until the beginning of the target interval). A notch filter of 25
Hz (width, 2 Hz) was applied to eliminate the SSVEP activity. Amplitude
measures for the ERP components elicited by each of the four preceding
standard frames and the target frame itself were acquired using separate
baselines of 80 to 0 before the onset of each stimulus. Note that because
a target frame cannot be identified as such until the 800 ms time point, we
regarded it as the fifth pretarget standard frame here.
To select latency windows for the measurement of ERP components, a
grand-average standard frame ERP was generated by averaging across the
five frames preceding the target interval and without distinguishing between hits and misses (Fig. 3A). Standard frames elicited three principal
ERP components: first, the early visual P1, maximal over occipital regions and peaking 120 ms after stimulus onset. Second, a frontal positivity, peaking at 300–350 ms. Finally, as in the target–interval waveform, we observed a CNV component with onset 600 ms and lasting
until the following transient response. To reduce the likelihood that differences between detection conditions could be contaminated by activity
differences at the prestimulus baseline, ERP component amplitudes were
calculated by subtracting the amplitude at component onset from the
peak amplitude (Table 1; Fig. 3A). Amplitude measures for each component were entered into a 2  5 ANOVA with two levels of detection (hit
and miss) and five levels of trial (standard 4, standard 3, standard 2,
standard 1, and target).
To measure effects on activity within discrete spectral bands, we used
the Fast-Fourier transform to compute the amplitude spectrum across a
Immediatetargetprocessing.GrandaverageERPwaveformsandscalptopographiesfocusedonthetargetdetection
interval and averaged separately for hits and misses. Scalp topographies show potential distribution for hits. Although the
waveformsweretime-lockedtotheonsetofthetargetframe(timepoint0),atargetframecannotbeidentifieduntilitsduration
passes that of a standard frame (800–1120 ms, referred to as the target interval and highlighted by dashed vertical lines). The
target interval elicited a central negativity between 600 and 1100 ms (CNV, bottom-left) and a late positive wave with frontocentral(1200ms,frontaltargetP3;top)andparietalmaxima(1400ms,ParietalTargetP3;bottom-right).Eachofthesecomponents was reduced on miss trials.
8606 • J. Neurosci., July 1, 2009 • 29(26):8604–8611
O’Connell et al. • Error-Predicting Electrophysiology
4 s epoch extending from 3200 to 800 ms relative to target frame
onset. Three dominant peaks were observed in grand average spectra
collapsed across conditions: a relatively narrow spectral peak was identified within the theta band mainly over frontal sites; this was measured by
integrating amplitude across the band 5–6.5 Hz. Alpha was measured in the
broaderstandardbandof8–14Hz,whereasSSVEPamplitudewasmeasured
at the discrete frequency of 25 Hz. Spectral amplitude measures were acquired individually from clusters of six electrodes centered on frontal (Fz),
Cz, parietal (Pz), and occipital (Oz) scalp sites and entered into a 2  4
ANOVA with two levels of detection and four levels of region (frontal, central, parietal, and occipital). A separate ANOVA was carried out for each of
the three bands.
Long-term pretarget processing. The next step in our analysis was designed to explore the longer-term temporal dynamics of the electrophysiological markers identified in the previous step and their relationship to
performance on an upcoming target. On the basis of the findings of
Eichele et al. , we examined a 30 s long pretarget epoch. For the P3,
we extracted an amplitude measure from each of 40 consecutive frames
ending on the target frame (starting 39 frames,
or 31.2 s before target frame onset). P3 amplitude was computed as the integrated amplitude
in the interval 280–400 ms minus that in the
onset period from 80 to 160 ms relative to the
onset of each frame (as in analysis step 2). Because of the rarity of 30 s periods of data that are
free of blinks or other artifacts, we rejected a
target trial only if an artifact was detected in the
preceding 4 s using a 90 V criterion as before.
For all preceding frames, artifact rejection was
carried out on a frame-by-frame basis. Because
artifacts were distributed evenly across frames,
this did not result in appreciably lower sweep
counts for earlier frames than frames closer to
the target. The average sweep count was in the
range 42–49 for all frames. A smoothed series of
19 P3 amplitude measures, derived by averaging across windows of four frames in steps of 2,
were entered into a 2  19 ANOVA with the
factors of detection (hit vs miss) and time.
For the spectral measures of  and SSVEP, 2 s
segments of data were extracted to provide reasonable frequency resolution. Starting with an
epoch defined by the interval 1200 to 800 ms
relative to target frame onset, we derived spectral measures at parietal and occipital sites for 
(8–14 Hz) and SSVEP (25 Hz), respectively. We
then proceeded in steps of two frames (1.6 s)
back to 30 s before the target, resulting in 20
time points. To match the temporal smoothing
applied to the P3, each pair of consecutive time
bins was averaged, and a 2  19 ANOVA was
carried out for each spectral measure, again
with factors of detection and time. For the measures that showed an effect of detection in the
short-term pretarget time frame, it was of interest to characterize the timing of the effect.
Paired t tests were carried out for each of the 19
bins to determine the time bin at which each
measure ceased to dissociate hits from misses.
Given the exploratory nature of this step of the
analysis, the more permissive cutoff of p  0.1
was used to identify the time bins for which
hit/miss divergences were strongest.
Behavioral data
Participants completed 10 blocks of the
CTET during which they were presented
with an average of 200 target trials (range,
188–207). Over the 21 participants included in the analysis, 64%
(SD, 15; range, 37–85) of target stimuli were correctly identified
with an average reaction time of 626 ms (SD, 87; range, 510–922).
The rate of false alarms was very low with an average of just 0.6%
(SD, 0.6; range, 0–3), indicating that all participants were performing the task well above chance levels. We also examined
performance accuracy as a function of time-on-task. Although
performance did decline with time within block duration,
F(10,200)  13.5, p  0.001, there was no significant main effect of
time-on-task across the 10 testing blocks, F(9,198)  1.3, p  0.2
(see supplemental Fig. 1, available at www.jneurosci.org as supplemental material).
Immediate target processing
Since target stimuli are identical to standards, except for their
increased duration, a target stimulus cannot be identified until its
Short-termpretargetepoch.A,Grand-averageERPwaveformforthefiveframesimmediatelyprecedingthetarget
interval (TI) and collapsed across outcome. This waveform was used as the basis for defining component measurement intervals
fortheshort-andlong-termpretargetanalysis.B,C,Grand-averageERPwaveformsandassociatedscalptopographieswithinthe
epoch of 4000 ms pre-TI averaged separately according to subsequent target identification performance (hit, miss). Each
stimulus change elicited a clear P1 response over visual areas (B), but its amplitude did not discriminate the two detection
conditions, suggesting that basic visual processing was equated. In addition, each standard stimulus change elicited a strong P3
component over frontocentral scalp (C) that was increased before a hit relative to a miss.
Table 1. Latency intervals and electrode sites used for the measurement of ERP in the short-term pretarget
Onset interval (ms)
Peak interval (ms)
Electrodes
Nine electrodes surrounding Oz
Standard P3
Six electrodes surrounding Fz
Six electrodes surrounding Cz
O’Connell et al. • Error-Predicting Electrophysiology
J. Neurosci., July 1, 2009 • 29(26):8604–8611 • 8607
duration has exceeded that of a standard.
Therefore, in our analyses of the electrophysiological data, we made the distinction between “target onset,” which is the
time point at which the target frame begins
(0 ms) and “target interval” (800–1120
ms), which is the window of time during
which target identification is possible. All
of the following analysis steps adhere to
this convention whereby the zero time
point corresponds to target frame onset.
Previous work has demonstrated that
the amplitude of the CNV tends to increase with time, becoming more negative
as an imperative stimulus approaches,
consistent with a build-up of anticipatory
activity . On target trials in the CTET, we found that CNV
amplitude continued to grow into the target interval (800 ms) (Fig. 2) but to a
much greater extent before a hit trial than
a miss, t(19)  2.87, p  0.01.
The late positive wave was measured
around its dominant peak in the interval of
1300–1450 ms at both frontal and parietal
sites. A 2  2 ANOVA with factors of region (frontal, parietal) and detection (hit,
miss) revealed a main effect of detection,
F(1,19)  8.3, p  0.05, and a detection by
region interaction, F(1,19)  18.3, p 
0.001. Comparing hits and misses at each
region revealed a significant difference
only at parietal sites ( p  0.01). Although target–P3 amplitude
did not distinguish hits from misses at frontal sites in the time
frame of its largest peak, a clear onset latency difference was evident at frontal sites (Fig. 2). We tested this by measuring the onset
latency of the positive-going component at the frontal cluster of
electrodes for hits and misses. The onset for hits (1057  92 ms)
was significantly earlier than the onset for misses (1154  150 ms;
t(19)  4.24; p  0.001). It is also noted that the frontal target P3
onset was estimated to occur before the subsequent pattern
change. Given the earliest reported onsets of purely stimulusdriven frontal scalp activity , it is clear
that this positive deflection is not driven exogenously by the pattern shift itself in either condition. In fact, the peak latency of the
frontal target P3 is 300–400 ms after the point at which the next
standard stimulus would have been expected to occur.
Short-term pretarget epoch
Divergencesinelectrophysiologicalmarkerswereexaminedwithina
time-frame of 4 s before the onset of the target interval (Fig. 3).
Early sensory processing
The P1 was measured from a cluster of nine occipital electrodes
surrounding occipital. No main effects were found (all p  0.4).
Standard P3
For the standard P3, there was a significant main effect of detection, F(1,20)  8.1, p  0.01, driven by larger amplitudes before
correct target detections, but there was no main effect of trial
( p  0.6) and no trial by detection interaction ( p  0.6). Given
the clear similarities between the scalp topographies and peak
latencies, it is likely that the frontal target P3 (highlighted in
analysis step 1) and standard P3 arise from the same endogenous
processes that monitor the temporal structure of the task.
There were no significant main effects of time or detection for CNV
amplitude (all p  0.3).
EEG amplitude spectrum
The continuous EEG amplitude spectrum was also calculated for
the 4 s pretarget epoch (Fig. 4).
Theta (5–6.5 Hz). There was no main effect of detection,
F(1,20)  1.3, p  0.25, but there was a main effect of region, F(3,60)
 4.1, p  0.01, and a detection by region interaction F(3,60) 
3.1, p  0.05. Post hoc t tests at each region indicated that theta
amplitude did not reliably distinguish between hits and misses at
any of the four scalp regions (all p  0.1).
Alpha (8–14 Hz). There was a main effect of region, F(3,60) 
17, p  0.001, a marginal main effect of detection, F(1,20)  3.8,
p  0.06, and a significant detection by region interaction, F(3,60)
 4.9 p  0.01. Post hoc t tests at each region indicated significantly increased  amplitude before a miss relative to a hit, over
parietal ( p  0.05) and occipital sites ( p  0.05), but not over
central ( p  0.1) or frontal ( p  0.2) sites. To investigate
whether the -band effect had arisen from alterations in
stimulus-evoked processing (e.g., visual-evoked components to
the frame onset having power in the  band or differential 
suppression in response to stimuli), we also examined the time
course of  activity within the stimulus frames in the 4 s window.
To this end, we derived temporal spectral evolution waveforms
by filtering each 4 s epoch in the band 8–14 Hz, rectifying the
filtered signals, smoothing with a 100 ms sliding window, and
averaging across trials for each condition and SSVEP (25 Hz). Relative to misses, hits were
associated with reduced  before a target, but there were no differences in SSVEP amplitude, again suggesting that basic visual
processing of the stimuli was matched across the two detection conditions. B, Grand-average temporal spectral evolution of 
activitycalculatedforthefivestandardframesimmediatelyprecedingthetargetinterval.Thehitvsmissdifferentialwasevident
across the entire epoch, and no systematic differences time-locked to stimulus onset were apparent. C, Scalp topographies for
distribution of SSVEP and  activity as measured in the 4 s spectrum. The “SSVEP” and “alpha” topographies map spectral
amplitude preceding hits. The “alpha pre-miss increase” topography was generated using a normalized measure [miss  hit]/
[miss  hit]. The increase in  power before a miss was most prominent over right inferior parietal scalp sites and was clearly
distinct from the central occipital SSVEP topography associated with basic visual processing.
8608 • J. Neurosci., July 1, 2009 • 29(26):8604–8611
O’Connell et al. • Error-Predicting Electrophysiology
et al. 2006). Figure 4B shows the  time course in the epoch of
0–800 ms averaged across the five pretarget stimulus frames. No
systematic differences time-locked to stimulus onset between hits
and misses were apparent.
To examine the topography of the pre-error increase in 
amplitude, we took a normalized measure of the difference, subtracting  before hits from  before misses and dividing by the
sum of these conditions. Figure 4C shows the scalp distribution of
this measure and, for comparison, the topographies of SSVEP
amplitude and  amplitude for the hit condition. The increase in
 power before a miss was most prominent over right inferior
parietal scalp sites.
SSVEP (25 Hz). There was a significant main effect of region,
F(3,60)  21.7 p  0.001, reflecting stronger SSVEP amplitude
over occipital regions, but there was no main effect of response
( p  0.7) and no detection by region interaction ( p  0.3). At
the site of its overall maximum (cluster around occipital), SSVEP
amplitude was 1.857 V for hits and 1.858 V for misses, indicating that basic sensory processing was closely matched.
Long-term pretarget epoch
The electrocortical markers that predicted successful target detection in the short-term epoch were then entered into a further
analysis examining a 30 s period before the target interval (Fig. 5).
On the basis of the results of analysis step 2, the standard P3 and
parietal  amplitude were selected for further analysis. Although
no differences were observed during the 4 s epoch, SSVEP amplitude was also selected for the analysis to account for any changes
in visual cortical excitability preceding hits and misses.
Standard P3
For the standard P3, there was a strong trend toward an effect of
detection, F(1,20)  4.12, p  0.056, but no main effect of time,
F(18,360)  0.8, p  0.6, and no detection by time interaction ( p 
0.4). To highlight the pretarget time point at which P3 amplitude
ceased to distinguish between a subsequent hit or miss, a series of
paired-samples t tests were conducted for each 4 s time bin. Differences appeared reliable only for the first three time bins
(equivalent to 3–4 s) immediately before target frame onset (all
Posterior alpha (8–14 Hz)
There were significant main effects of detection, F(1,20)  5.53,
p  0.05, and of time, F(18,360)  2.7, p  0.001, and a detection by
time interaction, F(18,360)  2.2, p  0.01. Linear contrasts indicated that the interaction was driven by an increase in  over time
before a miss ( p  0.05), whereas  amplitude remained stable
before a hit ( p  0.9). Again, a series of paired-samples t tests
were used as a means of exploring the time course of the  effect.
Significant differences were evident for the last 14 of 19 total
pretarget time points tested, i.e., the 20 s immediately preceding a target in which  amplitude was significantly larger before a
miss (all p  0.1).
SSVEP (25 Hz)
There were no significant effects of trial or detection on SSVEP
amplitude over the 30 s epoch (all p  0.1). Time-bin comparisons also failed to identify any consistent divergences between the
two detection conditions (hit, miss).
Long-termpretargetepoch.StandardP3,,andSSVEPmeasurescalculatedoverthe30speriodprecedingtargetonsetandaveragedseparatelyforhitsandmisses.Nosignificantdifferenceswere
foundforSSVEPamplitude,butpredictivedifferenceswereapparentforbothandfrontalP3overthe30sepoch.Individualtime-bincomparisonsthatreachedsignificancearemarkedingray(lightgraydenotesp0.1;dark
graydenotesp0.05).ForfrontalP3amplitude,thestrongestdifferenceswereapparent3–4sbeforetargetonset.-Banddivergencesweresignificantupto20sbeforeanattentionallapse.
O’Connell et al. • Error-Predicting Electrophysiology
J. Neurosci., July 1, 2009 • 29(26):8604–8611 • 8609
Discussion
Thepresentstudyprovidesthefirstevidencethatalapseofsustained
attention can be foreshadowed in electrophysiological signals up to
20 s before the occurrence of that lapse. Our data reveal specific
maladaptive trends on multiple time-scales with slow drifts in
-band amplitude (20 s pretarget) followed by disruption of taskrelated time-monitoring mechanisms indexed by the P3 (3–4 s pretarget) and CNV (during target processing). These results indicate
that relatively subtle behavioral changes can be anticipated ahead of
time by monitoring changes in the EEG. The temporal trends identified here accord well with those of Eichele et al. and emphasize the important complimentary contributions of fMRI and EEG.
Sustained attention has been defined as the ability to maintain a
mindful goal-directed focus in contexts whose repetitive, nonarousing qualities provide little external stimulation .Lapsesofsustainedattentionaremostlikelytooccurin
highly routine and mundane task scenarios when we become prone
to temporary goal neglect. The CTET paradigm was designed to test
this ability by demanding the continuous deployment of attentional
resourcestothetimedomain.Theabilitytomonitortimeintervalsis
essentialinguidingmanyeverydayactivities,andoursubjectiveperception of the duration of stimuli is sharpened when attention is
actively oriented to time . This situation requires
attention to be maintained more continuously over successive trials
and thus places greater demands on top-down control resources
than stimulus identification tasks such as the go/no-go, stop-signal,
or flanker tasks in which classification can be concluded within the
first few hundred milliseconds of presentation. An equally important aspect of this paradigm is that, aside from duration, the perceptual features of target and standard stimuli are identical. This bypasses the sometimes problematic issue of target salience
automatically engaging attention and obviating the endogenous
processes under investigation . Finally, that there was a strong decline in performance across just 3
min of task performance, but no broader decline over blocks indicates that the CTET is a useful paradigm for tracing drifts in the level
of attentional control that are not related to changes in basal arousal
-Band activity provided the strongest electrophysiological predictorofalapseofattention.Overthe30sepoch,twodistincttrends
emerged: a maladaptive increase in activity, beginning 20 s before
a target and eventually leading to a behavioral lapse and an adaptive
period of stable  levels associated with successful target detection.
These differences were equally evident in the 4 s, target-free epoch,
making it unlikely that the data are confounded by targets occurring
within that interval. It is noteworthy that misses would not be consciously processed on the CTET since they result from the failure to
detect a target. As such, the CTET would not entail a restoration of
performance monitoring following errors as has been found on
other tasks [e.g., the flanker task of Eichele et al. ] and may
thus provide a better estimation of the natural time course of attentional lapses unperturbed by evaluative error processing.
Activity in the  frequency band is thought to reflect the state of
cortical excitability . For example, studies that
have focused on event-related synchronization (increase) and desynchronization (decrease) of  have pointed to antagonistic neural
mechanisms that actively suppress and enhance visual cortical excitability when attention is deployed in space and time . Although the sensitivity
of  activity to subtle changes in visual excitability has been well
documented , the  effects observed here are
unlikely to reflect changes in baseline visual activity since we observednochangesineitherSSVEPorP1amplitude,includingonthe
target trial itself. The absence of any such relationship in our data is
likely to be a product of the particular paradigm used. In contrast to
previous  studies, most of which involved detection or discrimination tasks performed close to threshold levels ,theCTETentailsmonitoringacentrallypresented,
high-contrast stream of continuous visual input that is well above
detection thresholds. Moreover, it was verified that the increased
duration of target frames was readily detectable at 100% accuracy
during short practice runs. Consequently, performance is much less
dependent on the active deployment of attention to the visual domain or the fine-tuning of perceptual thresholds. This made it possible to isolate “miss” trials that arose from a failure to sustain attention to stimulus duration as opposed to a temporary fluctuation in
visual baseline activity.
Given that well-established indices of bottom-up visual stimulus
processing (P1 and SSVEP) are unaffected, it would seem that the
performance-predicting variance in  in our study is not the same
marker of early visual cortical excitability as inferred in previous
studies .
Numerous studies have demonstrated that early visual regions are
not the only generators of  activity. Source analysis and combined
EEG/fMRI studies have also mapped  activity in key nodes of the
attentional control network, including the frontal and parietal cortices . Although it is not possible to make
strong claims regarding potential cortical generators on the basis of
EEG topographies alone, the pre-miss  increase observed here was
most strongly focused over right inferior parietal scalp and not over
any of the regions that were associated with event-related stimulus
processing. The right inferior parietal cortex has been heavily implicated in the top-down control of attention , and the gradual increase in  amplitude appears consistent
with the emergence of cortical idling or a resting state as controlled
monitoring processes go off-line . An alternative possibility is that this 
trend arises from decreasing recruitment of specialized temporal
processing regions. Transcranial magnetic stimulation and lesion
studies have indicated that the right inferior parietal cortex also
forms a critical part of the dorsal “when” pathway, which underpins
our perception of time .
The actual source of the present  trends may be best elucidated by
combining EEG with brain imaging methods that provide finegrained spatial resolution (e.g., fMRI) to explore the interaction of
distributed functional networks.
The absence of any differences in visual perceptual analysis of
task stimuli is consistent with previous reports that temporal expectation alone does not modulate the visual P1 component but specifically affects higher levels of stimulus processing relevant to goal
monitoring and response execution as indexed by components such
as the P3 and CNV . An
interesting avenue for future research may be to explore whether
top-down modulation of the SSVEP emerges when participants are
required to monitor for a visual feature such as a change in the
frequency of the stimulus flicker.
The frontal P3 component differentiated hits from misses over
both the long and short pretarget epochs. The analysis of the target
trialforhitsisrevealinginthatacomponentwiththesametemporal
andtopographicalcharacteristicsasthestandardP3waselicitedduringtheadditionaltargettrialdurationintheabsenceofanystimulus
changeover.Previousstudiesofrhythmperceptionhavepointedtoa
link between increased P3 amplitudes and improved timing
 . The fact that a fron-
8610 • J. Neurosci., July 1, 2009 • 29(26):8604–8611
O’Connell et al. • Error-Predicting Electrophysiology
tal P3 was elicited during the target interval in the absence of a stimuluschangeindicatesthatthiscomponentisnotstimulusdrivenbut
represents an active endogenous mechanism that traces the temporal structure of the task . Although amplitude differences reached significance across the 30 s epoch, no
clear trends were apparent in the P3 signal that could differentiate
thetwodetectionconditions.Thelargestdivergencesoccurredinthe
3–4 s immediately preceding target onset, suggesting a brief disengagement of this monitoring mechanism immediately before a behavioral lapse.
TheeffectofanattentionallapseontheCNVappearedtobeeven
morefleeting,withdifferencesonlyapparentonthetargettrialitself.
Previous research has demonstrated that the CNV represents the
anticipatory deployment of attention before the presentation of an
expected imperative stimulus as well as the preparation of an associatedresponse .In
the present study, the CNV grew in amplitude as the expected onset
of the next stimulus approached, peaking at 800 ms on standard
frames but extending to 1100 ms on target trials. CNV amplitude
wassignificantlyattenuatedonmisstrials,indicativeofamomentary
reduction in target anticipation and consistent with the earlier disengagement of the P3 time-monitoring mechanism.
Whiletop-downcontrolgraduallydecaysoverthe20stimescale,
the shorter-term changes in the task-specific monitoring processes
indexedbythestandardP3andCNVsuggestthatacriticalthreshold
may need to be passed before task performance is actually compromised.Thisraisestheinterestingpossibilitythatfeedbackon-band
statescouldbeusedasanearlywarningsystemtoavertcriticallapses
of attention.
In conclusion, the present study reports a novel approach to the
analysis of electrophysiological markers of lapsing attention that
opensmanynewavenuesforinvestigation.Ourresultsidentifymaladaptiveneuralpatternsoperatingonatleasttwodistincttimescales:
longer-term drifts in  amplitude (up to 20 s) preceding short-term
disruption of performance-monitoring mechanisms before target
onset (3–4 s). The absence of any change in early sensory processing
indicates that lapsing top-down attention impacts primarily on
higher-order endogenous mechanisms, at least in the present task
scenario in which performance does not rely heavily upon perceptual acuity. Exploring prelapse activity may help to better characterize the neuropsychological deficits in a range of clinical groups and
could contribute to the development of new rehabilitative
techniques.