J Med Virol. 2020;92:408–417.
wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/jmv
© 2020 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
Received: 23 December 2019 | Accepted: 12 January 2020
DOI: 10.1002/jmv.25674
R E V I E W
Recent advances in the detection of respiratory virus
infection in humans
Naru Zhang1 | Lili Wang2 | Xiaoqian Deng3 | Ruiying Liang3 | Meng Su3 |
Chen He3 | Lanfang Hu3 | Yudan Su3 | Jing Ren3 | Fei Yu3 | Lanying Du4 |
Shibo Jiang4,5
1Department of Clinical Medicine, School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University City College,
Hangzhou, China
2State Key Laboratory of North China Crop
Improvement and Regulation, Research
Center of Chinese Jujube, Hebei Agricultural
University, Baoding, China
3State Key Laboratory of North China Crop
Improvement and Regulation, College of Life
and Science, Hebei Agricultural University,
Baoding, China
4Lindsley F. Kimball Research Institute, New
York Blood Center, New York, New York
5Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular
Virology (MOE/NHC/CAMS), School of Basic
Medical Sciences, Shanghai Medical College,
Fudan University, Shanghai, China
Correspondence
Shibo Jiang and Lanying Du, Lindsley F.
Kimball, Research Institute, New York Blood
Center, New York 10065, NY.
Email: (SJ) and
 (LD)
Fei Yu, State Key Laboratory of North China
Crop Improvement and Regulation, College of
Life and Science, Hebei Agricultural
University, Baoding 071001, China.
Email: 
Funding information
Hebei Province's Program for Talents
Returning from Studying Overseas,
Grant/Award Number: CN201707; National
Natural Science Foundation of China,
Grant/Award Numbers: 81974302,
81601761; starting grant from Hebei
Agricultural University,
Grant/Award Numbers: ZD2016026,
YJ201843; Program for Youth Talent of
Higher Learning Institutions of Hebei
Province, Grant/Award Number: BJ2018045
Respiratory tract viral infection caused by viruses or bacteria is one of the most
common diseases in human worldwide, while those caused by emerging viruses, such
as the novel coronavirus, 2019‐nCoV that caused the pneumonia outbreak in Wuhan,
China most recently, have posed great threats to global public health. Identification of
the causative viral pathogens of respiratory tract viral infections is important to
select an appropriate treatment, save people's lives, stop the epidemics, and avoid
unnecessary use of antibiotics. Conventional diagnostic tests, such as the assays for
rapid detection of antiviral antibodies or viral antigens, are widely used in many
clinical laboratories. With the development of modern technologies, new diagnostic
strategies, including multiplex nucleic acid amplification and microarray‐based assays,
are emerging. This review summarizes currently available and novel emerging
diagnostic methods for the detection of common respiratory viruses, such as
influenza virus, human respiratory syncytial virus, coronavirus, human adenovirus,
and human rhinovirus. Multiplex assays for simultaneous detection of multiple
respiratory viruses are also described. It is anticipated that such data will assist
researchers and clinicians to develop appropriate diagnostic strategies for timely and
effective detection of respiratory virus infections.
K E Y W O R D S
adenovirus, coronavirus, diagnostic methods, influenza virus, respiratory syncytial virus,
respiratory viral infection, rhinovirus
Naru Zhang, Lili Wang, and Xiaoqian Deng contributed equally to this work.
INTRODUCTION
Acute respiratory disease (ARD) accounts for a large proportion of all
acute morbidities, as well as mortalities, worldwide, among which
acute viral respiratory tract infection is the leading cause (appropriate 80%).1 The major viral pathogens include influenza virus,
respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), coronavirus, adenovirus, and
rhinovirus. In children below the age of five, the combined global
mortality of only influenza and RSV reaches 300 000 deaths each
year.2 Other respiratory viruses, such as adenovirus and rhinovirus,
are associated with lower mortality, but significant morbidity, causing
a huge economic burden.3 The highly pathogenic emerging and
reemerging coronaviruses that may cause epidemics or pandemics,
such as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS‐CoV)
and Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS‐CoV),
have posed great threat to global public health. Most recently, a
novel coronavirus 2019‐nCoV ( has caused the
pneumonia in 41 confirmed cases of patients, including 7 in serious
condition, 1 dead, and 2 recovered ( 
nation/2001119576/). The full genomic sequence of this coronavirus
was released on January 10, 2020 ( 
genome‐release‐of‐novel‐coronavirus/319?from=groupmessage&isap
pinstalled=0), which is more than 82% identical to those of SARS‐CoV
and bat SARS‐like coronavirus (SL‐CoV).4
Accurate and fast diagnosis of the causative viral pathogens is
important to select the appropriate treatment, save people's lives,
stop the epidemics, and reduce unnecessary use of antibiotics. All
viruses mentioned above can cause both upper and lower respiratory
tract infections, as well as overlapping clinical presentations, making
it difficult for physicians to distinguish the causative agents without a
solid laboratory analysis. Conventional diagnostic methods, such as
viral culture and direct/indirect immunofluorescence assay (IFA), are
time‐consuming and labor intensive with limited sensitivity. Rapid
and accurate diagnosis of respiratory viruses can help in epidemiologic monitoring, along with taking effective prevention steps and
implementing appropriate antiviral therapies. Over the past decades,
an evolution in viral diagnostic testing has been seen, all the way
from conventional approaches to rapid antigen detection. More
recently, highly sensitive nucleic acid amplification tests (NAAT) and
point‐of‐care tests (POCT) have been developed.2
approaches
available, or under development, for diagnosis of common respiratory
virus infections in humans. It is anticipated that these data will assist
clinical laboratories to rapidly and accurately diagnose respiratory
viruses, thus providing physicians with essential information for
timely and appropriate treatment of patients. The commonly used
diagnostic approaches for influenza virus, RSV, coronavirus, adenovirus, and rhinovirus are summarized in Table 1 and described in
detail in the following review.
| INFLUENZA VIRUS AND ITS
DIAGNOSTIC APPROACHES
Influenza viruses belong to the family of Orthomyxoviridae. This family
consists of five genera (influenza A virus, influenza B virus, influenza
Respiratory viruses and their specific diagnostic approaches.
Virus type
Family and Genus
Diagnostic approaches
References
Influenza virus
Orthomyxoviridae family & Influenza virus A, Influenza
virus B, Influenza virus C, Influenza virus D, Isavirus,
Quaranjavirus and Thogotovirus genus
Viral culture; IFA; ELISA‐based test; PCR‐based (reverse
transcriptase‐PCR, LAMP); DNA‐microarray‐based;
sequencing‐based tests
Paramyxoviridae family & Pneumovirus genus
IFA; ELISA‐based test; DFA; LFIA (Remel Xpect, Binax
Now RSV, BD Directigen EZ RSV, QuickLab RSV, Respi‐
Strip); real‐time PCR based (TaqMan PCR, Locked
nucleic acid (LNA)‐based one‐tube nested real‐time
(OTNRT) RT‐PCR); RT‐RAA assay; RT‐SIBA
Coronavirus
Coronaviridae family & Alphacoronavirus,
Betacoronavirus, Deltacoronavirus and
Gammacoronavirus genus
RT‐PCR; rRT‐PCR (PowerCheck, DiaPlexQ, Anyplex,
AccuPower, LightMix, UltraFast); RT‐LAMP; Real‐time
Adenovirus
Adenoviridae family & Atadenovirus, Aviadenovirus,
Mastadenovirus and Siadenovirus genus
Viral culture; Indirect ELISA; IFA; LAT; EIA; Real‐time
PCR based (RealStar® Adenovirus PCR kit 1.0, in‐
house hAdV qPCR assay)
Rhinovirus
Picornaviridae family & Enterovirus genus
CFT; HI; IFA; ELISA; Semi‐nested RT‐PCR assay; One‐
step Panenterhino/Ge/08 real‐time RT‐RCR assay;
WGS‐based assays
Abbreviations: CFT, complement fixation test; DFA, direct fluorescent assay; EIA, enzyme‐immunoassay; ELISA, enzyme‐linked immunosorbent assay; HI,
hemagglutination inhibition; IFA, immunofluorescence assay; LAMP, loop‐mediated isothermal amplification; LAT, lateral‐flow test; LFIA, lateral‐flow
immunochromatographic assay; LNA, locked nucleic acid; OTNRT, one‐tube nested real‐time; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; RT‐PCR, reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction; rRT‐PCR, real‐time reverse transcription‐polymerase chain reaction; RT‐LAMP, reverse transcription loop‐
mediated isothermal amplification; RT‐RAA, reverse transcription recombinase‐aided amplification assay; RT‐SIBA, reverse transcription strand invasion‐
based amplification; WGS, whole genome sequencing.
ZHANG ET AL.
C virus, Thogotovirus, and Isavirus), which are classified based on
internal nucleoprotein (NP) and matrix (M) proteins. Among these
genera, only influenza A and influenza B viruses cause clinical
diseases. Influenza B viral infections usually cause localized outbreaks, whereas influenza A virus is the primary pathogen for human
infections and, thus, the major cause of large influenza epidemics and
pandemics.44 Based on the glycoproteins hemagglutinin (HA) and
neuraminidase (NA), which are located on the viral surface, influenza
A viruses are divided into various subtypes. Until now, 18 HA
(H1‐H18) and 11 NA (N1‐N11) subtypes have been identified.44 A
number of diagnostic approaches, including virus isolation, as well as
some emerging molecular‐based approaches, have been used to
detect influenza viruses in clinical laboratories.
Traditional approaches for influenza virus
Viral culture is the gold standard for diagnosing influenza viral infections.
This approach includes inoculation of the corresponding cell lines, such as
Madin Darby canine kidney (MDCK), A549, and rhesus monkey kidney
(LLC MK2), with clinical samples, propagation for seven to 10 days to
monitor the development of cytopathic effect (CPE), and final confirmation of influenza virus infection by hemadsorption using erythrocytes,
specific antibody staining or immunofluorescence microscopy.5 IFA has
been used since the 1960s. It directly stains respiratory epithelial cells
derived from nasopharyngeal aspirates or swabs with fluorescently
labeled influenza virus‐specific antibodies.5 Currently, several FDA‐
approved enzyme‐linked immunosorbent (ELISA)‐based tests are available for diagnosis of influenza virus infections. However, ELISA‐based
tests often show lower sensitivity compared with nucleic acid‐based
methods. A novel immunoassay based on europium nanoparticles has
been developed to rapidly detect 29 strains of influenza A and 10 strains
of influenza B viruses with high sensitivity and specificity.6
Molecular–based approaches for influenza
virus detection
The above‐described conventional diagnostic methods generally
have lower sensitivity and specificity relative to molecular methods.
With the development of laboratory approaches for virus diagnosis,
isolation of viral pathogens from secretion samples has become much
easier than before.
The rapid influenza diagnostic test (RIDT) offers a faster approach
for detecting both influenza A and B viruses. However, it has limited
ability to further identify the subtypes of influenza viruses. In addition,
its test performance (ie, sensitivity and specificity) varies widely. For
example, in November 2009, 290 suspected influenza patients were
analyzed using direct antigen EZ Flu A+B kit. The sensitivity and
specificity of RIDT were 40.5% and 94.5%, respectively.45 NAAT assays
based on polymerase chain reaction (PCR) detect virus‐specific genetic
materials, rather than viral antigens or antibodies. Therefore, optimal
extraction of viral genetic materials is required. One of the advantages
of NAAT over RIDT is that NAAT is able to identify different subtypes
of influenza viruses. Trombetta's group found that NAAT shows much
higher sensitivity for both influenza A and influenza B viruses, despite
its relative lower specificity.7 A variety of NAAT assays, such as reverse
transcriptase‐PCR, loop‐mediated isothermal amplification‐based assay
DNA‐microarray‐based
sequencing‐based
appearing for diagnosis of influenza viral infections in humans.5 Using
the LAMP approach, Poon's group demonstrated 100% sensitivity for
detection of seasonal influenza A H1N1 and H3N2 viruses from clinical
specimens with analytical sensitivity of 10 copies per reaction.8
Compared with the RT‐PCR‐based assay, a real‐time reverse transcription LAMP‐based assay (RT‐LAMP) showed a sensitivity of 97.8% and a
specificity of 100% for detecting 2009 H1N1 pandemic virus.9 LAMP‐
based assays have also been used to detect the highly pathogenic H5N1
and H7N9 avian influenza viruses, having comparable, or higher,
sensitivities than RT‐PCR‐based approaches.10–12 However, the high
cost of NAAT, the complexity of the equipment required, and the need
for trained professionals make NAAT assays less practical in areas with
limited resources.
In addition to the above approaches, the DNA‐microarray‐based
approach has been developed to detect influenza viruses, offering a
novel tool for accurate and rapid diagnosis of influenza epidemics or
pandemics. This assay uses multiple oligonucleotides specially designed
to target conserved sequences encoding HA, NA and M proteins of
influenza A and B viruses.5 For instance, Zhao's research group has
developed a gold nanoparticle‐based genomic microarray assay, which
is able to differentiate H5N1 viruses from the major seasonal influenza
A viruses (H1N1, H3N2). This can be explained by oligonucleotides
which are designed on the basis of consensus sequence of the HA and
NA genes of the H5N1 virus and M gene of H1N1, H3N2, and H5N1
viruses.13 The same group has expanded the platform and designed
specific oligonucleotides for HA, NA and M genes of the 2009 pandemic
H1N1 virus, enabling the detection of the 2009 pandemic H1N1 virus
and distinguish it from other influenza A viruses.46
Particularly, a combinational diagnostic platform is reported
using nanomicroarray for screening and multiplex next‐generation
sequencing (NGS) assays for confirmation to simultaneously identify
and characterize influenza A and B viruses in a single sample.47
Recently, a high‐throughput whole genome sequencing (WGS)
method with the MinION portable sequencer was developed to test
influenza A and B viruses, as subsequently validated by the Illumina
MiSeq platform. The overall accuracy, precision, as well as recall
rates, were 99.95%, 97.88%, and 89.41%, respectively, from 1D reads
and 99.97%, 99.86%, and 93.28%, respectively, from 1D2 reads.14
| HUMAN RESPIRATORY SYNCYTIAL
VIRUS AND ITS DIAGNOSTIC APPROACHES
Human RSV is a nonsegmented, negative‐sense and single‐stranded
RNA virus of the Paramyxoviridae family. The genome of RSV includes
ten genes that encode eleven proteins. RSV can be classified into
ZHANG ET AL.
subgroups A and B according to the genome sequence and the
reactivity of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) to the surface glycoprotein (G) and fusion protein (F).48,49 RSV is a leading cause of severe
respiratory disease in immunocompromised populations, such as
infants and elderly populations, with significant morbidity and
mortality worldwide. Early and accurate RSV diagnosis is crucially
important for appropriate treatment.
Traditional approaches for human respiratory
syncytial virus detection
ELISA and immunofluorescence assays are traditional assays to
identify RSV. However, a modified ELISA method has been developed,
targeting RSV F protein and it can detect RSV within 25 minutes at low
cost.15 The immunofluorescence assay can rapidly detect RSV antigens
using a fluorescence‐tagged primary or secondary antibody. For
example, the direct fluorescent antibody assay (DFA), which requires
a certain number of cells in the specimen, with a sensitivity and
specificity of 94% and 96.8%, respectively, is widely used for detection
of RSV in clinical laboratories because of its simplicity and rapidity. For
this reason, this assay has particular use in resource‐limited countries
since it can potentially eliminate prolonged hospitalization and
unnecessary use of antibiotics.16
Semiconductor quantum dots can be used for biological and
biomedical applications because of their unique size‐dependent
optical and electronic features. The assay detects RSV F protein
using thioglycolate (TGA)‐coated cadmium telluride (CdTe) particles,
which are bioconjugated with RSV anti‐F protein mAb.17 It overcomes some of DFA's disadvantage, such as relatively low sensitivity,
because of the background staining, and the rapid fading of the dye.
Also, this assay is more sensitive than RT‐PCT. By probing F and G
proteins with QDs, confocal microscopy could detect the progression
of RSV infection in the HEp‐2 cell line, and this method was found to
be more sensitive compared to RT‐PCR.18
Lateral flow immunoassay (LFIA) is another rapid RSV detection
method based on an immunochromatographic technique using the
samples of nasal washes or aspirates. Many LFIA kits are now
available in the market, such as BD Directigen EZ RSV, Binax Now
RSV, RSV Respi‐Strip, Remel Xpect, and QuickLab RSV Test.19–21 The
sensitivity and specificity of the abovementioned kits are normally
higher than 90% and 95%, but they differ by manufacturer.
PCR‐based approaches for human respiratory
syncytial virus detection
The PCR method is based on the nested RT‐PCR technique involving
the outer and inner primers designed from the F gene of RSV‐A or ‐B.
This method has been developed in both circle time and operability in
adult infections.22 Therefore, it can be used to detect samples with
low viral titers and sensitively perform identification using antigen‐
based detection approaches.
The following novel PCR detection methods have been established
by modification of the conventional PCR approach. For example, real‐
time quantitative PCR (RT‐qPCR) is a rapid, specific, and sensitive
TaqMan PCR method for detection, subgrouping, and quantitation of
pathogens. This assay increases the sensitivity of conventional PCR. It
needs two sets of primer‐probe pairs, which come from the nucleotide
sequence of nucleocapsid (N) gene or Fusion (F) gene targeting RSV‐A
and RSV‐B, respectively.23,24 A quantitative TaqMan PCR assay was
once used to detect 175 nasopharyngeal aspirates obtained from
children with respiratory symptoms in Hong Kong, and it detected 36
RSV‐positive samples, including 10 as RSV‐A and 26 as RSV‐B. In
contrast, a cell culture‐based assay only identified 21, and an
immunofluorescence assay identified 32 RSV‐positive specimens, all
of which were among those identified by the TaqMan PCR assay,
suggesting the greater accuracy and sensitivity of the TaqMan PCR
assay.24 In addition, locked nucleic acid (LNA)‐based one‐tube nested
real‐time (OTNRT)‐PCR is an assay with very high sensitivity and low
incidence of cross‐contamination for detection of RSV.25 A total of 143
nasopharyngeal aspirate samples that tested RSV‐negative by qRT‐PCR
were confirmed as RSV‐positive by sequencing the OTNRT‐PCR
products,25 indicating that OTNRT‐PCR is more sensitive than RT‐
qPCR for detection of RSV in clinical samples. Moreover, the rapid
reverse‐transcription recombinase‐aided amplification (RT‐RAA) assay
was developed as a molecular‐based diagnostic method to detect
subgroup RSV A and B genomes in clinical specimens. This method
mainly utilizes an enzyme mixture, including single‐strand DNA binding
protein (SSB), recombinase UvsX, and DNA polymerase, to detect RNA
amplicons of RSV.26 It is performed at 39°C in less than 30 minutes
specificity.
Furthermore,
transcription
invasion‐based amplification (RT‐SIBA) is reverse transcription isothermal nucleic acid amplification for rapid detection of RSV with good
sensitivity since it can detect as few as 10 copies of RSV RNA within
20 minutes.27 RT‐SIBA does not need highly purified RNA for detection
of RSV, which can reduce the complexity of specimen preparation and
shorten the total detection cycle in clinical specimens.
| CORONAVIRUS AND ITS DIAGNOSTIC
APPROACHES
Coronaviruses belong to the family of Coronaviridae. Bats have been
recognized
coronaviruses and the viruses have crossed species barriers to infect
humans and many other different kinds of animals, including avians,
rodents, and chiropters.50,51 Coronavirus may cause respiratory and
neurological diseases.52 So far, six human coronaviruses (HCoVs)
have been identified, including HCoV‐229E, HCoV‐HKU1, HCoV‐
OC43, HCoV‐NL63, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
(SARS‐CoV), and Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus
(MERS‐CoV).53 MERS‐CoV is a human coronavirus first reported in
June 2012 that can cause human respiratory diseases.52 It has been
classified as a lineage C β‐coronavirus, and its structure comprises a
~30 kb positive‐sense, single‐stranded RNA genome, which is closely
ZHANG ET AL.
related to the lineage C β‐coronaviruses of Tylonycteris bat CoV
HKU4 and Pipistrellus bat CoV HKU5.54 By genomic analysis of
lineage C β‐coronaviruses, human MERS‐CoV has shown high
similarities to MERS‐CoV derived from camels with >99.5% nucleotide identities, suggesting that the human and camel isolates belong
to the same coronavirus species.4 As of September 30, 2019, 2468
laboratory‐confirmed cases of MERS‐CoV infections, including 851
deaths in 27 countries, have been reported to WHO ( 
who.int/emergencies/mers‐cov/en/). Because no commercial vaccines
or therapeutic treatments are currently available for MERS, rapid
and accurate diagnosis of MERS‐CoV is important for the prevention
of its transmission and outbreaks.
Current diagnostic tests for coronavirus include RT‐PCR, real‐time
reverse transcription PCR (rRT‐PCR), reverse transcription loop‐
mediated isothermal amplification (RT‐LAMP), as well as real‐time
RT‐LAMP.51,55–58
A duplex RT‐PCR method has been developed based on primers
and probes targeting the conserved spike S2 gene of SARS‐CoV and
MERS‐CoV. By using pUC57SARS‐pS2 as a template for SARS‐CoV
and pGEM‐MERSS2 as a template for MERS‐CoV, respectively,
adequate detection limits of 50 to 100 copies/mL were achieved.28
The singleplex RT‐iiPCR assays are designed to detect MERS‐CoV
envelope gene (upE) and open reading frame 1a (ORF1a) genes
separately. Compared to the reference singleplex RT‐qPCR assay, the
sensitivities of the singleplex MERS‐CoV ORF1a and upE RT‐iiPCR
assays are 99.03% and 100%, respectively.29
Six commercially available MERS‐CoV RNA detection kits based on
rRT‐PCR are available, including AccuPower (Bioneer, Korea), Anyplex
Diagnostics,
Switzerland),
(Nanobiosys,
Korea) and PowerChek (Kogene Biotech, Korea). The PowerChek
MERS Real‐time PCR, Anyplex II MERS‐CoV (upE) Real‐time Detection
and DiaPlexQ MERS Virus Detection kits consist of two steps. A single
gene targets the upstream region of the upE region for screening, and
multiple genes target both upE and ORF1a regions for final
confirmation.30 The AccuPower MERS‐CoV Real Time RT‐PCR, Light-
Mix Molecular Dx MERS‐CoV upE/ORF1a, and UltraFast LabChip
MERSCoV Real‐time PCR kits use two single gene‐targeting reagents
to detect the upE and ORF1a genes simultaneously.30 No cross‐
reactivity has been reported with other respiratory viruses. Based on
the validation tests, including 28 specificity panels and 9 clinical
specimens, the sensitivity and specificity of all these rRT‐PCR kits for
detecting upE and ORF1a reach 100% (95% confidence interval [CI],
0.60‐1.00) and 100% (95% CI, 0.79‐1.00), respectively. Based on
results from the high inhibition panel, AccuPower and PowerChek
have lowest sensitivity to the presence of PCR inhibition.29 Therefore,
the overall sensitivity and specificity of the above six rRT‐PCR kits are
sufficient for diagnosing MERS‐CoV infection.
In the RT‐LAMP assay, two primer sets were constructed with
one set targeting the N gene and one set targeting the ORF1a gene.
Both sets have shown high efficiency in amplifying target sequences
derived from different MERS‐CoV strains with no cross‐reactivity
observed with other respiratory viruses.31 Huang's research group
has established a nucleic acid visualization technique that combines
the RT‐LAMP technique and a vertical flow visualization strip
(RT‐LAMP‐VF)
MERS‐CoV.52
RT‐LAMP‐VF assay can detect 2 × 101 copies/μL of synthesized
RNA transcript and 1 × 101 copies/μL of MERS‐CoV RNA without
cross‐reactivity to multiple SARS‐related‐CoVs, including HKU1,
HKU4, OC43 and 229E, thus exhibiting high specificity.
RT‐LAMP and RT‐LAMP‐VF mentioned above are assays for
rapid and accurate detection of MERS‐CoV infection. Bonhan Kooa's
team designed an arch‐shaped multiple‐target sensor capable of
rapid pathogen identification using direct amplification in clinical
samples. The method can detect a variety of viruses including MERS‐
CoV with high sensitivity and specificity and is able to distinguish
MERS‐CoV from HCoV in clinical samples within 20 minutes.32 The
TaqMan probe‐based one‐step rRT‐PCR assays provide rapid and
sensitive internal diagnostic detection of MERS‐CoV by detecting the
upE and open reading frame (ORF) 1b. This method is reliable,
specific and reproducible. In addition, different from the traditional
two‐step sample detection method, the one‐step method combines
two steps into one step, thus increasing the sensitivity of the
measurement, for example, <10 and ≦50 copies of RNA template per
reaction for upE and ORF1b, respectively.33 The MAb‐based rapid
NP detection method for MERS‐CoV was used for preliminary rapid
screening of MERS‐CoV infection due to its high specificity but
moderate sensitivity. The detection limit of this assay is about 103.7
to 104.2 TCID50/mL of MERS‐CoV, and the sensitivity is about 25‐ to
100‐fold lower than that of antigen capture ELISA.34
| HUMAN ADENOVIRUS AND ITS
DIAGNOSTIC APPROACHES
Adenovirus (AdV) infections are now regarded as a significant source
of human or animal morbidity and mortality. Human adenovirus
(hAdV) infections are readily transmittable, infecting all age groups,
especially infants and the elderly, as well as those with immunodeficiency and organ transplantation.59 HAdV has a non‐enveloped
spherical structure with a diameter of 70 to 100 nm. The external shell
consists of 252 capsomeres, including 240 hexons and 12 pentons,
which are composed of an icosahedral viral capsid. The capsomeres
are arranged on 20 triangular surfaces, making the shell form 30 edges
and 12 vertices. The genome of hAdV exists in the capsid in the form
of linear double‐stranded DNA with sizes ranging from 34 to more
than 37 kb. The genome contains the early expressed E1~E4 genes
associated with replication of hAdV, intermediate gene of Ⅸand Ⅳa2,
and late region genes L1~L5 associated with the production of mature
virions.60 HAdV belongs to the Adenoviridae family, and it has been
classified into seven species (A to G) with over 50 serotypes based on
hexon and fiber protein characteristics, relative nucleic homology,
immunochemical responses, biological properties, and phylogenetic
relationships.35,61,62 This subdivision has some clinical relevance,
essentially because different hAdVs differ in tissue orientation and
disease type. HAdV can cause multiple diseases, such as respiratory
ZHANG ET AL.
disease (hAdV‐B, ‐C, and ‐E), gastroenteritis (hAdV‐F and ‐G),
keratoconjunctivitis
meningoencephalitis
(hAdV‐A, ‐B, and ‐D).59,63 Therefore, effective and rapid diagnosis of
hAdV ahead of its progression will provide for effective monitoring of
hAdV infection and guarantee timely and effective treatment of hAdV‐
associated diseases.
Tratitional approaches for human adenovirus
The isolation of adenovirus after growth in cell culture and its
immunological detection are generally thought to be the “gold
standard.”36 Samples, such as throat swabs and stool specimen,
collected from patients are treated overnight with antibiotics,
centrifuged, and supernatant inoculated
with susceptible cells
(Hep‐2, Graham 293, or A549). CPE is observed after cell incubation
at 37°C, and then the hAdV is isolated. The serotype of hAdV can be
determined by detecting the antigenic determinant of penton
proteins by the hemagglutination inhibition (HI) test. HAdV can also
be typed by detecting the antigenic determinant of hexon proteins by
neutralizing test (NT). However, these methods are time‐consuming,
require experienced technicians to analyze the results, and the
results are still uncertain. Different types of hAdV infection can cause
different diseases and different symptoms; thus, detection of
antigens and antibodies can make the diagnosis of hAdV more rapid
and sensitive. Indirect ELISA can detect the IgA, IgM and IgG
antibodies of hAdV in human serum or plasma. Immunofluores (IF),
latex agglutination test (LAT) and enzyme immunoassay (EIA) are also
common diagnostic methods accepted by most clinical laboratories
because of their simple and rapid characteristics.
Molecular‐based approaches for human
adenovirus detection
Emerging molecular‐based detection methods have gradually replaced
traditional detection technology in many laboratories and clinical
practices, providing reliable new methods for the diagnosis of hAdV.60
Specific antigenic determinants on the hexon surface of hAdV can
be identified by neutralizing antibodies. The antigenic determinants
of hexon proteins have two loops, L1 and L2, which are divided into
seven hypervariable regions (HVR), among which HVR 1 to 7 has
become the newest method of choice for adenovirus typing. Madisch
developed a two‐step diagnostic method that can classify 51
serotypes by amplification and sequencing of the amplification
elements on L1 and L2.37 Shimada studied a more conservative
hexon gene on HVR, which can type 44 serotypes, but it is limited to
the hAdV serotypes that can lead to corneal conjunctivitis.38 Real‐
time PCR is a sensitive and quantitative technique to diagnose hAdV
infections. A real‐time PCR with consensus primer and probe for a
conserved region of the hexon gene has been designed to detect 51
prototypes. The sensitivity of the assay is ≤15 copies per run, and the
linear range of quantitation was 1.5 × 101 to 1.5 × 108 copies/run.39
The RealStar Adenovirus PCR Kit 1.0 is a real‐time PCR‐based
diagnostic test for in vitro detection and quantification of hAdV‐
specific DNA. Its sensitivity is 1.09 copies/μL (95%, 0.62‐3.08
copies/μL), and it has no cross‐reactivity against 35 human viral
pathogens. Compared with the RealStar Adenovirus PCR Kit, the in‐
house qPCR assay is more sensitive and reliable for the detection and
quantification of hAdV‐specific DNA. The performance characteristics of this in‐house qPCR have been evaluated against the RealStar
Adenovirus PCR Kit, using 122 clinical specimens and 18 proficiency
samples.35 In this study, the in‐house hAdV qPCR assay detected six
hAdV species A to F, except species G. Using the RealStar Adenovirus
PCR Kit as the reference, the sensitivity and specificity are 98.1%
and 100%, respectively, for the in‐house qPCR assay, and the
correlation of the two assays is quite good (R2 = 0.984). Furthermore,
the in‐house qPCR assay has a linear range up to 9 log10 copies/m,
/inter‐assay
variations.
| RHINOVIRUS AND ITS DIAGNOSTIC
APPROACHES
Rhinoviruses
Picornaviridae genus Enterovirus, which has been classified into 3
species (A to C) with over 160 serotypes.64–67 RVs are small single‐
stranded RNA viruses with an icosahedral symmetrical capsid.68 RVs
are the most frequent cause of respiratory tract infections in both
children and adults. RV‐A and RV‐C are common RV species causing
lower airway illness, wheezing and acute asthma, and they can lead to
more severe symptoms than RV‐B in children.67,69
Culture isolation of virus combined with acid stabilization test is a
classic method for RV diagnosis. However, this assay is time‐
consuming and laborious, limiting its value for clinical treatment.
Human RV antibodies can be detected by immunological methods,
such as the complement fixation test (CFT), HI test, IF, and ELISA.
However, owing to the lack of suitable cross‐reactive antigens to
cover a large number of RV serotypes, the application of these
methods is greatly limited. In contrast, the one‐step, real‐time PCR
assay detects RVs by using a sequence detection system. This assay
improves workflow, reduces preparation time, and eliminates cross‐
contamination that might be introduced during cDNA transfer from
the reverse transcription reaction into the PCR reaction step.40 Semi‐
nested RT‐PCR assay is based on an extremely sensitive PCR to
detect airborne RVs, which has a limit of detection (LOD) of
approximately 0.8 median tissue culture infectious dose (TCID50).41
The one‐step Panenterhino/Ge/08 real‐time RT‐RCR assay has been
developed and validated by using an internal extraction control and
serial dilutions of an in vitro‐transcribed rhinovirus RNA reference
standard.42 The LOD and limit of quantification (LOQ) of this assay
are 3.10 log copies/mL and 4.10 log copies/mL, respectively. The
linearity is conserved from 4.10 to 9.10 log copies/mL, and intra‐
assay reproducibility is r2 = 0.999.42 With the rapid development of
ZHANG ET AL.
WGS technology, more and more laboratories may perform WGS on
human RV isolates clinically. With the discovery of hRV‐C, the data
volume of whole‐genome hRV sequencing has been increased and
improved significantly. This will help researchers and clinicians to
understand the evolutionary and recombination of RV,43 which may
improve diagnosis.
MULTIPLEX RESPIRATORY VIRUS
Although single respiratory viruses can be detected in patients with
symptoms, other respiratory viruses may also exist simultaneously.
Children, especially those under 5 years of age, present with a higher
frequency of coinfections.70–72 Multiplex assays that contain more
than one viral gene target in a single tube have the advantage of
rapid detection of several potential viral pathogens simultaneously.
Multiplex real‐time PCR has allowed simultaneous detection of
multiple respiratory viruses in a short time. Compared with the
singleplex approach, the multiplex diagnostic approach has higher
sample throughput (96 samples per run), shorter turnaround time
(5 hours), and a smaller amount of sample requirement.73
The Luminex NxTAG Respiratory Pathogen Panel (NxTAG‐RPP) is a
new high‐throughput multiplex real‐time PCR system, which was
upgraded from the xTAG Respiratory Viral Panel Fastv2 (RVPv2)
assay.73 This assay demonstrates good diagnostic performance on
detection of multiplex respiratory pathogens. A total of 284 clinical
respiratory specimens, including hAdV and RV, and 3 influenza A/H7N9
viral culture samples have been tested, and the overall diagnostic
sensitivity of the NxTAG‐RPP was 98.9% (95% CI, 97.2 to 99.7), while
the specificity was 99.0% (95% CI, 98.6 to 99.2). This assay demonstrated
100% sensitivity for detection of hAdV.73 A number of such assays have
been developed, as described, and are summarized in Table 2.
Recently, Feng's group designed locked nucleic acid LNA‐
modified primers and developed a multiplex one‐tube nested real‐
time RT‐PCR (mOTNRT‐PCR) assay that could detect RSV, hRV and
human metapneumovirus (hMPV) simultaneously with higher sensitivity and lower cost compared to the individual RT‐qPCR.74 This
assay was evaluated using 398 clinical samples, and the sensitivity for
RSV, hRV, and hMPV was 5 copies per reaction. No cross‐reactivity
was observed among other common respiratory viruses, and the total
detection time of this assay was 2.7 hours for 96 samples.
The Panther Fusion respiratory assay has been developed to
detect multiple respiratory viruses, and it consists of three multiplex
real‐time PCR panels: Flu A/B/RSV, Paraflu (Parainfluenza), and
hAdV/hMPV/RV.75 The performance characteristics of this assay for
the detection of Flu A/B, RSV, Paraflu 1 to 3, hMPV, RV, and hAdV
have been evaluated using 395 nasopharyngeal (NP) and 104 lower
respiratory tract (LRT) samples.75 The Wilson‐126 Score method was
used to calculate the 95% CI for positive percent agreement (PPA)
and negative percent agreement (NPA). For the NP samples, the
Panther Fusion Assay has 100% PPA and 98.4% to 100% NPA for all
targets. For the LRT samples, it had 100% PPA for all targets and
100% NPA for all targets, except hMPV (96.1%).75
Fast Track Diagnostics Respiratory pathogens 21 (FTD21 kit) is a
commercial multiplex nucleic acid amplification assay. The FTD21 kit
has been evaluated using 665 samples from patients with influenza‐
like illness. This kit has sensitivity of 90.7% and specificity of 100%
compared to the RealStar 1.0 kit. In addition, upon modification of
the FTD21 kit, the sensitivity increased to 97.3%.76
A GeXP‐based multiplex RT‐PCR assay (GeXP assay) has been
developed to detect 16 different respiratory viruses simultaneously.77 Seventeen sets of chimeric primers were designed to
initiate the RT‐PCR, and another pair of universal primers was used
for subsequent cycles of RT‐PCR.77 The GeXP assay achieves a
sensitivity of 20 to 200 copies for a single virus, and when all 16
premixed viral targets were present, the sensitivity was 1000 copies,
suggesting that this assay is a sensitive and specific method for
detecting respiratory viruses.77
The Qiagen ResPlex II V2.0 kit, which uses a target‐enriched
multiplexing RT‐PCR amplification combined with a suspension array
detection, detects a total of 17 respiratory viruses, including Flu A/B,
Diagnostic approaches for multiplex respiratory virus infections
Diagnostic approaches
Virus detected
References
hAdV, hRV, influenza virus
mOTNRT‐PCR
RSV, hRV, hMPV
Panther fusion respiratory
Flu A/B, RSV, PIV, hAdV, hMPV, hRV
hAdV, RSV A/B, coronaviruses (229E, OC43, NL63, and HKU1), hPIV 1/2/3/4, Flu A ,
Flu B, hRV, hMPV A/B
GeXP assay
Flu A (H1), Flu B, hPIV 1/2/3, hRV, hMPV, hAdV, RSV A/B, coronaviruses (229E, OC43, NL63, and
HKU1), hBoV
Qiagen ResPlex II V2.0 kit
A/B, hPIV 1/2/3/4, RSV, hMPV, RV, EV, hBoV, hAdV, coronaviruses (229E, OC43, NL63 and HKU1)
and FluA pdm09
FilmArray multiplex PCR
hAdV, RSV A/B, coronaviruses (229E, OC43, NL63, and HKU1), hMPV, hRV/hEV, Flu A
 , Flu B, PIV 1/2/3/4
Abbreviations: Flu A/B, influenza A/B; hAdV, human adenovirus; hBoV, human bocavirus; hEV, human enterovirus; hMPV, human metapneumovirus; hRV,
human rhinovirus; PIV, parainfluenza virus; RSV, respiratory syncytial virus.
ZHANG ET AL.
PIV 1/2/3/4, RSV, hMPV, rhinoviruses (RVs), enterovirus (EV), human
bocavirus (hBoV), hAdV, four coronaviruses (229E, OC43, NL63, and
HKU1) and FluA pdm09 from 438 nasopharyngeal swab specimens.78
The specificity of the test was about 92.9% to 100%. The sensitivity
for PIV3, hMPV, PIV1 and BoV was reported to be 73.1%, 70%,
66.7%, and 55.6%, respectively, but the sensitivity for FluA, EnV,
OC43, RSV and H1N1 was relatively low.78
The FilmArray multiplex PCR system is a multiplex PCR panel
that can be used to detect 17 viruses, including RSV‐A and RSV‐B,
and 2 bacteria. This platform requires 2 minutes of hands‐on time for
sample preparation and about 1 hour for device running time. The
testing platform integrates cell lysis reagents, DNA/RNA extraction
reagents, purification reagents, amplification reagents, and also
detection reagents into one pouch.79 After finishing the run, software
analyses were performed, and the test results were presented in an
integrated table that includes all tested pathogens.79 The studies
have revealed the sensitivity to be 86.4% for RSV‐A and 100% for
RSV‐B, and the specificity was 100% for RSV‐A and RSV‐B compared
to a combination reference of eSensor, xTAG, and a laboratory‐
developed test.78 The sensitivity and specificity were 100% and
99.5% compared to the Prodesse assay.79
CONCLUSIONS
Respiratory viruses are a major cause of symptomatic respiratory
tract infection in all age groups worldwide. Timely and accurate
diagnosis of these viruses enables appropriate treatment of infections. Traditional and modern molecular diagnostic approaches with
their advantages, disadvantages and principles, are summarized for
several common respiratory viruses, such as influenza virus, human
RSV, coronavirus, hAdV, and rhinovirus, as discussed in this review.
However, these respiratory viruses are prone to antigenic drift
caused by point mutations in viral genes, and new strains with
pandemic potential may result from gene reassortment. All of these
continue to pose new challenges to rapid and accurate detection of
respiratory virus infection in humans. Therefore, the identification of
mutations within viral genomes is quite essential. However, efforts to
pinpoint genetic mutations in human respiratory viruses have relied
on high‐throughput sequencing of single genes or gene families using
Sanger sequencing. Although this approach has been fruitful, the cost
and throughput of Sanger sequencing generally prohibits systematic
sequencing of the ~22 000 genes that make up the exome. The
recent development of NGS technologies changed this paradigm by
providing the capability to rapidly sequence exomes, transcriptomes,
and genomes at relatively low cost. The application of NGS in
diagnosis and identification of respiratory pathogens especially for
patients with severe pneumonia or those with unknown origin
infections becomes more and more popular. NGS exhibited the ability
to detect coinfections in severe pneumonia patients and performed
well in diagnosing severe pneumonia compared to conventional
methods. As an infrequently circulating genotype, genomic characterization of the whole genome of a viral strain will promote
further studies on its epidemiology and pathogenicity, and aid the
diagnosis of a new emerging respiratory virus. WGS enables better
identification of transmission events and outbreaks, which is not
always possible with sub‐genomic sequences.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This study was supported by grants from the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (81974302 and 81601761), the
Program for Youth Talent of Higher Learning Institutions of Hebei
Province (BJ2018045), a starting grant from Hebei Agricultural
University (ZD2016026 and YJ201843), and Hebei Province's
Program for Talents Returning from Studying Overseas (CN201707).
CONFLICT OF INTERESTS
The authors declare that there are no conflict of interests.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
NZ, LW, XD, RL, MS, CH, YS, and LH drafted the manuscript. FY, LD,
and SJ revised and edited the manuscript. All authors read and made
final approve of the manuscript.
Shibo Jiang