Journal of Machine Learning Research 1 XX-YY
Submitted 2/2009; Published 9/2009
Large Scale Online Learning
of Image Similarity through Ranking
Gal Chechik
 
Google, 1600 Amphitheatre Parkway, Mountain View CA, 94043
Varun Sharma∗
 
Google, RMZ Inﬁnity, Old Madras Road, Bengalooru,
Karnataka 560016, India
Uri Shalit∗
 
The Gonda brain research center, Bar Ilan University, 52900, Israel,
and ICNC, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, 91904, Israel
Samy Bengio
 
Google, 1600 Amphitheatre Parkway, Mountain View CA, 94043
Editor: Soeren Sonnenburg, Vojtech Franc, Elad Yom-Tov, Michele Sebag
Learning a measure of similarity between pairs of objects is an important generic problem
in machine learning. It is particularly useful in large scale applications like searching for an
image that is similar to a given image or ﬁnding videos that are relevant to a given video.
In these tasks, users look for objects that are not only visually similar but also semantically
related to a given object. Unfortunately, the approaches that exist today for learning such
semantic similarity do not scale to large datasets. This is both because typically their
CPU and storage requirements grow quadratically with the sample size, and because many
methods impose complex positivity constraints on the space of learned similarity functions.
The current paper presents OASIS, an Online Algorithm for Scalable Image Similarity
learning that learns a bilinear similarity measure over sparse representations. OASIS is
an online dual approach using the passive-aggressive family of learning algorithms with a
large margin criterion and an eﬃcient hinge loss cost. Our experiments show that OASIS
is both fast and accurate at a wide range of scales: for a dataset with thousands of images,
it achieves better results than existing state-of-the-art methods, while being an order of
magnitude faster. For large, web scale, datasets, OASIS can be trained on more than two
million images from 150K text queries within 3 days on a single CPU. On this large scale
dataset, human evaluations showed that 35% of the ten nearest neighbors of a given test
image, as found by OASIS, were semantically relevant to that image. This suggests that
query independent similarity could be accurately learned even for large scale datasets that
could not be handled before.
1. Introduction
Large scale learning is sometimes deﬁned as the regime where learning is limited by computational resources rather than by availability of data . Learning a pairwise
∗. Both authors contributed equally.
c⃝2009 Chechik, Sharma, Shalit, Bengio.
Chechik et al.
similarity measure is a particularly challenging large scale task: since pairs of samples have
to be considered, the large scale regime is reached even for fairly small data sets, and
learning similarity for large datasets becomes exceptionally hard to handle.
At the same time, similarity learning is a well studied problem with multiple real world
applications. It is particularly useful for applications that aim to discover new and relevant
data for a user. For instance, a user browsing a photo in her album may ask to ﬁnd similar
or related images. Another user may search for additional data while viewing an online
video or browsing text documents. In all these applications, similarity could have diﬀerent
ﬂavors: a user may search for images that are similar visually, or semantically, or anywhere
in between.
Many similarity learning algorithms assume that the available training data contains
real-valued pairwise similarities or distances. However, in all the above examples, the precise
numerical value of pairwise similarity between objects is usually not available. Fortunately,
one can often obtain information about the relative similarity of diﬀerent pairs , for instance, by presenting people with several object pairs and asking them to select
the pair that is most similar. For large scale data, where man-in-the-loop experiments are
prohibitively costly, relative similarities can be extracted from analyzing pairs of images
that are returned in response to the same text query . For
instance, the images that are ranked highly by one of the image search engines for the
query “cute kitty” are likely to be semantically more similar than a random pair of images.
The current paper focuses on this setting: similarity information is extracted from pairs of
images that share a common label or are retrieved in response to a common text query.
Similarity learning has an interesting reciprocal relation with classiﬁcation.
hand, pairwise similarity can be used in classiﬁcation algorithms like nearest neighbors or
kernel methods. On the other hand, when objects can be classiﬁed into (possibly overlapping) classes, the inferred labels induce a notion of similarity across object pairs. Importantly however, similarity learning assumes a form of supervision that is weaker than in
classiﬁcation, since no labels are provided. OASIS is designed to learn a class-independent
similarity measure with no need for class labels.
A large number of previous studies have focused on learning a similarity measure that
is also a metric, like in the case of a positive semideﬁnite matrix that deﬁnes a Mahalanobis
distance . However, similarity learning algorithms are often evaluated in a
context of ranking.
For instance, the learned metric is typically used together with a
nearest-neighbor classiﬁer . When the
amount of training data available is very small, adding positivity constraints for enforcing
metric properties is useful for reducing over ﬁtting and improving generalization. However,
when suﬃcient data is available, as in many modern applications, adding positive semideﬁnitiveness constraints consumes considerable computation time, and its beneﬁt in terms
of generalization are limited. With this view, we take here an approach that avoids imposing
positivity or symmetry constraints on the learned similarity measure.
The current paper presents an approach for learning semantic similarity that scales up
to an order of magnitude larger than current published approaches. Three components
are combined to make this approach fast and scalable: First, our approach uses an unconstrained bilinear similarity. Given two images p1 and p2 we measure similarity through a
bilinear form pT
1 Wp2, where the matrix W is not required to be positive, or even sym-
Large Scale Online Learning of Image Similarity
Second we use a sparse representation of the images, which allows to compute
similarities very fast. Finally, the training algorithm that we developed, OASIS, Online
Algorithm for Scalable Image Similarity learning, is an online dual approach based on the
passive-aggressive algorithm . It minimizes a large margin target
function based on the hinge loss, and already converges to high quality similarity measures
after being presented with a small fraction of the training pairs.
We ﬁnd that OASIS is both fast and accurate at a wide range of scales: for a standard
benchmark with thousands of images, it achieves better (but comparable) results than
existing state-of-the-art methods, with computation times that are shorter by orders of
magnitude. For web-scale datasets, OASIS can be trained on more than two million images
within three days on a single CPU, and its training time grows linearly with the size of the
data. On this large scale dataset, human evaluations of OASIS learned similarity show that
35% of the ten nearest neighbors of a given image are semantically relevant to that image.
The paper is organized as follows. We ﬁrst present our online algorithm, OASIS, based
on the Passive-aggressive family of algorithms. We then present the sparse feature extraction
technique used in the experiments. We continue by describing experiments with OASIS on
problems of image similarity, at two diﬀerent scales: a large scale academic benchmark with
tens of thousands of images, and a web-scale problem with millions of images. The paper
ends with a discussion on properties of OASIS.
2. Learning Relative Similarity
We consider the problem of learning a pairwise similarity function S, given data on the
relative similarity of pairs of images.
Formally, let P be a set of images, and rij = r(pi, pj) ∈R be a pairwise relevance
measure which states how strongly pj ∈P is related to pi ∈P. This relevance measure
could encode the fact that two images belong to the same category or were appropriate for
the same query. We do not assume that we have full access to all the values of r. Instead,
we assume that we can compare some pairwise relevance scores (for instance r(pi, pj) and
r(pi, pk)) and decide which pair is more relevant. We also assume that when r(pi, pj) is not
available, its value is zero (since the vast majority of images are not related to each other).
Our goal is to learn a similarity function S(pi, pj) that assigns higher similarity scores to
pairs of more relevant images,
i ) > S(pi, p−
i ∈P such that r(pi, p+
i ) > r(pi, p−
In this paper we overload notation by using pi to denote both the image and its representation as a column vector pi ∈Rd. We consider a parametric similarity function that has a
bi-linear form,
SW(pi, pj) ≡pT
with W ∈Rd×d. Importantly, if the images pi are represented as sparse vectors, namely,
only a number ki ≪d of the d entries in the vector pi are non-zeroes, then the value of
Eq. (2) can be computed very eﬃciently even when d is large. Speciﬁcally, SW can be
computed with complexity of O(kikj) regardless of the dimensionality d.
Chechik et al.
2.1 An Online Algorithm
We propose an online algorithm based on the Passive-Aggressive (PA) family of learning
algorithms introduced by Crammer et al. . Here we consider an algorithm that uses
triplets of images pi, p+
i ∈P such that r(pi, p+
i ) > r(pi, p−
We aim to ﬁnd a parametric similarity function S such that all triplets obey
i ) > SW(pi, p−
which means that it fulﬁlls Eq. (1) with a safety margin of 1. We deﬁne the following hinge
loss function for the triplet:
0, 1 −SW(pi, p+
i ) + SW(pi, p−
Our goal is to minimize a global loss LW that accumulates hinge losses (4) over all possible
triplets in the training set:
In order to minimize this loss, we apply the Passive-Aggressive algorithm iteratively over
triplets to optimize W. First, W is initialized to some value W0. Then, at each training
iteration i, we randomly select a triplet (pi, p+
i ), and solve the following convex problem
with soft margin:
2∥W −Wi−1∥2
where ∥·∥Fro is the Frobenius norm (point-wise L2 norm). Therefore, at each iteration i,
Wi is selected to optimize a trade-oﬀbetween remaining close to the previous parameters
Wi−1 and minimizing the loss on the current triplet lW(pi, p+
i ). The aggressiveness
parameter C controls this trade-oﬀ.
We follow Crammer et al. to solve the problem in Eq. (6). When lW(pi, p+
0, it is clear that Wi = Wi−1 satisﬁes Eq. (6) directly. Otherwise, we deﬁne the Lagrangian
L(W, τ, ξ, λ) = 1
2∥W −Wi−1∥2 + Cξ + τ(1 −ξ −pT
where τ ≥0 and λ ≥0 are Lagrange multipliers. The optimal solution is such that the
gradient vanishes ∂L(W,τ,ξ,λ)
= 0, hence
∂L(W, τ, ξ, λ)
= W −Wi−1 −τVi = 0
where the gradient matrix Vi =
i ), . . . , pd
i )]T . The optimal new
W is therefore
W = Wi−1 + τVi
Large Scale Online Learning of Image Similarity
Initialization:
Initialize W0 = I
Iterations
Sample three images p, p+
i , such that r(pi, p+
i ) > r(pi, p−
Update Wi = Wi−1 + τiVi
where τi = min
C, lWi−1(pi,p+
and Vi = [p1
k ), . . . , pd
until (stopping criterion)
Figure 1: Pseudo-code of the OASIS algorithm.
where we still need to estimate τ. Diﬀerentiating the Lagrangian with respect to ξ and
setting it to zero also yields:
∂L(W, τ, ξ, λ)
= C −τ −λ = 0
which, knowing that λ ≥0, means that τ ≤C. Plugging Equations (8) and (9) back into
the Lagrangian in Eq. (7), we obtain
2τ 2∥Vi∥2 + τ(1 −pT
i (Wi−1 + τVi)(p+
Regrouping the terms we obtain
2τ 2∥Vi∥2 + τ(1 −pT
Taking the derivative of this second Lagrangian with respect to τ and setting it to 0, we
= −τ∥Vi∥2 + (1 −pT
which yields
= lWi−1(pi, p+
Finally, Since τ ≤C, we obtain
C, lWi−1(pi, p+
Equations (8) and (11) summarize the update needed for every triplets that applying such an iterative algorithm yields a
cumulative online loss that is likely to be small. It was furthermore shown that selecting the
best Wi during training using a hold-out validation set achieves good generalization. We
also show below that multiple runs of the algorithm converge to provide similar precision
(see Fig. 7).
Chechik et al.
2.2 Loss Bounds
Following closely the analysis of loss bounds for passive aggressive (PA) algorithms developed by Crammer et al. we state similar relative bounds for the OASIS framework.
We do this by rewriting OASIS as a straightforward linear classiﬁcation problem. Denote
wi the vector obtained by“unfolding” the matrix W (concatenating all its columns into
a single vector) and similarly −→
xi the unfolded matrix pi(p+
i )T . Using this notation, the
constraint in Eq. (3) becomes
with · denoting the standard inner product. This is equivalent to the formulation of PA
when the label yi is always 1. The introduction of slack variables in Eq. (6) brings us to
the variant denoted by Crammer et al. as PA-I.
The loss bounds in Crammer et al. rely on −→
w0 being the zero vector. Since here
we initialize with W 0 = I (the identity matrix) we need to adapt the analysis slightly. Let
−→u be a vector in Rd
obtained by unfolding an arbitrary matrix U. We deﬁne
li = 1 −−→
i = 1 −−→u · −→
where li is the instantaneous loss at round i, and l∗
i is the loss suﬀered by the arbitrary
vector −→u . The following two theorems rely on Lemma 1 of Crammer et al. , which
we restate without proof:
τi(2li −τi∥xi∥2 −2l∗
i ) ≤∥−→u −−→
While in −→
w0 is the zero vector, in our case −→
w0 is the unfolded identity
matrix. We therefore have
w0∥2 = ∥U∥2
Fro −2trace(U) + n .
Using this modiﬁed lemma we can restate the relevant bound:
Theorem 1 Let (−→
x1),...,(−→
xM) be a sequence of examples where −→
xi ∈Rd2, ∥−→
all i = 1...M. Then, for any matrix U ∈Rn2, the number of prediction mistakes made by
OASIS on this sequence of examples is bounded from above by,
max{R2, 1/C}
Fro −2trace(U) + n + 2C
where C is the aggressiveness parameter provided to OASIS.
2.3 Sampling Strategy
For real world data sets, the actual number of triplets (pi, p+
i ) is typically very large and
cannot be stored in memory. Instead, we use the fact that the number of relevant images
for a category or a query is typically small, and keep a list of relevant images for each query
or category. For the case of single-labeled images, we can eﬃciently retrieve an image that
Large Scale Online Learning of Image Similarity
is relevant to a given image, by ﬁrst ﬁnding its class, and then ﬁnding another image from
that class. The case of multi-labeled images is described in Sec. 5.2.
Speciﬁcally, to sample a triplet (pi, p+
i ) during training, we ﬁrst uniformly sample
an image pi from P. Then we uniformly sample an image p+
i from the images sharing the
same categories or queries as pi. Finally, we uniformly sample an image p−
i from the images
that share no category or query with pi. When the set P is very large and the number of
categories or queries is also very large, one does not need to maintain the set of non-relevant
images for each image: sampling directly from P instead only adds a small amount of noise
to the training procedure and is not really harmful.
When relevance feedbacks r(pi, pj) are provided as real numbers and not just ∈{0, 1},
one could use these number to bias training towards those pairs that have a higher relevance
feedback value. This can be done by considering r(pi, pj) as frequencies of appearance, and
sampling pairs according to the distribution of these frequencies.
3. Image Representation
The problem of selecting an informative representation of images is still an unsolved computer vision challenge, and an ongoing research topic. Diﬀerent approaches for image representation have been proposed including by Feng et al. , Takala et al. , Tieu
and Viola . In the information retrieval community there is wide agreement that
a bag-of-words representation is a very useful representation for handling text documents
in a wide range of applications. For image representation, there is still no such approach
that would be adequate for a wide variety of image processing problems. However, among
the proposed representations, a consensus is emerging on using local descriptors for various
tasks, for example . This type of representation segments
the image into regions of interest, and extracts visual features from each region. The segmentation algorithm as well as the region features vary among approaches, but, in all cases,
the image is then represented as a set of feature vectors describing the regions of interest.
Such a set is often called a bag-of-local-descriptors.
In this paper we take the approach of creating a sparse representation based on the
framework of local descriptors.
Our features are extracted by dividing each image into
overlapping square blocks, and each block is then described with edge and color histograms.
For edge histograms, we rely on uniform Local Binary Patterns (uLBPs) proposed by Ojala
et al. .
These texture descriptors have shown to be eﬀective on various tasks in
the computer vision literature , certainly due to
their robustness with respect to changes in illumination and other photometric transformations . Local Binary Patterns estimate a texture histogram of a block by
considering diﬀerences in intensity at circular neighborhoods centered on each pixel. Precisely, we use LBP8,2 patterns, which means that a circle of radius 2 is considered centered
on each block. For each circle, the intensity of the center pixel is compared to the interpolated intensities located at 8 equally-spaced locations on the circle, as shown on Figure 2,
left. These eight binary tests (lower or greater intensity) result in an 8-bit sequence, see
Figure 2, right. Hence, each block pixel is mapped to a sequence among 28 = 256 possible
sequences and each block can therefore be represented as a 256-bin histogram. In fact, it
has been observed that the bins corresponding to non-uniform sequences (sequences with
Chechik et al.
Neighborhood Intensities
Binary Tests
8-bit Sequence
Figure 2: An example of Local Binary Pattern (LBP8,2). For a given pixel, the Local Binary
Pattern is an 8-bit code obtained by verifying whether the intensity of the pixel
is greater or lower than its 8 neighbors.
more than 2 transitions 1 →0 or 0 →1) can be merged, yielding more compact 59-bin
histograms without performance loss .
Color histograms are obtained by K-means clustering. We ﬁrst select a palette or typical
colors by training a color codebook from the Red-Green-Blue pixels of a large training set
of images using K-means. The color histogram of a block is then obtained by mapping each
block pixel to the closest color in the codebook palette.
Finally, the histograms describing color and edge statistics of each block are concatenated, which yields a single vector descriptor per block. Our local descriptor representation
is therefore simple, relying on both a basic segmentation approach and simple features.
Naturally, alternative representations could also be used with OASIS, However, this paper focuses on the learning
model, and a benchmark of image representations is beyond the scope of the current paper.
As a ﬁnal step, we use the representation of blocks to obtain a representation for an
image. For computation eﬃciency we aim at a high dimensional and sparse vector space.
For this purpose, each local descriptor of an image p is represented as a discrete index, called
visual term or visterm, and, like for text data, the image is represented as a bag-of-visterms
vector, in which each component pi is related to the presence or absence of visterm i in p.
The mapping of the descriptors to discrete indexes is performed according to a codebook
C, which is typically learned from the local descriptors of the training images through kmeans clustering .
The assignment of the weight pi of visterm i in image p is as follows:
j=1(fj dj)2
where fi is the term frequency of i in p, which refers to the number of occurrences of i in p,
while dj is the inverse document frequency of j, which is deﬁned as −log(rj), rj being the
fraction of training images containing at least one occurrence of visterm j. This approach
has been found successful for the task of content based image ranking described by Grangier
and Bengio .
Large Scale Online Learning of Image Similarity
In the experiments described below, we used a large set of images collected from the
web to train the features. This set is described in more detail in Sec. 5.2. We used a set
of 20 typical RGB colors (hence the number of clusters used in the k-means for colors was
20), the block vocabulary size d = 10000 and our image blocks were of size 64x64 pixels,
overlapping every 32 pixels. Furthermore, in order to be robust to scale, we extracted blocks
at various scales by successively down scaling images by a factor of 1.25 and extracting the
features at each level, until there were less than 10 blocks in the resulting image. There
was on average around 70 non-zero values (out of 10000) describing a single image. Note
that no other information (such as meta-data) was added in the input vector representation
each image.
4. Related Work
Similarity learning can be considered in two main setups, depending on the type of available
training labels. First, a regression setup, where the training set consists of pairs of objects
i and their pairwise similarity yi ∈R. In many cases however, precise similarities are
not available, but rather a weaker notion of similarity order. In one such setup, the training
set consists of triplets of objects x1
i and a ranking similarity function, that can tell
which of the two pairs (x1, x2) or (x1, x3) is more similar.
Finally, multiple similarity
learning studies assume that a binary measure of similarity is available yi ∈{+1, −1},
indicating whether a pair of objects is similar or not.
For small-scale data, there are two main groups of similarity learning approaches. The
ﬁrst approach, learning Mahalanobis distances, can be viewed as learning a linear projection
of the data into another space (often of lower dimensionality), where a Euclidean distance is
deﬁned among pairs of objects. Such approaches include Fisher’s Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), relevant component analysis (RCA) , supervised global
metric learning , large margin nearest neighbor (LMNN) and Metric Learning by Collapsing Classes . A
Mahalanobis distance learning algorithm which uses a supervision signal identical to the
one we employ in OASIS is , which learns a special kind of PSD
matrix via linear programming. See also a review by Yang for more details.
The second family of approaches, learning kernels, is used to improve performance of
kernel based classiﬁers. Learning a full kernel matrix in a non parametric way is prohibitive
except for very small data. As an alternative, several studies suggested to learn a weighted
sum of pre-deﬁned kernels where the weights are being learned
from data. In some applications this was shown to be inferior to uniform weighting of the
kernels . The work of Frome et al. further learns a weighting over local
distance function for every image in the training set. Non linear image similarity learning
was also studied in the context of dimensionality reduction, as in Hadsell et al. .
Finally, Jain et al. , based on work by Davis et al. , aim to learn metrics
in an online setting. This work is one of the closest work with respect to OASIS: it learns
a linear model of a [dis-]similarity function between documents in an online way.
main diﬀerence is that the work of Jain et al. learn a true distance throughout
the learning process, imposing positive deﬁniteness constraints, and is slightly less eﬃcient
Chechik et al.
computationally. We argue in this paper that in the large scale regime, such a constraint is
not necessary given the amount of available training examples.
Another work closely related to OASIS is that of
Rasiwasia and Vasconcelos ,
which also tries to learn a semantic similarity function between images. In their case, however, semantic similarity is learned by representing each image by the posterior probability
distribution over a predeﬁned set of semantic tags, and then computing the distance between two images as the distance between the two underlying posterior distributions. The
representation size of images in this approach is therefore equal to the number of semantic
classes, hence it will not scale when the number of semantic classes is very large as in free
text search.
5. Experiments
Evaluating large scale learning algorithms poses special challenges. First, current available
benchmarks are limited either in their scale, like 30K images in Caltech256 as described
by Griﬃn et al. , or in their resolution, such as the tiny images dataset of Torralba
et al. . Large scale methods are not expected to perform particularly well on small
datasets, since they are designed to extract limited information from each sample. Second,
many images on the web cannot be used without explicit permission, hence they cannot
be collected and packed into a single database. Large, proprietary collections of images do
exist, but are not available freely for academic research. Finally, except for very few cases,
similarity learning approaches in current literature do not scale to handle large datasets
eﬀectively, which makes it hard to compare a new large scale method with the existing
To address these issues, this paper takes the approach of conducting experiments at
two diﬀerent scales. First, to demonstrate the scalability of OASIS we applied OASIS to
a web-scale data with 2.7 million images. Second, to investigate the properties of OASIS
more deeply, we compare OASIS with small-scale methods using the standard Caltech256
benchmark.
5.1 Evaluation Measures
We evaluated the performance of all algorithms using standard ranking precision measures
based on nearest neighbors. For each query image in the test set, all other test images were
ranked according to their similarity to the query image. The number of same-class images
among the top k images (the k nearest neighbors) was computed. When averaged across test
images (either within or across classes), this yields a measure known as precision-at-top-k,
providing a precision curve as a function of the rank k.
We also calculated the mean average precision (mAP), a measure that is widely used in
the information retrieval community. To compute average precision, the precision-at-top-k
is ﬁrst calculated for each test image. Then, it is averaged over all positions k that have
a positive sample. For example, if all positives are ranked highest, the average-precision
is 1. The average-precision measure is then further averaged across all test image queries,
yielding the mean average precision (mAP).
Large Scale Online Learning of Image Similarity
5.2 Web-Scale Experiment
Our ﬁrst set of experiments is based on Google proprietary data that is two orders of
magnitude larger than current standard benchmarks. We collected a set of ∼150K text
queries submitted to the Google Image Search system. For each of these queries, we had
access to a set of relevant images, each of which is associated with a numerical relevance
score. This yielded a total of ∼2.7 million images, which we split into a training set of 2.3
million images and a test set of 0.4 million images (see Table 1).
Table 1: Statistics of the Web dataset.
Number of Queries
Number of Images
5.2.1 Experimental setup
We used the query-image relevance information to create an image-image relevance as follows. Denote the set of text queries by Q and the set of images by P. For each q ∈Q, let
q denote the set of images that are relevant to the query q, and let P−
q denote the set of
irrelevant images. The query-image relevance is deﬁned by the matrix RQI : Q × P →R+,
and obeys RQI(q, p+
q ) > 0 and RQI(q, p−
q ) = 0 for all q ∈Q, p+
q . We also
computed a normalized version of RQI, which can be interpreted as a joint distribution
matrix, or the probability to observe a query q and an image p for that query,
Pr(q, p) =
q′,p′ RQI(q′, p′)
In order to compute the image-image relevance matrix RII : P×P →R+, we treated images
as being conditionally independent given the queries, Pr(p1, p2|q) = Pr(p1|q)Pr(p2|q), and
computed the joint image-image probability as a relevance measure
Pr (p1, p2) =
Pr (p1, p2|q) Pr (q) =
Pr(p1 | q)Pr(p2 | q)Pr(q) .
To improve scalability, we used a threshold over this joint distribution, and considered
two images to be related only if their joint distribution exceeded a cutoﬀvalue θ
RII(p1, p2) = [Pr(p1, p2)]θ
where [x]θ = x for x > θ and is zero otherwise. To set the value of θ we have manually
inspected a small subset of pairs of related images taken from the training set. We selected
the largest θ such that most of those related pairs had scores above the threshold, while
minimizing noise in RII.
Eq. 20 is written as if one needs to calculate the full joint matrix RII, but this matrix
grows quadratically with the number of images. In practice, we can use the fact that RQI
is very sparse, to quickly create a list with images that are relevant to a given image. To
Chechik et al.
Query image
Top 5 relevant images retrieved by OASIS
Table 2: OASIS: Successful cases from the Web dataset
do this given an image pi, we go over all the queries for which it is relevant RQI(q, pi),
and for each of these queries, collect the list of all images that are relevant to that query.
The average number of queries relevant for an image in our data is small (about 100), and
so is the number of images relevant for a given query. As a result, RII can be calculated
eﬃciently even for large image sets.
We trained OASIS over 2.3 million images in the training set using the sampling mechanism based on the relevance of each image, as described in Section 2.3. To select the number
of training iterations, we used as a validation set a small subset of the training set to trace
the mean average precision of the model at regular intervals during the training process.
Training was stopped when the mean average precision had saturated, which happened after
160 million iterations (triplets). Overall, training took a total of ∼4000 minutes on a single
CPU of a standard modern machine. Finally, we evaluated the trained model on the 400
thousand images of the test set.
5.2.2 Results
We start with speciﬁc examples illustrating the behavior of OASIS, and continue with a
quantitative analysis of precision and speed. Table 2 shows the top ﬁve images as ranked
Large Scale Online Learning of Image Similarity
Query image
Top 5 relevant images retrieved by OASIS
Table 3: OASIS: Failure cases from the Web dataset
by OASIS on four examples of query-images in the test set. The relevant text queries for
each image are shown beneath the image. The ﬁrst example (top row), shows a queryimage that was originally retrieved in response to the text query “illusion”. All ﬁve images
ranked highly by OASIS are semantically related, showing other types of visual illusions.
Similar results can be observed for the three remaining examples on this table, where OASIS
captures well the semantics of animal photos (cats and dogs), mountains and diﬀerent food
In all these cases, OASIS captures similarity that is both semantic and visual, since the
raw visual similarity of these images is not high. A diﬀerent behavior is demonstrated in
Table 3. It shows three cases where OASIS was biased by visual similarity and provided
high rankings to images that were semantically non relevant.
In the ﬁrst example, the
assortment of ﬂowers is confused with assortments of food items and a thigh section (5th
nearest neighbor) which has visually similar shape. The second example presents a query
image which in itself has no deﬁnite semantic element. The results retrieved are those that
merely match texture of the query image and bear no semantic similarity. In the third
example, OASIS fails to capture the butterﬂy in the query image.
To obtain a quantitative evaluation of OASIS we computed the precision at top k, using
a threshold θ = 0, which means that an image in the test set is considered relevant to a
query image, if there exists at least one text query to which they were both relevant to.
The obtained precision values were quite low, achieving 1.5% precision at the top ranked
image. This is drastically lower than the precision described below for Caltech256, and
could be the result of multiple reasons. First, the number of unique textual queries in our
Chechik et al.
data is very large (around 150K), hence the images in this dataset were signiﬁcantly more
heterogeneous than images in the Caltech256 data.
Second, and most importantly, our labels that measure pairwise relevance are very
partial. This means that many pairs of images that are semantically related are not labeled
as such. A clear demonstration of this eﬀect is observed in Tables 2 and 3. The query
images (like “scottish fold”) have labels that are usually very diﬀerent from the labels of the
retrieved images (as in “humor cat”, “agility”) even if their semantic content is very similar.
This is a common problem in content-based analysis, since similar content can be described
in many diﬀerent ways. In the case discussed here, the partial data on the query-image
relevance RQI is further propagated to the image-image relevance measure RII.
5.2.3 Human Evaluation Experiments
In order to obtain a more accurate estimate of the real semantic precision, we performed
a rating experiment with human evaluators. We chose the 25 most relevant images1 from
the test set and retrieved their 10 nearest neighbors as determined by OASIS. We excluded
query-images which contained porn, racy or duplicates in their 10 nearest neighbors. We
also selected randomly a set of 10 negative images p−that were chosen for each of the query
images p such that RII(p, p−) = 0. These negatives were then randomly mixed with the 10
nearest neighbors.
All 25 query images were presented to twenty human evaluators, asking them to mark
which of the 20 candidate images are semantically relevant to the query image2. Evaluators
were volunteers selected from a pool of friends and colleagues, many of which had experience
with search or machine vision problems. We collected the ratings on the positive images
and calculated the precision at top k.
Figure 3(B) shows the average precision across all queries and evaluators. Precision
peaks at 42% and reaches 35% at the top 10 ranked image, being signiﬁcantly higher than
the values calculated automatically using RII.
We observed that the variability across diﬀerent query images was also very high. Figure
3(C) shows the precision for 5 diﬀerent queries, selected to span the range of averageprecision values.
The error bars at each curve show the variability in the responses of
diﬀerent evaluators. The precision of OASIS varies greatly across diﬀerent queries. Some
query images were “easy” for OASIS, yielding high scores from most evaluators, while other
queries retrieved images that were consistently found to be irrelevant by most evaluators.
We also compared the magnitude of variability across human evaluators, with variability
across queries. We ﬁrst calculated the mAP from the precision curves of every query and
evaluator, and then calculated the standard deviation in the mAP of every evaluator and
of every query.
The mean standard deviation over queries was 0.33, suggesting a large
variability in the diﬃculty of image queries, as observed in Fig. 3(C) . The mean standard
deviation over evaluators was 0.25, suggesting that diﬀerent evaluators had very diﬀerent
notions of what images should be regarded as “semantically similar” to a query image.
1. The overall relevance of an image was estimated as the sum of relevances of the image with respect to
all queries.
2. The description of the task as given to the evaluators is provided in Appendix A.
Large Scale Online Learning of Image Similarity
number of neighbors
Web−scale test set
Web−scale test set
number of neighbors
mean human evaluation
automatic relevance
number of neighbors
query ID (sorted by precision)
Human precision
OASIS precision
Figure 3: (A) Precision at top k as a function of k neighbors computed against RII (θ = 0)
for the web-scale test set. (B)
Precision at top k as a function of k neighbors
for the human evaluation subset. (C)
Mean precision for 5 selected queries.
Error bars denote the standard error of the mean. To select the queries for this
plot, we ﬁrst calculated the mean-average precision per query, sorted the queries
by their mAP, and selected the queries ranked at position 1, 6, 11, 16, and 21.
(D) Precision of OASIS and human evaluators, per query, using rankings of all
(remaining) human evaluators as a ground truth.
Finally, to estimate an “upper bound” on the diﬃculty of the task, we also computed the
precision of the human evaluators themselves. For every evaluator, we used the rankings of
all other evaluators as ground truth, to compute his precision. As with the ranks of OASIS,
we computed the fraction of evaluators that marked an image as relevant, and repeated this
separately for every query and human evaluator, providing a measure of “coherence” per
query. Fig. 3(D) shows the mean precision obtained by OASIS and human evaluators for
every query in our data. For some queries OASIS achieves precision that is very close to
Chechik et al.
that of the mean human evaluator. In many cases OASIS achieves precision that is as good
or better than some evaluators.
5.2.4 Speed and scalability
runtime (min)
number of images (log scale)
fast LMNN (MNIST 10 categories)
projected extrapolation (2nd poly)
OASIS (Web data)
Figure 4: Comparison of the runtime of OASIS and fast-LMNN by Weinberger and Saul
 , over a wide range of scales. LMNN results (on MNIST data) are faster
than OASIS results on subsets of the web data. However LMNN scales quadratically with the number of samples, hence is three times slower on 60K images,
and may be infeasible for handling 2.3 million images.
We further studied how the runtime of OASIS scales with the size of the training set.
Figure 4 shows that the runtime of OASIS, as found by early stopping on a separate validation set, grows linearly with the train set size. We compare this to the fastest result
we found in the literature, based on a fast implementation of LMNN by Weinberger and
Saul . LMNN learns a Mahalanobis distance for k-nearest neighbor classiﬁcation,
aiming to have the nearest neighbors of a sample belong to the same class, and samples
from diﬀerent classes separated by a large margin. The LMNN algorithm is known to scale
quadratically with the number of objects, although their experiments with MNIST data
show that the active set of constraints grows linearly. This could be because MNIST has
10 classes only. In many real world data however, the number of classes typically grows
almost linearly with the number of samples.
Large Scale Online Learning of Image Similarity
5.3 Caltech256 Dataset
To compare OASIS with small-scale methods we used the Caltech256 dataset . This dataset consists of 30607 images that were obtained from Google image search and from PicSearch.com.
Images were assigned to 257 categories and evaluated by humans in order to ensure image quality and relevance.
After we have preprocessed the images as described in Sec. 3 and ﬁltered images that were too small, we
were left with 29461 images in 256 categories. To allow comparisons with other methods
in the literature that were not optimized for sparse representation, we also reduced the
block vocabulary size d from 10000 to 1000.
This processed data is available online at
 
Using the Caltech256 dataset allows us to compare OASIS with existing similarity learning methods. For OASIS, we treated images that have the same labels as similar. The same
labels were used for comparing with methods that learn a metric for classiﬁcation, as described below.
5.3.1 Compared methods
We compared the following approaches:
1. OASIS. - The algorithm described above in Sec. 2.1.
2. Euclidean. - The standard Euclidean distance in feature space. The initialization of
OASIS using the identity matrix is equivalent to this distance measure.
3. MCML - Metric Learning by Collapsing Classes . This
approach learns a Mahalanobis distance such that samples from the same class are
mapped to the same point. The problem is written as a convex optimization problem,
and we have used the gradient-descent implementation provided by the authors.
4. LMNN - Large Margin Nearest Neighbor Classiﬁcation .
This approach learns a Mahalanobis distance for k-nearest neighbor classiﬁcation,
aiming to have the k-nearest neighbors of a given sample belong to the same class while
examples from diﬀerent classes are separated by a large margin. As a preprocessing
phase, images were projected to a basis of the principal components (PCA) of the
data, with no dimensionality reduction, since this improved the precision results. We
also compared with a fast implementation of LMNN, that uses a clever scheme of
maintaining a set of active constraints . We used the
web data discussed above to compare with previously published results obtained with
fast-LMNN on MNIST data (see Fig. 4).
5. LEGO - Online metric learning . LEGO learns a Mahalanobis
distance in an online fashion using a regularized per instance loss, yielding a positive
semideﬁnite matrix. The main variant of LEGO aims to ﬁt a given set of pairwise
distances. We used another variant of LEGO that, like OASIS, learns from relative
distances. In our experimental setting, the loss is incurred for same-class examples
being more than a certain distance away, and diﬀerent class examples being less than
Chechik et al.
a certain distance away.
LEGO uses the LogDet divergence for regularization, as
opposed to the Frobenius norm used in OASIS.
For all these approaches, we used an implementation provided by the authors. Algorithms
were implemented in Matlab, with runtime bottlenecks implemented in C for speedup (except LEGO). We test below two variants of OASIS applied to the Caltech256 dataset: a pure
Matlab implementation, and one that has a C components. We used a C++ implementation
of OASIS for the web-scale experiments described below.
We have also experimented with the methods of Xing et al. and RCA .
We found the method of Xing et al. to be too slow for the
sets in our experiments.
RCA is based on a per-class eigen decomposition that is not
well deﬁned when the number of samples is smaller than the feature dimensionality. We
therefore experimented with a preprocessing phase of dimensionality reduction followed by
RCA, but results were inferior to other methods and were not included in the evaluations
below. RCA also did not perform well when tested on the full data, where dimensionality
was not a problem, possibly because it is not designed to handle well sparse data.
mean avg. prec.
number of training steps
mean avg. prec.
number of training steps
Figure 5: Mean average precision of OASIS as a function of the number of training steps.
Error bars represent standard error of the mean over 5 selections of training (40
images) and test (25 images) sets.
Performance is compared with a baseline
obtained using the na¨ıve Euclidean metric on the feature vector. C=0.1 (A) 10
classes. Test performance saturates around 30K training steps, while going over
all triplets would require 2.8 million steps. (B) 20 classes.
5.3.2 Experimental protocol
We tested all methods on subsets of classes taken from the Caltech256 repository. Each
subset was built such that it included semantically diverse categories, spanning the full
range of classiﬁcation diﬃculty, as measured by Griﬃn et al. . We used subsets of
sizes 10, 20, 50 and 249 classes (we used 249 classes since classes 251-256 are strongly
correlated with other classes, and since class 129 did not contain enough large images). The
Large Scale Online Learning of Image Similarity
10 classes
Mean avg prec
Top 1 prec.
Top 10 prec.
Top 50 prec.
20 classes
Mean avg. prec
Top 1 prec.
Top 10 prec.
Top 50 prec.
50 classes
Mean avg. prec.
Top 1 prec.
Top 10 prec.
Top 50 prec.
Table 4: Mean average precision and precision at top 1, 10, and 50 of all compared methods. Values are averages over 5 cross validation folds; ± values are the standard
deviation across the 5 folds. A ’*’ denotes cases where a method took more than
5 days to converge.
full lists of categories in each set are given in Appendix B. For each set, images from each
class were split into a training set of 40 images and a test set of 25 images, as proposed
by Griﬃn et al. .
We used cross-validation to select the values of hyper parameters for all algorithms
except MCML. Models were learned on 80% of the training set (32 images), and evaluated
on the remaining 20%. Cross validation was used for setting the following hyper parameters:
the early stopping time for OASIS; the ω parameter for LMNN (ω ∈{0.125, 0.25, 0.5}), and
the regularization parameter η for LEGO (η ∈{0.02, 0.08, 0.32}). We found that LEGO
was usually not sensitive to the choice of η, yielding a variance that was smaller than the
variance over diﬀerent cross-validation splits.
Results reported below were obtained by
selecting the best value of the hyper parameter and then training again on the full training
set (40 images). For MCML, we used the default parameters supplied with the code from
the authors, since its very long run time and multiple parameters made it non-feasible to
tune hyper parameters on this data.
Chechik et al.
LMNN (naive)
0.12 ± .03
1835 ± 210
0.15 ± .02
7425 ± 106
1.13 ± .15
Table 5: Runtime (minutes) of all compared methods. Values are averages over 5 cross
validation folds, ± values are the standard deviation across the 5 folds.
denotes cases where a method took more than 5 days to converge. A ’∗∗’ denotes
cases where performance was worse than the Euclidean baseline.
5.3.3 Results
Figure 5 traces the mean average precision over the training and the test sets as it progresses
during learning. For the 10 classes task, precision on the test set saturates early (around
35K training steps), and then decreases very slowly.
Figure 6 and Table 4 compare the precision obtained with OASIS, with four competing
approaches, as described above (Sec. 5.3.1). OASIS achieved consistently superior results
throughout the full range of k (number of neighbors) tested, and on all four sets studied.
Interestingly, we found that LMNN performance on the training set was often high, suggesting that it overﬁts the training set. This behavior was also noted by Weinberger et al.
 in some of their experiments.
OASIS achieves superior or equal performance, with a runtime that is faster by about
two orders of magnitudes than MCML, and about one order of magnitude faster than
LMNN. The run time of OASIS and LEGO was measured until the point of early stopping.
Table 5 shows the total CPU time in minutes for training each of the algorithms compared (measured on a standard 1.8GHz Intel Xeon CPU). For the purpose of a fair comparison with competing approaches, we tested two implementations of OASIS: The ﬁrst was
fully implemented Matlab. The second had the core of the algorithm implemented in C
and called from Matlab 3. LMNN code and MCML code were supplied by the authors and
implemented in Matlab, with core parts implemented in C. LEGO code was supplied by
the authors and fully implemented in Matlab.
Importantly, we found that Matlab does not make full use of the speedup that can be
gained by sparse image representation. As a result, the C/C++ implementation of OASIS
that we tested is signiﬁcantly faster.
5.4 Parallel Training
We presented OASIS as optimizing an objective function at each step. Since OASIS is based
on the PA framework, it is also known to minimize a global objective of the form
3. The OASIS code is available online at 
Large Scale Online Learning of Image Similarity
(A) 10 classes
(B) 20 classes
number of neighbors
number of neighbors
(C) 50 classes
number of neighbours
Figure 6: Comparison of the performance of OASIS, LMNN, MCML, LEGO and the Euclidean metric in feature space. Each curve shows the precision at top k as a
function of k neighbors. The results are averaged across 5 train/test partitions
(40 training images, 25 test images), error bars are standard error of the means
(s.e.m.), black dashed line denotes chance performance. (A) 10 classes. (B) 20
classes. (C) 50 classes.
as shown by Crammer et al. This objective is convex since the losses li are linear in
W. For such convex functions, it is guaranteed that any linear combination of solutions is
superior than each of the individual solutions. This property suggests another way to speed
up training, by training multiple rankers in parallel and averaging the resulting models.
Each of the individual models can be trained with a smaller number of iterations. Note
however that there is no guarantee that the total CPU time is improved.
Chechik et al.
Figure 7: Comparing individual rankers and a linear combination of 5 and 10 rankers.
Results are for an experiment with 249 classes of the Caltech256 dataset.
Figure 7 demonstrates this approach; we trained 5 or 10 rankers in parallel and plot the
test set mean average precision as a function of the number of training iterations.
number of neighbors
PROJ OASIS
ONLINE−PROJ OASIS
DISSIM−OASIS
number of neighbors
PROJ OASIS
ONLINE−PROJ OASIS
DISSIM−OASIS
Figure 8: Comparison of Symmetric variants of OASIS. (A) 10 classes. (B) 20 classes.
Large Scale Online Learning of Image Similarity
6. Symmetry and Positivity
The similarity matrix W learned by OASIS is not guaranteed to be positive or even symmetric.
Some applications, like ranking images by semantic relevance to a given image
query are known to be non-symmetric when based on human judgement .
However, in some applications symmetry or positivity constraints reﬂect a prior knowledge
that may help avoiding overﬁtting. Furthermore positive W impose a Mahalanobis metric
over the data, that can be further factorized to extract a linear projection of the data into
a Euclidean space: xT Wy = (Ax)T (Ay) such that AT A = W. Such projection A of the
data can be useful for visualization and exploratory analysis of data for example in scientiﬁc
applications. We now discuss variants of OASIS that learn a symmetric or positive matrices.
6.1 Symmetric Similarities
A simple approach to enforce symmetry is to project the OASIS model W onto the set of
symmetric matrices W′ = sym(W) = 1
. The update procedure then consists
of a series of gradient steps followed by projection to the feasible set (of symmetric matrices).
This approach is sometimes called projected gradient, and we denote it here Online-Proj-
Oasis. Alternatively, projection can also be applied after learning is completed (denoted
here Proj-Oasis).
Alternatively, the asymmetric score function SW(pi, pj) in the loss lW can be replaced
with a symmetric score
W(pi, pj) ≡−(pi −pj)T W (pi −pj) .
and derive an OASIS-like algorithm (which we call Dissim-Oasis). The optimal update for
this loss has a symmetric gradient V′i = (pi−p+
i )T −(pi−p−
i )T . Therefore,
if W0 is initialized with a symmetric matrix (for example, the identity matrix) all Wi are
guaranteed to remain symmetric. Dissim-Oasis is closely related to LMNN . This can be seen be casting the batch objective of LMNN, into an online
setup, which has the form err(W) = −ω · S′
i ) + (1 −ω) · l′
i ). This online
version of LMNN becomes equivalent to Dissim-Oasis for ω = 0.
Figure 8 compares the precision of the diﬀerent symmetric methods with the original
OASIS. All symmetric variants performed slightly worse, or equal to the original asymmetric
OASIS. Asymmetric OASIS is also twice faster than DISSIM-OASIS. The precision of Proj-
Oasis was equivalent to that of OASIS. This was because the asymmetric OASIS learning
rule actually converged to an almost-symmetric model (as measured by a symmetry index
ρ(W) = ∥sym(W)∥2
6.2 Positive Similarity
Most similarity learning approaches focus on learning metrics. In the context of OASIS,
when W is positive semi deﬁnite (PSD), it deﬁnes a Mahalanobis distance over the images.
The matrix square-root of W, AT A = W can then be used to project the data into a new
space in which the Euclidean distance is equivalent to the W distance in the original space.
We experimented with positive variants of OASIS, where we repeatedly projected the
learned model onto the set of PSD matrices, once every t iterations. Projection is done by
Chechik et al.
mean average precision
learning steps
proj. every 5000
proj. every 50000
proj. after complete
Figure 9: Mean average precision (mAP) during training for three PSD projection schemes,
using the set of 20 classes from caltech256.
taking the eigen decomposition W = V · D · VT where V is the eigenvector matrix and D
is the diagonal eigenvalues matrix limited to positive eigenvalues. Figure 9 traces precision
on the test set throughout learning for various values of t.
The eﬀect of positive projections is complex. First, continuously projecting once every
few steps helps to reduce overﬁtting, as can be observed by the slower decline of the blue
curve (upper smooth curve) compared to the orange curve (lowest curve). However, when
projection is performed after many steps (instead of continuously), performance of the
projected model actually outperforms the continuous-projection model (upper jittery curve).
The reason for this eﬀect is likely to be that the estimates of the positive sub-space are very
noisy when only based on a few samples section 2.1). Indeed,
accurate estimation of the negative subspace is known to be a hard problem, because small
perturbations can turn a negative but small eigenvalue, into a small but positive one. As
a result, the set of vectors selected based on having positive eigenvalues, is highly variable.
We found that this eﬀect was so strong, that the optimal projection strategy is to avoid
projection throughout learning completely.
Instead, projecting into PSD after learning
(namely, after a model was chosen using early stopping) provided the best performance in
our experiments.
An interesting alternative to obtain a PSD matrix was explored by Kulis et al. 
and Jain et al. . Using a LogDet divergence between two matrices Dld(X, Y ) =
tr(XY −1) −log(det(XY −1)) ensures that, given an initial PSD matrix, all subsequent matrices will be PSD as well.
It would be interesting to test the eﬀect of using LogDet
regularization in the OASIS setup.
Large Scale Online Learning of Image Similarity
7. Discussion
We have presented OASIS, a scalable algorithm for learning image similarity that captures
both semantic and visual aspects of image similarity. Three key factors contribute to the
scalability of OASIS. First, using a large margin online approach allows training to converge
even after seeing a small fraction of potential pairs.
Second, the objective function of
OASIS does not require the similarity measure to be necessarily a metric during training,
although it appears to naturally converge to a symmetric solution. Finally, we use a sparse
representation of low level features which allows computing scores very eﬃciently.
We found that OASIS performs well in a wide range of scales: from problems with thousands of images, where it slightly outperforms existing metric-learning approaches, to large
web-scale problems, where it achieves high accuracy, as estimated by human evaluators.
OASIS diﬀers from previous methods in that the similarity measure that it learns is not
forced to be a metric, or even symmetric. When the number of available samples is small,
it is useful to add constraints that reﬂect prior knowledge on the type of similarity measure
expected to be learned. However, we found that these constraints were not helpful even
for problems with a few hundreds of samples. Interestingly, human judgements of pairwise
similarity are known to be asymmetric, a property that can be easily captured by an OASIS
OASIS learns a class-independent model: it is not aware of which queries or categories
were shared by two similar images. As such, it is more limited in its descriptive power and it
is likely that class-dependent similarity models could improve precision. On the other hand,
class-independent models could generalize to handle classes that were not observed during
training, as in transfer learning. Large scale similarity learning, applied to images from a
large variety of classes, could therefore be a useful tool to address real-world problems with
a large number of classes.
Acknowledgements
We thank Andrea Frome for very helpful discussions and comments on the manuscript. We
thank Amir Globerson, Killian Weinberger and Prateek Jain, each providing an implementation of their method for our experiments.
Chechik et al.
Appendix A. Human Evaluation
The following text was given as instructions to human evaluators when judging the relevance
of images to a query image.
A user is searching images to use in a presentation he/she plans to
The user runs a standard image search, and selects an image,
the ‘‘query image’’.
The user then wishes to refine the search and
look for images that are SEMANTICALLY similar to the query image.
The difficulty lies, in the definition of ‘‘SEMANTICALLY’’. This can
have many interpretations, and you should take that into account.
So for instance, if you see an image of a big red truck, you can
interpret the user intent (the notion of semantically similar) in
various ways:
- any big red truck
- any red truck
- any big truck
- any truck
- any vehicle
You should interpret ‘‘SEMANTICALLY’’ in a broad sense rather than
in a strict sense but feel free to draw the line yourself (although
be consistent).
Your task:
You will see a set of query images on the left side of the screen,
and a set of potential candidate matches, 5 per row, on the
right. Your job is to decide for each of the candidate images if it
is a good semantic match to the query image or not. The default is
that it is NOT a good match. Furthermore, if for some reason you
cannot make-up your mind, then answer ‘‘can’t say’’.
Appendix B. Caltech256 Class Sets
• 10 classes: bear, skyscraper, billiards, yo-yo, minotaur, roulette-wheel, hamburger,
laptop-101, hummingbird, blimp.
• 20 classes: airplanes-101, mars, homer-simpson, hourglass, waterfall, helicopter-
101, mountain-bike starﬁsh-101, teapot, pyramid, refrigerator, cowboy-hat, giraﬀe,
joy-stick, crab-101, birdbath, ﬁghter-jet tuning-fork, iguana, dog.
• 50 classes: car-side-101, tower-pisa, hibiscus, saturn, menorah-101, rainbow, cartman, chandelier-101, backpack, grapes, laptop-101, telephone-box, binoculars, helicopter-
101, paper-shredder, eiﬀel-tower, top-hat, tomato, star-ﬁsh-101, hot-air-balloon, tweezer,
picnic-table, elk, kangaroo-101, mattress, toaster, electric-guitar-101, bathtub, gorilla,
jesus-christ, cormorant, mandolin, light-house, cake, tricycle, speed-boat, computermouse, superman, chimp, pram, fried-egg, ﬁghter-jet, unicorn, greyhound, grasshopper, goose, iguana, drinking-straw, snake, hot-dog.
• 249 classes: classes 1-250, excluding class 129 (leopards-101), which had less than
65 large enough images.
Large Scale Online Learning of Image Similarity