Neurobiology of Disease
Coupling between Beta and High-Frequency Activity in the
Human Subthalamic Nucleus May Be a Pathophysiological
Mechanism in Parkinson’s Disease
Jon Lo´pez-Azca´rate,1 Mikel Tainta,1 María C. Rodríguez-Oroz,1,2,3 Miguel Valencia,1 Rafael Gonza´lez,2,3 Jorge Guridi,1,2,3
Jorge Iriarte,1,2 José A. Obeso,1,2,3 Julio Artieda,1,2 and Manuel Alegre1,2
1Neuroscience Area, Centro de Investigacio´n Me´dica Aplicada, Universidad de Navarra, 2Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Clínica Universidad
de Navarra, and 3Centro Investigacio´n Biome´dica en Red para Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas, 31008 Pamplona, Spain
In Parkinson’s disease (PD), the oscillatory activity recorded from the basal ganglia shows dopamine-dependent changes. In the “off”
parkinsonian motor state, there is prominent activity in the beta band (12–30 Hz) that is mostly attenuated after dopaminergic therapy
(“on” medication state). The on state is also characterized by activity in the gamma (60–80 Hz) and high-frequency (300 Hz) bands that
is modulated by movement. We recorded local field potentials from a group of 15 PD patients (three females) treated with bilateral deep
brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus, using a high sampling rate (2 kHz) and filters suitable to study high-frequency activity
(0.3–1000 Hz). We observed high-frequency oscillations (HFOs) in both the off and on motor states. In the off state, the amplitude of the
HFOs was coupled to the phase of the abnormal beta activity. The beta-coupled HFOs showed little or even negative movement-related
changes in amplitude. Moreover, the degree of movement-related modulation of the HFOs correlated negatively with the rigidity/
bradykinesia scores. In the on motor state, the HFOs were liberated from this beta coupling, and they displayed marked movementrelated amplitude modulation. Cross-frequency interactions between the phase of slow activities and the amplitude of fast frequencies
have been attributed an important role in information processing in cortical structures. Our findings suggest that nonlinear coupling
between frequencies may not only be a physiological mechanism (as shown previously) but also that it may participate in the pathophysiology of parkinsonism.
Introduction
Neuronal oscillations are a key feature of human brain activity.
These oscillations exhibit large variability in amplitude and recurrence, extending up to frequencies 500 Hz . Oscillatory activity participates in many brain
processes, including motor, cognitive, and perception tasks, facilitating network integration .
Surgical treatment of Parkinson’s disease (PD) offers the opportunity to record oscillatory activity from different nuclei in
the basal ganglia (BGs) through the stimulators implanted to
treat the motor symptoms of the disease. In this way, clear differences can be observed in the power spectrum of the local field
potentials (LFPs) recorded in the subthalamic nucleus (STN) of
PD patients in the “off” (without medication) and “on” (after
dopaminergic treatment) motor states . At
rest, without medication, exaggerated oscillatory activity in the
beta range (10–30 Hz) dominates the spectrum. Dopaminergic
treatment attenuates the abnormal beta activity in parallel with
motor improvement . In some
cases, the on state is also characterized by a power increase in the
theta range, which is associated to the presence of levodopainduced dyskinesias , as well as by
activity in the gamma range (55–100 Hz) .
The presence of a high-frequency activity peak (300 Hz) in the
STN has also been described in PD patients under the effect of
dopaminergic treatment . Since this activity
was not detected in the off-medication state, it was proposed that
the loss of these high-frequency oscillations (HFO) might fulfill a
role in the pathophysiology of PD.
There are many reports of oscillations 100 Hz in different
cortical areas , although
in the human BGs they have only been identified in the STN
 and nucleus accumbens
 . Two recent studies described frequency interactions in STN LFP recordings from off PD patients measuring
correlations in the beta band , or by using the
bispectrum to detect cross-frequency interactions at low frequencies (0–40 Hz) . The studies involving
cross-frequency interactions between the phase of slow activities
and the amplitude of fast frequencies suggest they have a physiological role in facilitating the transient coordination of cortical
Received Oct. 28, 2009; revised March 1, 2010; accepted April 1, 2010.
This work was supported by the “Unio´n Temporal de Empresas Proyecto Centro de Investigacio´n Me´dica
Aplicada” and by grants from the Departamento de Salud (Gobierno de Navarra) and the Fondo de Investigaciones Sanitarias (PI 07/0034).
Correspondence should be addressed to Dr. Manuel Alegre, Neurophysiology Laboratory, Neuroscience Area,
Centro de Investigacio´n Me´dica Aplicada, Universidad de Navarra, Avenida Pío XII, 55, 31008 Pamplona, Spain.
E-mail: .
DOI:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5459-09.2010
Copyright © 2010 the authors
0270-6474/10/306667-11$15.00/0
The Journal of Neuroscience, May 12, 2010 • 30(19):6667–6677 • 6667
areas , in visual perception , or during task decision making .
Here, we studied HFO (300 Hz) in both motor states (off
and on) recorded from the STN of PD patients treated with bilateral deep brain stimulation (DBS). We found cross-frequency
interactions between beta and HFO at rest, with different properties depending on the motor state. These interactions affected
the movement-related changes in the HFO and correlated with
rigidity and bradykinesia scores.
Materials and Methods
A total of 15 PD patients treated with bilateral DBS of the STN participated in the study. All of them were right-handed according to the Oldfield inventory. The study was approved by the institutional ethical
committee, and each patient gave their written informed consent. All
patients were assessed preoperatively in the off motor state and in the on
motor state according to the CAPSIT (Core Assessment Program for
Surgical Interventional Therapies) protocol for surgical treatment of PD.
Their clinical details are given in Table 1.
Surgical procedure
An image fusion procedure (iPlan 2.6; BrainLAB) was used to obtain the
stereotactic coordinates for surgery. The day before surgery, the patients
were submitted to 1.5 tesla magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). After the
placement of the CRW frame under local anesthesia (Cosman–Robert–
Wells; Radionics), computerized tomography was performed with the
PD patients in the off condition, and these data were fused with the
previous MRI. Coordinates for the STN were determined from T2weighted MRI images in axial planes with the target usually placed 4–6
mm below and 11–13 mm lateral to the intercommissural line, and 2–3
mm posterior to the mid-intercommissural point. The motor region of
the STN was defined intraoperatively by microrecording (200–600 K
platinum/iridium FHC microelectrodes) and microstimulation. These
surgical techniques have been performed routinely by our group for
several years, and more details of the procedure can be found elsewhere
 .
A Medtronic 3389 electrode (four active contacts: 7.5 mm active, 1.5
mm  4 contacts with 0.5 mm  3 intervals) was placed at the selected
coordinates in the STN with the most ventral contact (contact 0) placed
in the ventral part of the nucleus. A clinical assessment of the efficacy and
adverse effects of DBS was performed intraoperatively before securing
the electrode in the chosen position. Subsequently, the electrode was
fixed with a burr hole ring and cap, and it was connected to percutaneous
Axial T1 section and parasagittal MRI reconstruction showing the correct placement of the DBS in the STN of a representative patient (patient 15).
Table 1. Clinical characteristics of the PD patients
Disease duration (years)
L-DOPA dose per day
Contacts R/L
Motor states studied
TheUPDRSscoresarethemotorsubscalescores(UPDRS-III)beforesurgery.The L-DOPAdoseincludestheequivalentdoseofalldopaminergicdrugstakenbyeachpatientinmilligramsperday(100mgofstandardlevodopa130mgof
controlled-released levodopa  10 mg of bromocriptine  1 mg of pergolide  1 mg of lisuride  1 mg of pramipexole  5 mg of ropinirole). The contacts used for final programming in each patient are indicated in the last column.
aSustained dopaminergic treatment was suppressed at the time of surgery because of gastrointestinal intolerance.
bThe patient was also given continuous apomorphine infusion of a total dose of 100 mg/d.
6668 • J. Neurosci., May 12, 2010 • 30(19):6667–6677
Lo´pez-Azca´rate et al. • Subthalamic Cross-Frequency Coupling in Parkinson’s Disease
connectors with extension wires that exit through a small incision in the
skin. The correct placement of the electrodes was corroborated in all
subjects by postoperative MRI (Fig. 1). After the intervention, the patients’ off Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) motor subscale score was reduced by a mean of 61.5% (SD, 14.3%) under the effect
of bilateral stimulation (135–185 Hz; 2.5–4.5 V; 60–90 s), in general
agreement with our standard results .
Clinical assessment
Bradykinesia, rigidity, and tremor were assessed preoperatively (1–3 d
before surgery) in both motor states (off and on) using the motor section
of the UPDRS-III. The off and on pharmacological states were defined,
respectively, as the motor scores after 12 h without medication, and the
maximum improvement after a dose of levodopa equal to 150% of the
usual first morning dose. Bradykinesia was calculated by considering
the UPDRS subitems 23–26 (finger tap, opening and closing hand movements, rapidly alternating prone and supine hand movements, and leg
movements), rigidity was the sum of the UPDRS subitem 22 (neck, arms,
and legs), and tremor was the sum of subitem 21.
Recording procedure and data acquisition
Signals were recorded 4–5 d after the initial surgery to situate the electrodes and before the second operation to internalize the connections to
the stimulating device. STN field potentials were recorded by connecting
the different leads of the wire corresponding to each contact on the
electrode to differential amplifiers using a custom-made cable and a
sequential bipolar montage, giving a total of three channels per side (0–1,
1–2, and 2–3: 0 being the most ventral contact). The STN bipolar signal
was filtered at 0.3–1000 Hz, amplified 50,000-fold (Digitimer C-150),
sampled at a frequency of 2000 Hz, and stored in a personal computer
using Spike2 software and a CED 1401 plus analog-to-digital converter
(Cambridge Electronic Design).
In addition, the right extensor carpi radialis surface EMG from the
patient was simultaneously recorded, filtered at 0.3–1000 Hz, amplified
5000-fold (Grass IP511 amplifiers; Astro-Med), and stored at the same
sampling frequency .
Twelve PD patients were first studied in the off motor state after overnight withdrawal of medication. Subsequently, they were given their
usual morning dose of L-DOPA and studied again during the transition
to the on motor state, as well as in the on motor state. In addition, two PD
patients were only studied in the off state and one PD patient was studied
only in the on state. Thus, a total of 14 patients were studied in the off
state and 13 in the on state.
Recordings at rest. The patients were instructed to stay awake, relaxed,
and with their eyes open, and to avoid voluntary movements during the
initial 10 min of the recording (in the off state), as well as during a 10 min
period after reaching the on motor state. They were also instructed to stay
relaxed with their eyes open during the motor state transition, although
some degree of movement was allowed for the sake of comfort. Signals
were recorded continuously with Spike2 software during the rest periods
and the motor state transition. Two 5 min segments of off and on resting
activity were selected off-line for additional analyses (see below).
Recordings during movement execution. After the rest periods, each
patient was instructed to perform self-initiated right wrist extensions,
with a minimum intermovement interval of 6 s. The recording procedure
was similar to that used in the resting condition, and it was repeated in
the off and on motor states. After the recording, we performed off-line
automatic triggering over the EMG signals to obtain segments centered
around movement onset. The trigger was carefully chosen individually
after a detailed review of each surface EMG signal, and different levels
were selected for different segments of the file if necessary. The files were
segmented in 4 s sweeps, 2 s premovement onset, and the other 2 s
postmovement onset. All sweeps were reviewed individually to exclude
those with visible artifacts or bad triggering (where the trigger could not
be located at the beginning of the movement). A more detailed description of the triggering/segmentation procedure can be found in the study
by Alegre et al. . The minimal number of artifact-free sweeps per
subject and motor state was 24 (mean, 58; SD, 23).
Signal analysis
All analyses were performed using Matlab 7.7 software (Mathworks).
Power spectrum analysis. Time-evolving power spectra of STN channels were estimated for all the patients in each motor state (“off,” “offto-on transition,” and “on”), using the fast Fourier transform with blocks
of 4096 samples, a Hanning window, and a 75% overlap, until the whole
recording was analyzed. The transforms obtained offered a resolution of
0.5 Hz and 1 s. This way, we obtained for each patient, state, hemisphere, and channel, a visualization of the frequency distribution and the
temporal evolution of the oscillatory activity.
After reviewing the recordings, 300 s rest segments were selected for
each patient in the off and on motor states. To characterize the frequency
components of these signals, we estimated the Welch periodogram
 using a fast Fourier transform of 4096 samples and a
Hanning window, to achieve a resolution of 0.5 Hz per bin. In these
spectra, we measured the peak frequency of the different relevant bands
(low beta, high beta, and HFO) and the relative power of these bands,
calculating a ratio between the peak power and the power of the adjacent
spectrum. The choice of relative power values instead of absolute power
Table 2. Spearman’s correlations between clinical and neurophysiological parameters
Parameters
Low-beta power
Mov.-rel. changes MI
Mov.-rel. changes HFO power
UPDRS (B&R)
Low-beta power
Mov.-rel. changes MI
Mov.-rel. changes HFO power
UPDRS (B&R)
Significantcorrelationsarehighlightedinbold.Low-betapower,Relativepowerofthelow-betapeakatrest;HFOpower,relativepowerofthehigh-frequency(250–350Hz)peakatrest;RestMI,modulationindex(cross-frequencycoupling)
atrest;Mov.-rel.changesMI,relativemovement-relatedchangesinthemodulationindex;Mov.-rel.changesHFOpower,relativemovement-relatedchangesinHFOpower;UPDRS(B&R),sumoftheUPDRS-IIIscoresforbradykinesiaand
rigidity. *p  0.05, **p  0.01.
Lo´pez-Azca´rate et al. • Subthalamic Cross-Frequency Coupling in Parkinson’s Disease
J. Neurosci., May 12, 2010 • 30(19):6667–6677 • 6669
values was because of the high intersubject
variability in baseline power values in the HFO
Power changes in the movement execution
recordings were studied by means of the Stockwell transform (ST) ,
which is a complex transformation that gives
an accurate estimate of the time-varying energy and phase of the signal analyzed in a
selected time–frequency window of interest.
The ST is suitable for our study because it
provides a unique time–frequency representation of a signal by adapting the Fourier
transform to analyze a localized signal, using
frequency-dependent time-scaling windows,
thereby allowing us to study a wide range of
frequencies (specifically 5–400 Hz, setting
the width factor of the localizing Gaussian to
a value of 9). In fact, the ST is a short-time
Fourier transform with scalable Gaussian
windows that provides a frequency-dependent resolution. Averaging the magnitude of
single-sweep ST gives an estimate of the
power spectrum variations during the time
period studied, considering only the changes
in amplitude and excluding the influence of
the phase. With that aim, the complex coefficients, S(t,f), were obtained for every single
sweep. Then, their absolute value was squared to
obtain power values, and finally these were averaged across the different sweeps. If represented as
an image scale plot, this transform gives a complete picture of the time evolution of the power
spectrum of the signal.
Where we detected high-frequency oscillations, we displayed that particular frequency
band linearly to measure and quantify the relative power variation with movement. The
transforms obtained were also normalized using the activity over the first 500 ms of the image as the baseline, to build a grand average
representation.
Cross-frequency interactions analysis. In first
place, we studied potential modulations in the
amplitude of the HFOs by computing the
power spectrum of their amplitude envelope.
This amplitude envelope was obtained by applying the Hilbert transform on the bandpassfiltered signal.
To detect and quantify the possible crossfrequency interactions between different frequency bands, we computed a modulation
index (MI), which allowed us to measure the
phase-to-amplitude modulation between two
frequency ranges of interest. This index has
been described previously and is calculated as follows.
Briefly, the raw data are bandpass filtered in the two frequency intervals
of interest: a low-frequency band and a higher-frequency range. Then,
the instantaneous phase is extracted from the low-frequency filtered
data, and the instantaneous amplitude envelope is extracted from the
high-frequency filtered data by applying the Hilbert transform. Next, the
coupling between the low-frequency phase and high-frequency amplitude envelope is determined. This is done by computing the entropy of
the distribution of the instantaneous amplitude envelope for every 20°
interval of the instantaneous phase. Finally, entropy values are normalized by the maximum entropy value, that of a uniform distribution,
giving the MI [MI  (Hmax  H)/Hmax]. When the MI value is 0, there is
no phase-to-amplitude modulation, whereas larger MI values arise from
stronger modulation. In this study, we calculated the MI for multiple
pairs of frequencies, and we represented the values obtained in an image
scale plot. Specifically, we calculated the phase signal filtering the raw
signal from 10 to 30 Hz in 1 Hz steps with 2 Hz bandwidth, and the
amplitude signal filtering from 200 to 400 Hz in 2 Hz steps with 4 Hz
bandwidth. Only the statistically significant values of the index were
represented in the MI diagrams. To determine the significance threshold
value, we computed a distribution of 200 surrogate data for each pair of
frequencies by adding a temporal random offset to the amplitude signal.
Assuming that the surrogate data follow a normal distribution, if we use
a p value of 0.01 and apply the Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons, we get the significance threshold value.
SubthalamicbetaandHFOsintheoffandonmotorstateshavedifferentcharacteristics.A,Temporalevolutionofthe
power spectrum of patient 1 (left STN, dorsal contacts 2–3) in both motor states (off and on) during rest periods. The bottom
imagesrepresentthe3–100Hzfrequencyrangeandthetopimagesrepresentthe100–400Hzfrequencyrange.Powervaluesare
shown in a logarithmic scale, adjusted for each frequency range. HFOs in the 250–350 Hz range can be observed in both motor
states.Thethinhorizontallinesobservedat50,150,250,and350Hzareartifacts(atthemainsfrequencyanditsoddharmonics).
B,Meanpowerspectrum(logarithmicscale)inthedorsalcontactpairs(0–400Hz),inbothmotorstates(n22).Theartifactsat
mainsfrequencyanditsharmonicshavebeenremovedandreplacedbyinterpolatedvalues.Mostdifferencesbetweentheonand
offplotsarecenteredinthebeta,gamma,andHFOranges.Theofflow-betapeakattenuatesintheonstate,whereasthehighbeta
activitydoesnotchange.Thesmallgammadifferencesobservedareattributabletothreesubjects.ApeakintheHFOrangecanbe
observed in both states, although at different frequencies. C, Topographical distribution of the HFOs in the whole group in both
motorstates(offandon).D,Comparisonofthemeanrelativepowervaluesoflow-andhigh-betapeaksinbothmotorstates(off
andon)indifferentcontactpairs(*p0.05).Allcontactpairswereincludedintheanalysis;2–3meansdorsalcontactpairs,1–2
means intermediate contact pairs, and 0–1 means ventral contact pairs.
6670 • J. Neurosci., May 12, 2010 • 30(19):6667–6677
Lo´pez-Azca´rate et al. • Subthalamic Cross-Frequency Coupling in Parkinson’s Disease
Movement-related changes in the MI were studied by selecting 1 s
fragments in two different conditions from all the trials: premovement
(time interval, 1.9 to 0.9 s) and during movement execution (time
interval, 0–1 s). The value of the MI was calculated as explained above
with the following exception: to obtain the significance threshold value,
we computed a distribution of 200 surrogate data for each pair of frequencies by randomizing the relationship between the amplitude signal
of one trial and the phase signal of a different random trial. Again, assuming that the surrogate data follow a normal distribution, we used a p
value of 0.01 and applied the Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons to get the significance threshold value.
Segments of the raw signal were also averaged centered on the peaks of
the high-frequency activity, with the requirement of a minimum 100 ms
separation between peaks to avoid selecting more than one peak in a beta
cycle . A similar result can be obtained by averaging
segments of the raw signal centered on those high-frequency activity
peaks showing amplitude values higher than a trigger level, set on the
mean amplitude plus 2 SDs. Although both methods offered similar
results, the figures of this paper were calculated using the first method
because the visualization of the HFOs was better.
We also calculated time–frequency plots of the mean normalized
power of the high-frequency activity time-associated to the phase minimums of the beta activity. This method was described by Canolty et al.
 , and it averages fragments of the normalized amplitudes, squared
element-wise, of the filtered high-frequency activity centered at the phase
minimums of the beta activity. In the off state, the phase minimums of
the filtered low-beta activity were used as triggers, whereas in the on
state the phase minimums were extracted from the filtered high-beta
activity. The frequencies of the beta filtering were derived from the
results of the previous analysis (HFO peak-centered average).
Statistics
Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS 15.0 for Windows (SPSS).
To assess the statistical significance of our results, we used nonparametric
tests, the Wilcoxon test for paired samples, and the Mann–Whitney U
test for unpaired samples. Correlations between different clinical and
neurophysiological variables (those indicated in Table 2 plus UPDRS
scores for tremor) were performed using a bivariate correlation for nonparametric data
(Spearman’s correlation), as most of the neurophysiological variables involved did not follow a normal distribution. Finally, once the
normality of the dependent variables (clinical
scores) was confirmed, the degree of prediction that the different variables offered for
the UPDRS scores for tremor, bradykinesia,
and rigidity was assessed using a multiple linear regression analysis with backward elimination. In this procedure, all independent
variables are initially entered into the model.
At each step, the variable with the largest
probability-of-F value is removed, provided
that the value is larger than the preestablished removal p value ( p  0.1). The equation is recomputed without the variable and
the process is repeated until no more independent variables can be removed. The residuals of the model followed a normal
distribution.
A total of 26 subthalamic nuclei from 14
patients were studied in the off state and
24 nuclei from 13 patients were studied in
the on state. The recordings of two nuclei,
both in the on and off state, were disregarded because of a low signal-to-noise
ratio generated by technical issues that
arose during the recording.
Rest analysis
Our analysis was focused on the two frequency bands that
showed consistently spectral peaks in both the off and on motor
states, albeit with different characteristics: high-frequency (250–
350 Hz range) and beta oscillations (12–30 Hz, subdivided into
low and high beta). In the on state, the power spectrum also
displayed activity bands at frequencies in the theta range (4–8
Hz) in 10 of the 13 patients and in the high gamma range (55–100
Hz) in 3 of the 13 patients. However, none of these bands was
present in the off state.
Characterization of the high-frequency band
At rest, in the off state, 13 of 14 patients showed a consistent band
of high-frequency activity at the peak frequency of 265  33 Hz
(Fig. 2A, left; B). These HFOs were most likely generated locally
in the STN and not volume-conducted from adjacent structures.
Indeed, phase reversal could be observed in the filtered signals of
two adjacent contact pairs (Fig. 3A,B) in 23 of 26 nuclei. The
phase reversals were usually found at contact 2 (18 of 23). Also,
the presence of these HFOs was well localized to the most dorsal
contacts (Fig. 2C). The only patient that showed no HFO was
predominantly tremoric with a UPDRS score in the lower range
(P15) (see UPDRS scores in Table 1).
The transition from the off to on motor state was characterized by a sharp attenuation of the power in these oscillations. The
HFO recovered gradually (between 40 and 120 s) after this sharp
decrease, but in a higher frequency range and with a broader
distribution (Figs. 2A, right; 4A). In the fully established on state,
this band was evident in the 13 patients studied and it was detected homogeneously at all the contact pairs (Fig. 2B,C), with a
peak frequency of 323  19 Hz. In this state, phase reversals in
HFOs were found in 23 of 24 nuclei with a uniform distribution
A,FilteredLFPfromasamplepatient(patient9)intheoffmotorstatehighlightingthephasereversalofthelow-beta
activity(right)andtheHFOs(left)inthedorsalSTN.B,Phasedifferencehistogram(360bins,300ssegment)fromthesamepatient
showingthephasereversalaroundcontact2intheHFOs.Themeanphasedifferencebetweencontactpairs2–3and1–2is180°
(radians).Thehorizontallineindicatesthemeanlevelinanideallyrandomdistribution.C,Phasedifferencehistogramfromthe
samepatientandcontactpairsshowingthephasereversalinthelow-betaactivityaroundelectrode2(sameparametersasinB).
Lo´pez-Azca´rate et al. • Subthalamic Cross-Frequency Coupling in Parkinson’s Disease
J. Neurosci., May 12, 2010 • 30(19):6667–6677 • 6671
across contacts, including 8 nuclei with
two phase reversals at contacts 2 and 1.
The peak frequency was significantly
higher in the on state than in the off state
(323  19 Hz in on vs 265  33 Hz in off;
Mann–Whitney U, Z  4.758; p  0.001),
whereas the relative peak power of this activity band was similar in both motor
states (1.83  0.98 in on vs 2.06  1.02
in off; Mann–Whitney U, Z  0.958;
p  0.349).
Characterization of the beta band
In all the patients studied, there were two
different spectral peaks of oscillatory activity in the beta range of the power spectrum in the off state. One of these peaks
was in the 12–20 Hz range (“low beta”
band, mean frequency, 15.33 Hz; SD, 1.97
Hz), whereas the other peak was in the
20–30 Hz range (“high beta” band, mean
frequency, 26.22 Hz; SD, 2.75 Hz). Phase
reversals were observed both in low-beta
and in high-beta activity in 21 of the 26
nuclei. The power of the low-beta activity
was significantly higher in the most dorsal
contacts when compared with the ventral
ones (Wilcoxon’s test: dorsal vs intermediate, Z  1.384, p  0.173; dorsal vs ventral, Z  2.68, p  0.004; intermediate vs
ventral, Z  3.215, p  0.001), whereas
the power of the high-beta band was similar in all contacts (Wilcoxon’s test: dorsal
vs intermediate, Z  1.493, p  0.141;
dorsal vs ventral, Z  0.571, p  0.582;
intermediate vs ventral, Z  1.13, p 
0.269) (Fig. 2D). Accordingly, low-beta
phase reversal was more frequent around
contact 2, whereas phase reversal in highbeta activity was more frequent in contact
1 and even was double (in contacts 1 and 2
simultaneously) in five nuclei.
In the transition from the off to the on
motor state, there was a sharp attenuation
of the power in the low-beta band (Wilcoxon’s test, Z  4.015, p  0.001), concomitant with the decrease in the HFOs
(ascommentedabove,seeFig.4A),whereas
the high-beta band remained invariant in
power and topography (Wilcoxon’s test
off–onhigh-betapowercomparison:dorsal
contacts,Z0.795,p0.443;intermediate
contacts, Z  1.607, p  0.113; ventral contacts, Z  0.081, p  0.949) (Fig. 2B,D). In
contrast to the HFOs, the decrease in the
low-beta activity that appeared in the off-to-on transition was sustained throughout the on state.
Cross-frequency interactions
The coincident temporal pattern of the low-beta activity and the
HFOs during the off-to-on transition (Fig. 4A) and their similar
topographic distribution in the off state led us to search for a
relationship between these two frequency bands. Accordingly, we
studied the power spectrum of the temporal evolution of the
amplitude in the HFO. We found that, in the off state, the amplitude of the HFOs presented a characteristic scale (frequency peak
in the power spectrum) within the low-beta range (Fig. 4B, left).
No such characteristic scale was evident in the same spectrum in
the on state, although some subjects showed increased power in
the high-beta range (Fig. 4B, right). The presence of this scale
implies that the amplitude of the HFO is modulated at frequencies within the beta range in the off state. We represented the
frequency of both beta bands (low and high) against the fre-
HFOs in the off motor state (but not in the on motor state) display amplitude modulation at the frequency of the
low-beta power peak. A, Temporal evolution of the power spectrum from patient 11 (right STN, dorsal contacts 2–3) during the
off-to-ontransition(markedwithablackarrow).Low-betaandHFObandsshowasimilartemporalpatternduringthetransition.
B, Power spectrum of the envelope of the HFOs (variations in amplitude, as shown in the small insert) from the same patient and
contacts(rightSTN,dorsalcontacts2–3)atrestinbothmotorstates(offandon).Amarkedlow-betapeakcanbeobservedinthe
off motor state (marked with “x”), whereas in the on state there is a smaller and more diffuse high-beta increment (marked with
“o”).C,Relationshipbetweenthefrequencyofbothbetabandsintherawsignalpowerspectrum(bluedotsforlowbetaandgreen
dotsforhighbeta)andthefrequencyofthepeak(characteristicscale)observedinthepowerspectrumoftheHFOenvelope,inthe
off (left) and on (right) states. In the off state, the highly significant linear correlation observed with the low-beta peak contrasts
with the lack of correlation with the high-beta peak. In the on state, a smaller (but significant) correlation is observed in the
high-beta range (there is no low-beta power peak in this motor state).
6672 • J. Neurosci., May 12, 2010 • 30(19):6667–6677
Lo´pez-Azca´rate et al. • Subthalamic Cross-Frequency Coupling in Parkinson’s Disease
quency of the characteristic scale found in the spectrum of HFO
amplitudes. In this way, we found a highly significant correlation
between the frequency of the characteristic scale in the amplitude
of the HFO and the peak frequency of the low-beta band in the off
state (R 2  0.8259; p  0.001) (Fig. 4C, left), whereas in the on
state there was just a weak correlation within the high-beta band
(Fig. 4C, right).
To characterize the relationship between the low-beta and the HFO bands,
we calculated a cross-frequency measure
named the modulation index. This index
allowed us to quantify the phase-toamplitude modulation between two frequency bands of interest. We calculated
this measure for multiple frequency pairs
considering the phase in the 10–30 Hz
range and amplitudes in the 200–400 Hz
range. These different MI values were
plotted as a color image.
In the off state, the images displayed
very significant phase-to-amplitude modulation between the phase of the low-beta
band and the amplitude of the HFO, particularly in the contact pairs in which the
patients had clear high-frequency peaks
(usually the most dorsal ones) (Fig. 5A).
By contrast, this modulation was shifted
from the low-beta to the high-beta band
in the on state, and its magnitude was
drastically reduced (Mann–Whitney U:
Z  2.327, p  0.02). This small modulation appeared in all contact pairs, as the
HFOs were detected homogeneously in all
contact pairs in the on state (Fig. 5B). We
used two complementary techniques to
assess the coupling pattern: one based on
averaging fragments of the HFO using the
beta troughs as a trigger, whereas the other
averaged fragments of the raw signal centered at the peaks of the HFOs. Qualitatively, both approaches showed that the
HFOpeaksappearedintheascendantphase
of the low-beta activity in the off state,
whereas no clear relationship could be appreciated in the on state (Fig. 5C). Figure 5
shows the results from one side of patient
P10 and the results from two other patients
(P14 and P9) are shown in supplemental
Figures 1 and 2 (available at www.jneurosci.
org as supplemental material).
Analysisofthemovement-related
We averaged single-sweep Stockwell transforms to study the movement-related
changes in the power of the oscillatory activity in the STN, optimizing the parameters for high-frequency activity. The study
of the 0–100 Hz frequency range, although limited by the parameters selected, confirmed the results obtained by
other groups . In the off
state, the power in the beta range decreased from at least 1 s before
movement until the end of the action. In the on state, there was
also a beta decrease with a similar temporal pattern, together with
an increase in the gamma range (Fig. 6A,B) (for another example, see also supplemental Fig. 3, available at www.jneurosci.org
as supplemental material). When analyzing the high-frequency
band, we found little or no movement-related power changes in
Cross-frequencycouplingbetweenthephaseofthelow-betaactivityandtheamplitudeoftheHFOsatrestisevident
in the off motor state. A, Phase to amplitude representations of the MI at rest in a representative patient (patient 10, left STN,
contacts2–3,1–2,and0–1),bothintheoff(topimages)andonstate(bottomimages).Allplotsusethesamescale.Pleasenote
thatcross-frequencycouplingis2ordersofmagnitudehigherintheoffstate.B,TopographicaldistributionofMIvaluesfromthe
macroelectrode contact pairs in both motor states (off and on) showing the predominance in dorsal contact pairs in the off state
(*p  0.05). C, Two additional representations of the beta–HFO coupling in both motor states (patient 10, left STN, contact pair
2–3). Top, Average of 500 ms segments of the raw signal centered at the peaks of the HFO. The amplitude of the HFOs is greater
during the valley and the ascending curve of the beta oscillations in the off state. This relationship is lost in the on state. Bottom,
Mean normalized power of the 100–400 Hz range time-locked to the phase minimums of the beta activity.
Lo´pez-Azca´rate et al. • Subthalamic Cross-Frequency Coupling in Parkinson’s Disease
J. Neurosci., May 12, 2010 • 30(19):6667–6677 • 6673
the off state, whereas marked positive
movement-related modulation of highfrequency power could be observed in the
on state (Fig. 6A,B). The movementrelated power increase in the HFOs
showed a trend for higher values in the
dorsal contact pairs when compared with
the ventral ones ( p  0.1). The values obtained are displayed in Figure 6C (one
contact pair for each nucleus), showing
the significant differences between the off
and on motor states (Mann–Whitney U:
Z  4.464, p  0.001).
We also studied the effect of movement on the beta–HFO coupling. There
was a significant decrease in the MI in the
off state (Wilcoxon’s test: Z  2.906, p 
0.003) together with a small shift in the
phase frequency (Fig. 6D; supplemental
Fig. 3, available at www.jneurosci.org as
supplemental material), as the low-beta
band frequency was modulated by movement . Despite this movement-related decrease, the magnitude of the MI was still
highly significant. We also observed a decrease in the MI in the on state (Wilcoxon’s test: Z  3.558, p  0.001), although
both the “pre” and “during” movement
indices were clearly higher in the off motor state than in the on state (Mann–
Whitney U: off-pre vs on-pre, Z  2.652,
p  0.007; off-mov vs on-mov, Z  2.075,
p  0.038) (Fig. 6E).
Correlations with clinical parameters
Spearman’s correlations were estimated
for different clinical and neurophysiological parameters in the off motor state. Specifically, we analyzed the correlations
between the relative power of the low beta
and high frequency peaks at rest, the magnitude of the MI at rest, the movementrelated power changes, the movementrelated changes in the MI, and the sum of
the UPDRS scores for bradykinesia/rigidity and tremor.
We found significant correlations between two of the neurophysiological measures at rest (low-beta power and HFO
power) and between the two dynamic measures (the movement-related changes in
the modulation index correlated with the
relative movement-related power changes).
The off UPDRS scores for bradykinesia
and rigidity were significantly correlated
with the three measures at rest (beta and
HFO power, and MI) and with the relative
movement-related power changes (Table 2). The multiple linear
regression analysis included the rigidity and bradykinesia scores
as dependent variables, and the other five parameters as independent variables. The relative movement-related change in power
was the only variable that predicted independently the UPDRS
scores for bradykinesia and rigidity in the off state (F  8.777; p 
0.008) (Fig. 7). Backward elimination in the regression model did
not show any significant additive effect for the remaining independent variables. No neurophysiological parameter was correlated with the tremor scores.
Movement-related changes in HFO power and beta–HFO coupling in both motor states. A, Average of the singlesweepStockwelltransformsofasamplepatient(P14,leftSTN,intermediatecontacts1–2)inbothmotorstates(offandon)during
movement.Time0indicatesthebeginningofmovement.AperimovementpowerincreaseintheHFOband(340Hz)canonlybe
observedintheonstate.Pleasenotethelogarithmicscaleinthey-axis.B,Linearrepresentationfromthewholegroupofpatients
of the normalized movement-related power changes in the HFO range in both motor states (off and on). Again, a perimovement
powerincreasecanonlybeobservedintheonstate.C,Bardiagramshowingtherelativemovement-relatedpowerchangesinall
thenucleistudiedinbothmotorstates(offandon).Intheonstate,mostnucleishowmovement-relatedpowerincreases,whereas
intheoffstatethechangesaremostlyminimalorabsent.D,PhasetoamplituderepresentationsoftheMIvaluesinpremovement
(Pre-) and perimovement periods (Mov-) from patient 14 (left STN, intermediate contacts 1–2). A perimovement decrease is
observedinbothmotorstates.However,offperimovementvaluesarestillmuchhigherthanonpremovementvalues.E,MeanMI
values premovement and perimovement in both motor states (off and on, *p  0.05) showing that, regardless of the relative
perimovement decrease, off values are still higher than on values.
6674 • J. Neurosci., May 12, 2010 • 30(19):6667–6677
Lo´pez-Azca´rate et al. • Subthalamic Cross-Frequency Coupling in Parkinson’s Disease
Discussion
Our results show that in the off parkinsonian motor state, HFOs
in the STN are coupled to the abnormal low-beta activity. The
beta-coupled HFOs show no or even negative movement-related
changes in amplitude. The “blockage” of the movement-related
modulation of the HFO amplitude is correlated with the severity
of the disease and, particularly, with rigidity/bradykinesia. In the
onmotorstate,after L-DOPAadministration,theHFOsarereleased
from low-beta coupling and they show marked movement-related
amplitude modulation.
Off and on subthalamic HFOs
Oscillations 100 Hz are commonly observed in the human
cortex, and although initially considered a phenomenon related to epilepsy , it is now generally
accepted that these oscillations may also have a physiological
role . In fact, oscillations at frequencies as
high as 600 Hz have been described during somatosensory
stimulation in the cortex and thalamus . The HFOs permit a higher information
load to be transmitted than slower oscillations, suggesting that
they may indeed be important in brain processing . The origin of such fast activity is not clear. Interneuronal activity has been proposed to be responsible for
somatosensory-evoked cortical HFOs , although this hypothesis cannot be applied to
the motor STN, which is essentially void of interneurons
 . The individual neuronal firing
rate in the off parkinsonian STN is 30 Hz and does not increase in the on state . However, the emergence of faster oscillations could be
explained by more complex mechanisms, such as the synchronized phase-shifted recruitment of STN cells, or reverberating
activity of STN units because of intrinsic membrane properties .
Foffani et al. described the presence of HFOs in the
parkinsonian STN in the on state, and their modulation by movement. Interestingly, some of their patients also showed HFOs in
the off state. Our results show that HFOs have similar amplitudes
in both the off and on states, although they differ in frequency,
topography, and beta coupling.
The frequency of HFOs in the off state was usually lower than
in the on state, but not always (see supplemental Fig. 1, available
at www.jneurosci.org as supplemental material). The off HFOs
have a topographic distribution similar to the abnormal low-beta
activity, and they are limited to dorsal contact pairs. The limited
topographical distribution of the off HFO might explain their
reduced presence in the study by Foffani et al. , where only
central or wide field contact pairs were used for the analysis.
However, the HFOs are observed in all of the contact pairs in the
on state with similar amplitude, more like the distribution of the
high-beta activity. Despite the broader distribution of basal
HFOs, movement-related changes were more marked in the
more dorsal contact pairs, most likely located within the motor
part of the nucleus.
Kane et al. described the presence of HFOs both in the
thalamus (reticular nucleus) and the STN in intraoperative LFP
recordings in PD patients. Dopaminergic stimulation increased
the frequency of the HFOs in both structures (as in our results),
but the power of the HFOs behaved differentially in the STN
(with an increase) and the thalamus (decrease). A more detailed
comparison with our study is difficult because of the different
characteristics of the recordings (microelectrodes vs macroelectrodes) and analysis procedures.
Another issue that might explain the differences between our
results and previous studies is the different time interval between
the surgery and the recordings: 4–5 d in our study, 2–3 d in the
study by Foffani et al. , and none (intraoperative) in the
study by Kane et al. .
Low and high beta
A collateral but still interesting finding of our study was the clear
separation of two different spectral peaks of beta activity in the
parkinsonian STN. In the off state, there was a predominant peak
within the low-beta band (12–20 Hz), together with a smaller
peak in the high-beta band (20–30 Hz). The low-beta peak disappeared or was greatly reduced in the on motor state, whereas
the high-beta peak remained at similar power. The topography of
both peaks was different as the low-beta activity in the off state
was clearly restricted to dorsal contact pairs, whereas the highbeta peak had a more widespread distribution through the STN
in both motor conditions. Our results, therefore, indicate that
low- and high-beta activities may have a different functional
meaning, as previously suggested .
Beta–HFO coupling
Nonlinear coupling between different frequencies has been described as a physiological mechanism in sensory processing and
memory circuits . Our results suggest that this coupling may also have a pathophysiological implication when exaggerated. In the on motor state, as well as in the off motor state of
less affected patients, slight coupling between the HFOs and the
high-beta band is observed (1 or 2 orders of magnitude lower).
This suggests that beta–HFO coupling may be a physiological
mechanism in motor control in the basal ganglia that becomes
pathologically exaggerated (100-fold) in Parkinson’s disease,
thereby blocking high-frequency amplitude modulation. Despite
thesignificant coupling between beta activity and the HFOs, there
was no direct relationship between the frequency of the beta peak
and the frequency of the HFOs, neither in the off or on state. This
finding confirms that the cross-frequency coupling is a complex
Regression plot displaying the relationship between the movement-related
changes in HFO power and the rigidity/bradykinesia scores.
Lo´pez-Azca´rate et al. • Subthalamic Cross-Frequency Coupling in Parkinson’s Disease
J. Neurosci., May 12, 2010 • 30(19):6667–6677 • 6675
nonlinear phenomenon that needs to be studied with specific
Correlation with motor signs
Recent studies have shown a positive correlation between the
relative amplitude of the off subthalamic beta oscillations and the
improvement in the bradykinesia/rigidity UPDRS scores after
dopaminergic treatment in PD patients .
Our patients showed positive correlation of the bradykinesia/
rigidity off scores with the beta amplitude, but also with the HFO
amplitude (with similar r values), and with the MI. The correlation was also significant, but negative, with the amplitude modulation of the HFOs. In the linear regression analysis, the
amplitude modulation of the HFOs was the only significant independent variable. Although the linear association found does
not imply causality, this result suggests that the parameter most
closely related to bradykinesia and rigidity is the impairment of
movement-related amplitude modulation of the HFOs. The
correlation of the amplitude to the off beta oscillations might
therefore be attributable to their “blocking” effect on the
movement-related HFO modulation. This idea is also supported
by the inverse relationship between the movement-related
changes in the MI and the movement-related changes in HFO
power. Accordingly, an interesting hypothesis might be to consider that an abnormal beta rhythm “blocks” the HFOs present in
the STN (and perhaps also in other parts of the motor circuit),
preventing any movement-related change. Thus, the lack of the
movement-related HFOs might be involved in the generation of
bradykinesia. Admittedly, this hypothesis remains to be confirmed. Indeed, from a purely theoretical point of view, the local
HFO–beta coupling can also be explained by thinking of the
construction of beta oscillations by means of variations in the
amplitude of the HFOs, instead of entraining of the HFOs by an
“external” beta. The simultaneous disappearance of the HFOs
and the low-beta activity during motor transitions and the similar
topographical localization also favor the idea that both low-beta
activity and the off HFOs are generated concomitantly as a consequence of the lack of dopaminergic input into the motor circuit
of the basal ganglia.
HFOs have been described in the nonparkinsonian STN, although sporadically during short periods of time . Moreover, they have not been described to our knowledge
in other motor structures of the basal ganglia. However, the histological characteristics of the STN (very few interneurons, excitatory output) argue against the possibility that the HFOs are a
purely “local” phenomenon. Additional studies will be needed to
assess the presence of HFOs (basally or movement-related) in
other basal ganglia structures and in subjects without PD.
Final remarks
In summary, our results show that the lack of dopaminergic input
into the motor circuit of the basal ganglia generates a series of
complex changes in the oscillatory activity of the subthalamic
nucleus. The off state subthalamic activity is characterized by the
presence of coupled low-beta and high-frequency oscillations.
These beta-coupled HFOs show little or no change during voluntary movements, and the altered movement-related changes correlate negatively with the bradykinesia/rigidity scores: a lower,
more strongly altered modulation is associated with a higher bradykinesia/rigidity off score. In the on state, low-beta activity disappears, the coupling is greatly reduced, and the HFOs show clear
movement-related positive amplitude modulation. These findings suggest the possibility that nonlinear coupling between frequencies may not simply be a physiological mechanism (as
shown previously) but also that it may take part in the pathophysiology of bradykinesia and rigidity in PD.