Research in Social Sciences and Technology
Volume 5 Issue 1, 2020
Sturm, E. & Quaynor, L. A Window, Mirror, and Wall: How Educators
Use Twitter for Professional Learning
A Window, Mirror, and Wall: How Educators Use Twitter for Professional Learning
Elizabeth Sturm*
Lewis University
Laura Quaynor
Johns Hopkins University
*Corresponding Author: 
Received : 2019-09-19
Accepted : 2019-11-24
How to cite this paper: Sturm, E. & Quaynor, L. A. Window, mirror, and wall: How educators use twitter for professional
learning. Research in Social Sciences and Technology, 5(1), 22-44.
Teachers and other professionals increasingly utilize Twitter as a medium for professional
expression and professional learning. These types of Twitter exchanges often take place in
formal chats which are moderated by professional organizations or other knowledge brokers
in the field. As moderated public online forums become more common, educators may wish to
understand the benefits and limitations of this type of professional learning. This paper reports
on a study of educators’ discourse in two hosted Twitter chats focused on global education and
analyzes the ways in which these types of chats align with research on high-quality professional
learning. Results indicate that Twitter chats provide multiple components of high-quality
professional learning, namely a focus on content, collaboration, and teacher agency; to a lesser
extent, they may provide peer coaching and allow for conversations across a sustained duration.
However, other components of meaningful professional learning are not possible in this
context, as it is not job-embedded and does not provide active learning or supported
opportunities to practice.
Keywords: Professional learning, Social media, Twitter, Educational technology, Global
Author Note
Portions of this scholarship were supported by a Faculty Scholar Award from Lewis University.
The manuscript has not been published and is not under consideration for publication
elsewhere. Copyright will be given to RESSAT should it be published in RESSAT.
Research in Social Sciences and Technology
Volume 5 Issue 1, 2020
Sturm, E. & Quaynor, L. A Window, Mirror, and Wall: How Educators
Use Twitter for Professional Learning
Introduction
Teacher professional learning that is relevant, collaborative, and involves active teacher
participation has been linked to both educator persistence and student learning, two valuable
goals in education . With the advent of professional
online social networking, platforms such as Twitter offer possibilities for professional learning
on topics selected by teachers themselves, in a community of committed educators from
various locations. However, Twitter can also serve as an echo chamber for ideas and might limit
professional growth due to a loss of available time for job-embedded professional development.
In this paper, we use a content analysis of educator Twitter chats to evaluate the possibilities
and barriers of Twitter as an avenue for teacher professional learning.
Below, we discuss research on professional learning and its importance in educator retention
and student learning, as well as controversies in this field. We then consider how Twitter and
other online learning communities can facilitate teacher professional learning. In the
subsequent sections, we describe our rationale for focusing on two different Twitter chats
centering on global learning, our content analysis of these chats, and the ways that educator
participation in these Twitter chats relates to teacher professional learning.
Teacher Professional Learning
Professional learning for teachers has historically been a main lever to focus on and improve
the quality of educational systems . When grounded in communities of practice
 , teacher professional learning develops teacher practice in meaningful
and sustainable ways. Indeed, studies of professional models have shown increases in student
achievement indicating that teacher engagement in quality professional learning can result in
a year of additional reading growth and improved science learning among their students as
compared to a control group . Although a substantial amount of
resources are invested each year by educational institutions, returns from professional learning
in the form of student outcomes are varied and minimal . Research indicates that
the most effective professional learning processes involve a focus on content, active learning
and collaboration, teacher coaching and feedback, coherence, and sustained duration . Below, we discuss each of these components in detail.
Content and Pedagogical Knowledge in Professional Learning
Across syntheses of research on effective professional learning, researchers have come to some
agreement that meaningful professional learning focuses on both content that teachers will
teach to students and pedagogy directly related to teaching this content . As an example of these types
of programs and results, Johnson and Fargo studied a professional learning experience
for 21 teachers across two elementary schools focused on both science and linguistically
relevant pedagogy, and showed its impact on Hispanic student performance on science
Research in Social Sciences and Technology
Volume 5 Issue 1, 2020
Sturm, E. & Quaynor, L. A Window, Mirror, and Wall: How Educators
Use Twitter for Professional Learning
assessments, as students of participating teachers showed higher growth in science knowledge
over time as compared to students of non-participating teachers. The efficacy of this program
was determined to be in part due to its inclusion of science content, conversational Spanish,
and strategies for using culturally relevant pedagogy in science. The type of content included
in professional learning should involve ways of understanding and teaching content known to
increase student learning and include an explicit link to classroom lessons,
involving not only what to teach but also how to teach it .
Overall, changing teacher procedural classroom behavior is easier than improving content
knowledge or inquiry-oriented instruction techniques . Supporting
growth in both content knowledge and pedagogy requires engagement in a community of
practice. The types of activities that result from this engagement are detailed in the following
Active Learning and Collaboration
Aligning with adult learning and social learning theories , effective
PL for teachers involves active learning and collaboration with peers. Active learning activities
might include seeing modeled practices that teachers can analyze, try out, and reflect on
 . This reflection-on-action can then turn an informational
experience, in which participants gain new knowledge and skills, into a transformational
experience, in which teachers change their points of view or habits of mind .
One main driver for the importance of active learning is understanding the mechanism of
change in teacher knowledge, skills, beliefs, and actions. Research on this change process
indicates that changes in teacher practices lead to changes in student outcomes (such as
learning, participation, or motivation), and this then leads to a change in teacher beliefs about
effective practices . Teacher commitment to a
new idea develops after implementation takes place in part because most teachers derive their
sense of professional success from student growth . Once teachers agree that a
practice does in fact lead to increased student growth, they incorporate it more regularly and
shift their beliefs about the efficacy of the new or modified practice. The connections between
knowledge, skills, beliefs, and actions are multidirectional and self-reinforcing .
Active learning in an environment of professional collaboration is a key aspect of professional
learning. In fact, teachers who work in isolation rarely change their practice . Harré applied the Vygotskian principles of social learning to the
intersection between individual and social learning, and public and private displays of learning.
This process involves a cycle of individual publication (communication) of information, the
conventionalization of this information in public space, the appropriation of information by
other individuals, and personal reflection and possible transformation prior to the next cycle of
publication. This collaboration interacts with active learning as teachers work together as active
learners. Such a connection between active learning and collaboration should take place in a
Research in Social Sciences and Technology
Volume 5 Issue 1, 2020
Sturm, E. & Quaynor, L. A Window, Mirror, and Wall: How Educators
Use Twitter for Professional Learning
context where teachers have some agency in their own learning. Raphael, Vasquez, Fortune,
Gavelek, and Au note that the success of professional learning will depend on the “buyin, ownership, and agency of the participating teachers” (p. 157). This agency and buy-in are
also related to peer coaching and feedback.
Teacher Coaching and Feedback
To support the content-based, active, and collaborative learning found in successful PL, peer
coaching and feedback are critical features of professional learning systems. The incorporation
of teacher leaders in coaching further supports a sense of teacher agency. In a study of
professional development within high-performing educational systems, Jensen, Sonnemann,
Roberts-Hull, and Hunter note the key role of teacher leaders in these systems. For
example, in Shanghai, teachers will not be promoted unless they can demonstrate that they
are collaborative, and mentors will not be promoted unless the teachers they mentor improve
 . This type of coaching and mentoring increasingly has involved video
technology . One successful professional model leading to substantial
improvements in student reading abilities included the work of literacy coaches, who worked
intensively with peers to improve the ways teachers scaffolded student discussion of texts . This type of peer coaching involves both a dialogical
approach to professional learning as well as a recognition of the importance of a teacher’s role
and a sense of teacher agency. In addition, such peer coaching required action over a sustained
period of time, the peer leadership of the literacy coaches, and the support of school and
system-based leadership.
Sustained Duration and Leadership
Current research indicates that time and leadership complement the above factors in allowing
for effective professional learning. Professional learning that is able to lead to systemic change
or a change in the outcomes of a system must be both systematic and sustained over time
 . Some reports suggest that, in fact, a duration of three to five years is
appropriate for systemic effort that results in increased student learning ; others indicate that increases in student learning can be seen through 10 days spread
over the course of one year . In both scenarios, significant time must be
allocated not only to learning but also to practicing and evaluating a job-embedded skill. Overall,
current trends suggest that educational leaders are moving away from professional learning
focused on short workshops and into longer-term initiatives .
Leaders, both at the school and district level, can be key gatekeepers to effective professional
learning . Focusing on a particular initiative over a number of years
on a systemwide scale requires leaders to balance multiple needs and choose not to undertake
other competing initiatives . Leaders can also choose to include
professional learning, or not, in a teacher’s evaluation, and foster an environment in which
teachers have time in their weekly teaching schedule to try and reflect on new skills .
Research in Social Sciences and Technology
Volume 5 Issue 1, 2020
Sturm, E. & Quaynor, L. A Window, Mirror, and Wall: How Educators
Use Twitter for Professional Learning
Teacher Professional Learning on Twitter
The Need for Alternate Models of Professional Learning
Traditional, formal models of professional learning face constraints of space and time and the lack of continuing support for
participants . Models of professional learning
that bring all teachers in a system together for days at the beginning or end of the school year
often are “inadequate, fragmented and superficial” and do not meet the
individual needs of the participants or are
often something “done to teachers” rather than a
participatory and collaborative form of learning.
Educators hampered by the costs of professional learning due to a lack of investment by their
educational institutions may look to social media as an affordable way of accessing professional
learning . This may be heightened in discipline areas that are not considered
to be high stakes, such as social studies. In a study of high school social studies teachers,
Thatcher found that the limited funds available for social studies professional learning
and a primary focus on literacy and mathematics in professional development creates an
environment in which social studies teachers need to find alternative models for creating
communities to improve their practice.
Twitter as a Platform for Professional Learning
As an alternate professional model, many educators have turned to social media platforms such
as Twitter as a free, informal, communal space for professional learning in which participants
can create personalized networks . Social media platforms also break down spatial boundaries
through real-time availability across geographical lines and time zones, provided that educators
have digital connections . Although many educators use
Twitter as a platform for professional learning, their social presence varies, much like in a
traditional professional learning model in which some participants may engage in reciprocal
sharing and others may prefer to listen without engaging in the dialogue. In examining
thousands of educators’ tweets, researchers found that the majority of visible interaction on
Twitter was through retweets and likes, with only a small percentage of original content
 . O’Keeffe found that higher education staff who
participated in Twitter had a variety of social presences, ranging from a small number with a
high usage of interactive posting to those who used it as a one-directional resource without
creating any form of social identity for themselves.
One method of professional learning on Twitter is the use of Twitter chats, planned virtual
dialogues that are organized around topics and include the use of hashtags as their method of
organization. According to Adjapong et al. , Twitter chats can be identified as Virtual
Research in Social Sciences and Technology
Volume 5 Issue 1, 2020
Sturm, E. & Quaynor, L. A Window, Mirror, and Wall: How Educators
Use Twitter for Professional Learning
Professional Learning Networks (VPLN). Within these chats, participants share and gain
knowledge and tools to further their own professional learning . Venable and Milligan argue that the real-time engagement that is a hallmark of
these types of scheduled Twitter chats may lead to transformational discussions. Although it is
not possible to identify how many individuals use these chats without engaging visibly in the
social sphere, several studies have attempted to capture the value of Twitter chats as a sphere
for professional learning amongst participants interacting visibly through retweets, responding
to questions, responding to other participants, and liking tweets. Researchers have also
examined how different educational groups use Twitter chats as a method of professional
learning. Recently, multiple studies have focused on preservice educators’ participation in
Twitter chats as a beneficial form of professional learning .
Adjapong et al. found that educational participants who took part in a #HipHopEd
Twitter chat found a sense of belonging within the chat community and reported that the
professional learning they engaged in as part of these chats had an impact on their instructional
practice; additionally, a majority of participants self-reported that #HipHopEd chat
participation “impacted their practice by specifically encouraging them to be more engaging
educators, possibly by gaining tools that supported the teaching to the specific needs of their
students” (p. 34).
This aligns with the findings by researchers in the social studies education community. Krutka
& Carpenter surveyed 303 “self-identified social studies educators” (p. 44) to examine
how and why these educators use Twitter. Seventy-four percent of those respondents listed
using Twitter chats for professional learning and a high percentage reported sharing and
collecting resources along with using Twitter as a tool for collaboration with other professionals.
Like in the #HipHopEd study, the majority of Krutka and Carpenter’s respondents also
noted that participation in Twitter chats impacted their teaching through challenging their
thinking and exposure to new ideas and materials.
Theoretical Framework
We used a sociocultural learning framework to understand the ways in which teachers engaged
in Twitter chats. As discussed in Raphael et al. , sociocultural approaches to professional
development hold that learning proceeds from social interactions and is then individually
transformative when an individual uses this idea in their private sphere. This cycle of public and
private learning, based on Harré’s description of the Vygotskian space, proceeds
through four phases: publication or open discussion of information, conventionalization or
making an idea normal in the public sphere, appropriation or using that idea in one’s private
sphere, and transformation of an individual’s understanding. Grounding this study in a
sociocultural learning framework necessitated a focus on dialogue and social interaction.
Research in Social Sciences and Technology
Volume 5 Issue 1, 2020
Sturm, E. & Quaynor, L. A Window, Mirror, and Wall: How Educators
Use Twitter for Professional Learning
Research Question and Methodology
Given the proliferation of teachers’ use of Twitter as a space for teacher-led, optional
professional learning, in this paper we investigate the engagement of teachers participating in
Twitter chats focused on global education. We particularly wished to understand the format of
professional learning to complement previous analyses focused on the content of these chats
 . The research question pursued in this study is: What types of
exchanges do teachers have with each other in a hosted Twitter chat?
Methodology
As an examination of online exchanges among teachers, we engaged in qualitative content
analysis complemented with code frequency analysis to
understand the ways in which teacher Twitter chats served as a form of professional learning.
We focused on two Twitter chats with the theme of global education conducted in February,
2016. The first, #sschat, is a weekly chat affiliated with the National Council for Social Studies
(NCSS). The second, #globaledchat, is a weekly chat hosted by the Center for Global Education
at Asia Society. After downloading .pdf versions of the selected Twitter chats conducted by the
hosting organizations, we uploaded these documents to the Dedoose platform for
coding. Consistent with the process of qualitative content analysis , we initially
individually created descriptive codes for each tweet based on reading the first 20 percent of
the Twitter chat transcript. These descriptive codes sought to describe the types of exchanges
teachers had with each other, aligning to the research question. In research meetings, we
discussed the reliability, validity, exhaustiveness, saturation, and mutual exclusiveness of the
codes . We then compared coding lists to identify similar codes, created one
shared coding list, and coded 10 percent of the transcript jointly, ensuring over 80 percent
agreement on codes and discussing any differences. Following this collaborative process, we
collapsed codes into categories with parent and child codes, and completed coding of the
transcripts. To move from codes to themes, we examined the prevalence of parent codes in
each Twitter chat, shared the findings, and created descriptive themes based on the
relationship between parent codes. Appendix A shares the relationship between child codes,
parent codes, and themes.
The main ways in which teachers engaged in Twitter chats included: (1) forming community, (2)
networking, (3) sharing resources, (4) dialogue, and (5) structured learning. In Table 1, we have
shared the prevalence of these parent codes across each Twitter chat. The most common form
of engagement was forming community, at 30% of chat engagement, followed by dialogue
(24%) and structured learning (23%). Less common were sharing resources (17%), often in
response to a specific query by the host, and promoting one’s own personal, professional, or
organizational work (6%).
Research in Social Sciences and Technology
Volume 5 Issue 1, 2020
Sturm, E. & Quaynor, L. A Window, Mirror, and Wall: How Educators
Use Twitter for Professional Learning
Parent Codes Across Twitter Chats
Parent Code
Forming Community Networking
Sharing Resources
Structured Learning
Perspectives in Social
#GlobalEd Chat Local
Global Connections 97
349 (23.5%)
Below, we describe the relationships among these activities in the chat, which we have
narrated into three themes. In these hosted Twitter chats, the host leads participants to create
community, and teachers connect as people and professionals. Both prompted and
unprompted, teachers share resources and dialogue about these resources. Participant
dialogue as professionals and learners involves networking and sharing resources they have
used or developed.
Theme 1: The host leads participants to create community
In both chats, the host’s first question involved introductions. Participants largely provided
professional introductions (e.g., I teach social studies in 8th grade), but some engaged in
personal, “fun” introductions.
Figure 1. Screenshot from a #globaledchat session
In the above example, the moderator asked participants to introduce themselves and mention
their favorite beverage in honor of National Drink Wine Day. This participant shared his
professional affiliation, personal information about parenting, and also humor about “not”
drinking his favorite beer.
In their subsequent questions, engagement, affirmation, and agreement with others were
common. During the #sschat, the participants showed affirmation and agreement in multiple
ways, such as the following example of a participant directly stating her agreement with
another participant. Although we did not include the number of likes of each tweet in this
Research in Social Sciences and Technology
Volume 5 Issue 1, 2020
Sturm, E. & Quaynor, L. A Window, Mirror, and Wall: How Educators
Use Twitter for Professional Learning
research, one can see that the answer to the first question received six likes along with one
direct agreement response.
Figure 2. Screenshot from a #sschat session
Humor and sharing emotion were also part of this process, with some participants sharing
emotion through words such as “happy” and the use of exclamation points, as shown in the
tweet below. This participant also showed emotion by comparing the events of the month to a
Figure 3. Screenshot from a #sschat session
Finally, participants shared experiences and perceived challenges, such as the challenge of
teaching students who have had few experiences traveling beyond their community borders.
The @ sign is used to respond to participants who share a common challenge, and the
responses reflect a shared experience.
Research in Social Sciences and Technology
Volume 5 Issue 1, 2020
Sturm, E. & Quaynor, L. A Window, Mirror, and Wall: How Educators
Use Twitter for Professional Learning
Figure 4. Screenshot from a #globaledchat session
Theme 2: Prompted and unprompted, teachers share resources and dialogue about these
In both the #sschat and the #globaled chat, hosts asked questions that required participants to
share resources such as lesson plans or pedagogy ideas. Appendix B contains the questions
asked during both chats used in this study; four questions in each chat ask participants to share
resources. The #sschat question prompts specifically ask participants to share teaching
methods (Q4), curriculum (Q5), classroom successes (Q6), and trusted resources (Q7), which is
similar to resources (Q3), strategies (Q5), interdisciplinary project examples (Q6), and ideas for
student action (Q7) asked for in the #globaledchat. The resources shared in the participants
responses ranged from links to movies and websites, to tested classroom ideas such as
curriculum and informal pedagogy strategies.
Participants also shared resources unprompted by the host. For example, when asked how they
think about global education, a participant shared a philosophical resource for the promises
and dangers of thinking globally if it reinscribes colonialist/white supremacist power dynamics.
Teachers then responded to the sharing of resources with affirmation, encouragement, and
occasional questions or critiques. Below, we provide an example of an extended informal
exchange about using street views on Google Maps for teaching about international locations.
Research in Social Sciences and Technology
Volume 5 Issue 1, 2020
Sturm, E. & Quaynor, L. A Window, Mirror, and Wall: How Educators
Use Twitter for Professional Learning
Figure 5. Screenshot from a #sschat session
Research in Social Sciences and Technology
Volume 5 Issue 1, 2020
Sturm, E. & Quaynor, L. A Window, Mirror, and Wall: How Educators
Use Twitter for Professional Learning
Theme 3: Participant dialogue involves networking
Although less prevalent than other types of engagement, networking was a consistent activity
in both of these chats. As organizations have Twitter accounts for marketing and public
relations, individuals from these organizations promoted their own initiatives as part of their
engagement in the Twitter chat. In the #globaled chat, the Asia Society (whose member hosted
the chat) as well as the Global Exploration for Educators Organization (GEEO), the Longview
Foundation, the Global Oneness Foundation, Global STEM Classroom, and IREX International
all participated as organizations and often tweeted answers or resources related to their
organizational brand. In this example, we see the Global Oneness Project replying to another
participant with a link to materials created by their organization.
Figure 6. Screenshot from a #globaledchat session
As noted within the individual themes, participants’ engagement via sharing resources,
providing encouragement or affirmation, networking, engaging in structured learning, and
informal dialogue are related and mutually reinforcing activities in a learning community. In
Figure 7, we provide an initial concept map demonstrating the relationship among these
activities as engaged in by participants during the chats. This pathway of engagement held for
both the #globaledchat and the #sschat.
Research in Social Sciences and Technology
Volume 5 Issue 1, 2020
Sturm, E. & Quaynor, L. A Window, Mirror, and Wall: How Educators
Use Twitter for Professional Learning
Figure 7. Concept map of parent codes
Discussion
As discussed above, educator engagement in online professional learning communities hosted
on Twitter involved multiple avenues for personal and professional connection. In this section,
we discuss how this type of engagement maps onto key components of high-quality
professional learning: a focus on content, active learning and collaboration, teacher coaching,
feedback, and sustained duration . By drawing together
educators interested in social studies learning, activity within the chats connected to
scholarship on situated learning, teacher agency, and marginalized voices. These connections
are detailed below.
Situated Learning
In reporting on meaningful professional learning that translates into changes in practice,
Raphael et al. note that learning should be situated within teachers’ professional
contexts. In the collective space of a Twitter chat, teachers are able to share and gain what
Guskey and Yoon call “just-in-time” information that they can integrate into pedagogy.
As pointed out in Adjapong et al. , the Twitter chat serves as a third space 
in which practitioners can dialogue with each other and organizations that serve as knowledge
brokers in their fields regarding problems of practice. Although
limited, this type of engagement begins to fulfill the need for teacher active learning and
collaboration in professional learning.
Research in Social Sciences and Technology
Volume 5 Issue 1, 2020
Sturm, E. & Quaynor, L. A Window, Mirror, and Wall: How Educators
Use Twitter for Professional Learning
In the hosted Twitter chats studied, students were found to be present in practitioner stories
and suggestions; this only partially meets Margolis, Durban, and Doring’s proposal that
high quality professional learning requires the presence (either metaphorical or physical) of
students. As participants are not engaged in real-time collaboration, the chats do not allow for
experiencing a new idea in practice and evaluating if it makes a difference in student outcomes,
which is a key component of professional learning .
Teacher Agency
Professional organizations focused on professional learning consider teacher agency to be a
key ingredient for teacher professional learning . Participating in a Twitter chat
is an example of independent engagement in professional topics, and a way in which teachers
demonstrate their agency as developing professionals. These chats are self-selected by
teachers and are an insertion of their voices as experts on their own practice in a public forum.
This is often displayed in their introductions, such as through participants identifying the
courses taught in the area of social studies, or international teaching expertise. Development
as professionals is also shown in the ending tweets, which often stated a variation of being able
to take a piece of learning from the chat into their classroom. One participant in the #sschat
ended the session with this tweet: “I won't be as chipper at 4:30am, but I'll have new ideas to
plan out and that's always a great time #sschat -until next time!” In the #globaledchat, one
participant signed off with: “Wow! Thanks for the fabulous ideas! My head is swimming with
The majority of the chat questions for both chats focused on participants sharing their expertise
with each other. Vella suggests that adult learning needs to be relevant, meaningful,
and embedded, with the learners acting as subjects and making their own decisions rather than
behaving as objects having decisions made for them. Generalized chat questions, while focused
on a broad theme, provide space for “participation of the learners in naming what is to be
learned” . The facilitator releases multiple questions at regular intervals
during the hour and participants select what, to whom, and when to share information, affirm
others’ responses, or ask additional questions. Being in a dialogic space where participants have
the ability to be both learners and experts increases teacher agency and active learning . Unfortunately, the nature of the fastpaced chats, with seven or eight questions posed within a 60-minute chat, does not appear to
provide a forum in which coaching could be sustained. While analyzing both chats using
archived material and revisiting several of the tweets that showed responses from other
participants, there was no evidence that the conversation threads extended past the duration
of the initial chat. Analysis of extended connections or coaching, as well as how teachers
Research in Social Sciences and Technology
Volume 5 Issue 1, 2020
Sturm, E. & Quaynor, L. A Window, Mirror, and Wall: How Educators
Use Twitter for Professional Learning
incorporated discussed ideas into their own practices, is a possible avenue for further research
in this area.
A Space for Marginalized Voices?
As noted by Adjapong et al. in their study of #HipHopEd chats, some participants in
hosted Twitter chats note that the online community allows for collaboration, innovation, and
enjoyment of public space by members working in the social justice sphere. In the wake of
testing regimes focused on reading, writing, and mathematics, teachers report limited amounts
of curricular time in school focused on social studies topics . Within social studies, the field of global education or a focus on global
issues is sometimes under critique from nationalist groups or cautious administrators. As an
example of these critiques, one participant in the #globaled chat shared that their school board
had cancelled a planned course on World Religions at the high school level.
In the chats studied, participants were able to come together with a group of self-identified
global educators to discuss not whether global education was a good idea, but how to put
global education into practice. Being a global educator may not be oppositional to all school
settings, but because of the limitations on teaching from a global perspective in some school
settings, teacher participation in these types of Twitter chats connects to previous research, in
which tweets and Twitter chats can be examples of Babha’s third space where
individuals can create oppositional, multifaceted identities . The ability to share resources and promote one’s own or
one’s recommended work, as well as the utilization of a Twitter handle and connection to other
Twitter users, all serve to promote and define a teacher’s professional identity in the digital age.
Within the chats, global aspects of power and equity were not a central topic of discussion.
However, in each discussion, participants brought up the legacies of imperialism or colonialism
and considered ways to teach about these legacies and power imbalances. In a community of
practice with other global educators, participants also discussed challenges to teaching with a
global lens and reflected on limitations to their own practices.
Conclusion
As demonstrated above, teacher exchanges within hosted Twitter chats focused on global
education exhibit multiple characteristics of high-quality professional learning. These include a
focus on content, active learning and collaboration, and teacher agency. However, the format
of the Twitter chat does not allow for other aspects of professional learning, including a clear
feedback cycle, sustained duration, the creation of a community of practice at a school, and a
hands-on approach .
Research in Social Sciences and Technology
Volume 5 Issue 1, 2020
Sturm, E. & Quaynor, L. A Window, Mirror, and Wall: How Educators
Use Twitter for Professional Learning
Digital exchanges and digital dialogue are becoming more prevalent in teachers’ informal
professional learning and promote participants’
sense of belonging within communities of educators with similar interests . The positive response received by participants through likes,
comments, and retweets reflects a sense of affirmation, showing the participants reflections of
themselves as members in the desired community. The comments and emotions about new
resources become windows into different classroom experiences and practices, broadening the
educators’ knowledge base and providing validation.
While multiple studies have focused on participants’ sense of belonging and the exchange of
resources within the timed Twitter chats, there is room for additional research on the feedback
cycle and on how the initial excitement and engagement with new resources translates into
actual transformative classroom practices. Research that follows teachers into their classrooms
after a chat to examine if transformation occurs would be of benefit to the educational
community. It is still unclear if professional learning through Twitter chats increases curricular
mirrors and windows , or if the absence of sustained duration and deeper feedback
cycles could serve as walls, where professional learning is left in the Twitter archive when the
chat ends.
Research in Social Sciences and Technology
Volume 5 Issue 1, 2020
Sturm, E. & Quaynor, L. A Window, Mirror, and Wall: How Educators
Use Twitter for Professional Learning
Appendix A
Child Codes, Parent Codes, and Themes
Parent Code
Child Codes
Theme 1: The host leads participants to
create community.
Parent codes: FC, N, SL
Theme 2: Prompted and unprompted,
teachers share resources and dialogue
about these resources.
Parent codes: SL, SR, D
Theme 3: Participant dialogue involves
networking.
Parent codes: D, N, SR
Forming Community (FC)
Affirmation
Agreement with other twitter user
How to engage
Parents don't
Personal information
Photo greeting
Professional information
Student limitations
Networking (N)
Announcing connection
Announcing participation
Promoting/sharing own professional work
Sharing group event
Sharing Resources (SR)
Sharing pedagogy suggestion
Sharing resource - theoretical
information and tech
Sharing teaching challenges
What we did
Dialogue (D)
information
Answering participant question
Asking participant for example
Disagreeing with other Twitter user?
I will try that!
Question to other participants
Structured Learning (SL)
Answering host content question (about
global ed.)
Question - content
Question from moderator
Research in Social Sciences and Technology
Volume 5 Issue 1, 2020
Sturm, E. & Quaynor, L. A Window, Mirror, and Wall: How Educators
Use Twitter for Professional Learning
Appendix B
Twitter Chat Questions
Global Perspectives in Social Studies
SSChat 1/2/16 hosted by @Caranowou
Welcome to #sschat! Introduce yourself, where you're from & something "global" about
Q1: What does teaching global perspectives in social studies mean to you? #sschat
Q2: What are obstacles to teaching with global perspectives? How can you overcome these
obstacles? #sschat
Q3: What are key issues/dimensions of a global perspective that students should learn? #sschat
Q4: What are methods to teach global perspectives to students who haven't been exposed to
much diversity? #sschat
Q5: What curriculum best lends itself to teaching from a global perspective? Why? #sschat
Q6: Share success stories of teaching from global perspective? What is an instance that didn’t
go so well? #sschat
Q7: Share some of your “go to” resources for teaching a global perspective? #sschat
Making Global/Local Connections for Students
Global Ed Chat 2/18/16 Hosted by @Singmaster
Welcome to #GlobalEdChat! Please introduce yourself and, in honor of National Drink Wine
Day, tell us your favorite beverage.
Q1: What are some issues that are relevant to both your local community as well as to the
global community? #globaledchat
Q2: What are some challenges for students in making connections between local and global
issues? #globaledchat
Q3: What are some current resources that can help teachers connect local issues to global
issues? #globaledchat
Q4: How can travel help bring to life local and global connections?
Q5: What are some strategies teachers can use to integrate their travel experiences into
student learning? #globaledchat
Q6: Do you have examples of interdisciplinary projects that make local/global connections?
#globaledchat
Q7: How can students take action on global issues in their local communities? #globaledchat
Q8: How does incorporating authentic issues, audiences, and actions enhance student learning?
#globaledchat
Research in Social Sciences and Technology
Volume 5 Issue 1, 2020
Sturm, E. & Quaynor, L. A Window, Mirror, and Wall: How Educators
Use Twitter for Professional Learning