Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2018 Conference, pages 338–343,
Melbourne, Australia, 12-14 July 2018. c⃝2018 Association for Computational Linguistics
Variational Cross-domain Natural Language Generation for Spoken
Dialogue Systems
Bo-Hsiang Tseng, Florian Kreyssig, Paweł Budzianowski,
I˜nigo Casanueva, Yen-Chen Wu, Stefan Ultes, Milica Gaˇsi´c
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
{bht26,flk24,pfb30,ic340,ycw30,su259,mg436}@cam.ac.uk
Cross-domain natural language generation
(NLG) is still a difﬁcult task within spoken
dialogue modelling. Given a semantic representation provided by the dialogue manager, the language generator should generate sentences that convey desired information. Traditional template-based generators can produce sentences with all necessary information, but these sentences are
not sufﬁciently diverse. With RNN-based
models, the diversity of the generated sentences can be high, however, in the process some information is lost.
work, we improve an RNN-based generator by considering latent information at
the sentence level during generation using
the conditional variational autoencoder architecture. We demonstrate that our model
outperforms the original RNN-based generator, while yielding highly diverse sentences. In addition, our model performs
better when the training data is limited.
Introduction
Conventional spoken dialogue systems (SDS) require a substantial amount of hand-crafted rules
to achieve good interaction with users. The large
amount of required engineering limits the scalability of these systems to settings with new or multiple domains. Recently, statistical approaches have
been studied that allow natural, efﬁcient and more
diverse interaction with users without depending
on pre-deﬁned rules .
Natural language generation (NLG) is an essential component of an SDS. Given a semantic representation (SR) consisting of a dialogue act and
a set of slot-value pairs, the generator should produce natural language containing the desired information.
Traditionally NLG was based on templates
 , which produce
grammatically-correct sentences that contain all
desired information. However, the lack of variation of these sentences made these systems seem
tedious and monotonic.
Trainable generators
 
can generate several sentences for the same SR,
but the dependence on pre-deﬁned operations limits their potential. Corpus-based approaches 
learn to generate natural language directly from
data without pre-deﬁned rules. However, they usually require alignment between the sentence and
the SR. Recently, Wen et al. proposed an
RNN-based approach, which outperformed previous methods on several metrics.
However, the
generated sentences often did not include all desired attributes.
variational
autoencoder
Welling, 2013) enabled for the ﬁrst time the generation of complicated, high-dimensional data such
as images.
The conditional variational autoencoder (CVAE) , ﬁrstly proposed
for image generation, has a similar structure to the
VAE with an additional dependency on a condition. Recently, the CVAE has been applied to dialogue systems using the previous dialogue turns as the condition. However, their output
was not required to contain speciﬁc information.
In this paper, we improve RNN-based generators by adapting the CVAE to the difﬁcult task
of cross-domain NLG. Due to the additional latent information encoded by the CVAE, our model
outperformed the SCLSTM at conveying all information. Furthermore, our model reaches better results when the training data is limited.
Model Description
Variational Autoencoder
The VAE is a generative latent variable model. It
uses a neural network (NN) to generate ˆx from a
latent variable z, which is sampled from the prior
pθ(z). The VAE is trained such that ˆx is a sample of the distribution pD(x) from which the training data was collected. Generative latent variable
models have the form pθ(x) =
z pθ(x|z)pθ(z)dz.
In a VAE an NN, called the decoder, models
pθ(x|z) and would ideally be trained to maximize
the expectation of the above integral E [pθ(x)].
Since this is intractable, the VAE uses another NN,
called the encoder, to model qφ(z|x) which should
approximate the posterior pθ(z|x). The NNs in the
VAE are trained to maximise the variational lower
bound (VLB) to log pθ(x), which is given by:
LV AE(θ, φ; x) = −KL(qφ(z|x)||pθ(z))
+Eqφ(z|x)[log pθ(x|z)]
The ﬁrst term is the KL-divergence between the
approximated posterior and the prior, which encourages similarity between the two distributions.
The second term is the likelihood of the data given
samples from the approximated posterior.
CVAE has a similar structure, but the prior is modelled by another NN, called the prior network. The
prior network is conditioned on c. The new objective function can now be written as:
LCV AE(θ, φ; x, c) = −KL(qφ(z|x, c)||pθ(z|c))
+ Eqφ(z|x,c)[log pθ(x|z, c)]
When generating data, the encoder is not used and
z is sampled from pθ(z|c).
Semantically Conditioned VAE
The structure of our model is depicted in Fig. 1,
which, conditioned on an SR, generates the system’s word-level response x. An SR consists of
three components: the domain, a dialogue act and
a set of slot-value pairs. Slots are attributes required to appear in x (e.g. a hotel’s area). A slot
can have a value. Then the two are called a slotvalue pair (e.g. area=north). x is delexicalised,
which means that slot values are replaced by corresponding slot tokens.
The condition c of our
model is the SR represented as two 1-hot vectors
for the domain and the dialogue act as well as a
binary vector for the slots.
Figure 1: Semantically Conditioned Variational
Autoencoder with a semantic representation (SR)
as the condition. x is the system response with
words w1:N. xD, xA and xS are labels for the domain, the dialogue act (DA) and the slots of x.
During training, x is ﬁrst passed through
a single layer bi-directional LSTM, the output
of which is concatenated with c and passed
to the recognition network.
The recognition
network parametrises a Gaussian distribution
N(µpost, σpost) which is the posterior. The prior
network only has c as its input and parametrises
a Gaussian distribution N(µprior, σprior) which is
the prior. Both networks are fully-connected (FC)
NNs with one and two layers respectively. During
training, z is sampled from the posterior. When
the model is used for generation, z is sampled
from the prior. The decoder is an SCLSTM using z as its initial hidden state and
initial cell vector. The ﬁrst input to the SCLSTM is
a start-of-sentence (sos) token and the model generates words until it outputs an end-of-sentence
(eos) token.
Optimization
When the decoder in the CVAE is powerful on its
own, it tends to ignore the latent variable z since
the encoder fails to encode enough information
into z. Regularization methods can be introduced
in order to push the encoder towards learning a
good representation of the latent variable z. Since
the KL-component of the VLB does not contribute
towards learning a meaningful z, increasing the
weight of it gradually from 0 to 1 during training
helps to encode a better representation in z. This
method is termed KL-annealing . In addition, inspired by ,
we introduce a regularization method using another NN which is trained to use z to recover the
condition c. The NN is split into three separate
FC NNs of one layer each, which independently
recover the domain, dialogue-act and slots components of c. The objective of our model can be
written as:
LSCV AE(θ, φ; x, c) = LCV AE(θ, φ; x, c)
+ Eqφ(z|x,c)[log p(xD|z) + log p(xA|z)+
where xD is the domain label, xA is the dialogue
act label and xSi are the slot labels with |S| slots
in the SR. In the proposed model, the CVAE learns
to encode information about both the sentence and
the SR into z. Using z as its initial state, the decoder is better at generating sentences with desired
attributes. In section 4.1 a visualization of the latent space demonstrates that a semantically meaningful representation for z was learned.
Dataset and Setup
The proposed model is used for an SDS that provides information about restaurants, hotels, televisions and laptops. It is trained on a dataset , which consists of sentences with
corresponding semantic representations. Table 1
shows statistics about the corpus which was split
into a training, validation and testing set according
to a 3:1:1 split. The dataset contains 14 different
system dialogue acts. The television and laptop
domains are much more complex than other domains. There are around 7k and 13k different SRs
possible for the TV and the laptop domain respectively. For the restaurant and hotel domains only
248 and 164 unique SRs are possible. This imbalance makes the NLG task more difﬁcult.
The generators were implemented using the Py-
Torch Library . The size of
decoder SCLSTM and thus of the latent variable
was set to 128. KL-annealing was used, with the
weight of the KL-loss reaching 1 after 5k minibatch updates. The slot error rate (ERR), used in
 , is the
metric that measures the model’s ability to convey the desired information. ERR is deﬁned as:
(p + q)/N, where N is the number of slots in the
SR, p and q are the number of missing and redundant slots in the generated sentence. The BLEU-4
metric and perplexity (PPL) are also reported. The
baseline SCLSTM is optimized, which has shown
to outperform template-based methods and trainable generators . NLG often
Figure 2: 2D-projection of z for each data point in
the test set, with two different colouring-schemes.
uses the over-generation and reranking paradigm
 . The SCVAE can generate multiple sentences by sampling multiple z,
while the SCLSTM has to sample different words
from the output distribution.In our experiments ten
sentences are generated per SR. Table 4 in the appendix shows one SR in each domain with ﬁve illustrative sentences generated by our model.
Experimental Results
Visualization of Latent Variable z
2D-projections of z for each data point in the test
set are shown in Fig. 2, by using PCA for dimensionality reduction.
In Fig. 2a, data points
of the restaurant, hotel, TV and laptop domain
are marked as blue, green, red and yellow respectively. As can be seen, data points from the laptop
domain are contained within four distinct clusters.
In addition, there is a large overlap of the TV and
laptop domains, which is not surprising as they
share all dialogue acts (DAs). Similarly, there is
overlap of the restaurant and hotel domains. In
Fig. 2b, the eight most frequent DAs are colorcoded. recommend, depicted as green, has a similar distribution to the laptop domain in Fig. 2a,
since recommend happens mostly in the laptop
domain. This suggests that our model learns to
map similar SRs into close regions within the latent space. Therefore, z contains meaningful information in regards to the domain, DAs and slots.
Empirical Comparison
Cross-domain Training
Table 2 shows the comparison between SCVAE
and SCLSTM. Both are trained on the full crossdomain dataset, and tested on the four domains individually. The SCVAE outperforms the SCLSTM
on all metrics. For the highly complex TV and
laptop domains, the SCVAE leads to dramatic improvements in ERR. This shows that the addi-
Table 1: The statistics of the cross-domain dataset
Restaurant
Television
# of examples
3114/1039/1039
3223/1075/1075
4221/1407/1407
7944/2649/2649
dialogue acts
reqmore, goodbye, select, conﬁrm, request,
inform, inform only, inform count, inform no match
compare, recommend, inform all,
suggest, inform no info, 9 acts as left
shared slots
name, type, area, near, price,
phone, address, postcode, pricerange
name, type, price,
family, pricerange,
speciﬁc slots
goodformeal,
kids-allowed
hasinternet,
acceptscards,
dogs-allowed
screensizerange, ecorating,
hdmiport, hasusbport, audio,
accessories, color, screensize,
resolution, powerconsumption
isforbusinesscomputing.
warranty, battery, design,
batteryrating, weightrange,
utility, platform, driverange,
dimension, memory, processor
Comparison between SCVAE and
SCLSTM. Both are trained with full dataset and
tested on individual domains
Restaurant
tional sentence level conditioning through z helps
to convey all desired attributes.
Limited Training Data
Fig. 3 shows BLEU and ERR results when the SC-
VAE and SCLSTM are trained on varying amounts
of data. The SCVAE has a lower ERR than the
SCLSTM across the varying amounts of training
data. For very slow amounts of data the SCVAE
outperforms the SCLSTM even more. In addition,
our model consistently achieves better results on
the BLEU metric.
K-Shot Learning
For the K-shot learning experiments, we trained
the model using all training examples from three
domains and only 300 examples from the target
Comparison between SCVAE and
SCLSTM with limited training data.
Comparison between SCVAE and
SCLSTM in K-shot learning
Restaurant
domain1. The target domain is the domain we test
on. As seen from Table 3, the SCVAE outperforms
the SCLSTM in all domains except hotel. This
might be because the hotel domain is the simplest
and the model does not need to rely on the knowledge from other domains. The SCVAE strongly
outperforms the SCLSTM for the complex TV and
laptop domains where the number of distinct SRs
is large. This suggests that the SCVAE is better at
transferring knowledge between domains.
Conclusion
In this paper, we propose a semantically conditioned variational autoencoder (SCVAE) for natural language generation. The SCVAE encodes information about both the semantic representation
and the sentence into a latent variable z. Due to a
newly proposed regularization method, the latent
variable z contains semantically meaningful information. Therefore, conditioning on z leads to a
strong improvement in generating sentences with
all desired attributes. In an extensive comparison
the SCVAE outperforms the SCLSTM on a range
of metrics when training on different sizes of data
and for K-short learning. Especially, when testing
the ability to convey all desired information within
complex domains, the SCVAE shows signiﬁcantly
better results.
1600 examples were used for laptop as target domain.
Acknowledgments
Bo-Hsiang Tseng is supported by Cambridge
Trust and the Ministry of Education, Taiwan. This
research was partly funded by the EPSRC grant
EP/M018946/1 Open Domain Statistical Spoken
Dialogue Systems. Florian Kreyssig is supported
by the Studienstiftung des Deutschen Volkes.
Paweł Budzianowski is supported by the EPSRC
and Toshiba Research Europe Ltd.