Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2018, pages 72–78
New Orleans, Louisiana, June 1 - 6, 2018. c⃝2018 Association for Computational Linguistics
RankME: Reliable Human Ratings for Natural Language Generation
Jekaterina Novikova, Ondˇrej Duˇsek and Verena Rieser
Interaction Lab
Heriot-Watt University
Edinburgh, UK
j.novikova, o.dusek, 
Human evaluation for natural language generation (NLG) often suffers from inconsistent user ratings.
While previous research
tends to attribute this problem to individual user preferences, we show that the quality of human judgements can also be improved by experimental design.
We present
a novel rank-based magnitude estimation
method (RankME), which combines the use
of continuous scales and relative assessments.
We show that RankME signiﬁcantly improves
the reliability and consistency of human ratings compared to traditional evaluation methods. In addition, we show that it is possible
to evaluate NLG systems according to multiple, distinct criteria, which is important for
error analysis.
Finally, we demonstrate that
RankME, in combination with Bayesian estimation of system quality, is a cost-effective alternative for ranking multiple NLG systems.
Introduction
Human judgement is the primary evaluation criterion for language generation tasks . However, limited effort has
been made to improve the reliability of these subjective ratings . In this
research, we systematically compare and analyse a
wide range of alternative experimental designs for
eliciting intrinsic user judgements for the task of
comparing multiple systems. We draw upon previous studies in language generation, e.g. ,
as well as in the related ﬁeld of machine translation
(MT), e.g. . In particular,
we investigate the following challenges:
Distinct criteria: Traditionally, NLG outputs are
evaluated according to different criteria, such as
naturalness and informativeness . Naturalness, also known as ﬂuency or
readability, targets the linguistic competence of the
text. Informativeness, otherwise known as accuracy
or adequacy, targets the relevance and correctness
of the output relative to the input speciﬁcation. Ideally, we want to measure outputs of NLG systems
with respect to these distinct criteria, especially for
error analysis. For instance, one system may produce syntactically ﬂuent output but misses important information, while another system, although
being less ﬂuent, may generate output that covers
the meaning perfectly. Nevertheless, human judges
often fail to distinguish between these different aspects, which results in highly correlated scores, e.g.
 . This is one of the reasons
why some more recent research adds a general,
overall quality criterion ,
or even uses only that . In
the following, we show that discriminative ratings
for different aspects can still be obtained, using
distinctive task design.
Consistency: Previous research has identiﬁed a
high degree of inconsistency in human judgements
of NLG outputs, where ratings often differ signiﬁcantly (p < 0.001) for the same utterance . While this might be attributed to
individual preferences, e.g. , we also show that consistency (as measured by inter-annotator agreement)
can be improved by different experimental setups,
e.g. the use of continuous scales instead of discrete
ones. Inconsistent user ratings are problematic in
many ways, e.g. when developing metrics for automatic evaluation .
Relative vs. absolute assessment. Intrinsic human evaluation methods are typically designed to
assess the quality of a system. However, they are
frequently used to compare the quality of different
NLG systems, which is not necessarily appropriate.
In the following, we show that relative assessment
methods produce more consistent and more discriminative human ratings than direct assessment
In order to investigate these challenges, we compare several state-of-the-art NLG systems, which
are evaluated by human crowd workers using a
range of evaluation setups.
We show that our
newly introduced method, called rank-based magnitude estimation (RankME), outperforms traditional evaluation methods. It combines advances
suggested by previous research, such as continuous scales , magnitude estimation and relative
assessment .
code and data, as well as a more detailed description of the study setup are publicly available at:
 
Experimental Setup
We were able to obtain outputs of 3 systems from
the recent E2E NLG challenge :1 the Shefﬁeld NLP system and the Slug2Slug system , as well as the outputs of the baseline TGen
system . We chose these
systems in order to assess whether our methods can
discriminate between outputs of different quality:
Automatic metric scores, including BLEU, ME-
TEOR, etc., indicate that the Slug2Slug and TGen
systems show similar performance while Shefﬁeld’s
is further apart.1
All three systems are based on the sequenceto-sequence (seq2seq) architecture with attention
 . Shefﬁeld NLP and TGen
both use this basic architecture with LSTM recurrent cells and
a beam search, TGen further adds a reranker to penalize semantically invalid outputs. Slug2Slug is
an ensemble of three seq2seq models with LSTM
recurrent decoders. Two of them use LSTM recurrent encoders and one uses a convolutional encoder.
A reranker checking for semantic validity selects
among the outputs of all three models.
We use the ﬁrst one hundred outputs for each
system, and we collect human ratings from three
independent crowd workers for each output using
the CrowdFlower platform. We use three different methods to collect human evaluation data: 6point Likert scales, plain magnitude estimation
1 
InteractionLab/E2E
Table 1: Three methods used to collect human evaluation data. Here, DA = direct assessment, RR =
relative ranking, DS = discrete scale, CS = continuous scale.
(plain ME), and rank-based magnitude estimation (RankME). In a magnitude estimation (ME)
task , subjects provide a relative
rating of an experimental sentence to a reference
sentence, which is associated with a pre-set/ﬁxed
number. If the target sentence appears twice as
good as the reference sentence, for instance, subjects are to multiply the reference score by two;
if it appears half as good, they should divide it in
half, etc. Note that ME implies the use of continuous scales, i.e. rating scales without numerical
labels, similar to the visual analogue scales used by
Belz and Kow or direct assessment scales
of , however, without given end-points. Siddharthan and
Katsos have previously used ME for evaluating readability of automatically generated texts.
RankME extends this idea by asking subjects to
provide a relative ranking of all target sentences.
Table 1 provides a summary of methods and scales,
and indicates whether relative ranking or direct
assessment was used.
Judgements of Multiple Criteria
In our experiments, we collect ratings on the following criteria:
• Informativeness (= adequacy): Does the utterance provide all the useful information from the
meaning representation?
• Naturalness (= ﬂuency): Could the utterance
have been produced by a native speaker?
• Quality: How do you judge the overall quality
of the utterance in terms of its grammatical correctness, ﬂuency, adequacy and other important
In order to investigate whether judgements of
these criteria are correlated, we compare two experimental setups: In Setup 1, crowd workers are
shown the input meaning representation (MR) and
the corresponding output of one of the NLG systems and are asked to evaluate the output with respect to all three aspects in one task. In Setup 2,
these aspects are assessed separately, in individual
tasks. Furthermore, when crowd workers are asked
to assess naturalness, the MR is not shown to them
since it is not relevant for the task. Both setups
utilise all three data collection methods – Likert
scales, plain ME and RankME.
The results in Table 2 show that scores are highly
correlated for Setup 1. This is in line with previous research in MT . Separate collection (Setup 2), however, decreases correlation between naturalness and
quality, as well as naturalness and informativeness
to very low levels, especially when using ME methods. Nevertheless, informativeness and quality are
still highly correlated. We assume that this is due
to the fact that raters see the MR in both cases.
To obtain more insight into informativeness ratings, we asked crowd workers to further distinguish
informativeness in terms of added and missed information with respect to the original MR. Crowd
workers were asked to select a checkbox for added
information if the output contained information not
present in the given MR, or a checkbox for missed
information if the output missed some information
from the MR. The results of Chi-squared test show
that distributions of missed and added information
are signiﬁcantly different (p < 0.01), i.e. systems
add or delete information at different rates. Again,
this information is valuable for error analysis. In
addition, results in Table 4 show that assessing
the amount of missed information indeed produces
a different overall system ranking to added information. As such, it is worth considering missed
information as a separate criterion for evaluation.
This can also be approximated automatically, as
demonstrated by Wiseman et al. .
Consistency and Use of Scales
To assess consistency in human ratings, we calculate the intra-class correlation coefﬁcient (ICC),
which measures inter-observer reliability for more
than two raters . In our
experiments, we compare discrete Likert scales
with continuous scales implemented via ME with
respect to the resulting reliability of collected human ratings. The results in Table 3 show that the
use of ME signiﬁcantly increases ICC levels for
naturalness and quality. This effect is especially
pronounced for Setup 2 where ratings are collected
separately. Both plain ME and RankME methods show a signiﬁcant increase in ICC, with the
RankME method showing the highest ICC results.
This difference is most apparent for naturalness,
where RankME shows an ICC of 0.42 compared to
plain ME’s 0.27. For informativeness, Likert scales
already provide satisfactory agreement.
In previous research, discrete, ordinal Likert
scales are the dominant method of human evaluation for NLG, although they may produce results
where statistical signiﬁcance is overestimated . Recent studies show that continuous scales allow subjects to give more nuanced
judgements . Moreover, raters were
found to strongly prefer continuous scales over discrete ones . In addition to
this previous work, our results also show that continuous scales signiﬁcantly improve reliability of
human ratings when implemented via ME.
Ranking vs Direct Assessment
Most data collection methods for evaluation, including Likert and plain ME, are designed to directly assess the quality of a system. However,
these methods are almost always used to compare
multiple systems relative to each other. Recently,
the NLP evaluation literature has started to address
this issue, mostly using binary comparisons, for
example between the outputs of two MT systems
 . In our experiments, Likert and plain ME are direct assessment
(DA) methods, while RankME is a relative ranking
(RR)-based method (see also Table 1). In order to
directly compare DA and RR, we generated overall
system rankings based on our different methods, using pairwise bootstrap test at 95% conﬁdence level
 to establish statistically signiﬁcant
differences.
The results in Table 4 show that both plain ME
and RankME methods produce similar rankings
of NLG systems, which is in line with previous research in MT . It is also apparent
that ME methods, by using a continuous scale, provide more distinctive overall rankings than Likert
scales. For naturalness scores, no method results in
clear system ratings, which possibly reﬂects in the
low ICC of this criterion (cf. Table 3). RankME
is the only method to provide a clear ranking with
respect to overall utterance quality. However, its
ranking of informativeness is less clear than that of
plain ME, which might be due to the different results for missed and added information (see Sec. 4).
In addition, the results in Table 3 show that RR, in
combination with Setup 2, results in more consistent ratings than DA.
naturalness
informativeness
naturalness
Table 2: Spearman correlation between ratings of naturalness and quality, collected using two different
setups and three data collection methods – Likert, plain ME and RankME. Here, “*” denotes p < 0.05.
naturalness
informativeness
naturalness
informativeness
naturalness
informativeness
Table 3: ICC scores for human ratings of naturalness, informativeness and quality. “*” denotes
Rating criterion & method
1. Slug2Slug
3. Shefﬁeld NLP
Plain ME informativeness
RankME quality
TrueSkill quality
added information
2. Slug2Slug
3. Shefﬁeld NLP
missing information
1.–2. Slug2Slug
3. Shefﬁeld NLP
Plain ME quality
RankME informativeness
TrueSkill informativeness
Likert quality
Likert informativeness
1.–2. Slug2Slug
+ Shefﬁeld NLP
Likert naturalness
1.–3. Slug2Slug
+ Shefﬁeld NLP
Plain ME naturalness
RankME naturalness
TrueSkill naturalness
Table 4: Results of system ranking using different
data collection methods with Setup 2 (different
ranks are statistically signiﬁcant with p < 0.05).
Relative comparisons of many outputs
While there are clear advantages to relative rankbased assessment, the amount of data needed for
this approach grows quadratically with the number of systems to compare, which is problematic
with larger numbers of systems, e.g. in a shared
task challenge. Data-efﬁcient ranking algorithms,
such as TrueSkill , are therefore applied by recent MT evaluation studies to produce
overall system rankings based on a sample of binary comparisons. However, TrueSkill has not
previously been used for evaluating NLG systems.
TrueSkill produces system rankings by gradually
updating a Bayesian estimate of each system’s capability according to the “surprisal” of pairwise
comparisons of individual system outputs. This
way, fewer direct comparisons between systems
are needed to establish their overall ranking. We
computed system rankings using TrueSkill over
comparisons collected via RankME and were able
to show that it produces exactly the same system
rankings for all three criteria as using RankME directly (see Table 4), despite the fact that the comparisons are only used in a “win-loss-tie” fashion. This
shows that RankME can be used with TrueSkill to
produce consistent rankings of a larger number of
Conclusion and Discussion
In this paper, we demonstrate that the experimental
design has a signiﬁcant impact on the reliability as
well as the outcomes of human evaluation studies
for natural language generation. We ﬁrst show that
correlation effects between different evaluation criteria can be minimised by eliciting them separately.
Furthermore, we introduce RankME, which combines relative rankings and magnitude estimation
(with continuous scales), and demonstrate that this
method results in better agreement amongst raters
and more discriminative results. Finally, our results
suggest that TrueSkill is a cost-effective alternative
for producing overall relative rankings of multiple
systems. This framework has the potential to not
only signiﬁcantly inﬂuence how NLG evaluation
studies are run, but also produce more reliable data
for further processing, e.g. for developing more
accurate automatic evaluation metrics, which we
are currently lacking, e.g. .
In current work, we test RankME with a wider
range of systems (under submission). We also plan
to investigate how this method transfers to related
tasks, such as evaluating open-domain dialogue
responses, e.g. . In addition,
we aim to investigate additional NLG evaluation
methods, such as extrinsic task contributions, e.g.
 .
Acknowledgements
This research received funding from the EPSRC
projects DILiGENt (EP/M005429/1) and MaDrIgAL (EP/N017536/1). The Titan Xp used for this
research was donated by the NVIDIA Corporation.