Journal of Ethnic and Cultural Studies Copyright 2015
2015, Vol. 2, No. 2, 47-57
ISSN: 2149-1291
Teachers’ Perceptions on Culturally Responsiveness in Education
Kasim Karatas1, Behcet Oral
Dicle University, Diyarbakir, Turkey
The aim of this research is to examine the views of teachers, who take
postgraduate education, regarding culturally responsive education. The research
was carried out with 25 teachers who are from various branches and take
postgraduate education in a big university in South-Eastern Anatolia Region of
Turkey in spring semester of 2014-2015. The pattern of the research is case
study of qualitative patterns. The views of teachers joined the research were
taken via semi-structured open-ended questionary form. According to the
findings of the research, they emphasize that the education process should be
maintained considering the cultural values. Besides, they think that will serve to
development of cognitive and affective characteristics of the individual and
social peace and integration. Therefore they advise to develop teaching
programs that quicken cultural diversity. Lastly, the most of teachers utter that
they don’t have enough self-sufficiency to give culturally responsive education.
It is thought the reason is that teachers can’t expose their potential due to the
training teacher system and teaching programs are deprived of providing that
kind of education. Consequently, the education system, with its all components,
should be such as to provide needs of people from various cultures.
Key Words: Teachers, Culturally responsiveness, Culturally responsive teaching
Introduction
Education is a socio-cultural process. The social and cultural textures that individual has grown
and lived in are important for development of the individual. According to Vygotsky ,
socio-cultural ground is important for cognitive development of the individual who is in contact with
other members of society and for his behaviors become meaningful . In the same way,
Bandura tells that individual’s socio-cultural viewpoint is important for teaching, because it is
the predictor of individual’s knowledge, skills and tendencies. According to Durkheim, each social
institution is a mold, a riverbed; children and young people are formed in it and slip by through it
 . Within this period, individuals develop their world-view, manners and reactions in the
shadow of the culture they live in. Personal cultural identity is a pool that consists of belief, values and
manners. The most efficient situation to fill this pool is the individual’s micro culture that he was born
and lives in. Micro cultural groups are also influenced by macro and universal cultures. In this sense,
the behaviors and manners of immediate environment figures are the most efficient on individuals’
learnings. By considering this effect and supporting it by caring its cultural substructure is seen as
critical factor that leads to the success from learning period .
Schools are like a garden which is the home of the flowers which have different features, colors
and sizes. School environment widens and gets rich with the students’ cultural ground and experience.
In this sense, schools are natural multicultural environments and the education programs performed at
schools should be built and configured as a strengthening tie such as to accept different cultures of the
nation and externalize its cultural characteristics . Students learn with a higher
motivation when the education programs externalize their culture, life and viewpoints. Therefore
education programs based on dominant culture should be re-designed in a multicultural way
considering different cultures . In the direction of this
necessity the principles and aims of the multicultural education serve to provide cultural, ethnical and
linguistic alternates for students; decreasing the separation they live due to their racial, physical and
cultural characteristics; improving students’ skills of knowledge, sensitivity and getting into the act to
help them for development of a more democratic and more fair society; this situations will generally
serve to consider cultural differences and values. Multicultural education argues that having different
cultures is abundance, richens a nation, increases solution methods for the individual and social
problems; it argues also that all individuals from any culture should have equal education opportunities
 . It is hoped that teachers, who are aforesaid education practitioners, manage learningteaching period by considering students’ cultural differences and values in accordance with this
1 Correspondence author’s email: 
Kasim Karatas, Behcet Oral
situation. Because it is important to provide stimulants needed in the process of obtaining information
by student in the context of social environment that student belongs to and cultural values in terms of
making the fact that will be learned significant. So teacher should know the social environment that
student came from and social relations and cultural ground well. Besides, he should also have
knowledge about topics as social forces and their effecting form, social development, social roles etc.
which effect education .
There are many factors on learners’ performance increase. One of the most important factors is
culture-based pedagogy or culturally responsiveness. According to Gay , culturally responsive
teaching is an endeavor to make learning activities more relevant with students and more effective for
them considering cultural knowledge, past experience, reference frame and performance styles of
students who are ethnically diverse. Also by means of strengthening and supportive effect of culturally
responsive teaching, students become much better and more successful individuals. As culturally
responsive teaching strategies, Villegas and Lucas suggest a) building a classroom atmosphere
that will encourage students make new learning significant although memorization b) providing
opportunities for students to search subjects they are interested in c) making up a platform in the
classroom d) presenting new information with examples regarding students’ lives, giving life examples
from students’ culture e) incorporating people from students’ lives into the learning process with the
purpose of building a bridge between students’ new learning and their existent experiences. According
to Parekh , the education system based on one culture has a tendency to look from the frame of
its own-culture and exclude everything out of this culture. This situation leads students not to develop
critical thinking and not to be respectful for diversities. In this sense, it is seen important that culturally
responsive education concept should have a place in all dimensions and periods of education system
considering the possibility that learners who have diverse cultures or are part of minorities can face
negativities during education period.
There are many points should be paid attention at the schools that have cultural diversities. If
these points are paid attention, it can help for social cohesion and equality of opportunities in the
classrooms and schools that have racial and ethnical diversities. If culturally responsive education is
adopted at schools that have cultural diversities; the students’ motivation will be provided and their
devotion to school will be strengthened, they will get high academic standards, classroom interaction
will be eased as the representatives of diverse cultures . People who learn in culturally responsive education environment join learning
process easily, can take risk, aren’t afraid of making mistake because of they feel themselves safe and
worthy . Slavin emphasizes that teachers should
be respectful to the individuals’ differences and emphasize their diversities while they arrange
classroom activities in the classrooms have cultural diversities, they should provide teaching conditions
based on cooperation, they shouldn’t allow jokes and teasing insult racial and ethnic characteristics,
they should design the classroom with wallpapers, bulletin panels, posters, works and other materials
considering cultural diversities. According to Villegas and Lucas , it is necessary to incorporate
students into configuring information process with practices of culturally responsive teaching, to
believe personal and cultural wealth, to help them to examine teaching program from various
perspectives, to use various evaluation methods and to be attentive for class culture includes all
Teachers have an important place during education process from start to the end. The interest of
teachers show their students and the interaction size between them effect many processes from
adapting learning process to academic successes. In this process, teachers should be sensitive to
students’ cultural values and direct education process by this awareness and sensitivity. Because just
knowing students is not enough; at the same time teachers should know how he will share the
knowledge with his students. It is necessary to incorporate students into configuring information
process with practices of culturally responsive teaching, to believe personal and cultural wealth, to help
them to examine teaching program from various perspectives, to use various evaluation methods and to
be attentive for class culture includes all students . If teachers adopt a
culturally responsive education and make up a learning environment accordingly this education, each
children’s cultural integration will be provided while learners’ success increases . According to Allen and Butler , the participation and performance of learners
increase when their cultural experiences and contextual learning conditions are coordinated. According
to this, it is necessary to actualize culturally responsive education process to provide the adequacy
required and expected from student.
Teachers should build a bridge between different cultures knowing cultural junction points of
students who are carrier of different cultures in the classroom and being aware of disagreements and
Journal of Ethnic and Cultural Studies, 2015, Vol.2, No.2
tension points. In this regard, teachers’ views related to different cultures and development of their
culturally responsiveness are important. Considering the education system whole, not only teacher, it is
also important to prepare education programs and learning-teaching process in the frame of the
principles of culturally responsive education. Considering this necessity and importance, the teachers’
views about culturally responsive education and whether existent education system configurations are
convenient for culturally responsive education. In the light of this information, it will be evaluated how
much Turkey education system configuration is sensitive about culturally responsive education. Also it
is thought it will be useful for literature studies made about culturally responsive education.
In this context, the purpose of the research is to examine the views of teachers about culturally
responsive education. Within the frame of this general purpose was sought for the questions below:
1. What are the probable positive and negative conditions if culturally responsive education comes
2. How are existent education programs in Turkey evaluated in terms of sensitivity to cultural
diversities?
3. What can be done to make learning and teaching process effective in a class that there are
different students as cultural?
4. What are teachers’ views about their self-sufficiency when they teach considering diversities of
the students who have diverse cultures?
Methodology
Research Design
In this research case study of qualitative research designs was used. The essential point in case
study is to determine a special condition and offer a mentality related to the condition .
Bogdan and Biklen describe the case study as examining an occasion, a subject or a specific
event in details. Stake classifies case studies as internal, instrumental and multi case studies
according to their group size and analysis purpose. In the instrumental case study, researchers focus on
a subject or question and then choose a limited case to sample this subject. According to Merram
 in the instrumental case studies, the purpose is not to understand an abstract structure or a
general event; the purpose is to build an idea. In this research, qualitative instrumental case study was
used because of trying to offer a mentality within the frame of teachers’, who are from various
branches in a limited group, ideas and views related to culturally responsive education.
Participants
Criterion sampling method, which is one of the purposeful sampling methods, was used in the
research; in this method, researchers choose participants according to specific criterions .
When participant are chosen, a prepared criterion list can be used as well as researchers’ criterions can
also be used . The acceptable criterion in this research is that participants
should actively be teacher and take postgraduate education. In this sense, teachers, who work in a
province of South Eastern Anatolia Region and take postgraduate education (with thesis or without
thesis) in a large university, participated. The reason of choosing this research group is the conjecture
that they have enough knowledge as institutional and agreeable with phenomenon researched. 11
female and 14 male in total 25 teachers participated research, and their age range is 24-36. The age
range of female teachers is 25-35 and male teachers’ is 24-36. According to branches, the distribution
is as that: 14 Primary School Teaching, 3 English Teaching, 2 Technology and Design Teaching, 2
Mathematics Teaching, 1 Social Sciences Teaching, 1 Turkish Teaching, 1 Physical Education
Teaching and 1 Private Education Teaching.
Collecting Data
The research was made in Spring Semester of 2014-2015. To collect data in the research, semistructured interview form that consists of open-ended questions was used. Open-ended answers enable
us to understand the world with viewpoints of the answerers. The purpose of collecting the answers
given to the open-ended questions is to provide opportunity for researcher to catch and understand
other people’s viewpoints with the limitations and foresights of predetermined question categorizes
 . Semi-structured interview form consists of four questions. To determine the face
validity of the semi-structured interview form, first a peer review was made, and then the form was
broached to three experts and it was made ready by revising to collect data after taking participant
confirmation. Data were collected in classrooms. Open-ended questions were distributed to volunteers,
who wanted to join research, after telling the purpose of the research. Participants answered openended questions in 15-20 minutes. Within the frame of research ethic, their names weren’t written,
participant teachers were named with the codes P1, P2, P3, P4, P5.
Kasim Karatas, Behcet Oral
Data Analysis
With the purpose of learning the views of teachers regarding culturally responsive education,
descriptive analysis technique of qualitative analysis techniques was used to analyze data collected by
open-ended survey . Descriptive analysis is to present data keeping to the
original format of data collected and quoting directly from participants’ words . In
descriptive analysis the purpose is presenting the obtained findings to the reader in a manner regulated
and interpreted. For this purpose, firstly the data obtained from teachers were described systematically
and clearly and then they were coded. Obtained data, after the allocation of data into significant pieces
and conversion into data units (sentences), were organized as draft categories and themes to understand
conceptual structure of each part. Thereafter, findings were presented with all positive-negative sides
quoting from teachers’ views. Only one of the same views was tried to write not to repeat in the
findings section.
The Limitations of the Study
In this research, which was made using qualitative research approach, there could be some
limitations that can affect validity and reliability. One of these limitations is that data were collected
just using open-ended question form because of participants didn’t have time to talk face to face. The
number of the participants matching criteria was limited because of that they were chosen from only
one university by criterion sampling method. This situation limits generalizability of the research
Findings were categorized in five themes in the light of data were collected from teachers.
Themes are: (1) Contribution to cognitive and affective development (2) Contribution to social peace
and tolerance (3) The sensitivity of programs to cultural differences (4) The reflection of cultural
diversity (5) The adequacy of culturally responsive teacher. Research findings were presented below
within the frame of themes.
Theme 1: Contribution to Cognitive and Affective Development
Teachers utter that the quality of educational lives offered to the individual will increase if
culturally responsive education comes true. Especially teachers emphasize that embodying of
learnings, which is important to facilitate the learning process, will provide learnings to be permanent.
The statement of the teacher coded P12, who has the opinion in question, is as follows:
P12: Concrete lives always facilitate learning and make it permanent.
Culturally responsive education provides that Concrete life.
Teachers utter that culturally responsive education will bring motivation for school and devotion
to school because of that the preparedness of learners is considered in this education. The statement of
the teacher coded P14, who has the opinion in question, is as follows:
P14: It will absolutely bring positive results. Students will prepare for learning
in a way that their prelearning program is completed. Hereby, their motivation
will increase. Success level will increase… Learning won’t abstractly stay in the
mind of the student; it will stay much more concretely.
Teachers utter that performing culturally responsive education with all students is important for
development of self-reliance and affective sides of the individuals as getting pleasure of the learning
process. The statement of the teacher coded P21, who has the opinion in question, is as follows:
P21: Culturally responsive education seems a positive approach in terms of it
talks back to all students. Hereby in classroom, each student will find something
from him and will be able to say I am also here, he won’t fall into contempt and
won’t be humiliated by his friends.
Culturally responsive education serves to development of cognitive and affective structures
necessary for learners in learning-teaching process considering teachers’ views.
Journal of Ethnic and Cultural Studies, 2015, Vol.2, No.2
Theme 2: Contribution to Social Peace and Tolerance
Teachers utter that culturally responsive teaching will serve to provide social peace and make
individuals more tolerant. They say that such an education is important in terms of removing possible
prejudices of the learner about other cultures and provision social integration. The statement of the
teacher coded P25, who has the opinion in question, is as follows:
P25: In this situation, the mutual prejudices of the students from different
cultures will decrease; also this will decrease racism and strengthen social
integration.
Some teachers utter that learners’ citizenship consciousness will get strong because of that
learners’ cultures and values are shown respect and they aren’t seen as second class citizens. The
statement of the teacher coded P22, who has the opinion in question, is as follows:
P22: Such an education will bring the thought that he is a part of the society
and will strengthen citizenship consciousness.
The view of P3 coded teacher has similar opinions is as follows:
P3: Culturally responsive education will bring behaviors such that tolerance,
sensibility, self-knowledge, self-reliance, different viewpoint, multi-dimensioned
thinking. The separation and conflict in society will decrease. People will try to
recognize and understand each other in unity and live in peace. This kind of
education is firm steps to see diversity as richness.
In the context of this theme, culturally responsive education is an important component for
development and expanse of love and tolerance removing prejudices between individuals and
contributes to social integration.
Theme 3: The Sensitivity of Programs to Cultural Differences
Teachers think teaching programs of Turkey at present are not sensitive to cultural diversity and
in this sense they are far from fulfilling the requirements of students. Besides, they utter that the
regional and local differences are not considered in programs, and the programs are limited in activities
special to different cultures in terms of quality and quantity. The statement of the teacher coded P8,
who has the opinion in question, is as follows:
P8: We don’t have an education system that operates cultural diversities. A
child who starts school in Eastern and South-Eastern Anatolia Region can’t
speak Turkish as well as illiteracy. This situation isn’t considered in education
program. According to upbringing way and environment prelearning conditions
of children differ from each other. But programs are made according to
Ankara-Çankaya.
The views of P23 coded teacher is as follows:
P23: Education is not very sensitive to cultural diversities in Turkey. For
example, students hesitate to use “Kurdish” word, the name of their nation,
when nations are explained in English lesson. At least I believe that there is not
sensitivity in South-Eastern.
Another topic attracted attention by some teachers is that a program mentality which
standardizes individuals is adopted in Turkey and pluralism is not reflected.
P3: The education system in our country is extremely poor in terms of
diversities. Standard individuals have been tried to grow since foundation of
Republic. The other cultures are almost never talked about, the culture of the
majority is always told as it is perfect. That means they allude to humiliate other
At another side, some teachers utter that emphasizing diversity hourly in the process of
Kasim Karatas, Behcet Oral
culturally responsive education can cause occur separatist ideas. The statement of the teacher coded
P22, who has the opinion in question, is as follows:
P22: If the authority of government becomes weak, it can cause that people
diverge from each other, separatist and discriminatory ideas occur, and people
don’t adopt and try to dominate each other.
In the context of the general answers of teachers, they think teaching programs are deprived of
culturally responsiveness.
Theme 4: The Reflection of Cultural Diversity
Teachers utter that teachers’ personal and professional competence is important to make
education process effective and reflect diversity to learning process in a classroom that there are
different students as cultural. Especially it will be appropriate for the nature of culturally responsive
education to have knowledge sufficiently regarding cultural diversity, not to have prejudices, to be
tolerant and lovely. The statement of the teacher coded P3, who has the opinion in question, is as
P3: We should give education making them feel and think that no need to fear of
being different, being different is natural and a work of God’s creativity,
reflecting that also we show respect to diversity. We can’t build love link by
humiliation and denial.
The view of P13 coded teacher is parallel with this view and it is as follows:
P13: Firstly teacher should have a humanist nature. He should consider
personal and cultural diversity. He shouldn’t evaluate his student forcing him
into certain molds. … he should consider his student as a human and he
shouldn’t try to enforce his ideology or race values on his students.
In addition to this, teachers think teaching programs should be designed in a way that they can
provide culturally responsive education and classroom activities should be arranged considering
culturally diversity. The statement of the teacher coded P1, who has the opinion in question, is as
P1: The special days and values of all cultures in the class should be known and
they should be talked about in the lesson... There may be a culture corner in the
classroom. Inscriptive and visual values of each culture can be shared there. On
important days of each culture, students belong to that culture can organize
presentation, theatre and festival in the classroom.
Similarly P18 coded teacher’s view is as follows:
P18: In the class that there are different students as cultural; qualified samples
special to each culture, and the examples that reflect soul of each culture and
feature values of each culture can be elaborated.
In general sense, teachers think that cultural diversity should be considered and kept alive in the
classroom. They link this situation with the personal and professional competence of the teacher and
flexibility of teaching program.
Theme 5: The Adequacy of Culturally Responsive Teacher
Teachers have different ideas about evaluating adequacy of students considering their cultural
diversity. Teachers’ general tendency is that they think they are inadequate to give culturally
responsive education. They think the reasons of this situation are their personal apprehension,
education programs and school opportunities. The statement of the teacher coded P1, who has the
opinion in question, is as follows:
P1: I confess that I prioritize my culture although I say I respect to different
cultures. I remember Islam speaking of Religious Culture, Turkish speaking of
Journal of Ethnic and Cultural Studies, 2015, Vol.2, No.2
language, festivals of Ramadan, Sacrfifice, Republic Day speaking of bairam
(festival). These are indicator that I don’t keep other cultures alive in the
classroom. But such behaviors arise from the education program that doesn’t
say anything to keep other cultures alive in the classroom.
Besides, having deficient information about the local culture that teachers serve also makes this
situation difficult. P4 coded teacher’s view is as follows:
P4: I don’t think I am adequate about this subject. Because in such a case
collocutor is not just student, the family and environment are also part of this
work and this situation makes our work difficult. Besides, I think we don’t have
a command of local sensitivities and this situation also makes our work difficult.
Teachers think teaching program limits teacher and it is not flexible, this is another factor to
question adequacy for that subject. P14 coded teacher’s view is as follows:
P14: I find it enough, but limited; because only adequacy of teacher considering
the difference of students doesn’t make teaching affective. Education programs
should also be appropriate for this.
Teachers who think they can serve easily in such an education system talk about the advantages
of their branch. P12 coded teacher’s view, who thinks like this, is as follows:
P12: I think my experiences of teaching foreign language are an advantage for
considering the differences of other students belong to different cultures.
Teachers think they are generally inadequate although they have different views adequacy
regarding culturally responsiveness.
When research findings are evaluated in general, it seems teacher have positive viewpoints
regarding culturally responsive education. They think such an education will contribute to cognitive
and affective development of individual and will serve to social integration. It is emphasized to be
sensitive to cultural diversity, to reflect pluralism to classroom activities and stay away from a
comprehension takes solo culture into center when education is performed in classroom. Besides, they
have self-sufficiency to perform culturally responsive education if teaching programs are flexed, and
school physical substructure and material support are provided.
Discussion and Conclusion
Culturally responsive education is accepted as a paradigm reform which is developed to
increase performance of students, who have cultural diversity, in the education period. According to
this new comprehension, students need to regulate and actualize teaching activities by considering their
old successes, personal and cultural powerful sides and intellectual adequacy. In the context of this
necessity, without looking at the ethnic origin of the students, teachers should be active in the process
to keep cultural diversity alive and spread the idea of equality. Because teachers have to do their best
for all students what they can do, not just for some students . In this sense, it
is seen necessary that teachers’ views should be positive regarding culturally responsive education,
students should be aware of cultural differences and teaching programs should be flexible, learning
environment should be richened using these values, and before everything teachers should have selfsufficient belief to give such an education.
In the context of the theme and findings of the research, teachers emphasize that education
should be in a way as culturally responsive education; they think it will be useful for cognitive and
affective development of students, the learning process will be functional and therefore their learning
performance will increase. To end education successfully, it is important that the manner of teachers,
who are one of the components of culturally responsive education, toward such kind of an education. In
this sense, in studies that teachers’ and teacher candidates’ manners regarding multicultural education
are examined it is generally seen they think culturally responsive education should be performed.
When it is thought that teaching is a process having contextual, situational and personal dimensions
 , the values of individual is closely related with dimensions in question and it is obvious
that it is not possible to ignore cultural values. In the researches made it was observed that the
academic success of learners, who took education in the process of culturally responsive education,
increase , at other side in the education process that cultural diversity was ignored,
the academic successes of learners who were from different cultures were low compared to others
 . Besides, the advantages of multi-cultural education for
student are recognizing different cultures, improving tolerance feeling, improving global thinking
ability, widening viewpoint, developing positive social relations, improving empathy ability, learning
being conformed, increasing motivation and thinking reflective . So
being culturally responsive in teaching will be effective for students to expose their academic potential,
besides it will be helpful for students to improve their affective characteristics.
The other one of the research findings, teachers utter that culturally responsive education will
serve to provide social peace and remove prejudices between individuals, and such an education
system is important in terms of provision social integration. In the same way, Grant emphasizes
that the education system which considers cultural diversity will serve to extinguish prejudices and
racism, to establish tolerance interactively and consistently, and to remove barriers. The situation that
culturally responsive education serves is not removing or extinguishing cultural diversity, it is to
provide culturally diversity to live and get strong . In the same way Gay , adopting
a teaching comprehension that considers cultural diversity will be useful intellectually and
psychologically for the general of the community, not for just ethnic minority. Besides, according to
Ameny-Dixon multicultural education will serve to refresh the community through richness of
culture diversity in the society, to provide development wide and versatile world-view by decreasing
cliche and prejudices. By considering this situation, teachers should build learning environments that
will provide students to respect other individuals’ cultural values, to remove their own prejudices about
other cultures and to adopt that diversity is richness . Therefore in a community has an
education that cultural diversity is recognized and individuals find themselves in the education system,
unity atmosphere is built more easily.
In the context of research findings, teachers think that they are inadequate to actualize the
culturally responsive education. They think the reasons are their personal apprehension, education
programs and school opportunities. According to Roux , performing culturally responsive
education successfully is highly related to the knowledge, manners, considerations and behaviors of
teacher about this subject. The development of teachers’ cognitive and affective features in question is
related teacher training program. Gunay and Aydin emphasize that teacher candidates should be
trained as sensitive to cultural diversity and cumulative teachers. Because teachers that will actualize
culturally responsive education should be opened to different cultural values, believe the necessity of
comprehension and sustenance of these values. Therefore, having a viewpoint in this direction is
possible if they are informed about the design of a multicultural classroom and arrangement of class
environment in way different viewpoints will be accepted . In this sense, it is important
that teachers, who will keep cultural diversity alive in classroom and be the main actor, act with this
responsibility and conscious. It is seen that teachers think that only informing is not enough; within the
frame of these research findings, teaching programs and lesson contents and materials, school
opportunities should provide flexibility for teachers to give such and education. This finding is
coherent with some studies made in the literature and it emphasizes many school programs of countries
don’t have a structure that can answer needs of different cultures . If that structure is provided, teachers will make changes in the program in
the way they can answer to learning forms of students according to their cultural diversity and
structures to increase their performance. In an education comprehension that cultural diversity is
wanted to be actualized, if teaching programs are far away of that comprehension, flexibility and
sensitivity, it will cause that teachers be in paradox. So it is seen necessary to support teachers in the
context of both teaching programs and school environment and materials. Shortly, the education
programs should be revised, new schools which have values as equality and mutual respectfulness
should be re-arranged and teachers should be supported to build a bridge between students’ cultural
experiences and program content . According to Reiter and Davis
 it is possible that a cultural disagreement can occur between student and teacher in the class
environment has cultural diversity. So to solve this possible problem, it is important to train teachers
who contact with students equally without a discrimination of language, religion and race.
In another finding of the research, teachers determined that education programs in Turkey are
deprived of culturally responsiveness and very poor in terms of reflecting cultural diversity. They are
far from multicultural program comprehension and very poor in terms of structure preparation and
practices. Cirik analyzed acquirements of teaching program of elementary 1st-5th grade that were
prepared by MEB (Education Ministry) in 2005 in accordance with multicultural education. According
to the results of the analysis it may be said that existent elementary programs don’t include
multicultural education enough. Arsal and Onal made a research to determine contents, visuals
Journal of Ethnic and Cultural Studies, 2015, Vol.2, No.2
and activities about multicultural education in social sciences lesson book that was used in elementary
6th and 7th grade. According to the results of the research it was fixed that in the lesson books in
question there are contents, concepts, visuals and activities about multicultural education. However it
was extrapolated that the criterions related to the principles of multicultural education of elements in
lesson books are not enough as quantity and quality. Keskin and Yaman tried to determine the
level and way of mentioning multicultural education in social sciences teaching program and its books
recently published. At the research result it was determined that multicultural education is emphasized,
a strict comprehension is not adopted, a smooth transition is aimed in the program and books in
Consequently in the context of teacher’s views, quickening culturally responsiveness and
cultural diversity in education is perceived important. Besides, it is accepted as an important
component that serves to social peace and integration. By considering this situation, being sensitive to
cultural sensibilities, values and differences in our education is needed. In this direction in the
components of our education system, that is to say from our teaching programs to the training teacher
programs, a configuration should be made by considering that situation.
Actualizing similar researches in various cities of Turkey by using quantitative and qualitative
methods with much bigger samples, enlightening the subject in depth will be useful for both offering
advices to education politics makers and literature. Also evaluating our lesson programs and all stages
of our teaching programs in terms of culturally responsiveness remain as a different subject. Lastly, it
is necessary to improve teachers’ adequacy for culturally responsiveness in training teacher programs
of universities. From this point, it may be said that giving multicultural lesson as an independent lesson
and preparing other contents considering this sensitivity will be useful for coming teachers to live
experiences regarding the subject and to internalize them.