Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Short Papers), pages 422–426
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c⃝2017 Association for Computational Linguistics
 
Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Short Papers), pages 422–426
Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, 2017. c⃝2017 Association for Computational Linguistics
 
“Liar, Liar Pants on Fire”:
A New Benchmark Dataset for Fake News Detection
William Yang Wang
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106 USA
 
Automatic fake news detection is a challenging problem in deception detection,
and it has tremendous real-world political and social impacts. However, statistical approaches to combating fake news
has been dramatically limited by the lack
of labeled benchmark datasets.
paper, we present LIAR: a new, publicly
available dataset for fake news detection.
We collected a decade-long, 12.8K manually labeled short statements in various
contexts from POLITIFACT.COM, which
provides detailed analysis report and links
to source documents for each case. This
dataset can be used for fact-checking research as well. Notably, this new dataset
is an order of magnitude larger than previously largest public fake news datasets
of similar type. Empirically, we investigate automatic fake news detection based
on surface-level linguistic patterns.
have designed a novel, hybrid convolutional neural network to integrate metadata with text. We show that this hybrid
approach can improve a text-only deep
learning model.
Introduction
In this past election cycle for the 45th President
of the United States, the world has witnessed a
growing epidemic of fake news. The plague of
fake news not only poses serious threats to the
integrity of journalism, but has also created turmoils in the political world. The worst real-world
impact is that fake news seems to create real-life
fears: last year, a man carried an AR-15 riﬂe and
walked in a Washington DC Pizzeria, because he
recently read online that “this pizzeria was harboring young children as sex slaves as part of a childabuse ring led by Hillary Clinton”1. The man was
later arrested by police, and he was charged for
ﬁring an assault riﬂe in the restaurant .
The broadly-related problem of deception detection is not
new to the natural language processing community. A relatively early study by Ott et al. 
focuses on detecting deceptive review opinions
in sentiment analysis, using a crowdsourcing approach to create training data for the positive class,
and then combine with truthful opinions from
TripAdvisor. Recent studies have also proposed
stylometric , semi-supervised
learning , and linguistic approaches to detect deceptive text on crowdsourced datasets. Even
though crowdsourcing is an important approach to
create labeled training data, there is a mismatch
between training and testing.
When testing on
real-world review datasets, the results could be
suboptimal since the positive training data was
created in a completely different, simulated platform.
The problem of fake news detection is more
challenging than detecting deceptive reviews,
since the political language on TV interviews,
posts on Facebook and Twitters are mostly short
statements.
However, the lack of manually labeled fake news dataset is still a bottleneck
for advancing computational-intensive,
broadcoverage models in this direction. Vlachos and
Riedel are the ﬁrst to release a public fake
news detection and fact-checking dataset, but it
only includes 221 statements, which does not permit machine learning based assessments.
To address these issues, we introduce the LIAR
1 
dataset, which includes 12,836 short statements
labeled for truthfulness, subject, context/venue,
speaker, state, party, and prior history. With such
volume and a time span of a decade, LIAR is an
order of magnitude larger than the currently available resources of similiar type. Additionally,
in contrast to crowdsourced datasets, the instances
in LIAR are collected in a grounded, more natural
context, such as political debate, TV ads, Facebook posts, tweets, interview, news release, etc. In
each case, the labeler provides a lengthy analysis
report to ground each judgment, and the links to
all supporting documents are also provided.
Empirically, we have evaluated several popular learning based methods on this dataset.
The baselines include logistic regression, support
vector machines, long short-term memory networks , and a
convolutional neural network model .
We further introduce a neural network architecture
to integrate text and meta-data. Our experiment
suggests that this approach improves the performance of a strong text-only convolutional neural
networks baseline.
LIAR: a New Benchmark Dataset
The major resources for deceptive detection of reviews are crowdsourced datasets . They are very
useful datasets to study deception detection, but
the positive training data are collected from a
simulated environment. More importantly, these
datasets are not suitable for fake statements detection, since the fake news on TVs and social media
are much shorter than customer reviews.
Vlachos and Riedel are the ﬁrst to
construct fake news and fact-checking datasets.
They obtained 221 statements from CHANNEL 42
and POLITIFACT.COM3, a Pulitzer Prize-winning
website. In particular, PolitiFact covers a widerange of political topics, and they provide detailed
judgments with ﬁne-grained labels. Recently, Ferreira and Vlachos have released the Emergent dataset, which includes 300 labeled rumors
from PolitiFact. However, with less than a thousand samples, it is impractical to use these datasets
as benchmarks for developing and evaluating machine learning algorithms for fake news detection.
2 
3 
Statement: “The last quarter, it was just
announced, our gross domestic product
was below zero. Who ever heard of this?
Its never below zero.”
Speaker: Donald Trump
presidential announcement
Label: Pants on Fire
Justiﬁcation: According to Bureau of
Economic Analysis and National Bureau of Economic Research, the growth
in the gross domestic product has been
below zero 42 times over 68 years. Thats
a lot more than “never.”
We rate his
claim Pants on Fire!
Statement: “Newly Elected Republican
Senators Sign Pledge to Eliminate Food
Stamp Program in 2015.”
Speaker: Facebook posts
Context: social media posting
Label: Pants on Fire
Justiﬁcation:
More than 115,000 social media users passed along a story
headlined, “Newly Elected Republican
Senators Sign Pledge to Eliminate Food
Stamp Program in 2015.” But they failed
to do due diligence and were snookered, since the story came from a publication that bills itself (quietly) as a
“satirical, parody website.” We rate the
claim Pants on Fire.
Statement: “Under the health care law,
everybody will have lower rates, better
quality care and better access.”
Speaker: Nancy Pelosi
Context: on ’Meet the Press’
Label: False
Justiﬁcation:
Pelosi’s staff cited as the source of that
statement suggested that some people
would pay more for health insurance.
Analysis at the state level found the
same thing. The general understanding
of the word “everybody” is every person. The predictions dont back that up.
We rule this statement False.
Figure 1: Some random excerpts from the LIAR
Dataset Statistics
Training set size
Validation set size
Testing set size
Avg. statement length (tokens)
Top-3 Speaker Afﬁliations
Republicans
None (e.g., FB posts)
Table 1: The LIAR dataset statistics.
Therefore, it is of crucial signiﬁcance to introduce
a larger dataset to facilitate the development of
computational approaches to fake news detection
and automatic fact-checking.
We show some random snippets from our
dataset in Figure 1.
LIAR dataset4 includes 12.8K human labeled short statements from
POLITIFACT.COM’s API5, and each statement is
evaluated by a POLITIFACT.COM editor for its
truthfulness. After initial analysis, we found duplicate labels, and merged the full-ﬂop, half-ﬂip,
no-ﬂip labels into false, half-true, true labels respectively. We consider six ﬁne-grained labels for
the truthfulness ratings: pants-ﬁre, false, barelytrue, half-true, mostly-true, and true. The distribution of labels in the LIAR dataset is relatively
well-balanced: except for 1,050 pants-ﬁre cases,
the instances for all other labels range from 2,063
to 2,638. We randomly sampled 200 instances to
examine the accompanied lengthy analysis reports
and rulings. Not that fact-checking is not a classic
labeling task in NLP. The verdict requires extensive training in journalism for ﬁnding relevant evidence. Therefore, for second-stage veriﬁcations,
we went through a randomly sampled subset of
the analysis reports to check if we agreed with the
reporters’ analysis. The agreement rate measured
by Cohens kappa was 0.82. We show the corpus
statistics in Table 1. The statement dates are primarily from 2007-2016.
The speakers in the LIAR dataset include a mix
of democrats and republicans, as well as a signiﬁcant amount of posts from online social media. We include a rich set of meta-data for each
speaker—in addition to party afﬁliations, current
4 
data/liar_dataset.zip
5 
v2apidoc.html
The proposed hybrid Convolutional
Neural Networks framework for integrating text
and meta-data.
job, home state, and credit history are also provided. In particular, the credit history includes the
historical counts of inaccurate statements for each
speaker. For example, Mitt Romney has a credit
history vector h = {19, 32, 34, 58, 33}, which corresponds to his counts of “pants on ﬁre”, “false”,
“barely true”, “half true”, “mostly true” for historical statements. Since this vector also includes the
count for the current statement, it is important to
subtract the current label from the credit history
when using this meta data vector in prediction experiments.
These statements are sampled from various
of contexts/venues, and the top categories include news releases, TV/radio interviews, campaign speeches, TV ads, tweets, debates, Facebook posts, etc. To ensure a broad coverage of
the topics, there is also a diverse set of subjects
discussed by the speakers. The top-10 most discussed subjects in the dataset are economy, healthcare, taxes, federal-budget, education, jobs, statebudget, candidates-biography, elections, and immigration.
Automatic Fake News Detection
One of the most obvious applications of our
dataset is to facilitate the development of machine
learning models for automatic fake news detection. In this task, we frame this as a 6-way multiclass text classiﬁcation problem. And the research
questions are:
• Based on surface-level linguistic realizations
only, how well can machine learning algorithms classify a short statement into a ﬁnegrained category of fakeness?
• Can we design a deep neural network architecture to integrate speaker related meta-data
with text to enhance the performance of fake
news detection?
Since convolutional neural networks architectures (CNNs) have obtained the state-of-theart results on many text classiﬁcation datasets, we
build our neural networks model based on a recently proposed CNN model . Figure 2 shows the overview of our hybrid convolutional neural network for integrating text and
meta-data.
We randomly initialize a matrix of embedding
vectors to encode the metadata embeddings. We
use a convolutional layer to capture the dependency between the meta-data vector(s).
a standard max-pooling operation is performed
on the latent space, followed by a bi-directional
LSTM layer. We then concatenate the max-pooled
text representations with the meta-data representation from the bi-directional LSTM, and feed them
to fully connected layer with a softmax activation
function to generate the ﬁnal prediction.
LIAR: Benchmark Evaluation
In this section, we ﬁrst describe the experimental
setup, and the baselines. Then, we present the empirical results and compare various models.
Experimental Settings
We used ﬁve baselines: a majority baseline, a regularized logistic regression classiﬁer (LR), a support vector machine classiﬁer (SVM) , a bi-directional long short-term
memory networks model (Bi-LSTMs) , and a convolutional neural network
model (CNNs) . For LR and SVM,
we used the LIBSHORTTEXT toolkit6, which was
shown to provide very strong performances on
short text classiﬁcation problems . For Bi-LSTMs and CNNs, we used TensorFlow for the implementation.
We used pretrained 300-dimensional word2vec embeddings
from Google News to
warm-start the text embeddings. We strictly tuned
all the hyperparameters on the validation dataset.
The best ﬁlter sizes for the CNN model was
(2,3,4). In all cases, each size has 128 ﬁlters. The
dropout keep probabilities was optimized to 0.8,
6 
Logistic Regress0ion
Hybrid CNNs
Text + Subject
Text + Speaker
Text + Job
Text + State
Text + Party
Text + Context
Text + History
Text + All
The evaluation results on the LIAR
dataset. The top section: text-only models. The
bottom: text + meta-data hybrid models.
while no L2 penalty was imposed. The batch size
for stochastic gradient descent optimization was
set to 64, and the learning process involves 10
passes over the training data for text model. For
the hybrid model, we use 3 and 8 as ﬁlter sizes,
and the number of ﬁlters was set to 10. We considered 0.5 and 0.8 as dropout probabilities. The
hybrid model requires 5 training epochs.
We used grid search to tune the hyperparameters for LR and SVM models. We chose accuracy
as the evaluation metric, since we found that the
accuracy results from various models were equivalent to f-measures on this balanced dataset.
We outline our empirical results in Table 2. First,
we compare various models using text features
only. We see that the majority baseline on this
dataset gives about 0.204 and 0.208 accuracy on
the validation and test sets respectively. Standard
text classiﬁer such as SVMs and LR models obtained signiﬁcant improvements. Due to overﬁtting, the Bi-LSTMs did not perform well.
CNNs outperformed all models, resulting in an accuracy of 0.270 on the heldout test set. We compare the predictions from the CNN model with
SVMs via a two-tailed paired t-test, and CNN was
signiﬁcantly better (p < .0001). When considering all meta-data and text, the model achieved the
best result on the test data.
Conclusion
We introduced LIAR, a new dataset for automatic
fake news detection. Compared to prior datasets,
LIAR is an order of a magnitude larger, which enables the development of statistical and computational approaches to fake news detection. LIAR’s
authentic, real-world short statements from various contexts with diverse speakers also make the
research on developing broad-coverage fake news
detector possible.
We show that when combining meta-data with text, signiﬁcant improvements
can be achieved for ﬁne-grained fake news detection. Given the detailed analysis report and links to
source documents in this dataset, it is also possible
to explore the task of automatic fact-checking over
knowledge base in the future. Our corpus can also
be used for stance classiﬁcation, argument mining, topic modeling, rumor detection, and political
NLP research.