The emergence of lncRNAs in cancer biology
John R. Prensner1,2 and Arul M. Chinnaiyan1,2,3,4,5
1Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, 1400 E.
Medical Center Drive, Ann Arbor, MI 48109
2Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, 1400 E. Medical Center Drive,
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
3Department of Urology, University of Michigan Medical School, 1400 E. Medical Center Drive,
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
4Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Michigan Medical School, 1400 E. Medical Center
Drive, Ann Arbor, MI 48109
5Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Michigan Medical School, 1400 E. Medical
Center Drive, Ann Arbor, MI 48109
The discovery of numerous non-coding RNA (ncRNA) transcripts in species from yeast to
mammals has dramatically altered our understanding of cell biology, especially disease biology
such as cancer. In humans, the identification of abundant long ncRNA (lncRNAs) >200 bp in
length has catalyzed their characterization as critical components of cancer biology. Recently,
roles for lncRNAs as drivers of tumor suppressive and oncogenic functions have appeared in
prevalent cancer types, such as breast and prostate cancer. In this review, we will highlight the
emerging impact of ncRNAs in cancer research, with a particular focus on the mechanisms and
functions of lncRNAs.
long noncoding RNA; lncRNA; cancer; epigenetics
Introduction
The question of which regions of the human genome constitute its functional elements—
those expressed as genes or serving as regulatory elements—has long been a central topic in
biology. While early cloning-based methods revealed more than 7000 human genes in the
1970s and 1980s (1), large-scale analyses of expressed sequence tags (ESTs) in the 1990s
suggested that the estimated number of human genes lay range from 35,000 to 100,000 (2).
The completion of the human genome project narrowed the focus considerably by
highlighting the surprisingly small number of protein-coding genes, which is now
conventionally cited as less than 25,000 (3).
Address correspondence to: .
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest A.M.C. serves as an advisor to Gen-Probe, Inc., who has developed diagnostic tests
using PCA3 and TMPRSS2-ERG. A.M.C. serves on the Scientific Advisory Board of Wafergen, Inc. Neither company was involved
in the writing or approval of this manuscript.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Cancer Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 April 1.
 
Cancer Discov. 2011 October ; 1(5): 391–407. doi:10.1158/2159-8290.CD-11-0209.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
While the number of protein-coding genes (20,000–25,000) has maintained broad
consensus, recent studies of the human transcriptome have revealed an astounding number
of non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs). These transcribed elements, which lack the capacity to
code for a protein, are bafflingly abundant in all organisms studied to date, from yeast to
humans (4-6). Yet, over the past decade, numerous studies have demonstrated that ncRNAs
have distinct biological functions and operate through defined mechanisms. Still, their sheer
abundance—some reports estimate that up to 70% of the human genome is transcribed into
RNA (4)—has sparked debates as to whether ncRNA transcription reflects true biology or
byproducts of a leaky transcriptional system. Encompassed within these studies are the
broad questions of what constitutes a human gene, what distinguishes a gene from a region
that is simply transcribed, and how we interpret the biological meaning of transcription.
These developments have been matched by equally insightful discoveries analyzing the role
of ncRNAs in human diseases, especially cancer, lending support to the importance of their
cellular functions (7, 8). Initial evidence suggests that ncRNAs, particularly long ncRNAs
(lncRNAs), have essential roles in tumorigenesis (7), and that lncRNA-mediated biology
occupies a central place in cancer progression (9). With the number of well-characterized
cancer-associated lncRNAs growing, the study of lncRNAs in cancer is now generating new
hypotheses about the biology of cancer cells. Here, we review the current understanding of
ncRNAs in cancer, with particular focus on lncRNAs as novel drivers of tumorigenesis.
ncRNA: a new kind of gene
ncRNAs are RNA transcripts that do not encode for a protein. In the past decade, a great
diversity of ncRNAs has been observed. Depending on the type of ncRNA, transcription can
occur by any of the three RNA polymerases (RNA Pol I, RNA Pol II, or RNA Pol III).
General conventions divide ncRNAs into two main categories: small ncRNAs less than 200
bp and long ncRNAs greater than 200 bps (10). Within these two categories, there are also
many individual classes of ncRNAs (Table 1), although the degree of biological and
experimental support for each class ranges substantially and should be evaluated
individually.
Small ncRNAs
The diversity of small ncRNAs has perhaps grown the most, where several dozen classes of
small ncRNAs have been proposed (10, 11). These include well-characterized housekeeping
ncRNAs (transfer RNA (tRNA) and some ribosomal RNA (rRNA)) essential for
fundamental aspects of cell biology, splicing RNAs (small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs)), and a
variety of recently-observed RNAs associated with protein-coding gene transcription, such
as tiny transcription-initiation RNAs, promoter-associated short RNAs, termini-associated
short RNAs, 3’UTR-derived RNAs, and antisense termini-associated short RNAs (10).
To date, the most extensively studied small RNAs in cancer are microRNAs (miRNAs).
Elegant studies over the past 15 years have defined an intricate mechanistic basis for
miRNA-mediated silencing of target gene expression through the RNA-induced silencing
complex (RISC), which employs Argonaute family proteins (such as AGO2) to cleave target
mRNA transcripts or inhibiting the translation of that mRNA (Figure 1A) (12). Aberrant
expression patterns of miRNAs in cancer have been well documented in most tumor types
(Figure 1B), and detailed work from many labs have shown that many miRNAs, including
miR-10b, let-7, miR-101, and the miR-15a-16-1 cluster, possess oncogenic or tumor
suppressive functions (Figure 1C) (12, 13).
Prensner and Chinnaiyan
Cancer Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 April 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Long ncRNAs
Recent observations of novel long ncRNA species has led to a complex set of terms and
terminologies used to describe a given long ncRNA. These include antisense RNAs, which
are transcribed on the opposite strand from a protein-coding gene and frequently overlap that
gene (14), transcribed ultraconserved regions (T-UCRs), which originate in regions of the
genome showing remarkable conservation across species, and ncRNAs derived from
intronic transcription.
Although many RNA species are >200 bp in length, such as repeat or pseudogene-derived
transcripts (15), the abbreviated term lncRNA (also referred to as lincRNA, for long
intergenic ncRNA) does not uniformly apply to all of these (Box 1). While the nomenclature
is still evolving, lncRNA typically refers to a polyadenylated long ncRNA that is transcribed
by RNA polymerase II and associated with epigenetic signatures common to protein-coding
genes, such as trimethylation of histone 3 lysine 4 (H3K4me3) at the transcriptional start site
(TSS) and trimethylation of histone 3 lysine 36 (H3K36me3) throughout the gene body (16).
This description also suits many T-UCRs and some antisense RNAs, and the overlap
between these categories may be substantial. lncRNAs also commonly exhibit splicing of
multiple exons into a mature transcript, as do many antisense RNAs but not RNAs
transcribed from gene enhancers (eRNAs) or T-UCRs (17-19). Transcription of lncRNAs
occurs from an independent gene promoter and is not coupled to the transcription of a
nearby or associated parental gene, as with some classes of ncRNAs (promoter/terminiassociated RNAs, intronic ncRNAs) (10). In this review we will use the term lncRNA in this
manner. When the data is supportive, we include specific T-UCRs and antisense RNAs
under the lncRNA umbrella term, and we distinguish other long ncRNAs, such as eRNAs,
where appropriate.
Identification of long ncRNAs
Many initial lncRNAs, such as XIST and H19, were discovered in the 1980s and 1990s by
searching cDNA libraries for clones of interest (20, 21). In these studies, the intention was
generally to identify new genes important in a particular biological process—X chromosome
inactivation in the example of XIST—by studying their expression patterns. At the time,
most genes uncovered were protein-coding, and this tended to be the assumption, with a
handful exceptions, such as XIST, which were subsequently determined to be noncoding as a
secondary observation (20).
In the past decade, however, large-scale analyses have focused on identifying ncRNA
species in a comprehensive fashion. This paradigm shift has been mediated by dramatic
advances in high-throughput technologies, including DNA tiling arrays and next generation
RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) (9, 22-25). These platforms provide systems with which RNA
transcription can be observed in an unbiased manner, and have thereby highlighted the
pervasive transcription of ncRNAs in cell biology (Box 2). Moreover, whereas conventional
cDNA microarrays detected only the transcripts represented by probes on the array, the
introduction and popularization of RNA-Seq as a standard tool in transcriptome studies has
removed many barriers to detecting all forms of RNA transcripts (9, 26). RNA-Seq studies
now suggest that several thousand uncharacterized lncRNAs are present in any given cell
type (9, 16), and elegant, large-scale analyses of lncRNAs in stem cells suggest that
lncRNAs may be an integral component of lineage-specificity and stem cell biology (27).
Observations that many lncRNAs demonstrate tissue-specific expression therefore enables
speculations that the human genome may harbor nearly as many lncRNAs as protein-coding
genes (perhaps ~15,000 lncRNAs), though only a fraction are expressed in a given cell type.
Prensner and Chinnaiyan
Cancer Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 April 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
lncRNAs in cancer
Emerging evidence suggests that lncRNAs constitute an important component of tumor
biology (Table 2). Dysregulated expression of lncRNAs in cancer marks the spectrum of
disease progression (9) and may serve as an independent predictor for patient outcomes (28).
Mechanistically, most well-characterized lncRNAs to date show a functional role in gene
expression regulation, typically transcriptional rather than post-transcriptional regulation.
This can occur by targeting either genomically local (cis-regulation) or genomically distant
(trans-regulation) genes. Recently, a new type of long ncRNAs at gene enhancers, termed
eRNAs, have also been implicated in transcriptional regulation (29).
cis-Regulatory lncRNA
cis-regulation by lncRNAs contributes to local control of gene expression by recruiting
histone modification complexes to specific areas of the genome (Figure 2). This effect can
either be highly specific to a particular gene, such as the regulation of IGF2 by lncRNAs
(30); or, it can encompass a wide chromosomal region, such as X-chromosome inactivation
in women through XIST. Historically, cis-regulation through lncRNAs was studied earlier
than trans-regulation, as several cis-regulatory lncRNAs, including H19, AIR, KCNQ1OT1,
and XIST were earlier discoveries (20, 21, 31). Several cis-regulatory lncRNAs, including
H19, AIR and KCNQ1OT1, are also functionally related through their involvement in
epigenetic imprinting regions.
Imprinting lncRNAs—lncRNA involvement in imprinted regions of the genome is critical
for maintaining parent-of-origin-specific gene expression. In particular, an imprinted region
of human chromosome 11 (orthologous to mouse chromosome 7) has been extensively
studied for the role of lncRNAs. In humans, most well-known are the H19 and KCNQ1OT1
lncRNAs (21, 31), which are expressed on the maternal and paternal alleles, respectively,
and maintain silencing of the IGF2 and KCNQ1 genes on those alleles (Figure 2A) (32).
Of the imprinting-associated ncRNAs, H19 has been most extensively studied in cancer.
Aberrant expression of H19 is observed in numerous solid tumors, including hepatocellular
and bladder cancer (30, 33). The functional data on H19 point in several directions, and it
has been linked to both oncogenic and tumor suppressive qualities (34). For example, there
is evidence for its direct activation by cMYC (35) as well as its downregulation by p53 and
during prolonged cell proliferation (36). In model systems, siRNA knockdown of H19
expression impairs cell growth and clonogenicity in lung cancer cell lines in vitro (35) and
decreased xenograft tumor growth of Hep3B hepatocellular carcinoma cells in vivo (30).
Together, these data support a general role for H19 in cancer, although its precise biological
contributions are still unclear.
Other imprinting-associated lncRNAs are only tangentially associated with cancer. Although
loss of imprinting is observed in many tumors, the role for lncRNAs in this process is not
well defined. For example, Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS), a disorder of abnormal
development with an increased risk for cancer, displays aberrant imprinting patterns of
KCNQ1OT1 (32, 37); but a direct association or causal role for KCNQ1OT1 in cancer is not
described (37). Conversely, aberrant H19 methylation in BWS appears to predispose to
cancer development more strongly (37)
XIST: XIST, perhaps the most well studied lncRNA, is transcribed from the inactivated X
chromosome, in order to facilitate that chromosome’s inactivation, and manifests as multiple
isoforms (38, 39). On the active X allele, XIST is repressed by its antisense partner ncRNA,
TSIX (39). XIST contains a double-hairpin RNA motif in the RepA domain, located in the
Prensner and Chinnaiyan
Cancer Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 April 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
first exon, which is crucial for its ability to bind Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2)
and propagate epigenetic silencing of an individual X chromosome (Figure 2B) (40).
Despite the body of research on XIST, a precise role for XIST in cancer has remained elusive
(41). Some evidence initially suggested a role for XIST in hereditary BRCA1-deficient breast
cancers (42, 43), where data indicated that BRCA1 was not required for XIST function in
these cells (44). Others have reasoned that XIST may be implicated in the X chromosome
abnormalities observed in some breast cancers. There have also been surprising accounts of
aberrant XIST regulation in other cancers, including lymphoma and male testicular germ-cell
tumors, where XIST hypomethylation is, unexpectedly, a biomarker (45). Yet, it remains
unclear whether these observations reflect a passenger or driver status for XIST, as a welldefined function for XIST in cancer has yet to attain a board consensus.
ANRIL: Located on Ch9p21 in the INK4A/ARF tumor suppressor locus, ANRIL was
initially described by examining the deletion of this region in hereditary neural system
tumors, which predispose for hereditary cutaneous malignant melanoma (46). ANRIL was
subsequently defined as a polyadenylated lncRNA antisense to the CDKN2A and CDKN2B
genes. In vitro data have suggested that ANRIL functions to repress the INK4A/INK4B
isoforms (47), but not ARF. This repression is mediated through direct binding to CBX7
(47), a member of Polycomb Repressive Complex 1 (PRC1), and SUZ12 (48), a member of
PRC2, which apply repressive histone modifications to the locus. However, these studies
were performed in different cell types and it is not known whether ANRIL binds both
complexes simultaneously.
ANRIL also displays a highly complicated splicing pattern, with numerous variants,
including circular RNA isoforms (49). Currently it is unclear whether these isoforms have
tissue-specific expression patterns or unique functions, which may suggest a biological basis
for this variation. Through GWAS, ANRIL has also been identified by single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) correlated with a higher risk of atherosclerosis and coronary artery
disease (50), and ANRIL expression has been noted in many tissues. The function and
isoform-level expression of ANRIL in these tissue types is not yet elucidated, but may shed
light onto its role in diverse disease processes.
HOTTIP and HOTAIRM1: An intriguing theme emerging in developmental biology is the
regulation of HOX gene expression by lncRNAs. Highly conserved among metazoan
species, HOX genes are responsible for determining tissue patterning and early
development, and in humans HOX genes reside in four genomic clusters. Within these
clusters, HOX genes display intriguing anterior-posterior and proximal-distal expression
patterns that mirror their genomic position 5’ to 3’ in the gene cluster.
Two recently-discovered lncRNAs, termed HOTTIP and HOTAIRM1, may help to explain
this co-linear patterning of HOX gene expression. HOTTIP and HOTAIRM1 are located at
opposite ends of the HoxA cluster, and each helps to enhance gene expression of the
neighboring HoxA genes (51, 52). HOTAIRM1, located at the 3’ end, coordinates HOXA1
expression and has tissue-specific expression patterns identical to HOXA1 (51). HOTTIP, by
contrast, is at the 5’ end of the cluster and similarly enhances expression of the 5’ HoxA
genes, most prominently HOXA13 (52). Mechanistic studies of HOTTIP suggest that it binds
WDR5 and recruits the MLL H3K4 histone methyltransferase complex to the HoxA cluster
to support active chromatin confirmation (52). These observations distinguish HOTTIP and
HOTAIRM1, as most lncRNAs to date facilitate gene repression.
While HOTAIRM1 and HOTTIP have not been extensively studied in cancer, expression of
these may have important roles in the differentiation status of cancer cells. For example,
Prensner and Chinnaiyan
Cancer Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 April 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
differentiation of myeloid cancer cell lines, such as K562 and NB4, by treatment with small
molecule drugs led to an increase in HOTAIRM1 expression, implicating it in myeloid
differentiation (51). Moreover, HoxA genes are broadly known to be important for many
cancers, particularly HOXA9, which is essential for oncogenesis in leukemias harboring
MLL rearrangements. Thus, HOTAIRM1 and HOTTIP also suggest a potential role for
lncRNAs in MLL-rearranged leukemias.
trans-Regulatory lncRNAs
Like most cis-acting lncRNAs, trans-acting lncRNAs typically facilitate epigenetic
regulation of gene expression. However, because trans-acting lncRNAs may operate at
geographically distant locations of the genome, it is generally thought that the mature
lncRNA transcript is the primary actor in these cases, as opposed to cis-regulating lncRNAs
like H19, AIR and KCNQ1OT1 which may function through the act of transcription itself
(34, 53, 54).
HOTAIR—trans-Regulatory lncRNAs were brought to widespread attention by the
characterization of HOTAIR. First described in fibroblasts, HOTAIR is located in the HoxC
cluster; but unlike HOTTIP and HOTAIRM1, HOTAIR was found to regulate HoxD cluster
genes in a trans-regulatory mechanism (Figure 2C) (55). These observations raise the
question of whether all Hox clusters are regulated by lncRNAs, either by a cis-regulatory or
a trans-regulatory mechanism.
In cancer, HOTAIR is upregulated in breast and hepatocellular carcinomas (10), and in
breast cancer overexpression of HOTAIR is an independent predictor of overall survival and
progression-free survival (28). Work by Howard Chang and colleagues has further defined a
compelling mechanistic basis for HOTAIR in cancer. HOTAIR has two main functional
domains, a PRC2-binding domain located at the 5’ end of the RNA, and a LSD1/CoREST1binding domain located at the 3’ end of the RNA (55, 56). In this way, HOTAIR is thought
to operate as a tether that links two repressive protein complexes in order to coordinate their
functions. In breast cancer, HOTAIR overexpression facilitates aberrant PRC2 function by
increasing PRC2 recruitment to the genomic positions of target genes. By doing so, HOTAIR
mediates the epigenetic repression of PRC2 target genes, and profiling of repressive
(H3K27me3) and active (H3K4me3) chromatin marks shows widespread changes in
chromatin structure following HOTAIR knockdown (28).
Furthermore, HOTAIR dysregulation results in a phenotype in both in vitro and in vivo
models. Ectopic overexpression of HOTAIR in breast cancer cell lines increases their
invasiveness both in vitro and in vivo. Supporting this, in benign immortalized breast cells
overexpressing EZH2, a core component of PRC2, knockdown of HOTAIR mitigated EZH2induced invasion in vitro (28). Taken together, these data provide the most thorough picture
of a lncRNA in cancer.
PCAT-1—Using RNA-Seq (i.e. transcriptome sequencing) on a large panel of tissue
samples, our lab recently described approximately 1,800 lncRNAs expressed in prostate
tissue, including 121 lncRNAs that are transcriptionally dysregulated in prostate cancer (9).
These 121 Prostate Cancer-Associated Transcripts (PCATs) may represent an unbiased list
of potentially functional lncRNAs associated with prostate cancer. Among these, we focused
on PCAT-1, a 1.9 kb, polyadenylated lncRNA comprised of two exons and located in the
Chr8q24 gene desert (9).
PCAT-1 demonstrates tissue-specific expression and is selectively upregulated only in
prostate cancer. Interestingly, PCAT-1, unlike HOTAIR, is repressed by PRC2, and PCAT-1
overexpression may define a molecular subtype of prostate that is not coordinated by PRC2
Prensner and Chinnaiyan
Cancer Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 April 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
(9). In vitro and in vivo experiments demonstrated that PCAT-1 supports cancer cell
proliferation (J.R.P. and A.M.C., unpublished data). Like HOTAIR, PCAT-1 functions
predominantly as a transcriptional repressor by facilitating trans-regulation of genes
preferentially involved in mitosis and cell division, including known tumor suppressor genes
such as BRCA2 (Figure 2D). Intriguingly, because loss of BRCA2 function is known to
increase cell sensitivity to small molecule inhibitors of PARP1, these data may suggest that
PCAT-1 may impact cellular response to these drugs as well.
The discovery of PCAT-1 highlights the power of unbiased transcriptome studies to explore
a rich set of lncRNAs associated with cancer. While PCAT-1 is the first cancer lncRNA to
be discovered by this method, we anticipate that many additional studies will employ this
GAS5—GAS5, first identified in murine NIH-3T3 cells, is a mature, spliced lncRNA
manifesting as multiple isoforms up to 12 exons in size (57). Using HeLa cells engineered to
express GAS5, Kino et al. recently described an intriguing mechanism by which GAS5
modulates cell survival and metabolism by antagonizing the glucocorticoid receptor (GR).
The 3’ end of GAS5 both interacts with the GR DNA-binding domain (DBD) and is
sufficient to repress GR-induced genes, such as cIAP2, when cells are stimulated with
dexamethasone. By binding to the GR, GAS5 serves as a decoy that prevents GR binding to
target DNA sequences (Figure 2E) (57).
In cancer, GAS5 induces apoptosis and suppresses cell proliferation when overexpressed in
breast cancer cell lines, and in human breast tumors GAS5 expression is downregulated (58).
Although it is unclear whether this phenotype is due to an interaction with GR, it is
intriguing that GAS5 may also be able to suppress signaling by other hormone receptors,
such as androgen receptor (AR), though this effect was not seen with estrogen receptor (ER)
Other long ncRNAs
eRNAs: eRNAs are transcribed by RNA polymerase II at active gene enhancers (17). But
unlike lncRNAs, they are not polyadenylated and are marked by a H3K4me1 histone
signature denoting enhancer regions (17), rather than the H3K4me3/H3K36me3 signature
classically associated with lncRNAs. While research on eRNAs is still in the earliest phases,
an emerging role for them in hormone signaling is already being explored. Nuclear hormone
receptors, such as AR and ER, are critical regulators of numerous cell growth pathways and
are important in large subsets of prostate (AR), breast (ER), and thyroid (PPARγ) cancers.
To date, eRNAs have been most directly implicated in prostate cancer, where they assist in
AR-driven signaling and are maintained by FOXA1, a transcription factor that mediates cell
lineage gene expression in several cell types (29).
T-UCRs: Ultraconserved regions in the genome were initially described as stretches of
sequence >200 bp long with 100% conservation between humans and rodents but harboring
no known gene (59). As high levels of sequence conservation are hallmarks of exonic
sequences in protein-coding genes, ultraconserved regions strongly suggest the presence of
either a gene or a regulatory region, such as an enhancer. Subsequently, numerous
ultraconserved sequences were found to be transcriptionally active, defining a class of T-
UCRs as ncRNAs (18). Many transcripts from T-UCRs are polyadenylated and associated
with H3K4me3 at their transcriptional start sites (TSSs), indicating that many are likely
lncRNAs according to our definition (60).
Aberrant expression of T-UCRs has been noted in several cancer types, including
neuroblastoma (60), leukemia (18), and hepatocellular carcinoma (19). Most notably, one T-
Prensner and Chinnaiyan
Cancer Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 April 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
UCR gene, termed TUC338, has been shown to promote both cell proliferation and
anchorage-independent growth in hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines (19), and TUC338
transcript is localized to the nucleus, suggesting a role in regulation of expression (19). Calin
et al. further demonstrated that T-UCRs are targets for miRNAs (18). While T-UCRs remain
poorly characterized as a whole, further exploration of the role and mechanism of these
ncRNAs will likely elucidate novel aspects of tumor biology.
Functions and mechanisms of long ncRNAs
Like protein-coding genes, there is considerable variability in the function of long ncRNAs.
Yet, clear themes in the data suggest that many long ncRNAs contribute to associated
biological processes. These processes typically relate to transcriptional regulation or mRNA
processing, which is reminiscent of miRNAs and may indicate a similar sequence-based
mechanism akin to miRNA binding to seed sequences on target mRNAs. However, unlike
miRNAs, long ncRNAs show a wide spectrum of biological contexts that demonstrate
greater complexity to their functions.
Epigenetic transcriptional regulation
The most dominant function explored in lncRNA studies relates to epigenetic regulation of
target genes. This typically results in transcriptional repression, and many lncRNAs were
first characterized by their repressive functions, including ANRIL, HOTAIR, H19,
KCNQ1OT1, and XIST (10, 47, 55). These lncRNAs achieve their repressive function by
coupling with histone modifying or chromatin remodeling protein complexes.
The most common protein partners of lncRNAs are the PRC1 and PRC2 polycomb
repressive complexes. These complexes transfer repressive post-translational modifications
to specific amino acid positions on histone tail proteins, thereby facilitating chromatin
compaction and heterochromatin formation in order to enact repression of gene
transcription. PRC1 may be comprised of numerous proteins, including BMI1, RING1,
RING2 and Chromobox (CBX) proteins, which act as a multi-protein complex to
ubiquitinate histone H2A at lysine 119 (61). PRC2 is classically composed of EED, SUZ12,
and EZH2, the latter of which is a histone methyltransferase enzymatic subunit that
trimethylates histone 3 lysine 27 (61). Both EZH2 and BMI1 are upregulated in numerous
common solid tumors, leading to tumor progression and aggressiveness (13, 61).
Indeed, ANRIL, HOTAIR, H19, KCNQ1OT1, and XIST have all been linked to the PRC2
complex, and in all except H19, direct binding has been observed between PRC2 proteins
and the ncRNA itself (40, 48, 55, 62, 63). Binding of lncRNAs to PRC2 proteins, however,
is common and observed for ncRNAs, such as PCAT-1, which do not appear to function
through a PRC2-mediated mechanism. It is estimated that nearly 20% of all lncRNAs may
bind PRC2 (64), though the biological meaning of these observations remains unclear. It is
possible that PRC2 promiscuously binds lncRNAs in a non-specific manner. However, if
lncRNAs are functioning in a predominantly cis-regulatory mechanism—such as ANRIL,
KCNQ1OT1, and XIST—then numerous lncRNAs may bind PRC2 to facilitate local gene
expression control throughout the genome. Relatedly, studies of PRC2-ncRNA binding
properties have been able to determine a putative PRC2-binding motif that includes a GCrich double hairpin, indicating a structural basis for PRC2-ncRNA binding in many cases
Similarly, PRC1 proteins, particularly CBX proteins, have been implicated in ncRNA-based
biology. For example, ANRIL binds CBX7 in addition to PRC2 proteins, and this interaction
with CBX7 recruits PRC1 to the INK4A/ARF locus to mediate transcriptional silencing (47).
More broadly, work with mouse polycomb proteins demonstrated that treatment with
Prensner and Chinnaiyan
Cancer Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 April 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
RNAse abolished CBX7 binding to heterochromatin on a global level, supporting the notion
that ncRNAs are critical for PRC1 genomic recruitment (65).
While PRC1 and PRC2 are perhaps the most notable partners of lncRNAs, numerous other
epigenetic complexes are implicated in ncRNA-mediated gene regulation. For example, the
3’ domain of HOTAIR contains a binding site for the LSD1/CoREST, a histone deacetylase
complex that facilitates gene repression by chromatin remodeling (Figure 3A) (56). AIR is
similarly reported to interact with G9a, a H3K9 histone methyltransferase (66). KCNQ1OT1
has been shown to interact with PRC2 (63), G9a (63), and DNMT1, which methylates CpG
dinucleotides in the genome. More rarely, lncRNAs have been observed in activating
epigenetic complexes. In a recent example, HOTTIP interacts with WDR5 to mediate
recruitment of the MLL histone methyltransferase to the distal HoxA locus. MLL transfers
methyl groups to H3K4me3, thereby generating open chromatin structures that promote
gene transcription (52).
In some cases, the mere act of lncRNA transcription is critical for the recruitment of protein
complexes. Studies for both H19, KCNQ1OT1 and AIR suggest that transcriptional
elongation of these genes is an important component of their function (34, 53, 54). By
contrast, other lncRNAs, including HOTTIP as well as many trans-regulatory ones, do not
show this relationship (52). For these lncRNAs, biological function may be centrally linked
to their role as flexible scaffolds. In this model, lncRNAs serve as tethers that rope together
multiple protein complexes through a loose arrangement. Supporting this model are the
multiple lncRNAs found to bind multiple protein complexes, such as ANRIL (binding PRC1
and PRC2) and HOTAIR (binding PRC2 and LSD1/CoREST) (Figure 3A).
Enhancer-associated long ncRNAs
In addition to facilitating epigenetic changes that impact gene transcription, emerging
evidence suggests that some ncRNAs contribute to gene regulation by influencing the
activity of gene enhancers. For example, HOTTIP is implicated in chromosomal looping of
active enhancers to the distal HoxA locus (52), though knockdown and overexpression of
HOTTIP is not sufficient to alter chromosomal confirmations (52). There is also a report of
local enhancer-like ncRNAs that typically lack the H3K4me1 enhancer histone signature,
but possess H3K4me3, and function to potentiate neighbor gene transcription in a manner
independent of sequence orientation (67).
A major recent development has been the discovery of eRNAs, which are critical for the
proper coordination of enhancer genomic loci with gene expression regulation. While the
mechanism of their action is still unclear, in prostate cancer cells, induction of AR signaling
increased eRNA synthesis at AR-regulated gene enhancers, suggesting that eRNAs facilitate
active transcription upon induction of a signaling pathway (29). Using chromatin
conformation assays, Wang et al. showed that eRNAs are also important for the
establishment of enhancer-promoter genomic proximity by chromosomal looping.
Moreover, eRNAs work in conjunction with cell lineage-specific transcription factors, such
as FOXA1 in prostate cells, thereby creating a highly specialized enhancer network to
regulate transcription of genes in individual cell types (Figure 3B) (29). Future work in this
area will likely provide insight into signaling mechanisms important in cancer.
Modulating tumor suppressor activity
The role of many lncRNAs as transcriptional repressors lends itself to inquiry as a
mechanism for suppression of tumor suppressor genes. Here, one particular hotspot is the
chromosome 9p21 locus, harboring the tumor suppressor genes CDKN2A and CDKN2B,
which give rise to multiple unique isoforms, such as p14, p15, and p16, and function as
Prensner and Chinnaiyan
Cancer Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 April 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
inhibitors of oncogenic cyclin dependent kinases. Expression of this region is impacted by
several repressive ncRNAs, such as ANRIL (Figure 3C, upper), and the p15-Antisense
RNA, the latter of which also mediates heterochromatin formation through repressive
histone modifications and was observed in leukemias (47, 68).
Moreover, several lncRNAs are implicated in the regulation of p53 tumor suppressor
signaling. MEG3, a maternally-expressed imprinted lncRNA on Chr14q32, has been shown
to activate p53 and facilitate p53 signaling, including enhancing p53 binding to target gene
promoters (69). MEG3 has also been linked to p53 signaling in meningioma (70), and
MEG3 overexpression suppresses cell proliferation in meningioma and hepatocellular
carcinoma cell lines (70, 71). In human tumors, MEG3 downregulation is widely noted, with
frequent hypermethylation of its promoter observed in pituitary tumors (10) and leukemias
(72). Taken together, these data implicate MEG3 as a putative tumor suppressor.
A recently described murine lncRNA located near the p21 gene, termed linc-p21, has also
emerged as a promising p53-pathway gene. In murine lung, sarcoma, and lymphoma tumors,
linc-p21 expression is induced upon activation of p53 signaling and represses p53 target
genes through a physical interaction with hnRNP-K, a protein that binds the promoters of
genes involved in p53 signaling (Figure 3C, lower) (73). linc-p21 is further required for
proper apoptotic induction (73). These data highlight linc-p21 as a candidate tumor
suppressor gene. However, due to sequence differences between species, it is currently
unclear whether the human homologue of linc-p21 plays a similarly important role in human
tumor development.
Regulation of mRNA processing and translation
While many lncRNAs operate by regulating gene transcription, post-transcriptional
processing of mRNAs is also critical to gene expression. A primary actor in these processes
is the nuclear paraspeckle, a sub-cellular compartment found in the interchromatin space
within a nucleus and characterized by PSP1 protein granules (74). While nuclear
paraspeckle functions are not fully elucidated, this structure is known to be involved in a
variety of post-transcriptional activities, including splicing and RNA editing (74).
Paraspeckles are postulated to serve as storage sites for mRNA prior to its export to the
cytoplasm for translation, and one study discovered a paraspeckle-retained, polyadenylated
nuclear ncRNA, termed CTN-RNA, that is a counterpart to the protein-coding murine CAT2
(mCAT2) gene (75). CTN-RNA is longer than mCAT2, and under stress conditions, cleavage
of CTN-RNA to the mCAT2 coding transcript resulted in increased mCAT2 protein (75).
In cancer, two ncRNAs involved in mRNA splicing and nuclear paraspeckle function,
MALAT1 and NEAT1, are overexpressed. MALAT1 and NEAT1 are genomic neighbors on
Chr11q13, and both are thought to contribute to gene expression by regulating mRNA
splicing, editing, and export (Figure 3D) (76, 77). MALAT1 may further serve as a precursor
to a small, 61-base-pair ncRNAs that is generated by RNase P cleavage of the primary
MALAT1 transcript and exported into the cytoplasm (78). Although a unique role for
MALAT1 in cancer is not yet known, its overexpression in lung cancer predicts for
aggressive, metastatic disease (79).
Regulatory RNA-RNA interactions
Recent work on mechanisms of RNA regulation has highlighted a novel role for RNA-RNA
interactions between ncRNAs and mRNA sequences. These interactions are conceptually
akin to miRNA regulation of mRNAs, as sequence homology between the ncRNA and the
mRNA is important to the regulatory process.
Prensner and Chinnaiyan
Cancer Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 April 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
This sequence homology may be derived from ancestral repeat elements that contribute
sequence to either the untranslated sequences of a protein-coding gene, or, less frequently,
the coding region itself. For example, STAU1-mediated mRNA decay involves the binding
STAU1, a RNA degradation protein, to protein-coding mRNAs that interact with lncRNAs
containing ancestral Alu repeats. In this model, sequence repeats, typically Alus, in
lncRNAs and mRNAs partially hybridize, forming double-stranded RNA complexes that
then recruit STAU1 to implement RNA degradation (Figure 3E) (80). A related concept is
found with XIST, which contains a conserved repeat sequence, termed RepA, in its first
exon. RepA is essential for XIST function and the RepA sequence is necessary to recruit
PRC2 proteins for X-chromosome inactivation (40).
Another model for mRNA regulation was recently posited by Pandolfi and colleagues, who
suggested that transcribed pseudogenes serve as decoy for miRNAs that target the proteincoding mRNA transcripts of their cognate genes (81). Sequestration of miRNAs by the
pseudogene then regulates the gene expression level of the protein-coding mRNA indirectly
(Figure 3F). In addition to pseudogenes, this model more broadly suggests that all long
ncRNAs, as well as other protein-coding mRNAs, may function as molecular “sponges” that
bind and sequester miRNAs in order to control gene expression indirectly. In their study,
Pandolfi and colleagues demonstrate that pseudogenes of two cancer genes, PTEN and
KRAS, may be biologically active, and that PTENP1, a pseudogene of PTEN that competes
for miRNA binding sites with PTEN, itself functions as a tumor suppressor in in vitro assays
and may be genomically lost in cancer (81). This intriguing hypothesis may shed new light
onto the functions or ncRNAs, pseudogenes, and even the UTRs of a protein-coding gene.
Implications of ncRNAs for cancer management
lncRNA diagnostic biomarkers
For clinical medicine, lncRNAs offer several possible benefits. lncRNAs, such as PCAT-1,
commonly demonstrate restricted tissue-specific and cancer-specific expression patterns (9).
This tissue-specific expression distinguishes lncRNAs from miRNAs and protein-coding
mRNAs, which are frequently expressed from multiple tissue types. While the underlying
mechanism for this is unclear, recent studies of chromatin confirmation show tissue-specific
patterns, which may impact ncRNA transcription (29, 52). Given this specificity, ncRNAs
may be superior biomarkers than many current protein-coding biomarkers, both for tissueof-origin tests as well as cancer diagnostics.
A prominent example is PCA3, a lncRNA that is a prostate-specific gene and markedly
overexpressed in prostate cancer. Although the biological function of PCA3 is unclear, its
utility as a biomarker has led to the development of a clinical PCA3 diagnostic assay for
prostate cancer, and this test is already being employed for clinical uses (82, 83). In this test,
PCA3 transcript is detected in prostate cancer patient urine samples, which contain prostate
cancer cells shed into the urethra. Thus, monitoring PCA3 does not require invasive
procedures (Figure 4A) (82). The PCA3 test represents the most effective clinical
translational of a cancer-associated ncRNA gene, and the rapid timeline these developments
—only 10 years from between its initial description and a clinical test—suggests that the use
of ncRNAs in clinical medicine is only beginning. Non-invasive detection of other
aberrantly expressed lncRNAs, such as upregulation of HULC, which occurs in
hepatocellular carcinomas, has also been observed in patient blood sera (10); however other
lncRNA-based diagnostics have not been developed for widespread use.
Prensner and Chinnaiyan
Cancer Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 April 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
lncRNA-based therapies
The transition from ncRNA-based diagnostics to ncRNA-based therapies is also showing
initial signs of development. Although the implementation of therapies targeting ncRNAs is
still remote for clinical oncology, experimental therapeutics employing RNA interference
(RNAi) to target mRNAs have been tested in mice, cynomolgus monkeys, and humans (84),
as part of a phase I clinical trial for patients with advanced cancer (Figure 4B). Davis and
colleagues found that systemic administration of RNAi-based therapy was able to effectively
localize to human tumors and reduce expression of its target gene mRNA and protein (84).
Currently, ongoing clinical trials are further evaluating the safety and efficacy of RNAibased therapeutics in patients with a variety of diseases, including cancer (85), and these
approaches could be adapted to target lncRNA transcripts.
Other studies investigate an intriguing approach that employs modular assembly of small
molecules to adapt to aberrant RNA secondary structure motifs in disease (86). This
approach could potentially target aberrant ncRNAs, mutant mRNAs, as well as nucleotide
triplet-repeat expansions seen in several neurological diseases (such as Huntington’s
disease). However, most RNA-based research remains in the early stages of development,
and the potential for RNAi therapies targeting lncRNAs in cancer is still far from use in
oncology clinics.
lncRNAs in genomic epidemiology
In the past decade, genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have become a mainstream
way to identify germline SNPs that may predispose to myriad human diseases. In prostate
cancer, over 20 GWAS have reported 31 SNPs with reproducible allele-frequency changes
in prostate cancer patients compared to men without prostate cancer (87), and these 31 SNPs
cluster into 14 genomic loci (87). In principle, profiling of these SNPs could represent an
epidemiological tool to assess patient populations with a high risk of prostate cancer.
Of the 14 genomic loci, the most prominent by far is the “gene desert” region upstream of
the cMYC oncogene on chromosome 8q24, which harbors 10 of the 31 reproducible SNPs
associated with prostate cancer (Figure 4C). Several SNPs in the 8q24 region have been
studied for their effect on enhancers (88), particularly for enhancers of cMYC (89), and
chromosome looping studies have shown that many regions within 8q24 may physically
interact with the genomic position of the cMYC gene (90).
Recently, our identification of PCAT-1 as a novel chr8q24 gene implicated in prostate
cancer pathogenesis further highlights the importance and complexity of this region (Figure
4C) (9). Although the relationship between PCAT-1 and the 8q24 SNPs is not clear at this
time, this discovery suggests that previously-termed “gene deserts” may, in fact, harbor
critical lncRNA genes, and that SNPs found in these regions may impact uncovered aspects
of biology. Relatedly, GWAS analyses of atherosclerosis, coronary artery disease, and type
2 diabetes have all highlighted ANRIL on chr9p21 as a ncRNA gene harboring of diseaseassociated SNPs (50).
Clinically, the use of GWAS data may identify patient populations at risk for cancer and
may stratify patient disease phenotypes, such as aggressive versus indolent cancer, and
patient outcomes (91). SNP profiles may also be use to predict a patient’s response to a
given therapy (92). As such, the clinical translation of GWAS data remains an area of
interest for cancer epidemiology.
Prensner and Chinnaiyan
Cancer Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 April 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Future directions
Defining the lncRNA component of the human genome
Going forward, it is clear that the systematic identification and annotation of lncRNAs, and
their expression patterns in human tissues and disease, is important to clarifying the
molecular biology underlying cancer. These efforts will be facilitated by large-scale RNA-
Seq studies followed by ab initio or de novo sequence data assembly to discover lncRNAs in
an unbiased manner (9, 26).
However, it is increasingly appreciated that a number of annotated but uncharacterized
transcripts are important lncRNAs—HOTTIP is one such example (52). Similarly, the
STAU1-interacting lncRNAs described by Gong and colleagues were also found by
screening for annotated transcripts that contained prominent Alu repeats (80). While these
examples were annotated as non-coding genes, it is also possible that other annotated genes,
enumerated in early studies as protein-coding but not studied experimentally, are mislabeled
ncRNA genes. These may include the generic “open-reading frame” genes (such as LOCxxx
or CxxORFxx genes) that have not received detailed study.
Supporting this, Dinger et al. recently argued that bioinformatically distinguishing between
protein-coding and non-coding genes can be difficult and that traditional computational
methods for doing this may have been inadequate in many cases (93). For example, XIST
was initially identified as a protein-coding gene because it has a potential, unused open
reading frame (ORF) of nearly 300 amino acids (94). Additional complications further
include an increasing appreciation of mRNA transcripts that function both by encoding a
protein and at the RNA level, which would support miRNA sequestration hypotheses
posited by Pandolfi and colleagues (81), and of very small ORFs (encoding peptides
<10kDA) (95).
Elucidating the role of lncRNA sequence conservation
In general, most protein-coding exons are highly conserved and most lncRNAs are poorly
conserved. This is not always true, as T-UCRs are prime examples of conserved ncRNAs.
However, the large majority of lncRNAs exhibit substantial sequence divergence among
species, and lncRNAs that do show strong conservation frequently only exhibit this
conservation in a limited region of the transcript, and not the remainder of the gene.
This conundrum has sparked many hypotheses, many of which have merit. Small regions of
conservation could indicate function domains of a given ncRNA, such as a binding site for
proteins, microRNAs, mRNAs, or genomic DNA. Development of abundant ncRNA species
could also suggest evolutionary advancement as species develop. In support of this latter
proposition, many have commented that complex mammalian genomes (such as the human
genome) have a vastly increased non-coding DNA component of their genome compared to
single-celled organisms and nematodes, whereas the complement of protein-coding genes
varies less throughout evolutionary time (96).
For lncRNAs, the issue of sequence conservation is paramount. However, it is now well
established that poorly-conserved lncRNAs can be biologically important, but it is unclear
whether these represent species-specific evolutionary traits or whether functional homologs
have simply not been found. For example, AIR was initially described in mice in the 1980s,
but a human homolog was not identified until 2008 (97).
Moreover, even lncRNAs with relatively high conservation, such as HOTAIR, may have
species-specific function. Indeed, a study of murine HOTAIR (mHOTAIR) showed that
mHOTAIR did not regulate the HoxD locus and did not recapitulate the functions observed
Prensner and Chinnaiyan
Cancer Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 April 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
in human cells (98). Other ncRNAs observed in mice, such as linc-p21, also show only
limited sequence homology to their human forms and may have divergent functions as well.
This may support hypotheses of rapid evolution of lncRNAs during the course of
mammalian development. Moreover, this may suggest either that lncRNAs may have
functions independent of conserved protein complexes (which have comparatively static
functions throughout evolution) or that lncRNAs may adapt to cooperate with different
protein complexes in different species.
Determining somatic alterations of lncRNAs in cancer
To date, somatic mutation of lncRNAs in cancer is not well explored. While numerous
lncRNAs display altered expression levels in cancer, it is unclear to what extent cancers
specifically target lncRNAs for genomic amplification/deletion, somatic point mutations, or
other targeted aberrations.
In several examples, data suggest that lncRNAs may be a target for somatic aberrations in
cancer. For example, approximately half of prostate cancers harbor gene fusions of the ETS
family transcription factors (ERG, ETV1, ETV4, ETV5), which generally result in the
translocation of an androgen-regulated promoter to drive upregulation of the ETS gene (99).
One patient was initially found to have an ETV1 translocation to an intergenic androgenregulated region (100) which was subsequently found to encode a prostate-specific lncRNA
(PCAT-14) (9), thereby creating a gene fusion between the lncRNA and ETV1. Similarly, a
GAS5-BCL6 gene fusion, resulting from a chromosomal translocation and retaining the full
coding sequence of BCL6, has been reported in a patient with B-cell lymphoma (101).
Finally, Poliseno and colleagues demonstrated that the PTEN pseudogene, PTENP1, is
genomically deleted in prostate and colon cancers, leading to aberrant expression levels of
these genes (81).
These initial data suggest that somatic aberrations of lncRNAs do contribute to their
dysregulated function in cancer, although most studies to date identify gene expression
changes as the primary alteration in lncRNA function. Yet, the study of mutated lncRNAs in
cancer will be an area of high importance in future investigations, as several prominent
oncogenes, such as KRAS, show no substantial change in protein expression level in
mutated compared to non-mutated cases.
Characterizing RNA structural motifs
Just as protein-coding genes harbor specific domains of amino acids that mediate distinct
functions (e.g. a kinase domain), RNA molecules also have intricate and specific structures.
Among the most well-known RNA structures is the stem-loop-stem design of a hairpin,
which is integral for miRNA generation (12). RNA structures are also known to be essential
for binding to proteins, particularly PRC2 proteins (40). However, global profiles of
lncRNA structures are poorly understood. While it is clear that lncRNA structure is
important to lncRNA function, few RNA domains are well-characterized. Moreover, it is
likely that RNA domains occur at the level of secondary structure, as lncRNA sequences are
highly diverse yet may form similar secondary structures following RNA folding (102).
To this end, both computational and experimental advancements are beginning to address
these topics. While numerous computational algorithms have been proposed to predict RNA
structures (102), perhaps the most dramatic advance in this area has been the development of
RNA-Seq methods to interrogate aspects of RNA structure globally. Recently, Frag-Seq and
PARS-Seq have demonstrated the unbiased evaluation of RNA structures by treating RNA
samples with specific RNAses that cleave RNA at highly selective structural positions (103,
104). These RNA fragments are then processed and sequenced to determine the nucleotide
Prensner and Chinnaiyan
Cancer Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 April 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
sites where RNA transcripts were cleaved, indirectly implying a secondary structure. This
area of research promises to yield tremendous insight into the overall mechanics of lncRNA
Conclusions
In the past decade, the rapid discovery of ncRNA species by high-throughput technologies
has accelerated current conceptions of transcriptome complexity. While a biological
understanding of these ncRNAs has proceeded more slowly, increasing recognition of
lncRNAs has defined these genes as critical actors of numerous cellular processes. In cancer,
dysregulated lncRNA expression characterizes the entire spectrum of disease and aberrant
lncRNA function drives cancer through disruption of normal cell processes, typically by
facilitating epigenetic repression of downstream target genes. lncRNAs thus represent a
novel, poorly-characterized layer of cancer biology. In the near term, clinical translation of
lncRNAs may assist biomarker development in cancer types without robust and specific
biomarkers, and in the future RNA-based therapies may be a viable option for clinical
Acknowledgments
We thank Sameek Roychowdhury, Matthew Iyer, and members of the Chinnaiyan lab for helpful discussions and
comments on this manuscript. Robin Kunkel assisted with figure preparation. We would further acknowledge the
numerous labs, authors, and publications that we were unable to cite in this review due to space restrictions.
Grant Support This work was supported by the Department of Defense grants PC100171 (to A.M.C.) and
PC094290 (to J.R.P), NIH Prostate Specialized Program of Research Excellence grant P50CA69568 (to A.M.C.),
the Early Detection Research Network grant U01 CA 11275 (to. A.M.C.). A.M.C. is supported by the Doris Duke
Charitable Foundation Clinical Scientist Award, a Burroughs Welcome Foundation Award in Clinical translational
Research, the Prostate Cancer Foundation, the American Cancer Society, and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute.
J.R.P. is a Fellow of the University of Michigan Medical Scientist Training Program. A.M.C. is a Taubman Scholar
of the University of Michigan.