Noise Perturbation for Supervised Speech Separation
Jitong Chena,*, Yuxuan Wanga, and DeLiang Wanga,b
aDepartment of Computer Science and Engineering, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio
bCenter for Cognitive and Brain Sciences, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210
Speech separation can be treated as a mask estimation problem, where interference-dominant
portions are masked in a time-frequency representation of noisy speech. In supervised speech
separation, a classifier is typically trained on a mixture set of speech and noise. It is important to
efficiently utilize limited training data to make the classifier generalize well. When target speech
is severely interfered by a nonstationary noise, a classifier tends to mistake noise patterns for
speech patterns. Expansion of a noise through proper perturbation during training helps to expose
the classifier to a broader variety of noisy conditions, and hence may lead to better separation
performance. This study examines three noise perturbations on supervised speech separation:
noise rate, vocal tract length, and frequency perturbation at low signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs). The
speech separation performance is evaluated in terms of classification accuracy, hit minus falsealarm rate and short-time objective intelligibility (STOI). The experimental results show that
frequency perturbation is the best among the three perturbations in terms of speech separation. In
particular, the results show that frequency perturbation is effective in reducing the error of
misclassifying a noise pattern as a speech pattern.
Speech separation; supervised learning; noise perturbation
1. Introduction
Speech separation is a task of separating target speech from noise interference. The task has
a wide range of applications such as hearing aid design and robust automatic speech
recognition (ASR). Monaural speech separation is proven to be very challenging as it only
uses single-microphone recordings, especially in low SNR conditions. One way of dealing
with this problem is to apply speech enhancement on a noisy signal, where certain assumptions are made
* Corresponding author, (Jitong Chen).
 (Yuxuan Wang), (DeLiang Wang)
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Speech Commun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
 
Speech Commun. 2016 April 1; 78: 1–10. doi:10.1016/j.specom.2015.12.006.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
regarding general statistics of the background noise. The speech enhancement approach is
usually limited to relatively stationary noises. Looking at the problem from another
perspective, computational auditory scene analysis (CASA) ,
which is inspired by psychoacoustic research in auditory scene analysis (ASA) , exploits perceptual principles to speech separation.
In CASA, interference can be reduced by applying masking on a time-frequency (T-F)
representation of noisy speech. An ideal mask suppresses noise-dominant T-F units and
keeps the speech-dominant T-F units. Therefore, speech separation can be treated as a mask
estimation problem where supervised learning is employed to construct the mapping from
acoustic features to a mask. A binary decision on each T-F unit leads to an estimate of the
ideal binary mask (IBM), which is defined as follows.
where t denotes time and f frequency. The IBM assigns the value 1 to a T-F unit if its SNR
exceeds a local criterion (LC), and 0 otherwise. Therefore, speech separation is translated
into a binary classification problem. Recent studies show IBM separation improves speech
intelligibility in noise for both normal-hearing and hearing-impaired listeners . Alternatively, a soft
decision on each T-F unit leads to an estimate of the ideal ratio mask (IRM). The IRM is
defined below .
where β is a tunable parameter. A recent study has shown that β = 0.5 is a good choice for
the IRM . In this case, mask estimation becomes a regression problem
where the target is the IRM. Ratio masking is shown to lead to slightly better objective
intelligibility results than binary masking . In this study, we use the IRM
with β = 0.5 as the learning target.
Supervised speech separation is a data-driven method where one expects a mask estimator to
generalize from limited training data. However, training data only partially captures the true
data distribution, thus a mask estimator can overfit training data and do a poor job in unseen
scenarios. In supervised speech separation, a training set is typically created by mixing clean
speech and noise. When we train and test on a nonstationary noise such as a cafeteria noise,
there can be considerable mismatch between training noise segments and test noise
segments, especially when the noise resource used for training is restricted. Similar
problems can be seen in other supervised learning tasks such as image classification where
the mismatch of training images and test images poses a great challenge. In image
classification, a common practice is to transform training images using distortions such as
rotation, translation and scaling, in order to expand the training set and improve
generalization of a classifier . We conjecture that
supervised speech separation can also benefit from training data augmentation.
Chen et al.
Speech Commun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
In this study, we aim at expanding the noise resource using noise perturbation to improve
supervised speech separation. We treat noise expansion as a way to prevent a mask estimator
from overfitting the training data. A recent study has shown speech perturbation improves
ASR . However, our study perturbs noise instead of speech since we
focus on separating target speech from highly nonstationary noises where the mismatch
among noise segments is the major problem. To our knowledge, our study is the first to
introduce training data augmentation to the domain of speech separation.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the system used for mask estimation.
Noise perturbations are covered in Section 3. We present experimental results in Section 4.
Section 5 concludes the paper. A preliminary version of this paper is included in Chen et al.
 . Compared to the preliminary version, this paper has added a comparison with an
alternative supervised separation method , detailed analysis of the
three perturbation methods, and more evaluations in unvoiced and voiced intervals of
speech, unmatched noises, expanded training and the very low SNR condition of −10 dB.
2. System overview
To evaluate the effects of noise perturbation, we use a fixed system for mask estimation and
compare the quality of estimated masks as well as the resynthesized speech that are derived
from the masked T-F representations of noisy speech. While comparison between an
estimated mask and an ideal mask reveals the spectrotemporal distribution of estimation
errors, resythesized speech can be directly compared to clean speech. As mentioned in
Section 1, we use the IRM as the target of supervised learning. The IRM is computed from
the 64-channel cochleagrams of premixed clean speech and noise. The cochleagram is a
time-frequency representation of a signal . We use a 20 ms
window and a 10 ms window shift to compute cochleagram in this study. We perform IRM
estimation using a deep neural network (DNN) and a set of acoustic features. Recent studies
have shown that DNN is a strong classifier for ASR and speech
separation . As shown in Fig. 1, acoustic features
are extracted from a mixture sampled at 16 kHz, and then sent to a DNN for mask
prediction.
We use classification accuracy, hit minus false-alarm (HIT–FA) rate and short-time
objective intelligibility (STOI) score as three criteria for measuring the
quality of the estimated IRM. Since the first two criteria are defined for binary masks, we
calculate them by binarizing a ratio mask to a binary one. In this study, we follow Equation
3 and Equation 1.
During the mask conversion, the LC is set to be 5 dB lower than the SNR of a given
mixture. The three criteria evaluate the estimated IRM from three different perspectives.
Classification accuracy computes the percentage of correctly labeled T-F units in a binary
mask. In HIT–FA, HIT refers to the percentage of correctly classified target-dominant T-F
Chen et al.
Speech Commun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
units and FA refers to the percentage of wrongly classified interference-dominant T-F units.
HIT–FA rate is well correlated with human speech intelligibility . In
addition, STOI is computed by comparing the the short-time envelopes of clean speech and
resynthesized speech obtained from IRM masking, and it is a standard objective metric of
speech intelligibility .
3. Noise perturbation
The goal of noise perturbation is to expand noise segments to cover unseen scenarios so that
the overfitting problem is mitigated in supervised speech separation. A reasonable and
straightforward idea for noise expansion is to reverse each noise signal in time. We have
evaluated this idea and unfortunately adding reversed noises does not improve speech
separation results. We conjecture that the spectrogram of a noise segment may be a better
domain to apply perturbation. A recent study has found that three perturbations on speech
samples in the spectrogram domain improve ASR performance . These
perturbations were used to expand the speech samples so that more speech patterns are
observed by a classifier. The three perturbations are introduced below. Unlike this study, we
perturb noise samples instead of perturbing speech samples, as we are dealing with highly
nonstationary noises.
3.1. Noise Rate (NR) perturbation
Speech rate perturbation, a way of speeding up or slow down speech, is used to expand
training utterances during the training of an ASR system. In our study, we extend the
method to vary the rate of nonstationary noises. We increase or decrease noise rate by factor
γ. When a noise rate is being perturbed, the value of γ is randomly selected from an interval
[γmin, 2−γmin]. The effect of NR perturbation on a spectrogram is shown in Fig. 2.
3.2. Vocal Tract Length (VTL) perturbation
VTL perturbation has been used in ASR to cover the variation of vocal tract length among
speakers. A recent study suggests that VTL perturbation improves ASR performance . VTL perturbation essentially compresses or stretches the medium and
low frequency components of an input signal. We use VTL perturbation as a method of
perturbing a noise segment. Specifically, we follow the algorithm in to perturb noise signals:
where α is the wrapping factor, S is the sampling rate, and Fhi controls the cutoff frequency.
Fig. 3(a) shows how VTL perturbation compresses or stretches a portion of a spectrogram.
The effect of VTL perturbation is visualized in Fig. 3(b).
3.3. Frequency perturbation
When frequency perturbation is applied, frequency bands of a spectrogram are randomly
shifted upward or downward. We use the method described in to
Chen et al.
Speech Commun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
randomly perturb noise samples. Frequency perturbation takes three steps. First, we
randomly assign a value to each T-F unit, which is drawn from a uniform distribution.
Then we derive the perturbation factor δ(f, t) by averaging the assigned values of
neighboring time-frequency units. This averaging step avoids large oscillations in
spectrogram.
where p and q control the smoothness of the perturbation, and λ controls the magnitude of
the perturbation. These tunable parameters are decided experimentally. Finally the
spectrogram is perturbed as follows.
where S(f, t) represents the original spectrogram and S̃(f, t) is the perturbed spectrogram.
Interpolation between neighboring frequencies is used when δ(f, t) is not an integer. The
effect of frequency perturbation is visualized in Fig. 4.
4. Experimental results
4.1. Experimental setup
We use the IEEE corpus recorded by a male speaker and six nonstationary
noises from the DEMAND corpus to create mixtures. All signals are
sampled at 16 KHz. Note that all recordings of the DEMAND corpus are made with a 16channel microphone array, we use only one channel of the recordings since this study is on
monaural speech separation.
The DEMAND corpus has six categories of noises. We choose one noise from each category
to represent distinct environments. The six nonstationary noises, each is five-minute long,
are described as follows.
The “Street” category:
The SCAFE noise, recorded in the terrace of a cafe at a public square.
The “Domestic” category:
The DLIVING noise, recorded inside a living room.
The “Office” category:
The OMEETING noise, recorded in a meeting room.
The “Public” category:
The PCAFETER noise, recorded in a busy office cafeteria.
Chen et al.
Speech Commun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
The “Nature” category:
The NPARK noise, recorded in a well visited city park.
The “Transportation” category:
The TMETRO noise, recorded in a subway.
To create a mixture, we mix one IEEE sentence and one noise type at −5 dB SNR. This low
SNR is selected with the goal of improving speech intelligibility in mind where there is not
much to improve at higher SNRs . The training set uses 600 IEEE
sentences and randomly selected segments from the first two minutes of a noise, while the
test set uses another 120 IEEE sentences and randomly selected segments from the second
two minutes of a noises. Therefore, the test set has different sentences and different noise
segments from the training set. We create 50 mixtures for each training sentence by mixing
it with 50 randomly selected segments from a given noise, which results in a training set
containing 600×50 mixtures. The test set includes 120 mixtures. We train and test using the
same noise type and SNR condition.
To perturb a noise segment, we first apply short-time Fourier transform (STFT) to derive
noise spectrogram, where a frame length of 20 ms and a frame shift of 10 ms are used. Then
we perturb the spectrogram and derive a new noise segment. To evaluate the three noise
perturbations, we create five different training sets, each consists of 600×50 mixtures. We
train a mask estimator for each training set and evaluate on a fixed test set (i.e. the 120
mixtures created from the original noises). The five training sets are described as follows.
Original Noise: All mixtures are created using original noises.
NR Perturbation: Half of the mixtures are created from NR perturbed noises, and
the other half are from original noises.
VTL Perturbation: Half of the mixtures are created from VTL perturbed noises, and
the other half are from original noises.
Frequency Perturbation: Half of the mixtures are created from frequency perturbed
noises, and the other half are from original noises.
Combined: Half of the mixtures are created from applying three perturbations
altogether, and the other half are from original noises.
The acoustic features we extract from mixtures are a complementary feature set (AMS +
RASTAPLP + MFCC) combined with gammatone filterbank (GFB)
features. To compute 15-D AMS, we derive 15 modulation spectrum amplitudes from the
decimated envelope of an input signal . 13-D RASTAPLP is derived by
applying linear prediction analysis on the RASTA-filtered bark-scale power spectrum of an
input signal . We follow a standard procedure to compute
31-D MFCC. To derive GFB features, an input signal is passed to a 64-channel gammatone
filterbank, the response signals are decimated to 100 Hz to form 64-D GFB features. After
appending delta features, we end up with a feature set of 123×2 dimensions.
Chen et al.
Speech Commun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
A four-hidden-layer DNN is employed to learn the mapping from acoustic features to the
IRM. Each hidden layer of the DNN has 1024 rectified linear units .
To incorporate temporal context and obtain smooth mask estimation, we use 5 frames of
features to estimate 5 frames of the IRM . As we use a 246-D feature set
and the 64-channel IRM, the input layer of the DNN has 246×5 units and the output layer
has 64×5 sigmoidal units. Since each frame of the mask is estimated 5 times, we take the
average of the 5 estimates. We use mean squared error as the cost function. Hidden-layer
dropout and adaptive stochastic gradient descent (AdaGrad) with a mini-batch size of 1024 are used to train the DNN. We set the dropout ratio to
0.2 and the initial learning rate of AdaGrad to 0.003. We train the DNN for 80 epochs and
select the best epoch by cross validation.
4.2. Parameters of noise perturbation
In this section, three sets of experiments are carried out to explore the parameters used in the
three perturbations to get the best performance. To facilitate parameter selection, we create
five smaller training sets, following the same configuration in Section 4.1 except that we use
480 IEEE clean sentences to create 480×20 training mixtures. Another 120 IEEE sentences
(different than the test ones in Section 4.1) are used to create 120 test mixtures only for the
purpose of choosing parameter values (i.e. a development set). The speech separation
performance is evaluated in term of STOI score.
In NR perturbation, the only adjustable parameter is the rate γ. We can slow down a noise by
setting γ < 1, or speed it up using γ > 1. To capture various noise rates, we randomly draw γ
from an interval [γmin, 2−γmin]. We evaluate various intervals in term of speech separation
performance. As shown in Fig. 5, the interval [0.1, 1.9] (i.e. γmin = 0.1) gives the best
performance for six noises.
In VTL perturbation, there are two parameters: Fhi controls cutoff frequency and α the
warping factor. Fhi is set to 4800 to roughly cover the frequency range of speech formants.
We randomly draw α from an interval [αmin, 2−αmin] to systematically stretch or shrink the
frequencies below the cutoff frequency. Fig. 6 shows the effects of different intervals on
speech separation performance. The interval of [0.3, 1.7] (i.e. αmin = 0.3) leads to the best
result for the majority of the noise types.
In frequency perturbation, a 161-band spectrogram derived from a noise segment is
perturbed using the algorithm described in Section 3.3. We set p = 50 and q = 100 to avoid
dramatic perturbation along time and frequency axes. We experiment with different
perturbation intensity λ. As shown in Fig. 7, λ = 1000 achieves the best performance for the
majority of the noise types.
4.3. Evaluation results and comparisons
Before we evaluate the three perturbations, it is worth stressing that we are trying to apply
noise perturbations to improve the performance of a strong baseline separation system,
making further improvements harder. As described in Section 2, this baseline system trains a
DNN to estimate the IRM. To demonstrate this, we compare our baseline system with a
Chen et al.
Speech Commun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
recently proposed supervised algorithm based on non-negative matrix factorization (NMF)
 . This algorithm is called active-set Newton
algorithm (ASNA), which we denote as ASNA-NMF . We select
ASNA-NMF as it outperforms many variants of supervised NMF algorithms . We set ASNA-NMF to use 1000 speech bases, 300 noise bases and 5 frames of
magnitude spectra. For a fair comparison, we train ASNA-NMF on the first two minutes of a
noise and 600 IEEE sentences, and test on the second two minutes of the noise and another
120 IEEE sentences. Table 1 shows the separation results of the baseline system and ASNA-
NMF in terms of STOI. The DNN-based baseline produces significantly better results than
ASNA-MNF for six noises at −5 dB SNR. On average, DNN-based ratio masking improves
STOI by 10%, while ASNA-NMF improves STOI by 4%.
We evaluate the three perturbations with the parameter values selected in Section 4.2 and the
five large training sets described in Section 4.1. The effects of noise perturbations on speech
separation are shown in Table 2, Table 3 and Table 4, in terms of classification accuracy,
HIT–FA rate and STOI score respectively. The results indicate that all three perturbations
lead to better speech separation than the baseline where only the original noises are used.
Frequency perturbation performs better than the other two perturbations. Compared to only
using the original noises, the frequency perturbed training set on average increases
classification accuracy, HIT–FA rate and STOI score by 8%, 11% and 3%, respectively.
This indicates that noise perturbation is an effective technique for improving speech
separation results. Combining three perturbations, however, does not lead to further
improvement over frequency perturbation. We conjecture that frequency perturbation alone
provides sufficient noise variations for generalization purposes. To verify this, we expand
training by mixing each clean sentence with more noise segments. For the training sets using
perturbed noises, we fix the number of mixtures created from original noises to 600×25, but
vary the number of mixtures created from perturbed noises. Fig. 8 shows the average STOI
results as the number is set to 600×25, 600×50, and 600×150. As the size of the training set
increases, the combined method and frequency perturbation reach almost the same peak
performance. We also observe that the speech separation performance does not benefit from
a larger training set when no perturbation is used.
A closer look at Table 3 reveals that the contribution of frequency perturbation lies mainly
in the large reduction in FA rate. This means that the problem of misclassifying noisedominant T-F units as speech-dominant is mitigated. This effect can be illustrated by
visualizing the masks estimated from the different training sets and the ground truth mask in
Fig. 9 (e.g. around frame 150). When the mask estimator is trained with the original noises,
it mistakenly retains the regions where target speech is not present, which can be seen by
comparing the top and bottom plots of Fig. 9. Applying frequency perturbation to noises
essentially exposes the mask estimator to more noise patterns and results in a more accurate
mask estimator, which is shown in the middle plot of Fig. 9.
In addition, we show HIT–FA rate for voiced and unvoiced intervals in Table 5 and Table 6
respectively. We find that frequency perturbation is effective for both voiced and unvoiced
intervals.
Chen et al.
Speech Commun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
While classification accuracy and HIT–FA rate evaluate the estimated binary masks, STOI
directly compares clean speech and the resynthesized speech. As shown in Table 4,
frequency perturbation yields higher average STOI scores than using original noises with no
perturbation and NR and VTL perturbations.
To evaluate the effectiveness of frequency perturbation at other SNRs, we carry out
additional experiments at −10 dB and 0 dB input SNRs, where we use the same parameter
values as for −5 dB SNR. Fig. 10 shows frequency perturbation improves speech separation
in terms of STOI in each SNR condition. Also, we find that frequency perturbation remains
the most effective among the three perturbations at −10 dB and 0 dB SNR.
All the above evaluations are conducted on unseen segments of the same nonstationary
noises, corresponding to environment-specific speech separation .
Although not the focus of the present study, it is interesting to see how our mask estimator
performs when evaluated on completely new noises. To get an idea, we evaluate two models
trained with and without frequency perturbation. We use the same setting described in
Section 4.1 except that we train on SCAFE noise and test on the other five noises. The
results are shown in Table 7. As expected, the two models do not perform as well as in the
matched noise case. But they still significantly improve STOI over unprocessed mixtures.
Table 7 also shows that the model with frequency perturbation generalizes better to new
noises than the model without perturbation.
Finally, to evaluate the effect of frequency perturbation on multi-condition training, we test
on SCAFE noise using another two models trained on the other five noises at −5 dB SNR.
The first model is trained with 600 × 30 × 5 mixtures created using the five original noises,
where each sentence is mixed with each noise type 30 times. The second model is trained
with the same number of mixtures where one half are created using original noises and the
other half are created using perturbed noises. The STOI of unprocessed mixtures, separated
speech using the first model and separated speech using the second model are 64.1%, 75.5%
and 78.4%, respectively. This indicates that frequency perturbation also improves
generalization in multi-condition training.
5. Concluding remarks
In this study, we have explored the effects of noise perturbation on supervised monaural
speech separation at low SNR levels. As a training set is usually created from limited speech
and noise resources, a classifier likely overfits the training set and makes poor predictions on
a test set, especially when background noise is highly nonstationary. We suggest to expand
limited noise resources by noise perturbation.
We have evaluated three noise perturbations with six nonstationary noises recorded from
daily life for speech separation. The three are noise rate, VTL, and frequency perturbations.
When a DNN is trained on a data set which utilizes perturbed noises, the quality of the
estimated ratio mask is improved as the classifier has been exposed to more scenarios of
noise interference. In contrast, a mask estimator learned from a training set that only uses
original noises tends to make more false alarm errors (i.e. higher FA rate), which is
detrimental to speech intelligibility . The experimental results show that
Chen et al.
Speech Commun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
frequency perturbation, which randomly perturbs the noise spectrogram along frequency,
almost uniformly gives the best speech separation results among the three perturbations
examined in this study in terms of classification accuracy, HIT–FA rate and STOI score.
Finally, this study adds another technique to deal with the generalization problem in
supervised speech separation. Previous studies use model adaptation 
and extensive training to deal with the mismatch of SNR
conditions, noises and speakers between training and testing. Our study aims at situations
with limited training noises, and provides an effective data augmentation method that
improves generalization in nonstationary environments. The idea of signal perturbation may
also be applicable to augmenting speech signals for improved generalization to different
kinds of speech data, such as different speaking rates and styles.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by an AFOSR grant (FA9550-12-1-0130), an NIDCD grant (R01 DC012048)
and the Ohio Supercomputer Center.