o. A. B. Lindberg,
B.L. Humphreys,
A. T.McCray
National Library of Medicine,
Bethesda MD,
Introduction
In 1986, the National Library of
Medicine (NLM) began a long-term
research and development project to
build the Unified Medical Language
System (UMLS). The purpose of the
UMLS is to improve the ability of
computer programs to "understand"
the biomedical meaning in user inquiries and to use this understanding
to retrieve and integrate relevant
machine-readable information for users . More specifically, the UMLS
project is an effort to overcome two
significant barriers to effective retrieval of machine-readable biomedical information. The first is the variety of
~ays the same concepts are_ expressed
tn different machine-readable sources
and by different people. The second is
the distribution of useful information
among many disparate databases and
systems. Advances in technology,
such as more powerful workstations,
Yearbook of Medical Informatics 1993
Review Article
The Unified Medical Language
Abstract: In 1986, the National Library of Medicine began a long-term
research and development project to build the Unified Medical Language
System® (UMLS®). The purpose of the UMLS is to improve the ability of
computer programs to "understand" the biomedical meaning in user
inquiries and to use this understanding to retrieve and integrate relevant
machine-readable information for users. Underlying the UMLS effort is
the assumption that timely access to accurate and up-to-date information
will improve decision making and ultimately the quality of patient care
and research. The development of the UMLS is a distributed national
experiment with a strong element of international collaboration. The
general strategy is to develop UMLS components through a series of
successive approximations of the capabilities ultimately desired. Three
experimental Knowledge Sources, the Metathesaurus®, the Semantic
Network, and the Information Sources Map have been developed and are
distributed annually to interested researchers, many of whom have tested
and evaluated them in a range of applications. The UMLS project and
current developments in high-speed, high-capacity international networks
are converging in ways that have great potential for enhancing access to
biomedical information.
Key-Words: Unified Medical Language System, UMLS, Semantic Network, National Library of Medicine, NLM, Telecommunication, Information Management, IAIMS
storage devices, and telecommunications capabilities, and improvements
in organizational infrastructure, as
typified by the National Network of
Libraries of Medicine ™ (NN/LM™)
 and Integrated Advanced Information Management Systems (IAIMS)
 , are necessary but not sufficient
to connect health care practitioners
and researchers to pertinent machinereadable information. The critical and
inherently most difficult requirement
is the conceptual connection between
the user's question and the available
machine-readable information .
Underlying the UMLS effort is the
assumption that timely access to accurate and up-to-date information will
improve decision-making and ultimately the quality of patient care and
research. A growing body of evidence
supports this assumption . The
UMLS project assumes that the
amount of useful biomedical information will continue both to increase and
to be dispersed among many databases and systems. The rapidly increasing number of biomedical sources accessible via the Internet illustrates this phenomenon. The UMLS
strategy recognizes that many of the
differences in the terminology used in
databases and by users reflect important distinctions in purpose and perspective . Although current efforts
to standardize the record structure,
transmission formats, and terminology
of specific types of biomedical information may reduce the complexity of the UMLS task, they will
not eliminate it.
In short, the UMLS project assumes a continuing need to navigate a
large array of diverse machine-readable sources to obtain information
relevant to a particular user's practice
or research question. Disparities in
the way concepts are expressed will
continue to exist in different sources,
,for example, in patient record systems
Review Article
and in bibliographic databases. The
UMLS approach is to help applications to exploit this diversity for the
benefit of health professionals and
biomedical researchers. While the results of the UMLS effort may be
useful in related endeavors, the project is not an attempt to develop a
single standard biomedical vocabulary
or classification, or. to build a knowledge base covering all of biomedicine,
nor is it an attempt to define the
structure and content of computerbased patient records.
mission is
to support
· biomedical research and to improve
health care delivery by providing
ready access to published biomedical
information.
Medic us TM,
MeSH™, MEDLARSTM, the National Network of Libraries of Medicine,
TOXNET1TM, and DOCLTNE™ [11)
all contribute to this mission. NLM's
support for training in medical librarianship and medical informatics, for
medical informatics research, and for
innovative systems development also
contributes to an effective infrastructure that supports enhanced infonnation services. NLM focuses its resources on the creation and maintenance
of services that are not readily subject
to private development and distribution. The long-term maintenance of
the knowledge structures required by
the UMLS presents this kind of challenge and is therefore an appropriate
role for NLM.
Development Strategy and
The development of the UMLS is a
distributed national experiment with a
strong element of international collaboration [12). To address the complex
problem of relating user inquiries to
the content of biomedical information
sources, NLM has assembled a multi-
1 As part of the MEDLARS system, 'JOX-
. NET is a computerized collection of files on
toxicology, hazardous chemicals and related
disciplinary in-house research group2
and contracted with a number of
primarily university-based medical informatics research groups throughout
the United States 3• The UMLS research team incorporates: experience
in the development of different types
of information sources, e. g., patient
record systems, ex-pert systems, bibliographic databases; expertise in a
range of disciplines, e. g., medical informatics, computer science, linguistics, library and information science;
and access to members of the user
groups the UMLS jntends to serve.
From its inception the UMLS project
has also sought input from a wide
range of intended users of UMLS
products, including many outside the
United States [13). The general
strategy is to develop the UMLS components through a series of successive
approximations of the capabilities ultimately desired. Rapid development
and broad distribution of early UMLS
products will allow subsequent expansions in scope and complexity to be
based on· feedback from real applications in a variety of biomedical environments. The success of the UMLS
effort is dependent on collaborators
who arc willing to apply its experimental products.
In the first phase of the project
 , the UMLS research
2 In addition to the authors, Wiliam Hole, M.
D., Lawrence King<>land fll, Pb. D., Danlel
Masys, M. D., R. P. C. Rodgers, M. D.,
Harold Scboolman, M. D., and Peri Scbuy·
ler lead UMLS research activities at NLM.
3 The current UMLS contracton; are Brigham
and Women's Hospital (PI: Robert Greenes,
M. D., Ph. D.), Columbia University (PI:
James Cimino, M . .D.), Lexical Technology,
Inc. (PI: Marl< 1\.lttle), Massachusetts General Hospital (PI: G. Octo Barnett, M.D.),
University of Pittsburgh (PI: Randolph Miller, M. D.) with subcontractor University of
Utah (PI: Homer Warner, M.D., Ph. D.),
and Yule School of Medicine (PI: Perry
Miller, M. D., Ph. D.). The MPC Corporation (Pis: Randolph Miller, M.D., University of Pittsburgh; David Evans, Ph. D.,
Carnegie-Mellon University; subcontractor
PI: Homer Warner, M.D., Ph. D.; University of Utah) and the University of California,
San FranciRco (PI: Marsden S. Blois, M_ D.,
Ph. D.) were UMLS contractors from
1986- 1988.
team investigated user needs, de,
veloped tools for the research effortll
identified required UMLS capabili
ties, examined alternative methods fo
delivering these capabilities, and del
fined in general terms the necessarY,
components of the system . nv~
types of components were deeme
essential:
machine-readabl
knowledge sources and sophisticate~
interface programs. The interface
programs would use the highly stru~'
tured information about biomcdic
terminology and databases contain
in the knowledge sources to interpret
user inquiries, to identify and locat~
relevant sources of information, and
to execute successful searches on the
user's behalf.
Definition of the Three UMLS
Knowledge Sources
From the outset; it was assumed
that a "Metathesaurus" which linked
terminology and concepts from a
range .of vocabularies and clasl>ifica·
tions would be needed. The UMLS
team had no preconceptions about the
specific form of this
methods for building it . Seriou~
consideration was given to creating a
classification
biomedical concepts to which existing
vocabularies could be mapped. The
UMLS-funded
"generic frames" for patient findings
(15, 16] explored this approach. A
semantic network was proposed as a
structure for such a new taxonomy
f17J. As research proceeded, it became clear that development of a new
detailed taxonomy of the requisite
scope (all of biomedicine) was a
monumental undertaking with
guarantee ~f an end product more
useful than existing vocabulary sys·
terns. Such an undertaking was not in
keeping with the strategy of rapid
distriSution and feedback on early
versions of U MLS products. Other
UMLS-funded work indicated that a
new canonical taxonomy was not es·
sential to achieving the UMLS goal ~
aiding the retrieval of informati~~
machine-readabl5
sources. Direct linking of alternativ1
names for concepts taken from exist.,
Yearbook of Medical Informatics 1993
ing machine-readable vocabularies
emerged as a potentially viable way to
build the Metathesaurus . This
approach exploited both automated
lexical matching techniques and
the structured "knowledge" embedded in existing biomedical vocabularies, classifications, and databases such as MEDLINE® . The
methodology selected to build the
Metathesaurus is an example of the reuse of knowledge developed for other
purposes discussed by Musen .
Once the outline of the Metathesaurus was defined, the UMLS
project team decided that a separate,
associated UMLS Sema,ntic Network
was needed, not of the individual
concepts in the Metathesaurus, but of
the semantic types or broad categories
of concepts within it. The assignment
of semantic types to concepts in the
Metathesaurus provides a consistent
high level of categorization of these
concepts and also links them to the
biomedical "common sense" represented by the relationships among
semantic types
The initial definition of the ·Characteristics of the third UMLS Knowledge Source, the Information Sources
Map, occasioned less debate. The
UMLS research team readily agreed
that it should contain both human
readable and machine-processable information about the scope and content
of publicly available machine-readable
biomedical information sources. This
information is needed to support automated or semi-automated scource
selection. The other key component of
Information Sources Map records will
be procedural information needed to
effect successful automated ·searches
of the selected sources . Details
about the structure and content of the
three UMLS Knowledge Sources appear in subsequent sections of the
Building, Distributing, and Applying
the UMLS Knowledge Sources
The highest priority for the next
DMLs development phase was the production of initial
Versions of the Knowledge Sources.
NLM issued the first experimental
Yearbook of Medical Informatics 1993
editions of the Metathesaurus and the
Semantic Network on CD-ROM in
the fall of 1990 . A year later, the
first version of the Information Sources Map was released, along with
Metathesaurus and the Semantic Network.
New experimental editions of all three
UMLS Knowledge Sources now appear on CD-ROM annually. NLM is
considering making a UMLS knowledge source server based on the clientserver paradigm available on the Internet. The knowledge server would
allow users, developers, and programs
to navigate and retrieve information
stored in the data files. .
In addition to encouraging testing
and feedback on useful improvements, broad dissemination of the early versions of the Knowledge Sources
promotes the development of prototypes of the interface programs required to deliver the UMLS functionality to end users. The combination of
centralized development of the core of
the Knowledge Sources and decentralized development of the applications programs that make use of them
was considered likely to foster progress toward the complex goals of the
UMLS project. Experience to date
supports this strategy, although some
aspects of maintenance of the Knowledge Sources will become more decentralized over time and some utility
programs are being developed centrally for release with the Knowledge
The UMLS project priorities for
the 1992-1994 period are to develop
an array of useful applications that
Sources, to expand and refine the ·
Knowledge Sources based on feedback from early applications, and to
establish robust production systems
and procedures for maintaining and
distributing the Knowledge Sources
 . NLM itself and its UMLS research contractors are among those
developing spe<;:ific applications programs that make use of the UMLS
Knowledge Sources. NLM has also
awarded grants for UMLS-related
projects and provided small contracts
for testing the use of the Knowledge
Sources with existing applications at
several institutions . Some signific-
Review Article
ant applications have emerged which
should be ready for general distribution within the next two years. In the
meantime, each successive edition of
the UMLS Knowledge Sources incorporates substantial enhancements in
content or format or both . French
translations of MeSH terms were added in a recent addition, and additional
translations
of Metathesaurus
terminologies will be incorporated in
the future. Steady progress is being
made toward sustainable production
mechanisms for maintaining, enhancing, and distributing these complex
products .
UMLS Knowledge Sources
The UMLS Knowledge Sources
contain information useful for developing
intelligent interfaces
biomedical information systems. Tht
knowledge stored in the Metathesau
rus and Semantic Network should hely
interfaces to map user queries to infor
mation in a wide range of biomedic~
information systems. The knowledg.
stored in the Information Source
Map should assist in the identificatior
of the most appropriate informatiot
source or sources for the query posed.
All three Knowledge Sources have
been designed to allow for local addenda that can work in concert with
the regularly released NLM files .
Metathesaurus
Biomedical vocabularies have been
developed for a variety of disciplines
and for a range of information
bibliographic
databases, factual databases, clinical
record systems, and expert systems.
The Metathesaurus may be seen as a
thesaurus that transcends these individual thesauri, or controlled vocabularies, by virtue of the lexical and
semantic links tha.t it provides .
The Metathesaurus contains information about biomedical' terms from a
continuously increasing set of controlled vocabularies and classifications. Additional information is added
in the process of constructing the
Metathesaurus, but the original mean-
Review Article
ing of a term in its source vocabulary is
always preserved. The 1993 version
contains terms from 15 biomedical
vocabularies . In some cases, all
terms from a vocabulary are included,
while in other cases, only selected
terms are included. As the Metathesaurus continues to evolve, more
and more vocabularies will be represented in their entirety. Although
extensive, the Metathesaurus is not
meant to be a complete source of
biomedical concepts. Its scope is determined by the scope of the vocabularies contained within it. ·
The Metathesaurus is organized by
concept, or meaning. In this sense it is
a true thesaurus in the tradition of
Peter Mark Roget, or "basically a tool
for transforming ideas into words"
 . Entries in the Metathesaurus
connect alternate names for the ·same
concept, such as synonyms, lexical
variants, and translations. Strings that
are lexical variants of each other are
first grouped together as a single term
with one string designated as the preferred form of that term. Terms that
mean the same thing are then linked
together as alternate names of the
same concept, with one term designated as the preferred name of the
concept. The designation of preferred
forms and preferred names is done by
an algorithm based on an order of
precedence among. the source vocabularies. In some cases, identically
spelled strings mean very different
things in different vocabularies. For
example, "dressing" in MeSH is an
entry term to "bandages", and in the
Nursing Interventions Classification it
has the meaning of "to dress". These
terms would, thus, be treated as different concepts in the Metathesaurus.
The identification of relationships
among different concepts offers great
potential for improved information
systems. The Metathesaurus incorporates all inter-concept relationships
present in its source vocabularies,
adds relationships between concepts
from different vocabularies, and provides empirically derived co-occurrence data for some information
sources .
A concept may be related hierarchically to another concept within the
same source. It may be a parent, child
or sibling of one or more concepts in
the source vocabulary. These relationships are represented in the Metathesaurus, thereby enabling a user to
choose the most appropriate terms
when formulating a search strategy.
Examination of the relevant hierarchy
might, for example, make it ciear that
the initial search term chosen was
either too broad or too narrow. For
certain sections of the MeSH hierarchy some of the implicit links between
child and parent concepts have been
labelled with a valid t:elationship from
the Semantic Network. All anatomical, disease, and psychiatry and
psychology terms have been labelled,
as well as sections of biological
phenomena, including physiology.
Broader, narrower, and other close
relations between concepts are labelled during Metathesaurus construction. Not all close relati~nships among
concepts in different Methathesaurus
vocabularies have been identified,
however. This is an iterative process
that begins with lexical programs and
is refined by a variety of techniques
including human review and revision.
The number of links among concepts
will gradually increase. The greater
the number of connections that can be
identified among concepts across voccabularies, the more likely it is that
information will be found in a variety
of relevant information sources.
When a concept present in one
vocabulary does not appear as a single
concept in another vocabulary, but
can be represented or closely approximated by a combination of concepts in
the second vocabulary, the Metathesaurus may store this combination
as an "associated expression". The
associated expression can be used to
construct an appropriate search statement in the database that is coded
with this other vocabulary. For example; the DSM-III-R concept "Amphetamine or similarly acting sympathomimetic delirium" is not found
as a single concept in MeSH. In order
to find this concept in MEDLINE, the
MeSH heading "Delirium" qualified
by the subheading "chemically induced" might be used. Similarly, the
MeSH heading "Aortography" is not
directly found in the Library of Congress Subject Headings (LCSH). A
Boolean combination of the LCSQ
headings "Aorta" and "Radiographyt
might be used when searching for this
concept in online catalogs indexed by
the Library of Congress.
A somewhat different and poten,
tially quite powerful set of links is
provided between concepts that co.
occur in a particular database. These
co-occurrence data are pre-compute4
before each release, making it possiblt
for an application to make use of
information much of which cannot be
computed in real time or without larg~
computational resources. The co-oc.;
currence of findings and the diseaseg~
with which they are associated in All
RHEUM .has been included in the
most recent ·release. For example,
"partial hearing loss" and "hemopt)J
sis" both co-occur with the disordet~
"Wegener's granulomatosis". The majority of the co-occurrence data in the
Metathesaurus is derived from the
MEDLINE file. The frequency of cooccurring MeSH terms together with
the frequency of the subheadings applied has been calculated for the main
points in more than eight years of
MEDLINE citation records. Main
points in citation records are those
MeSH index terms that are marked
with an asterisk. Because Meta·
thesaurus concepts have been assigneq
to semantic types, it is possible ~
present a view of the co-occurrence
data at a higher level of generality, to
display, for example, the relative frequency with which a particular disor·
der co-occurs with drugs, organisiilS1
or geographic areas. The co-occurr·
ence data can be used by search inter·
faces to provide the user with a view of
what aspects of a topic have or have
not been written about in the litera·
ture. This, in turn, can help the user
search for articles of interest from the
categories that are known to occur.
For some information sources, so·
called locator information has been
computed. Concepts are marked if
they appear in selected sources, in
particular, MEDLINE, Online Men·
delian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) ~
Physician Data Query (PDQ) System,
DXplain, Quick Medical Reference
(QMR), and AI/RHEUM. In some
cases frequency information is listed
together with an indication of what the
Yearbook of Medical Informatics 1993
frequency count is measuring. For
MEDLINE it would be the number of
times the concept (either a MeSH
heading or subheading) has appeared
as a main concept in articles indexed
in a particular segment of the database. These data areincomplete in the
current Metathesaurus except for
MEDLINE and AI/RHEUM. System
developers might consider adding lo~
cation information for their own information sources. This would ensure an
even stronger link between a local
source and the extensive information
available in the Metathesaurus and the
other two Knowledge Sources.
In addition to the inter-concept
data included in the Metathesaurus,
many attributes of individual concepts
are also included. Some key attributes
Metathesaurus, others are taken from
its source vocabularies. Definitions
and other kinds of notes or annotations give a more extensive indication
of the meaning of a concept. In the
most recent release of the Metathesaurus, definitions from the 27th
edition of the Dorland's Illustrated
Medical Dictionary were added to
the Metathesaurus. The Dorland dictionary has some 112,000 entries of
which only a small number has been
added to the Metathesaurus to date.
In subsequent versions many more
will be added. Concepts derived from
MeSH and AI/RHEUM often include
a definition, as well. Metathesaurus
entries may include multiple definitions from different sources. In this
case, each definition is labelled with
its source. In addition, for some controlled vocabularies, a scope note or
annotation is included that, while not
precisely a definition, does give useful
information about the intended use or
scope of a concept in that vocabulary.
Special lexical entities such as acronyms, abbreviations, trade names,
and drug identification numbers are
explicitly labelled. This information,
together with syntactic category and
inflectional variant information, is
useful for natural language processing.
Inflectional variants are included only
for those vocabularies that explicitly
store them. The MeSH vocabulary, in
addition to having human-assigned
Variants, includes· algorithmically gen-
Yearbook of Medical Informatfcs 1993
erated variants for all of its terms.
Although a number of algorithms exists for recognizing and/or generating
lexical variants, each has been developed for a specific purpose and has
certain virtues as well as limitations
 . The advantage of handling
lexical variation algorithmically is that
fewer data need to be stored; the
disadvantage is that since some of
these phenomena depend on the particular lexical item, a program will
sometimes give the wrong result. Beginning in 1994, NLM will distribute a
set of lexical programs with the UMLS
Knowledge Sources that will include
both rules and known exceptions to
these rules.
All strings are represented in the
word index that accompanies the
Meta thesaurus . The index ciln be
used to identify all concepts, terms
and strings that contain a particular
word. By searching the word index it
is possible, for example, to identify all
Metathesaurus concepts that include
the word "heart". Some 88 concepts
are found in the current version, including, "American Heart Association", "heart aneurysm", "heart auscultation",
an~ "heart catheterization". Note that concepts such as "cardiac volume", "myocardial contraction" and "coronary artery bypass"
are found as well, since they each have
synonymous terms that contain the
word "heart".
Semantic Network
The UMLS Semantic Network provides a consistent view of the concepts
represented in the UMLS Metathesaurus. Semantic networks attempt
to impart common sense knowledge to
computers, allowing them to "reason"
and draw conclusions about entities by
virtue of the categories to which they
have been assigned. The UMLS
Semantic Network is a structure for
categorizing objects in the biomedical
domain. The scope is thus broader
than any single vocabulary represented in the Metathesaurus, yet the
granularity is uneven. So, while
- semantic types have been included for
organisms,
anatomical
structures,
biologic . function,
chemicals,
Review Article
haviors and other activities and concepts and ideas, the depth of these
categories v'aries. Actual use of the
Network in a range of applications
categories will be further refined in
subsequent releases of this Knowledge
The early versions of the Network
were developed based on analysis of
the vocabularies included in the
Metathesaurus and based on experiments using the UMLS test collection
of queries and MEDLINE citation
records . Analysis of existing
structured vocabularies yielded a set
of high-level categories that resulted
in the initial set of semantic types, and
work with the UMLS test collection
resulted in the initial set of relationships. Concurrently with the work on
the Semantic Network, experiments
were conducted in making explicit the
relationships between MeSH child and
parent terms in certain sections of the
vocabulary. This led to further candidate relationships for inclusion in the
Network. Participation by all UMLS
research collaborators resulted in the
version of the Network which was
released in the fall of 1990 .
The current version includes 132
semantic types and 47 relationships
between them.
Each concept in the Metathesaurus
is assigned to one or more of the
semantic types in the Network based
on the meaning or meanings that the
concept has in its source vocabularies.
. Assigning semantic types to Metathesaurus concepts involves algorithmic procedures as well as extensive
review by subject matter experts.
Wherever possible, default semantic
types are assigned to concepts by a
program. This is possible because
most of the constituent vocabularies in
the Metathesaurus are already structured, providing useful semantic information. These default assignments are
subsequently reviewed by experts who
determine if the correct assignment
has been made and whether any types
need to be added. For some concepts
it is not possible to assign default
semantic types reliably either because
the concept comes from an unstructured or loosely structured source vocabulary, or because its position in a
Review Article
structured vocabulary does not map
easily to a semantic type. ln this case,
the semantic types are assigned by
subject matter experts. In either case,
whether the initial assignment has
been done algorithmically, or whether
it has been done by ·a subject matter
expert, there is further review to ensure accuracy and consistency.
The primary relation in the Semantic Network is the 'isa' link. This links
semantic types of greater and lower
specificity, establishes the hierarchy of
types within the Network, and is used
for deciding on the most specific
semantic types available for assignment to a Metathesaurus concept. The
isa link allows nodes in a hierarchy to
inherit information from higher level
nodes. The inheritance property allows efficient storage of information,
since information that holds true for a
higher level node need not be repeated for all lower level nodes. It allows
certain generalizations to be captured
that otherwise would appear as isolated facts. For example, by grouping
all biologic functions together and by
grouping all organisms together, it is
possible to make one (common sense)
statement like "biologic functions are
processes of organisms". Procedurally, then, each of the descendants of
biologic function and organism inherits this information that was stated
only once.
By traversing the isa links it is
possible to compute an interpretation
for any given node in the Network.
For example, a leaf node in the· Network is "Medical Device". This is a
"Manufactured Object", which is a
"Physical Object", which, in tum, is
an "Entity". Similarly, a "Disease or
Syndrome" is a "Pathologic Function", which is a "Biologic Function",
which, in tum, is a '.'Natural Phenomenon or Process". Simply by traversing
the Network, it is possible to see that a
medical device is an object and that a
disease is a process. By inheritance,
any properties that are associated with
objects are automatically sbated by
medical devices, and any properties
associated with processes are automatically shared by diseases. Note that
these inferences can be made in the
absence of any other definitional in-
formation and can be done with ease
by program.
non-hierarchical
relationship
may be thought of as ·a property that
relates concepts or classes of concepts
in a network. The non-hierarchical
relationships in the Network fall into
four categories: physical, functional ,
temporal, and conceptual relationships. The relations are stated between high-level nodes in the Network
whenever possible and are generally
inherited by all the children of those
nodes. The links indicate what rela~
tionships are possible (or permitted).
For example, a drug may treat a
disease, it may prevent a disease, or it
may complicate a disease. A drug may
even cause a disease, though the reverse (a disease causing a drug) is not
permitted.
In addition to giving an indication
of the meaning of indjvidual Metathesaurus concept:;, the Semantic Network importantly provides an overall
semantic structure for Metathesaurus
concepts. Siflce Metathesaurus concepts are derived from a number of
sometimes quite disparate thesauri
which have their own structure, the
Network serves as a unifying force. lt
groups together all concepts that share
a particular semantic type and allows
generalizations to be made about that
set of objects. Thus, all diagnostic
procedures would be grouped together regardless of whether they appear in the CPT vocabulary, the ICD-
9-CM, or MeSH. This means that a
generalization that states, for example, tha! diagnostic procedures measure biological function is applicable
to this entire set of concepts.
Information Sources Map
The Information Sources Map
(ISM) is a knowledge source which
has been developed to describe computerized
biomedical
information
sources. The goal is to provide users
with a path to th~ most appropriate
databases based on the particular
query posed. ISM records contain
highly structured information, drawn
in some cases from the other UMLS
Knowledge Sources, as well as information intended primarily for humans
to read. The current version contains
data on some 64 information source,
many of which have been develop~
and are maintained at NLM, togethec
with others that have been develope4
by other institutions. The informatio11
sources are varied and include not
only major bibliographic databases for
biomedical research, clinical practice,
and bioethics, but also diagnostic ex,
pert systems such as AI/RHEUM,
DXplain, Iliad, Quick Medical Refer.
eoce, and factual databases concerneq
with drugs, toxicology, environmental
health, genetics, and protein and nuc.
leic acid sequences. Future editions ot
the ISM will describe many more
information sources.
Four elements .in the ISM are used
to index the conceptual scope of the
information sources: relevant MeSH
terms, MeSH subheadings which de.
note the contexts in which the main
applicable,
semantic types
Semantic Network, and semantk
links, which link two semantic t~
with a relation from the Semantic
Network. Th~ application of indexing
terms to information sources is similar
to the indexing of the biomedical liter·
ature, except that in the case of the
literature, the most specific applicable
term is chosen, while in the case of the
lSM, the most generally applicable
term is chosen [25). An example win
illustrate the ·indexing done for ISM
records. The Environmental Mutagen
Database Backfilc is a database ere·
ated by the Oak Ridge National
Laboratory. It contains citations to
publications
agents that have been tested for
MeSH terms and subheadings that
have been assigned to this database
are "DNA Damage/drug effects",
"Mutation", and "Genes, Lethallra<lil
arion effects". Sample semantic types
assigned are "Acquired Abnormalil
ty", "Genetic Function", and "Ha·
iardous or Poisonous
Substance~.
Sample Network relations assignc:lj
are "Hazardous or Poisonous Sui>'
stance affects Biologic Function", and
''Biologically Active Substance cau~
Congenital Abnormality;'.
In addition to characterizing subject scope, ISM records include narril·
tjve descriptions of the databases; an
Yearbook of Medical Informatics 1993
indication of who the intended audience for a database might be; the type
of information that is contained, e. g.,
bibliographic database, knowledge
base, full-text database, clinical protocols; the probable uses of the database, e. g., for clinical practice or
health services research; the organization that provides the database; the
names and addresses of contact individuals; the name of the host system;
and sample records from the database
Development of the procedural.
component of the ISM is in its early
stages. Certain emerging standards,
such as the ANSI Z39.50 information
retrieval protocol, are being considered in the development of the procedural component.
Applying the UMLS
Knowledge Sources
Information Retrieval
To improve access to machinereadable biomedical information, the
UMLS Knowledge Sources must be
exploited by intelligent user interface
programs. The UMLS model of
biomedical information retrieval includes the Knowledge Sources, many
target machine-readable information
sources, smart interface programs,
and an involved user. For a successful
outcome, the user must be willing to
interact with the smart programs to
clarify ambiguous inquiries, to select
among alternatives presented by the
system, and to evaluate the relevance
of information retrieved. This view of
the role of the user is similar to current
thinking about how health professionals should interact with expert systems
Although user interaction is essen- ·
tial to the UMLS model, the amount,
type, and timing of that interaction
will be variable,-based on a number of
factors, including user interface design, the complexity of the information need, the extent to which the
~owledge Sources cover the topic of
mterest, and the characteristics and
preferences ·of the user. Current retrieval
applications
Yearbook of Medical Informatics 1993
UMLS Knowledge Sources illustrate a
range of approaches to assisting the
user. Further development and evaluation will be needed to identify the
approaches that are most effective for
specific tasks, environments,
Effective searching of databases indexed by human-assigned subject
headings or codes often depends on
the translation of the meaning of a
user query into the controlled terminology used in the target database.
semantic types, inter-concept relationships, and concept usage information
in the UMLS Metathesaurus and the
relationships among semantic types
represented in the UMLS Semantic
Network are potentially useful in this
process. A range of applications has
explored how information from these
two Knowledge Sources can best be
organized, displayed, and employed
on behalf of the user.
Micro MeSH [ 46, 4.7] and Meta-
Card offer innovative solutions to the problem of displaying
complex relationships among strings,
terms, and concepts in MeSH and
the Metathesaurus, respectively. Researchers at Brigham & Women's Hospital have used a network approach to
displaying and navigating the UMLS
Semantic Network and the inter-concept
relationships
Metathesaurus [e. g., 50]. Other systems exploit UMLS knowledge without attempting to display its structure.
the Metathesaurus' representation of synonymy to identify MeSH terms in free text
as part of a concept-based automatic
indexing and retrieval strategy which
endeavors to apply probabilistic retrieval. methods to concepts rather
than words. SPECIALIST 
makes use of a range of information in
both Knowledge Sources in research
on natural language processing of
biomedical text. Coach, an expert system designed to assist Grateful Med
users to conduct more effective searches, consults UMLS information on
the user's behalf, but also allows the
user to explore the Metathesaurus
directly through a browser application
Review Article
Several UMLS investigators are
testing the hypotheses that many user
inquiries, particularly in clinical environments, are in fact specific instances
of a limited number of query types or
"generic queries" and that an interface
program can offer more intelligent
and useful assistance to the user if the
query type can be determined. Psychtopix identifies a set of important
search topics in the field of psychiatry
and then maps information from
psychiatric consultation reports to this
set, using a knowledge base of DSM-
111-R concepts and manually developed MeSH search strategies. The
Interactive Query Workstation (IQW)
 uses the semantic types of the
terms in the user's query to determine
a subset of relevant query types. Its
associated Q & A query formulation
assistant uses Metathesaurus co-occurrence data to help users to construct successful searches . · Researchers at Columbia· are exploring
several approaches to identifying the
appropriate query type. These include
natural language processing techniques that consult the Metathesaurus
and the Semantic Network and the
development of subsets of query types
likely to be of interest in particular
clinical contexts .
Research done to date confirms
that the UMLS Metathesaurus and
Semantic Network can be used effectively to aid retrieval of information
relevant to specific patient problems.
Powsner et al. have built a frontend that uses the Metathesaurus to
find and list MeSH terms that are
related to words or phrases the user
has marked in a machine-readable
patient record. The program passes a
MEDLINE search strategy to the
Grateful Med Search Engine after the
user selects terms from the list. The
MEDLINE Button attempts to
use ICD9-CM to MeSH mapping information in the Metathesaurus to
construct MEDLINE searches relevant to particular diagnoses. Using fulltext patient records from the MARS
system , CHARTLINE identifies terms in segments. of a patient's
chart that are also present in the Metathesaurus,
co-occurring
MeSH terms relevant to this particular
patient, and conducts a MEDLINE
Review Article
search on MARS using terms selected
from the display by the user.
While several researchers have concentrated on the problem of connecting clinical infoi1llation to relevant
MEDLINE citations, others have applied the UMLS Knowledge Sources
to the task of selecting the databases
most likely to contain information relevant to particular queries. The Physician's Information Assistant 
uses the MetaCard browser interface
and the concept location and co-occurrence information in the Metathesaurus to select one or more relevant information sources and then searches these for the user. IQW 
directs queries to several types of
databases, including full-text sources,
drug databases, and the DXplain diagnostic system. Miller et al. and
Masys have conducted preliminary tests of source selection algorithms that rely on matching information about the user's search terms
obtained from the Metathesaurus and
the Semantic Network with information about the subject scope of various
databases in the prototype Information Sources Map. This work indicates
that the Information Sources Map can
be used to identify databases likely to
be relevant to particular inquiries. A
version of the Information Sources
Map is currently available through
Yale's NetMenu campus-wide network interface , which also provides access to a Metathesaurus
browser. Users of NetMenu's Information Sources Map receive assistance in selecting relevant databases
and then are connected automatically
to those they select.
Although much research, development, and evaluation work remains,
two general conclusions can be drawn
from investigations done to date.
First, the UMLS Knowledge Sources
are useful for their intended purpose,
which is to facilitate retrieval of relevant information from a variety of
machine-readable sources. Second,
the most effective retrieval interfaces
are likely to employ a range of different approaches to assisting users, depending on user preference, the type .
of inquiry, and the amount of machine-readable "context", available to
assist in automated interpretation of
the user's meaning. The utility of
offering a variety of user aids is amply
illustrated in a number of currently
available user interfaces, including
Grateful Med.
Indexing and Data Creation
Applications
Designed to support information
retrieval, the content and structure of
the UMLS Metathesaurus and Semantic Network are also potentially useful
to those involved in data creation,
indexing, or encoding.'By linking concept
terminologies, the Metathesaurus creates
a richer set of synonyms and concept
relationships than is present in any
single source. This larger entry vocabulary can help people or programs
to locate the appropriate preferred
term or code in the specific vocabulary
or classification being applied, assuming that it is represented in the
Metathesaurus. Hersh and Wagner and Cooper have applied the
Metathesaurus in automated indexing
of biomedical text and image descriptions, respectively. Chute et al. have
applied UMLS Knowledge Sources to
latent semantic indexing of diagnoses
 . The Medindex expert indexing assistant program makes use of
knowledge in the Metathesaurus and
the Semantic Network.
Because the Metathesaurus provides uniform access to terminology
from an array of vocabulary sources, it
facilitates the review and analysis of
existing controlled vocabularies and
the construction of lists of concepts
and terms suitable for specific data
creation and indexing tasks. Eisner
 has constructed a core vocabulary
for use in describing the content of
dental curricula by extracting some
terminology from the Metathesaurus
and augmenting it with terms from
other sources. Borrowing from one or
more existing controlled vocabularies
is inore efficient than creating a new
vocabulary de novo and offers better
potential for linking the information
being captured to related information
in other machine-readable sources.
As stated previously, the scope of
the UMLS Metathesaurus is determined by the. combined scope of the
vocabularies and classification it en.
compasses. Its coverage of specifil
clinical concepts that are needed in
patient records mirrors that of its
source vocabularies and increases as
more clinical vocabularies are incor1
porated. The UMLS project links voc.
abularies at the individual concept
level and groups all concepts by broad
semantic types. It does not attempt to
reconcile the differences in hierarchit
cal perspective ~d specificity among
its source vocabularies. For this
reason, the Metathesaurus and the
Semantic Network do not constitute a
single consistent classification suitabl~
for indexing or coding detailed clinical
content . The Meta thesaurus adds
value to existing clinical vocabularieS
by linking them to a rich array of
synonyms, variants, related conceptsj
hierarchical perspectives, and other
useful semantic and syntactic informa•
tion. The added features provided by
Metathesaurus
therefore'
facilitate manual and automated encoding of patient data in one or more
of its constituent vocabularies. The
Metathesaurus can also support automated connections between patient
records and other types of information
that can improve health care decisions, such as practice guidelines, expert systems, and the current literature . The combination of the
Metathesaurus and the Semantic Network may also be useful in evaluating
the coverage of existing clinical voc·
abularies and in building better ones
Several studies have examined the
extent to which different editions of
the UMLS Metathesaurus cover clinical concepts . The addition of
concepts from a variety of clinical
vocabularies and classifications is a
high priority for the UMLS project
and is proceeding rapidly influenced
by feedback from these studies. The
1993 edition includes all preferr~
terms and codes for ICD9-CM diagnoses, and work is beginning on incor·
poration of concepts and terminology
from SNOMED III.
Yearbook of Medical Informatics 1993
The UMLS and Emerging
International High-Speed
Low-cost powerful workstations,
bigh~capacity world-wide networks,
and the move to flexible client-server
architectures are all contributing to
the rapid growth in the amount and
types of machine-readable information that are technically accessible to
anyone with an Internet connection.
The volume of information available
has been described as overwhelming
and bewildering. At the same time the
number of Internet users is also growing rapidly, and the use of electronic
mail, bulletin boards, FfP, etc. is
transforming the way many people
work. A number of important tools,
such as Knowbots, WAIS, Gopher,
and World Wide Web , and their
many combinations and derivatives,
are emerging to assist users in navigating the Internet and in identifying and
locating potentially useful information
sources. The use of these tools has
increased the visibility of the problems
the UMLS project is attempting to
solve. For most users, technical access
to hundreds or thousands of databases
is of no value unless it is accompanied
by some means of determining which
ones contain information useful in the
current circumstances and by the ability to frame search inquiries in terms
the relevant databases can understand. If these conditions are not met,
access to hundreds of information
sources is actually less useful than
access to a few.
As technical barriers to information
access are removed, better semantic
connections become even more important. Fortunately, the UMLS project and current network developments
are converging in ways that are potentially beneficial to the worldwide
biomedical community. The UMLS
Knowledge Sources and the intelligent
interface programs that make use of
them can supply, for the biomedical
domain, the missing conceptual link
t~at is needed to isolate relevant information in the masses of machinereadable data av_ailable on the Internet. In tum, the Internet provides a
powerful tool for distributed access to
mai~tenance of the UMLS
Yearbook of Medical Informatics 1993
Knowledge Sources, including the
very large Metathesaurus files. Use of
high-performance computers accessible on the network can speed some of
the time-consuming vocabulary and
database analysis tasks associated with
Metathesaurus construction. Internet
access can also solve some of the
problems encountered by those attempting to apply the Knowledge
Sources in modest hardware and software environments.
increasing
availability
biomedical databases on the Internet
simplifies the task of the UMLS Information Sources Map. The ongoing
development of tools and protocols
for connecting to and searching Internet-accessible information sources is
likely to provide solutions to many of
the basic connectivity issues that must
be addressed to achieve a fully functional UMLS Information Sources
Map. The combination of these networking advances and the semantic
connections provided by the UMLS
should speed progress toward the goal
. of seamless retrieval and integration
of machine-readable biomedical information, including images and computer-based patient records.
The UMLS project has much to
gain and much to offer in the new era
of high-performance computing and
communications. The UMLS development team is only beginning to identify and test the ways in which these
technical developments can help to
make the UMLS goals a ·reality for
professionals
biomedical researchers.