The Annals of Applied Statistics
2012, Vol. 6, No. 3, 1209–1235
DOI: 10.1214/11-AOAS532
⃝Institute of Mathematical Statistics, 2012
NETWORK INFERENCE AND BIOLOGICAL DYNAMICS1
By Chris. J. Oates and Sach Mukherjee
University of Warwick and Netherlands Cancer Institute,
and Netherlands Cancer Institute and University of Warwick
Network inference approaches are now widely used in biological applications to probe regulatory relationships between molecular components such as genes or proteins. Many methods have been proposed
for this setting, but the connections and diﬀerences between their
statistical formulations have received less attention. In this paper,
we show how a broad class of statistical network inference methods,
including a number of existing approaches, can be described in terms
of variable selection for the linear model. This reveals some subtle but
important diﬀerences between the methods, including the treatment
of time intervals in discretely observed data. In developing a general formulation, we also explore the relationship between single-cell
stochastic dynamics and network inference on averages over cells.
This clariﬁes the link between biochemical networks as they operate
at the cellular level and network inference as carried out on data that
are averages over populations of cells. We present empirical results,
comparing thirty-two network inference methods that are instances of
the general formulation we describe, using two published dynamical
models. Our investigation sheds light on the applicability and limitations of network inference and provides guidance for practitioners
and suggestions for experimental design.
1. Introduction.
Networks of molecular components such as genes, proteins and metabolites play a prominent role in molecular biology. A graph
G = (V,E) can be used to describe a biological network, with the vertices V identiﬁed with molecular components and the edges E with regulatory relationships between them. For example, in a gene regulatory network [Babu et al. ; Davidson ], nodes represent genes and edges
transcriptional regulation, while in a protein signaling network [Yarden and
Received June 2011; revised November 2011.
1Supported in part by EPSRC EP/E501311/1 (CJO & SM) and NCI U54 CA 112970
(SM) and the Cancer Systems Biology Center grant from the Netherlands Organisation
for Scientiﬁc Research.
Key words and phrases. Network inference, biological dynamics, variable selection.
This is an electronic reprint of the original article published by the
Institute of Mathematical Statistics in The Annals of Applied Statistics,
2012, Vol. 6, No. 3, 1209–1235. This reprint diﬀers from the original in pagination
and typographic detail.
C. J. OATES AND S. MUKHERJEE
Sliwkowski ], nodes represent proteins and edges may represent the
enzymatic inﬂuence of the parent on the biochemical state of the child, for
example, via phosphorylation. In many biological contexts, including disease
states, the edge structure of the network may itself be uncertain (e.g., due
to genetic or epigenetic alterations). Then, an important biological goal is
to characterize the edge structure (often referred to as the “topology” of
the network) in a context-speciﬁc manner, that is, using data acquired in
the biological context of interest (e.g., a type of cancer, or a developmental
state). Advances in high-throughput data acquisition have led to much interest in such data-driven characterization of biological networks. Statistical
approaches play an increasingly important role in these “network inference”
eﬀorts. From a statistical perspective, the goal can be viewed as making inference regarding the edge structure E in light of biochemical data y. Since
aspects of biological dynamics may not be identiﬁable at steady-state, timevarying data is usually preferred, and this is the setting we focus on here. In
many applications the data y arise from “global perturbation” of the cellular system, for example, by varying culture conditions or stimuli. The extent
to which networks can be characterized using global perturbations remains
poorly understood, since it is likely that such data expose only a subspace
of the phase space associated with cellular dynamics.
The importance of network inference in diverse biological applications,
from basic biology to diseases such as cancer, has spurred vigorous activity
in this area. Many speciﬁc methods have been proposed, in the statistical
literature as well as in bioinformatics and bioengineering, with some popular
approaches reviewed in Bansal, Belcastro and Ambesi-Impiombato ;
Bonneau ; Hecker et al. ; Lee and Tzou ; Markowetz and
Spang . Graphical models play a prominent role in this literature, as
does variable selection. A distinction is often made between statistical and
“mechanistic” approaches [Ideker and Lauﬀenburger ]. The former is
usually used to refer to models that are built on conventional regression formulations and variants thereof, while the latter usually refers to models that
are explicitly rooted in chemical kinetics, for example, systems of coupled
ordinary diﬀerential equations (ODEs). This distinction is somewhat artiﬁcial, since it is possible in principle to carry out formal statistical network
inference based on mechanistic models (e.g., systems of ODEs), although
this remains challenging [Xu et al. ].
Many network inference schemes are based on formulations that are closely
related in terms of the underlying statistical model. For example, vector autoregressive (VAR) models [including Granger causality-related approaches
as special cases; Bolstad, Van Veen and Nowak ; Meinshausen and
B¨uhlmann ; Morrissey et al. ; Opgen-Rhein and Strimmer ;
Zou and Feng ], linear dynamic Bayesian networks [DBNs; Kim, Imoto
and Miyano ] and certain ODE-based approaches [Bansal and di Ber-
NETWORK INFERENCE AND BIOLOGICAL DYNAMICS
nardo ; Li and Chen ; Nam, Yoon and Kim ] are intimately related, being based on linear regression, but with potentially differing approaches to variable selection. In recent years, several empirical
comparisons of competing network inference schemes have emerged, including Altay and Emmert-Streib ; Bansal, Belcastro and Ambesi-
Impiombato ; Hache, Lehrach and Herwig ; Smith, Jarvis and
Hartemink ; Werhli, Grzegorczyk and Husmeier . Assessment
methodology has received attention, including attempts to automate the
generation of large scale biological network models for automatic benchmarking of performance [Marbach et al. ; Van den Bulcke et al.
 ]. In particular, the Dialogue for Reverse Engineering Assessments
and Methods (DREAM) challenges [Prill et al. ] have provided an
opportunity for objective empirical assessment of competing approaches. At
the same time, developments in synthetic biology have led to the availability
of gold standard data from hand-crafted biological systems, such that the
underlying network is known by design [Camacho and Collins ; Cantone et al. ; Minty, Varedi and Nina ]. However, relatively little
attention has been paid to the (sometimes contrasting) assumptions of the
statistical formulations underlying these network inference schemes.
Inferential limitations due to estimator bias and nonidentiﬁability remain
incompletely understood. It is clear that chemical reaction networks (CRNs;
these are graphs that give detailed descriptions of individual reactions comprising the overall system) underlying biological networks are not in general
identiﬁable [Craciun and Pantea ]. Indeed, there exist topologically
distinct CRNs which produce identical dynamics under mass-action kinetics. Moreover, even when the true network structure is known, reaction rates
themselves may be nonidentiﬁable. However, mainstream descriptions of biological networks, for example, gene regulatory or protein signaling networks,
are coarser than CRNs. Such networks are useful because they are closely
tied to validation experiments in which interventions (e.g., RNA interference or inhibitors) target network vertices. For example, inference of an
edge in a gene regulatory network corresponds to the qualitative prediction
that intervention on the parent will inﬂuence the child (via transcription
factor activity). It remains unclear to what extent such biological network
structure can be usefully identiﬁed from various kinds of data. On the other
hand, Wilkinson ; Wilkinson discusses a number of general
issues relating to stochastic modeling for systems biology, but does not discuss network inference per se in detail. This paper complements existing
empirical work by focusing on statistical issues associated with linear models commonly used in network inference applications.
Network inference methods can be viewed as generating hypotheses about
cell biology. Yet the link between biochemical networks at the cellular level
and network inference as applied to bulk or aggregate data (i.e., data that
are averages over large numbers of cells) from assays such as microarrays
C. J. OATES AND S. MUKHERJEE
remains unclear. In applications to noisy time-varying data there is uncertainty in the predictor variables of the same order of magnitude as uncertainty in the responses, yet often only the latter is explicitly accounted for.
Moreover, the treatment of time intervals in discretely observed data remains unclear, with contradictory approaches appearing in the literature.
Most high-throughput assays, including array based technologies (e.g., gene
expression or protein arrays), as well as single-cell approaches (e.g., FACSbased) involve destructive sampling, that is, cells are destroyed to obtain
the molecular measurements. The impact of the resulting nonlongitudinality upon inference does not appear to have been investigated.
The contributions of this paper are threefold. First, we explore the connection between biological networks at the cellular level and the linear statistical models that are widely used for inference. Starting from a description of
stochastic dynamics at the single-cell level, we describe a general statistical
approach rooted in the linear model. This makes explicit the assumptions
that underlie a broad class of network inference approaches. This also clariﬁes the relationship between “statistical” and “mechanistic” approaches to
biological networks. Second, we explore how a number of published network
inference approaches can be recovered as special cases of the model we arrive
at. This sheds light on the diﬀerences between them, including how diﬀerent
assumptions lead to quite diﬀerent treatments of the time step. Third, we
present an empirical study comparing 32 diﬀerent approaches that are special cases of the general model we describe. To do so, we simulate stochastic
dynamics at the single-cell level from known networks, under global perturbation of two published dynamical models. This enables a clear assessment
of the network inference methods in terms of estimation bias and consistency, since the true data-generating network is known. Furthermore, the
simulation accounts for both averaging over cells, nonlongitudinality due
to destructive sampling and the fact that only a subspace of the dynamical
phase space is explored. Using this approach, we investigate a number of data
regimes, including both even and uneven sampling, longitudinal and nonlongitudinal data and the large sample, low noise limit. We ﬁnd that the net
eﬀect of predictor uncertainty, nonlongitudinality and limited exploration
of the dynamical phase space is such that certain network estimators fail
to converge to the data-generating network even in the limits of large data
sets and low noise. However, we point to a simple formulation which might
represent a default choice, delivering promising performance in a number of
An implication of our analysis is that uneven time steps may pose inferential problems, even when using models that apparently handle the sampling intervals explicitly. We therefore investigate this case by carrying out
network inference on unevenly sampled data using a variety of statistical
models. We ﬁnd that the ability to reconstruct the data-generating network
is much reduced in all cases, with some approaches faring better than others.
NETWORK INFERENCE AND BIOLOGICAL DYNAMICS
Since biological data are often unevenly resolved in time, this observation
has important implications for experimental design.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We begin in Section 2
with a description of stochastic dynamics in single cells and show how a series
of assumptions allow us to arrive at a statistical framework rooted in the
linear model. Section 3 contains an empirical comparison of several inference
schemes, addressing questions of performance and consistency in a number
of regimes. In Section 4 we discuss our results and point to several speciﬁc
areas for future work.
2. Methods.
The cellular dynamics that underlie network inference are
subject to stochastic eﬀects [Elowitz, Levine and Siggia ; Kou, Xie and
Liu ; McAdams and Arkin ; Paulsson ; Swain, Elowitz
and Siggia ]. We therefore begin our description of the data-generating
process at the level of single cells and then discuss the relationship to aggregate data of the kind acquired in high-throughput biochemical assays. We
then develop a general statistical approach, rooted in the linear model, for
data from such a system observed discretely in time. We discuss inference
and show how a number of existing approaches can be recovered as special
cases of the general model we describe. Our exposition clariﬁes a number
of technical but important distinctions between published methodologies,
which until now have received little attention.
2.1. Data-generating process.
2.1.1. Stochastic dynamics in single cells.
Let X = (X1,...,XP) ∈X denote a state vector describing the abundance of molecular quantities of interest, on a space X chosen according to physical and statistical considerations.
The components of the state vector (e.g., mRNA, protein or metabolite levels) are identiﬁed with the vertices of the graph G that describes the biological network of interest. In this paper the “expression levels” X(t) of a single
cell at time t are modeled as continuous random variables that we assume
satisfy a time-homogenous stochastic delay diﬀerential equation (SDDE)
dX = f(FX)dt + g(FX)dB,
where f,g are drift and diﬀusion functions respectively, FX(t) = {X(s) : s ≤t}
is the natural ﬁltration (the history of the state vector X) and B denotes
a standard Brownian motion. A continuous state space X is appropriate as
a modeling assumption only if the copy numbers of all molecular components
are suﬃciently high. This is thought to be the case for the biological systems
considered in this paper, but in general the stochasticity due to low copy
number will need to be encoded into inference [Paulsson ]. The edge
structure E of the biological network G is deﬁned by the drift function f,
such that (i,j) ∈E ⇐⇒fj(X) depends on Xi.
C. J. OATES AND S. MUKHERJEE
We further assume that the functions f,g are suﬃciently regular and depend only on recent history FX([t −τ,t]). For example, in the context of
gene regulation τ might be the time required for one cycle of transcription,
translation and binding of a transcription factor to its target site, the characteristic time scale for gene regulation. This is a ﬁnite memory requirement
and can be considered a generalization of the Markov property. Equivalently,
this property codiﬁes the modeling assumption that the observed processes
are suﬃcient to explain their own dynamics, that there are no latent variables. It is common practice to take τ = 0, in which case the process deﬁned
by equation (1) is Markovian. This stochastic dynamical system with phase
space {(f(FX),X) : X ∈X} forms the basis of the following exposition.
2.1.2. Aggregate data.
A variety of experimental techniques, including,
notably, microarrays and related assays, capture average expression levels
X(N) := PN
k=1 Xk/N over cells, where Xk denotes the expression levels in
cell k. This paper does not consider eﬀects due to intercellular signaling,
which are typically assumed to be negligible. Then averaging sacriﬁces the
ﬁnite memory property (a generalization of the fact that the sum of two
independent Markov processes is not itself Markovian). However, it is usually
possible to construct a ﬁnite memory approximation of the form
dX(N) = f (N)(FX(N))dt + g(N)(FX(N))dB(N)
using a so-called “system size expansion” [Van Kampen ]. Approximations of this kind derive from a coarsening of the underlying state space,
assuming that the new state vector X(N) captures every quantity relevant
to the dynamics. The statistical models discussed in this paper rely upon
coarsening assumptions in order to control the dimensionality of state space.
Using the mild regularity conditions upon cellular stochasticity g, the
laws of large numbers give that in the large sample limit the sample average X∞:= limN→∞X(N) = E(X) equals the expected state of a single cell
(almost surely). We note that the relationship between the single-cell dynamics as it appears in equation (1) and this deterministic limit may be
complicated, since in general E(f(FX)) ̸= f(FE(X)). However, for linear f,
say, for simplicity, f ≡f(X) = AX, we have
(f(FXk)dt + g(FXk)dBk)
NETWORK INFERENCE AND BIOLOGICAL DYNAMICS
= AX(N) dt + R(N) = f(FX(N))dt + R(N),
where R(N) := P
k g(FXk)dBk/N →0 almost surely as N →∞, and so
dX∞/dt = f(FX∞). In other words, the average over large numbers of cells
shares the same drift function as the single cell, so that inference based on averaged data applies directly to single-cell dynamics. Otherwise this may not
hold, that is, dX∞/dt = dE(X)/dt = E(f(FX)) ̸= f(FE(X)) = f(FX∞). This
has implications when using nonlinear forms, such as Michaelis-Menten or
Hill kinetics, to describe the behavior of a large sample average; these nonlinear functions are derived from single-cell biochemistry and may not apply
equally to the large sample average X∞. The error entailed by commuting
drift and expectation may be assessed using the multivariate Feynman-Kac
formula for X∞= E(X) [Øksendal ].
In practice, the observation process may be complex and indirect, for
example, measurements of gene expression may be relative to a “housekeeping” gene, assumed to maintain constant expression over the course of
the experiment. Moreover, the details of the error structure will depend
crucially on the technology used to obtain the data. To limit scope, this
article assumes the averaged expression levels X∞(t) are observed at discrete times t = tj (0 ≤j ≤n) with additive zero-mean measurement error as
Y(tj) = X∞(tj)+wj, where the wj are independent, identically distributed
uncorrelated Gaussian random variables.
2.2. Discrete time models.
Network inference is usually carried out using
coarse-grained models [equation (2)] that are simpler and more amenable to
inference than the process described by equation (1). Here, informed by the
foregoing treatment of cellular dynamics, we develop a simple network inference model for data observed discretely in time. We clarify the assumptions
of the statistical model, and show how several published approaches can be
recovered as special cases.
2.2.1. Approximate discrete time likelihood.
Network inference entails
statistical comparison of networks G ∈G, where G denotes the space of
candidate networks. The space G may be large (naively, there are 2P ×P possible networks on P vertices), although biological knowledge may provide
constraints. Network comparisons require computation of a model selection
score for each network, that is, considered, which in turn entails use of the
likelihood (e.g., maximization of information criteria, or integration over the
likelihood in the Bayesian setting). Therefore, exploration over large model
spaces is often only feasible given a closed-form expression for the likelihood
(or preferably for the model score itself).
C. J. OATES AND S. MUKHERJEE
However, the likelihood for a SDDE model [equation (2)] is not generally available in closed form. There has been recent research into computationally eﬃcient approximate likelihoods for fully observed, noiseless diﬀusions [Hurn, Jeisman and Lindsay ], but it remains the case that the
most eﬃcient (though least accurate) closed-form approximate likelihood is
based on the Euler-Maruyama discretization scheme for stochastic diﬀerential equations (SDEs), which in the more general SDDE case may be written
as (henceforth dropping the superscript N)
X(tj) ≈X(tj−1) + ∆jf(FX(tj−1)) + g(FX(tj−1))∆Bj,
where ∆Bj ∼N(0,∆jI) and ∆j = tj −tj−1 is the sampling time interval.
Incorporating measurement error into this so-called Riemann-Itˆo likelihood
[Dargatz ] requires an integral over the hidden states X which would
destroy the closed-form approximation. Therefore, the observed, nonlongitudinal data y are directly substituted for the latent states X, yielding the
(triply) approximate likelihood
N(y(tj);µ(tj),Σ(tj)),
µ(tj) = y(tj−1) + ∆jf(Fy(tj−1)),
Σ(tj) = ∆jg(Fy(tj−1))g(Fy(tj−1))′.
Here N(•;µ,Σ) denotes a Normal density with mean µ and covariance Σ.
Implicit here is that the functions f,g depend on Fy only through time lags
which coincide with the measurement times tj−1.
Thus, L may be obtained from a state-space approximation to the original
SDDE model [equation (2)]. Despite reported weaknesses with the Riemann-
Itˆo likelihood [Dargatz ; Hurn, Jeisman and Lindsay ] and the
poorly characterized error incurred by plugging in nonlongitudinal observations, this form of approximate likelihood is widely used to facilitate network
inference [equations (5) and (6) correspond to a Gaussian DBN for the observations y, generalized to allow dependence on history]. This is due both
to the possibility of parameter orthogonality, allowing inference to be performed for each network node separately, and the possibility of conjugacy,
leading to a closed-form marginal likelihood π(y|G).
2.2.2. Linear dynamics.
Kinetic models have been described for many
cellular processes [Cantone et al. ; Schoeberl et al. ; Swat,
Kel and Herzel ; Wilkinson ]. However, statistical inference for
these often nonlinear models may be challenging [Bonneau ; Wilkinson ; Wilkinson ; Xu et al. ]. Moreover, there is no guarantee that conclusions drawn from cellular averages will apply to single
cells, because, as noted above, the deterministic behavior seen in averages
NETWORK INFERENCE AND BIOLOGICAL DYNAMICS
may not coincide with the single-cell drift. However, linear dynamics satisfy
E(f(FX)) = f(FE(X)) exactly, so that conclusions drawn from verages apply directly to single cells. For notational simplicity consider the Markovian
τ = 0 regime. A Taylor approximation of the cellular drift f about the origin
f(X) ≈f(0) + Df|x=0X,
where Df is the Jacobian matrix of f. The constant term can be omitted
(f(0) = 0), since absent any regulators there is no change in expression.
Then, the Jacobian Df captures the dynamics approximately under a linear model. Furthermore, the absence of an edge in the network G implies
a zero entry in the Jacobian, that is, (i,j) /∈E ⇒(Df)ji = 0. Obtaining the
Jacobean at x = 0 therefore does not imply complete knowledge of the edge
structure E. We note that the general SDDE case is similar but with additional diﬀerentiation required for the additional dependencies of f. Henceforth, we write equations for the simpler Markovian model, although they
hold more generally.
One may ask whether the restriction to linear drift functions allows the
computational diﬃculties associated with inference for continuous time models to be avoided, since in the Markovian (τ = 0) case both the SDE [equation (1)] and limiting ordinary diﬀerential equation (ODE) have exact closed
form solutions. In the ODE case, for example, X(t) = exp(At)X0 and under
Gaussian measurement error the likelihood has a closed form as products
of terms N(y(tj);exp(Atj)X0,M), where the parameters θ = (A,X0,M)
include the model parameters A, initial state vector X0 and the measurement error covariance M. Unfortunately, evaluation of the matrix exponential is computationally demanding and inference for the entries of A must
be performed jointly since, in general, exp(A) does not factorize usefully.
It therefore remains the case that inference for continuous time models is
computationally burdensome, even when the models are linear.
2.2.3. The dynamical system as a regression model.
The Jacobian Df
with entries (Df)i,j = ∂fi/∂xj|x=0 is now the focus of inference. We can
identify the Jacobian with the unknown parameters in a linear regression
problem by modeling the expression of gene p using
where the gradients dXp(tj) are approximated by ﬁnite diﬀerences, in this
case (Xp(tj) −Xp(tj−1))/∆j. Our notation for ﬁnite diﬀerences should not
be confused with the diﬀerentials of stochastic calculus. More generally, for
processes with memory, the matrix may be augmented with columns corre-
C. J. OATES AND S. MUKHERJEE
sponding to lagged state vectors and the vector (Df)p,• augmented with the
corresponding derivatives of the drift function f with respect to these lagged
states. To avoid confusion, we write A for Df when discussing parameters,
since the drift f is unknown. Similarly, design matrices will be denoted by B
to suppress the dependence on the random variables X. So equation (7) may
be written compactly as
Inference for the parameters Ap,• may be performed independently for each
variable p. While equation (8) is fundamental for inference, one can equivalently consider the dynamically intuitive expression
dX(tj) ≈AB′
An interesting issue arises from the dual interpretation of the regression
model as a dynamical system [equation (9)], because there are natural restrictions on A to avoid the solution tending to inﬁnity. For instance, if the
sampling interval ∆is constant, then we require R(λ) ≤0 for each eigenvalue λ of A+∆I. The inference schemes which we discuss do not account for
this, because the condition forces a nontrivial coupling between rows Ap,•,
jeopardizing parameter orthogonality.
Finally, the generative model is speciﬁed by substituting noisy, nonlongitudinal observables Y for latent variables X into equation (9) and stating
the dependence of the approximation error on the sampling interval ∆j.
Under uncorrelated Gaussian measurement error we arrive at a model
dY(tj) ∼N(AB′
j,•,h(∆j)D(σ2
where h : R+ →R+ is a variance function that must be speciﬁed and D(v)
represents the diagonal matrix induced by the vector v.
There are a number of ways in which this regression is nonstandard. For
example, the substitution of (nonlongitudinal) observations for latent variables is clearly unsatisfactory because the linear regression framework does
not explicitly allow for uncertainty in the predictor variables B. It is unclear
whether this introduces bias or leads to an overestimate of the signiﬁcance
of results. Moreover, it is unclear how to choose the variance function h,
since the Euler-Maruyama approximation [equation (4)] is only valid for
small sampling intervals ∆j, but in this regime the responses dY(tj) are
dominated by measurement error, such that the data may carry little information. These issues are investigated in Sections 3 and 4 below.
2.3. A unifying framework.
Equation (10) describes a class of models
with speciﬁc instances characterized by choice of design matrix B and variance function h. Since any such model corresponds to the linear regression
equation (7), the task of determining the edge structure of the network, or,
equivalently, the location of nonzero entries in the Jacobian A, can be cast
as a variable selection problem.
NETWORK INFERENCE AND BIOLOGICAL DYNAMICS
A nonexhaustive list of network inference schemes rooted in the linear model.
The examples from literature demonstrate the statistical features indicated,
but may diﬀer in some aspects of implementation. The symbol ∅denotes
the VAR(q) model which lacks a variance function
Variable selection
Ridge regression
Bansal and di Bernardo “TSNIB”
Standard with
Group LASSO
Bolstad, Van Veen and Nowak 
lagged predictors
Conjugate Bayesian
Hill, Lu and Molina 
with network prior
Information criteria
Kim, Imoto and Miyano 
Nonlinear (Hill)
AIC with backstepping
Li and Chen 
basis functions
Conditional independence
Li et al. “DELDBN”
Semi-conjugate Bayesian
Morrissey et al. 
SVD and pseudoinverse
Nam, Yoon and Kim “LEARNe”
Multi-stage analytic
Opgen-Rhein and Strimmer 
shrinkage approach
Standard and
Granger causality
Zou and Feng 
nonlinear with
lagged predictors
A number of speciﬁc network inference schemes can now be recovered by
ﬁxing the design matrix and variance function and coupling the resulting
model with a variable selection technique. A selection of published network
inference schemes that can be viewed in this way is presented in Table 1.
One might see these schemes classed as VAR models [Bolstad, Van Veen and
Nowak ; Morrissey et al. ; Opgen-Rhein and Strimmer ;
Zou and Feng ], DBNs [Hill, Lu and Molina ; Kim, Imoto and
Miyano ] or ODE-based approaches [Bansal and di Bernardo ;
Li and Chen ; Nam, Yoon and Kim ], although as we have
demonstrated this classiﬁcation disguises their shared foundation in the linear model.
As shown in Table 1, the variance functions h, and therefore sampling
intervals ∆j, are not treated in a consistent way in the literature. In the
special case of even sampling times ∆j = ∆, a model is characterized only
by its design matrix. If the standard design matrix is used, then the entire
family of models
Y(tj) −Y(tj−1)
∼N(AY(tj−1),h(∆)D(σ2
C. J. OATES AND S. MUKHERJEE
reduces to a linear VAR(1) model
Y(tj) ∼N( ¯AY(tj−1),D(¯σ2
1,..., ¯σ2
where ¯A = ∆A + I and ¯σ2
p = ∆2h(∆)σ2
p. More generally, the VAR(q) model
is prevalent in the literature (see Table 1), yet it does not explicitly handle uneven sampling intervals. This is a potentially important issue since
uneven sampling is commonplace in global perturbation experiments, with
high frequency sampling used to capture short term cellular response and
low frequency sampling to capture the approach to equilibrium. We discuss
the importance of modeling using a variance function, and whether a natural
choice for such a function exists in Section 4 below. In addition, we explored
whether inference may be improved through the use of either nonlinear basis functions or lagged predictors to capture respectively nonlinearity and
memory in the underlying drift function is unclear. Section 3 presents an
empirical investigation of these issues.
2.4. Inference.
An appealing feature of the discrete time model is that
parameters corresponding to diﬀerent variables are orthogonal in the Fisher
L(Ap,•,σp).
As a consequence, network inference over G may be factorized into P independent variable selection problems. For deﬁniteness we focus on just two
approaches to variable selection, the Bayesian marginal likelihood and AIC,
but note that many other approaches are available, including those listed
in Table 1, and can be applied here in analogy to what follows. Below we
assume the response vector dyph−1/2 and the columns of the design matrix
Bh−1/2 are standardized to have zero mean and unit variance, but for clarity
subsume this into unaltered notation.
2.4.1. Bayesian variable selection.
For simplicity, the variance function
is initially taken to be constant (h = 1). We set up a Bayesian linear model
conditional on a network G using Zellner’s g-prior [Zellner ], that is,
with priors Ap,•|σ2
pBp)−1) and π ; Friedman et al. ].
Let mp be the number of predictors for variable p in the network G.
Integrating the likelihood [induced by equation (10)] against the prior for
p) produces the following closed-form marginal likelihood:
NETWORK INFERENCE AND BIOLOGICAL DYNAMICS
dyp = Bp(B′
pdyp. These formulae extend to arbitrary variance functions h by substituting B 7→Bh1/2, dy 7→dyh1/2. Network inference may now be carried out by Bayesian model averaging, using the
posterior probability of a directed edge from variable i to variable j:
P(i regulates j) =
π(y|G)π(G)
G′ π(y|G′)π(G′)I{(i,j) ∈E(G)}.
In experiments below, we take a network prior which, for each variable p,
is uniform over the number of predictors mp up to a maximum permissible in-degree dmax, that is, π(G) ∝Q
−1I{mp ≤dmax}, but note that
richer subjective network priors are available in the literature [Mukherjee
and Speed ]. Finally, a network estimator ˆG is obtained by thresholding posterior edge probabilities: (i,j) ∈E( ˆG) ⇔P(i regulates j) > ε. For
small maximum in-degree dmax, exact inference by enumeration of variable
subsets may be possible. Otherwise, Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
methods can be used to explore an eﬀectively smaller model space [Ellis and
Wong ; Friedman and Koller ]. In the experiments below we use
exact inference by enumeration.
2.4.2. Variable selection by corrected AIC.
Again, consider a constant
variance function (h = 1); rescaling as described above recovers the general
case. The usual maximum likelihood estimates ˆAp,• = (B′
j(dyp(tj)−ˆ
dyp(tj))2 induce closed forms Cpˆσ−n
for the maximized
factors of the likelihood function, where Cp is a constant not depending
on the choice of predictors. Corrected AIC scores [Burnham and Anderson
 ] for each variable p are then
AICc(p,G) = nlog(ˆσ2
p) + 2mp + 2mp(mp + 1)
n −mp −1 .
Again we consider all models with maximum permissible in-degree dmax.
Lowest scoring models are chosen for each variable in turn, inducing a network estimator ˆG.
3. Results.
In this section we present empirical results investigating the
performance of a number of network inference schemes that are special cases
of the general formulation described by equation (10). Objective assessment
of network inference is challenging [Prill et al. ], since for most biological applications the true data-generating network is unknown. We therefore exploit two published dynamical models of biological processes, namely,
Cantone et al. and Swat, Kel and Herzel , described in detail in the Supplemental Information [SI; Oates and Mukherjee ]. The
C. J. OATES AND S. MUKHERJEE
ﬁrst is a synthetic gene regulatory network built in the yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. These ﬁve gene network and associated delay diﬀerential equations (DDEs) have received attention in computational biology [Camacho
and Collins ; Minty, Varedi and Nina ], and have been shown
to agree with gold-standard data [at least under an E(f(FX)) ≈f(FE(X))
assumption]. Cantone et al. consider two experimental conditions: “switchon” and “switch-oﬀ.” In this paper “switch-on” parameter values were used
to generate data. The Swat model is a gene-protein network governing the
G1/S transition in mammalian cells. The model has a nine-dimensional state
vector and, unlike Cantone, is Markovian. We note that this model has not
been directly veriﬁed in the manner of Cantone but is based on a theoretical understanding of cell cycle dynamics. There is undoubtedly bias from
this essentially arbitrary choice of dynamical systems, but a comprehensive
sampling of the (vast) space of possible networks and dynamics is beyond
the scope of this paper.
3.1. Experimental procedure.
3.1.1. Simulation.
We consider global perturbation data by initializing
the dynamical systems from out of equilibrium conditions. This is a common setting for network inference approaches, but the limitations of inference from such data remain incompletely understood. For each dynamical
system f, trajectories Xk of single-cell expression levels were obtained as
solutions to the SDDE equation (1) with drift f and uncorrelated diﬀusion g(X) = σcellD(X) (representing multiplicative cellular noise). Trajectories were obtained by numerically solving SDDEs with heterogeneous initial
conditions using the Euler-Maruyama discretization scheme [equation (4)].
MATLAB R2010a code for all simulation experiments is available in the
SI. To mimic destructive sampling and consequent nonlongitudinality, solutions were regenerated at each time point. We are interested in data that
are averages over a large number N of single-cell trajectories. However, the
computational cost of solving N ×n SDDEs to produce each data set is prohibitive. Therefore, only a smaller number N ∗≪N of cells were simulated
and a larger sample N then obtained by bootstrapping, that is, resampling
from the N ∗trajectories with replacement. In practice, N ∗should be taken
suﬃciently large such that a negligible change in experimental outcome results from further increase in N ∗. Initial conditions for single-cell trajectories
varied with standard deviation σcell. Finally, uncorrelated Gaussian noise of
magnitude σmeas was added to simulate a measurement process with additive error. In the experiments presented below, N = 10,000, N ∗= 30 and
n = 20 time points are taken within the dynamically interesting range (0–
280 minutes for Cantone and 0–100 minutes for Swat). Measurement error and cellular noise are set to give signal-to-noise ratios ⟨X⟩/σmeas ≈10,
NETWORK INFERENCE AND BIOLOGICAL DYNAMICS
Two published dynamical systems models of cellular processes were used to generate data sets. Single-cell trajectories were generated from an SDDE model [equation (1)]
and averaged under measurement noise and nonlongitudinality due to destructive sampling.
( a) Data generated from (a model due to) Cantone et al. , describing a synthetic
network built in yeast. ( b) Data generated from Swat, Kel and Herzel , a theory–
driven model of the G1/S transition in mammalian cells.
⟨X⟩/σcell ≈10 [here ⟨X⟩represents the average expression levels of the variables X over all generated trajectories]. Figure 1 shows typical data sets for
the two dynamical systems.
3.1.2. Inference schemes.
The following inference schemes were assessed:
Variable selection
{ Bayesian, AICc }
Design matrix
{ Standard, Quadratic }
Lagged predictors
{ No, Yes }
Variance function h(∆) ∝∆−α
α = { 0, 1, 2 , ∅}
For the design matrix “quadratic” refers to the augmentation of the predictor set by the pairwise products of predictors, the simplest nonlinear
C. J. OATES AND S. MUKHERJEE
basis functions. For the variance function the symbol ∅is used to denote the VAR(q) model, which formally lacks a variance function. “Lagged
predictors = Yes” indicates augmentation of the predictor set with lagged
observations (a lag of ≈28 mins is used for Cantone and ≈10 mins for
Swat). There are heuristic justiﬁcations for each of the candidate variance
functions. For example, the function with α = 2 appears for small ∆j when
an exact Euler approximation and additive measurement error are assumed
[Bansal and di Bernardo ], whereas α = 1 is reminiscent of the Euler-
Maruyama discretization equation (4).
3.1.3. Empirical assessment.
The performance of each inference scheme
is quantiﬁed by the area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
curve (AUR), averaged over 20 data sets [Fawcett ]. This metric,
equivalent to the probability that a randomly chosen true edge is preferred
by the inference scheme to a randomly chosen false edge, summarizes, across
a range of thresholds, the ability to select edges in the true data-generating
graph. Results presented below use a computationally favorable in-degree
restriction dmax = 2. In order to check robustness to dmax, all experiments
were repeated using dmax = 3, with no substantial changes in observed outcome (SFigure 6).
3.2. Empirical results.
3.2.1. Even sampling interval.
Figure 2(a) displays box-plots over AUR
scores for the Cantone dynamical system under even sampling intervals.
Note that under even sampling, for an otherwise identical scheme, changing
variance function does not aﬀect the model, leading to identical AUR scores
for schemes which diﬀer only in variance function. (An exception to this is
the VAR model, since the parameters A carry a subtly diﬀerent meaning,
which under a Bayesian formulation leads to a translation of the prior distribution and in the information criteria case changes the deﬁnition of the
predictor set.)
Despite the presence of nonlinearities and memory in the cellular drift f,
neither the use of quadratic basis functions nor the inclusion of lagged predictors appear to improve performance in terms of AUR. In order to verify that
quadratic predictors are suﬃciently nonlinear and that lagged predictors are
suﬃciently delayed, we repeated the investigation using both cubic predictors and using a delay twice as long. Results (SFigures 3 and 4) demonstrate
that no improvement to the AUR scores is achieved in this way.
Corresponding results for the Swat model are shown in Figure 2. Here we
ﬁnd that none of the methods perform well.
We also performed inference using biochemical data from the experimental
system reported in Cantone et al. (speciﬁcally the “switch-on” data
NETWORK INFERENCE AND BIOLOGICAL DYNAMICS
An empirical comparison of network inference schemes. Simulated experiments
based on published dynamical systems allow benchmarking of performance in terms of area
under ROC curves (AUR; higher scores correspond to better network inference performance). ( a) Even sampling intervals. ( b) Uneven sampling intervals.
C. J. OATES AND S. MUKHERJEE
set therein). AUR scores obtained using this data (SFigure 5) were in close
agreement with those obtained using synthetic data [Figure 2(a)], suggesting
that the results of the simulations are relevant to real world studies.
3.2.2. Uneven sampling intervals.
Many biological time-course experiments are carried out with uneven sampling intervals. We therefore repeated
the analysis above with sampling times of 0, 1, 5, 10, 15, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 75,
90, 105, 120, 140, 160, 180, 210, 240 and 280 minutes. Figure 2(b) displays
the AUR scores so obtained. We ﬁnd that all the methods perform worse in
the uneven sampling regime, with no method performing signiﬁcantly better than random. Corresponding results for the Swat model are shown in
SFigure 7. Again, here we ﬁnd that none of the methods perform well.
3.2.3. Consistency.
Figure 3 displays AUR scores for Cantone for a large
number of evenly sampled time points (n = 100), and the limiting case of zero
measurement noise and zero cellular heterogeneity (σmeas = 0, σcell = 0, even
sampling intervals). Consistency (in the sense of asymptotic convergence of
the network estimate to the data-generating network) may be unattainable
due to the nonidentiﬁability resulting from limited exploration of the dynamical phase space. This lack of subjectivity means that in many cases
Investigation of empirical consistency of network estimators, using the Cantone
et al. model with even sampling intervals. Area under ROC curves are shown in
the large data set, zero cellular heterogeneity and zero measurement noise limits.
NETWORK INFERENCE AND BIOLOGICAL DYNAMICS
inference cannot possibly reveal the full data-generating graph, although,
as we have seen, network inference can nonetheless be informative. From
Figure 3 we see that the Bayesian schemes using linear predictors approach
AUR equal to unity, and in this sense show empirical consistency with respect to network inference. However, some of the other methods do not
converge to the correct graph even in this limit.
4. Discussion.
The analyses presented here were aimed at better understanding statistical network inference for biological applications. We showed
how a broad class of approaches, including VAR models, linear DBNs and
certain ODE-based approaches, are related to stochastic dynamics at the
cellular level. We discuss a number of these aspects below and close with
some views on future perspectives for network inference, including recommendations for practitioners.
4.1. Time intervals.
We found that uneven sampling intervals posed
problems, even for methods that explicitly accounted for the sampling interval. Further insight may be gained from a “propagation of uncertainty”
analysis of the approximations indicated in Section 2.2. Assuming the true
large sample process obeys dX∞/dt = F(X∞), we have that under an observation process with independent additive Gaussian measurement error
Y(t) ∼N(X∞(t),M) an expansion for the variance V(dY −F(Y)) over
a time interval ∆is given by
M∆−2 + (I∆−1 + DF)M(I∆−1 + DF)′ + ···
(see SI for details). Recall that the model family in equation (10) approximates this variance by h(∆)D(σ2
P), where h(∆) = ∆−α. From this
perspective it is clear that each variance function we considered captures
only partial variation due to ∆. It is therefore not surprising that performance suﬀers in the uneven sampling regime, which requires the variance
function to apply equally to large ∆as to small ∆. Moreover, a natural
choice of variance function driven by equation (17) is not possible, since
this would require knowledge of the unknown process F. The implication
for experimental design is that, absent speciﬁc reasons for uneven sampling,
it may be preferable to collect data at regular intervals.
Figure 4 displays an approximation to the true variance function for the
Cantone model (see SI). Observe that for small sampling intervals ∆the
true curvature is best captured by a functional approximation of the form
h(∆) ∝∆−α with α = 1,2, whereas for intervals larger than 10 mins (which
are more common in practice) the ﬂat approximation h(∆) ∝1 correctly
captures the asymptotic behavior. In applications where high frequency sampling is infeasible, the ﬂat variance function might be a sensible choice. To
understand whether diﬃculties related to sampling intervals disappear in
the large sample limit, we repeated the empirical consistency analysis under
C. J. OATES AND S. MUKHERJEE
Variance functions used in literature provide partial approximation to the “true”
functional form for Cantone et al. . For small time steps a power law ∆−α provides
a good approximation, but for larger time steps a constant variance function may be more
appropriate. In practice, the precise form of htrue will be unknown.
uneven sampling (SFigures 11 and 12). Interestingly, we found that none of
the methods appeared to be empirically consistent, and that the choice of
variance function is inﬂuential. However, unevenly sampled data are common in biology and it may be the case that in some settings, the existence of
multiple time scales (e.g., signaling, transcription, accumulating epigenetic
alterations) mean that unevenly sampled data are nonetheless useful. Our
ﬁndings suggest that care should be taken in the uneven sampling regime.
4.2. Interventional data.
The Cantone data are favorable in the sense
that gene proﬁles show interesting time-varying behavior under global perturbation, exploring a large proportion of the dynamical phase space. However, such behavior is dependent on the speciﬁc dynamical system and is not
displayed by the Swat model, which has a much larger phase space, being
a nine-dimensional dynamical system. This may help explain the poor performance of all the methods on this latter model using global perturbation
data and perhaps reinforces the intuitive notion that dynamics that are favorable (in this informal sense) facilitate network inference. In some cases,
perturbation data are available in which individual variables are inhibited
(e.g., by RNA interference, gene knockouts or inhibitor treatments). Such
data have the potential to explore much more of the dynamical phase space,
including regions which cannot be accessed without direct inhibition of speciﬁc molecular components. This is an important consideration because the
statistical estimators described in Section 2.4 take the form
ˆA = ⟨Df(FX)⟩X∈R,
NETWORK INFERENCE AND BIOLOGICAL DYNAMICS
where the average is over the region R ⊆X in state space visited during the
experiments. Clearly, if the region (f(FR),R) is only a small subspace of
phase space, then the estimate equation (18) will be poor compared to one
based on the entire phase space ˆA∗= ⟨Df(FX)⟩X∈X .
To investigate the added value of interventional treatments for network
inference, we repeated both the Cantone and Swat analyses with an ensemble of data sets obtained by inhibiting each variable in turn; this gave 5 and
9 data sets for Cantone and Swat respectively. While no improvement to the
Cantone AUR scores was observed (SFigure 15), there was improved performance for Swat (SFigure 16). This suggests that global perturbations are
insuﬃcient to explore the Swat dynamical phase space, and supports the
intuitive notion that intervention experiments may be essential for inference regarding larger dynamical systems. Nevertheless, AUR scores remain
far from unity. This may be because the Swat drift function contains complex interaction terms which single interventions alone fail to elucidate. An
important problem in experimental design will be to estimate how much
(possibly combinatorial) intervention is required to achieve a certain level of
network inference performance.
We considered precise artiﬁcial intervention of single components in silico.
However, biological interventions may be imprecise and imperfect. For example, RNA interference achieves only incomplete silencing of the target and
small molecule inhibitors may have oﬀ-target eﬀects. Moreover, at present
such interventions are not instantaneous nor truly exogenous. This means
that in many cases the system itself may be changed by the intervention,
rendering resulting predictions inaccurate for the native system of interest.
There remains a need for novel statistical methodology capable of analyzing
time-course data under biological interventions. Existing literature in causal
inference [Pearl ] and related work in graphical models [Eaton and
Murphy ] are relevant, but in biological applications it may also be
important to consider the mechanism of action of speciﬁc interventions.
4.3. Nonlinear models.
We focused on linear statistical models. Clearly,
linear models are inadequate in many cases. For example, Rogers, Khanin
and Girolami demonstrate the beneﬁt of a nonlinear model based
on Michaelis-Menten chemical kinetics for inference of transcription factor
activity. However, network inference based on nonlinear ODEs remains challenging [Xu et al. ]. Alternatively, ¨Aij¨o and L¨ahdesm¨aki consider the use of a nonparametric Gaussian process (GP) interaction term
in the regression, which is naturally more ﬂexible than linear regression using ﬁnitely many basis functions. This may help to overcome the linearity
restriction, but introduces additional degrees of freedom, including the GP
covariance function and associated hyperparameters. While a thorough comparison of such approaches was beyond the scope of this article, the potential
C. J. OATES AND S. MUKHERJEE
utility of nonparametric interaction terms is worthy of investigation. In this
study we observed that neither the use of predictor products nor lagged
predictors led to improved performance; this may reﬂect nontrivial coupling
between cellular dynamics and the observed data.
4.4. Single-cell data.
In the future it may become possible to measure
single-cell expression levels Xk nondestructively (e.g., by live cell imaging), producing truly longitudinal data sets. It is interesting to consider
how such data may impact upon the performance of regression-based network inference. Under independent additive Gaussian measurement error
Y(t) ∼N(Xk(t),M) an expansion for the single-cell variance V(dY −f)
over a time interval ∆, in analogy with equation (17), is given by
M∆−2 + (I∆−1 + DF)M(I∆−1 + DF)′ + ∆−1gg′ + ···
(see SI). Thus, a (single) longitudinal single-cell data set contains less information about the drift f than aggregate data [equation (17)] due to cellular
stochasticity g. However, multiple longitudinal data sets may jointly contain
more information than a single aggregate data set. To empirically test the
utility of such data, we carried out network inference using 10 such longitudinal single-cell data sets on both the Cantone and Swat models, observed
at even intervals with the same magnitude of measurement error as aggregate data. Results (SFigures 13 and14) show a small improvement to the
mean AUR scores, but reduction by a factor of about two in the variance
of these scores (compared with the corresponding nonlongitudinal data),
implying that the network estimators may be converging to an incorrect
network. Bias may occur when the cellular drift f is not well approximated
by a linear function, as is the case for the Swat model. Consider the idealized scenario where f ≡f(X) is Markovian and it is possible to observe
longitudinal, single-cell expression levels. Under these apparently favorable
circumstances even estimators obtained after a thorough exploration of state
space may not oﬀer good approximations, that is, ˆA∗̸≈Df|x=0. As a toy
example consider the cellular drift
f : 2 →R,
(2π)−1 sin(2πX2)
(2π)−1 sin(2πX1)
which is not well approximated by a linear function over the state space
X = 2. In this case averaging leads to cancellation
ˆA∗= ⟨Df(X)⟩X∈X =
NETWORK INFERENCE AND BIOLOGICAL DYNAMICS
so that no interactions are inferred. Under such circumstances network inference is no longer possible using the na¨ıve linear regression approach. This
suggests that network inference rooted in nonlinear models may be needed
to fully exploit longitudinal single-cell data in the future. A related line of
work addresses heterogeneity of the drift function in time by coupling DBNs
with change point processes [Grzegorczyk and Husmeier ; Kolar, Song
and Xing ; L`ebre et al. ]. A promising direction would be piecewise linear regression modeling for network inference applications, where the
heterogeneity appears in the spatial domain.
4.5. High-dimensions and missing variables.
We focused on the simplest
possible case of fully observed, low-dimensional systems. There is a rich literature in high-dimensional variable selection and related graphical models
[Meinshausen and B¨uhlmann ; Hans, Dobra and West ; Friedman, Hastie and Tibshirani ] which applies equally to the regression
models described here. The issues raised in this paper remain relevant in
the high-dimensional setting. However, in practice, even high-dimensional
observations are likely to be incomplete, since it is not currently possible
to measure all relevant chemical species. Therefore, inferred relationships
between variables may be indirect. This may be acceptable for the purpose
of predicting the outcome of biochemical interventions (e.g., inhibiting gene
or protein nodes), but limits stronger causal or mechanistic interpretations.
Latent variable approaches are available [Beal et al. ], but model selection can be challenging and remains an open area of research [Knowles
and Ghahramani ]. We note also that the missing variable issue for
biological networks is arguably more severe than in, say, economics or epidemiology, insofar as measured variables may represent only a small fraction
of the true state vector, often with little speciﬁc insight available into the
nature of the missing variables or their relationship to observations. Further
work is required to better understand these issues in the context of inference
for biological networks.
4.6. Future perspectives.
We found that a simple linear model could successfully infer network structure using globally perturbed time-course data
from the Cantone system. It is encouraging that inference based only on associations between variables, none of which were explicitly intervened upon,
can in some cases be eﬀective. Interventional designs should further enhance
prospects for network inference. On the other hand, theoretical arguments,
and the results we showed from the Swat system, emphasize that in some
cases network structure may not be identiﬁable, even at the coarse level required for qualitative biological prediction. On balance, we believe that network inference can be useful in generating biological hypotheses and guiding
further experiment. However, the concerns we raise motivate a need for caution in statistical analysis and interpretation of results. At the present time,
we do not believe network inference should be treated as a routine analysis
C. J. OATES AND S. MUKHERJEE
in bioinformatics applications, but rather as an open research area that may,
in the future, yield standard experimental and statistical protocols.
Some speciﬁc recommendations that arise from the results presented here
are as follows:
• A default model. Our results suggest that a reasonable default choice of
model for typical applications uses the standard design matrix with no
lagged predictors and a ﬂat variance function, corresponding to the linear
dY(tj) ∼N(AY(tj−1),D(σ2
Coupled with the Bayesian variable selection scheme outlined in Section 2.4.1, this simple model produced empirically consistent network estimators for Cantone using evenly sampled global perturbation data (Figure 3).
• Diagnostics and validation. It is clear that network inference does not
enjoy general theoretical guarantees and that the ability to successfully
elucidate network structure depends on details of the speciﬁc system under study. Therefore, careful empirical validation on a case-by-case basis
is essential. This should include statistical assessment of model ﬁt, robustness and predictive ability and, where possible, systematic validation
using independent interventional data.
• Experimental design. We suggest sampling evenly in time as a default
choice. Interventional designs may be helpful to eﬀectively explore larger
dynamical phase spaces. However, to control the burden of experimentally
exploring multiple time points, molecular species, interventions, culture
conditions and biological samples, adaptive designs that prune experiments based on informativeness for the speciﬁc biological setting may be
helpful [Xu et al. ].
In conclusion, linear statistical models for networks are closely related
to models of cellular dynamics and can shed light on patterns of biochemical regulation. However, biological network inference remains profoundly
challenging, and in some cases may not be possible even in principle. Nevertheless, studies aimed at elucidating networks from high-throughput data
are now commonplace and play a prominent role in biology. For this reason
there remains an urgent need for both new methodology and theoretical
and empirical investigation of existing approaches. Furthermore, there remain many open questions in experimental design and analysis of designed
experiments in this setting.
Acknowledgments.
We would like to thank Professor K. Kafadar and
the anonymous referees for constructive suggestions that helped to improve
the content and presentation of this article, and G. O. Roberts, S. Spencer
and S. M. Hill for discussion and comments.
NETWORK INFERENCE AND BIOLOGICAL DYNAMICS
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Additional materials (DOI: 10.1214/11-AOAS532SUPP; .zip). This supplement provides the dynamical systems used in this paper and accompanying MATLAB R2010a scripts, derivations and additional ﬁgures SFigures 1–