Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with
free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-
19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the
company's public news and information website.
Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related
research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre - including this
research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other
publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights
for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means
with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are
granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre
remains active.
Computers in Human Behavior Reports 4 100130
Available online 1 August 2021
2451-9588/©
( 
Transition to online learning during the COVID-19 pandemic
David John Lemay a, Paul Bazelais b, Tenzin Doleck c,*
a McGill University, Canada
b John Abbott College, Canada
c Simon Fraser University, Canada
A R T I C L E I N F O
Approach to learning
Online teaching
Online learning
e-learning
A B S T R A C T
Background: With the new pandemic reality that has beset us, teaching and learning activities have been thrust
online. While much research has explored student perceptions of online and distance learning, none has had a
social laboratory to study the effects of an enforced transition on student perceptions of online learning.
Purpose: We surveyed students about their perceptions of online learning before and after the transition to online
learning. As student perceptions are influenced by a range of contextual and institutional factors beyond the
classroom, we expected that students would be overall sanguine to the project given that access, technology
integration, and family and government support during the pandemic shutdown would mitigate the negative
consequences.
Results: Students overall reported positive academic outcomes. However, students reported increased stress and
anxiety and difficulties concentrating, suggesting that the obstacles to fully online learning were not only
technological and instructional challenges but also social and affective challenges of isolation and social
distancing.
Conclusion: Our analysis shows that the specific context of the pandemic disrupted more than normal teaching
and learning activities. Whereas students generally responded positively to the transition, their reluctance to
continue learning online and the added stress and workload show the limits of this large scale social experiment.
In addition to the technical and pedagogical dimensions, successfully supporting students in online learning
environments will require that teachers and educational technologists attend to the social and affective di­
mensions of online learning as well.
1. Introduction
The novel coronavirus disease 2019 or Covid-19 or SARS-CoV-2 pandemic
outbreak has disrupted and changed how we socialize, work, and learn
 . Since the pandemic began,
much human activity has transitioned online . The profound effects of the pandemic
are being especially felt in education . For education, the pandemic
is both a challenge and an opportunity .
Schools have closed to mitigate the spread of COVID-19 and the Covid-19 pandemic has disrupted traditional
models of learning and precipitated a move to
online teaching and learning activities . In the wake of the pandemic, most institutions of higher educa­
tion have had to reconsider ways of teaching and assessment (García-­
Pe˜nalvo, Corell, Abella-Garcí).
Regarding teaching, this abrupt transition “has led to significantly
intensified workloads for staff as they work to not only move teaching
content and materials into the online space, but also become sufficiently
adept in navigating the requisite software” . Likewise, students faced difficulties and challenges
adapting to the abrupt and unplanned shift to online learning . In fact, it is not surprising that we know little about stu­
dents’ readiness for real-time online learning . Pre­
vious research on online teaching and learning has generally shown that
transitions are usually voluntary and/or planned; however, emergency
transitions, such as the one brought upon by the Covid-19 pandemic,
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: (D.J. Lemay), (P. Bazelais), , 
(T. Doleck).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Computers in Human Behavior Reports
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/computers-in-human-behavior-reports
 
Received 3 May 2021; Received in revised form 29 July 2021; Accepted 31 July 2021
Computers in Human Behavior Reports 4 100130
have relatively little body of knowledge . Considering this significant upheaval, we wanted to
explore how these changes might influence student perceptions of online
In this context it is important to understand student perceptions, to
be able to develop successful interventions and correct deficits in
learning. Examining student perceptions of online learning through the
transition helps us to understand the limits and the potential of this
mode of distance learning, and help to anticipate and adapt the effects of
this sudden transition to online instruction.
2. Background
According to Kauffman , “students perceive online courses
differently than traditional courses” (p.1). In a highly cited paper Song,
Singleton, Hill, and Koh conducted a large-scale study of grad­
uate student perceptions of online learning and found a mix of facili­
tating and discouraging factors. Students felt that course design was an
important factor that distinguished successful from unsuccessful online
learning experiences. A review by Nora and Snyder documented
mixed evidence for improved learning outcomes for online learning over
traditional classes as technical problems were a significant impediment,
including user proficiency with technology but also time management
and maintaining interest and motivation online. It is unclear to what
extent a forced and precipitated transition to online learning might
affect perceptions of online learning.
Some research suggests that students may perform differently across
different modalities, and some may even perform better in online
learning environments . Cole, Lennon, and Weber inves­
tigated the relationship between student perceptions of online learning
practices, social belonging, and the learning climate, controlling for age
and gender. They argue that successful online learning addresses the
social dimension, to counter the absence and overcome the distance.
They concluded that a successful fully online learning experience ne­
cessitates exploiting active learning strategies to create opportunities for
connection and exchange. Indeed, there is research reporting that stu­
dents are more appreciative of active learning strategies in online
learning environments .
It is acknowledged in the literature that online learning presents a
learning environment that is distinct from face-to-face or classroom
learning environments . Students
generally have favorable perceptions of online learning although they
have reservations around technological proficiency and adequate course
designs . According to a recent review by Pokhrel and
Chhetri , “broadly identified challenges with e-learning are
accessibility, affordability, flexibility, learning pedagogy, life-long
learning and educational policy” (p. 4). Anecdotally, many distance
learning programs are successful and students have thrived when they
have been adequately supported. However, the unequal social outcomes
and deprivations of the pandemic means many students have been
deprived of adequate educational support . Many educationalists are lamenting the lost years of
the pandemic and the lamentable effects for youth social development
 . Thus, it is not clear how an
enforced transition to remote teaching might influence student percep­
tions of online learning.
3. Purpose of the study
We sought to explore how the pandemic influenced student per­
ceptions of online learning.
3.1. Research question
We asked “How did the pandemic and the unprecedented institution
wide transition to remote delivery of instruction influence student per­
ceptions of online learning in terms of access, engagement and academic
4.1. Design
We employed a cross-sectional survey-based design to gauge student
perceptions of online learning before, during, and after the transition to
remote instruction. We surveyed students at a college in Northeastern
North America about their experience of the transition to online
learning. Then, we compared and contrasted our findings with the
empirical research to describe how student perceptions of online
learning were influenced by the wholesale transition to online learning.
4.2. Procedure and participants
Participants completed an online survey during the middle months of
2020.Survey responses were collected online. Surveys were completed
on a voluntary basis and were completely anonymous. The survey
included questions related to the effects of transition to online learning
during the COVID-19 pandemic.A total of N = 149 students from a pre-
university science program at an English Coll`ege d’enseignement g´en´eral et
professionnel 
participated in the study. A breakdown of the participant characteristics
is provided in Table 1.
4.3. Measures
We used items from an existing questionnaire 
adapted for the present context, focusing on student perceptions after
the transition and assessing student reactions, and their perceptions of
the impact of the transition on academic outcomes. We supplemented
the Likert scale items with the following open-ended questions:
1. What one thing could the College have done to improve your expe­
rience after the transition to online instruction?
2. Reflecting on your transition to online instruction, what was the
most negative outcome?
3. Reflecting on your transition to online instruction, what was the
most positive outcome?
4. What one thing could your instructors have done to improve your
experience after the transition to online instruction?
5. Is there anything else that you feel is important regarding your
experience with the transition to online learning that you would like
5. Analysis
5.1. Background
We summarized the results and calculated descriptive statistics. We
analyzed tendencies to provide a holistic picture of student perceptions
General characteristics of the respondents.
Student Characteristics
D.J. Lemay et al.
Computers in Human Behavior Reports 4 100130
of online throughout the transition. Open-ended questions were sum­
marized using thematic analysis to inductively group answers into
categories.
Of the 149 students surveyed, 45 were employed prior to COVID-19,
but then unemployed due to COVID-19. 28 continued to be employed
throughout the Winter 2020 semester. 76 reported no employment
during this period. This is unsurprising as nearly all the students sur­
veyed were still living with their parents, save one student who reported
living alone. Fig. 1 presents student living situations prior to the
pandemic. Students reported difficulty finding adequate study space,
due to interruptions from too many people, not having space, and too
much noise. Fig. 4 shows that 95% had not taken an online course prior
to the pandemic. When the Winter 2020 semester began, only nine
students were taking courses fully online or in a blended learning situ­
ation (a hybrid model, mixing both online and face-to-face components).
90% of students were not taking any online courses. However, over a
third were registered in at least one blended learning course. Please see
Table 2 for the frequency of online, blended, and face-to-face courses
reported by students. Virtually none of the students surveyed had taken
fully online courses prior to the wholesale transition to remote
instruction.
In Table 3, we summarize student responses regarding levels of food
or monetary insecurity in the earlier months of the pandemic. Whereas
the pandemic was undeniably disruptive in everyone’s lives, some were
hit harder than others. Even for a relatively affluent population, food
insecurity was an issue for a few. Signaling that despite governmental
measures, some students were still facing hardships at home.
5.2. Technology details
In Table 4, we summarize student responses concerning their access
to technology and their preparation for online learning. Fig. 2 illustrates
students’ principal mode of connecting to online learning resources.
Over 85% had access to the necessary computer equipment and Internet
access, though 10% struggled with Internet connectivity and 5% did not
have adequate computer hardware. Whereas the majority felt suffi­
ciently prepared, 15% were unprepared which increased to a worrying
40% when accounting for those who were mitigated. Hence, material
issues of technology and access were not important factors for the ma­
jority of students surveyed.
As can be seen in Fig. 2, over 85% reported using their own laptop.
Surprisingly, more than half reported working on their smartphone at
least part of the time. Given that a smartphone has become a necessary
part of life, for many it is their only connected device or their only device
at all. If one has to choose between a smartphone or a laptop, the laptop
is the greater luxury and often the loser in the cost benefit analysis. Still a
few reported having to share equipment to participate in online learning
activities. This is concerning since it is largely accepted as a matter of
course that everyone is connected these days. Yet for a minority, access
remains uncertain or variable. Virtually everyone surveyed reported
having an internet connection at home though at least 10% reported
poor Internet connectivity. In Fig. 3, we observe that virtually all stu­
dents connected using their residence’s internet services.
5.3. Engagement
This section of the survey addresses how the shift to online instruc­
tion impacted student engagement at college and in their courses. As can
be observed in Tables 5 and 6, the transition did lead to disaffection for
many. Although most continued to identify as students, their academic
goals became less important. 25% felt they were unsuccessful as a result
of the transition to online learning even though 50% still found success
in the transition.
In Table 6, students were asked to think about their specific
Fig. 1. Student living situation prior to pandemic.
Winter course registration by delivery model prior to the transition to online
Originally 100% online class (es)
Originally hybrid (blended-learning)
class (es)
Originally face-to-face class (es)
*fully-online courses (100% online), hybrid courses (with some face-to-face and
some online sessions), or face-to-face courses 100130
experience of one of three physics courses from Winter 2020, after
courses transitioned to online instruction. Overall, students reported
increased workload and more challenging work but also increased
teacher support, however they also reported poorer communication, less
understanding of course goals and less interaction with their peers.
5.4. Reaction
The following section deals with student reaction to the pandemic
and its effects on instruction. As we can clearly see, the pandemic pro­
voked a lot of stress and anxiety in students (see Fig. 5). Paradoxically,
some were happy or optimistic, perhaps driven by the “reset” that was
discussed in the early days of the pandemic where we might reflect
socially in our collective relationship to work and to each other.
Whereas students struggled with self-discipline in online learning, they
remained optimistic and motivated to achieve their goals and this did
not appear dampened by the transition to online learning.
Although students experienced a higher incidence of stress or
anxious emotions on average, a few were opportunistic and even excited
at the prospect of moving to online learning as we can see in Table 7.
This is perhaps explainable by the fact that one third did not feel they
had sufficient self-discipline to be successful at fully online learning.
However, majority of the students reported feeling positive about their
diligence. Indeed, that they had grown from the experience and that
they expected to be rewarded for their hard work.
Student access to technology and preparation for online learning.
Disagree (%)
Neither either or
disagree (%)
Strongly Agree
I had adequate access to the internet connectivity necessary to
participate in online instruction.
I had adequate access to computer hardware necessary to
participate in online instruction.
I was prepared for online instruction.
Fig. 2. Student internet connected device for online learning.
Fig. 3. Primary method of connecting to the internet.
D.J. Lemay et al.
Computers in Human Behavior Reports 4 100130
Fig. 4. Student experience of online learning prior to pandemic.
Consequence of transition on student engagement in college and in class.
Disagree (%)
Neither either or
disagree (%)
I still found it easy to think of myself as a college student.
I became less concerned about what my classmates and instructors
thought of me.
I felt like I lost touch with the College community.
My academic goals became less important to me.
I felt I was successful as a college student.
I encountered discrimination or racism in my online instruction
environment that had a negative impact on my learning.
Consequence of transition on teaching and learning.
Strongly Disagree (%)
Disagree (%)
Neither either or disagree (%)
Strongly Agree (%)
I found my coursework more challenging.
My instructor was more available for support.
I interacted with my classmates more.
I missed more course announcements than usual.
I earned lower grades than I expected.
It took more effort to complete my coursework.
It was harder to meet deadlines.
I had a better understanding of the learning goals.
I spent more time on my schoolwork overall.
Fig. 5. Student affect response to pandemic.
D.J. Lemay et al.
Computers in Human Behavior Reports 4 100130
5.5. Standards outcomes
Table 8 describes how students felt the transition impacted the
standards and outcomes of their courses. Overall, students did not
perceive academic misconduct had increased. Although it was felt that
teachers relaxed their standards somewhat, the majority believed that
their grades accurately reflected their performance.
5.6. Academic progress
In this section, we asked how students believed the transition to
online instruction impacted their academic progress and future plans.
Overall students appeared sanguine about the effects of the pandemic.
As can be seen in Table 9, many felt they were on pace to graduate. Most
did not feel that they had been negatively impacted by the transition to
online learning. Although one quarter did feel they had been held back
in their academic progress due to the transition to online learning.
5.7. Learning
In Table 10 we asked how students believed the transition to online
instruction impacted their ability to learn. Students painted a somewhat
bleaker picture of online learning, as many as one in three struggled with
online discussions. While most appreciated the ability to replay videos,
nearly two thirds found it very difficult to focus on online lectures.
5.8. Qualitative analysis
In addition to the Likert scale questions, students were also asked five
open-ended questions. Answers were inductively coded into thematic
groupings and are summarized in Tables 11–15 below. Student open-
ended answers are aligned with their responses to the Likert question
items. Their answers manifest their concerns for organization, commu­
nication, and technological support for effective online learning. They
especially call for standards in delivery of online instruction. Students
would have liked teachers to be more understanding about the their
needs and the obstacles and challenges posed by the pandemic. Students
also highlighted the specific challenges of this wholesale transition to
online learning: technological shortcomings or lack of support, and
perceptions of increased workloads, less interactions, poorer commu­
nication, and more overall confusion. Students called for varying in­
struction and employing a greater range of instructional tools and
strategies, and most importantly for increased interactions, whether by
making more use of group chats, collectively worked problems on vir­
tual whiteboards, and flipping the classroom by assigning lectures and
using class time to discuss problems. Many students called for recording
lectures so they could be consulted later.
6. Discussion
This small survey reported on student perceptions of the transition to
online learning at one college in Northeastern North America. Our re­
sults describe an overall successful transition in terms of student aca­
demic outcomes and instructional standards. However, this is far from
saying that the transition was a runaway success. Students reported high
levels of stress and anxiety, two thirds had difficulty concentrating in
online learning, and few students were ready to continue studying on­
line. While the outcomes could be worse, students will be happy to re­
turn to in-class instruction as lockdowns are lifted and institutions are
reopened to the student population.
Our findings largely parallel the pre-pandemic literature on student
perceptions of online learning. Students perceive both advantages and
disadvantages to online learning . What
our results highlight however, is the emotional and psychological toll of
fully remote learning. Social connection is sorely lacking after many
months of enforced social distancing and isolation. This stresses the
importance of the social and affective dimension of online learning
 . The rela­
tionship of the social and affective to student perceptions of online
learning has not been explored in significant depth in the student per­
ceptions literature. In light of the social effects of the pandemic on
student life, our results stress the importance of online learning situa­
tions that create opportunities for connection and exchange . Our findings
show that educators and educationalists cannot ignore the social and
affective dimensions when planning and delivering online instructions
for the simple well-being of many students who suffer in isolation. Our
findings also support the community of inquiry notions of social and
cognitive presence in successful online learning environments .
In a recent study, Zheng, Yu, and Wu compared a blended
learning situation where students interacted with their teacher over
social media, and one face-to-face learning situation, finding that af­
fective and cognitive learning are enhanced in blended learning and that
Student performance self-assessment of online learning during pandemic.
Strongly Disagree
Neither either or
disagree (%)
Strongly Agree
I do not have the self-discipline to be successful in a completely
online environment.
During the period of online learning, I feel that I experienced
personal growth.
I have the inner drive to achieve my goals.
I sometimes let others limit my success.
I am diligent and will finish what I start.
I believe I will be rewarded for my hard work.
Student perceptions of academic standards and outcomes in online learning during pandemic.
Disagree (%)
Neither either or
disagree (%)
Strongly Agree
Academic misconduct increased among my classmates.
My instructor was not as concerned about cheating.
My instructor relaxed his/her standards (e.g., for grading,
participation, deadlines, attendance, etc.)
My instructor should have been more concerned about cheating.
The grades I received accurately reflected how much I had learned.
D.J. Lemay et al.
Computers in Human Behavior Reports 4 100130
the affective dimension appeared to mediate that effect though the two
conditions did not significantly differ on grade point average, social
presence, and academic self concept (though it significantly influenced
cognitive learning). Studies persistently show that affective and cogni­
tive presence are increased in blended learning . Zheng, Yu, and Wu’s 
model is interesting as its shows quite starkly how affect and
self-concept are tied to learning. These findings show that there are ways
to transcend the isolation and create social and affective connections in
online instruction.
Our present findings align with Zheng et al. as everyone’s
well-being was rudely tested by a year in social distancing and social
isolation. The students in our study missed interacting with their peers in
class and on campus. Many reported difficulty concentrating and
heightened stress. And largely students reported increased workloads as
the work shifted online. This contradicts the general discourse that as­
signments actually decreased. This disconnect can be understood from
the perspective of distributed cognition and distributed learning, where
the cognitive load is shared across a group of individuals. In this
perspective the environment or the system provides affordances for
activity. Work did not increase, as so much more of the cognitive load
was redistributed on the individual and away from the group. Distrib­
uted cognition in an online or a face-to-face environment follow mark­
edly different trajectories. Historically, it has been hard to reproduce
online the flow of face-to-face classroom discourse where you can easily
switch from one activity to another. Which is perhaps why the transition
Student perceptions of academic progress in online learning during the pandemic.
Disagree (%)
Neither either or
disagree (%)
In terms of my academic progress, I feel that I am still on pace to meet my
academic goals as scheduled.
I will be a better student than I was before the transition to online instruction.
I am more likely to enroll in a 100% online course now than I was before the
transition to online instruction.
I anticipate being behind in my academic progress upon return to the
classroom.
I will have to delay graduation or employment opportunities because I was not
able to complete essential coursework or practical experiences during the
Winter 2020
Student Perceptions of Transition’s Impact on their Ability to Learn.
Strongly Disagree
Neither either or
disagree (%)
Strongly Agree
I had access to the same software that I was using on campus.
I benefited from being able to replay video lectures.
I struggled with the use of online discussions.
I was able to focus more clearly on the lectures without the
distraction of other people.
What one thing could the College have done to improve your experience after
the transition to online instruction?.
Thematic Category
Don’t know
Better organization
No evaluations
Recorded lectures
Better communication
Better student adaptations
Better technological support
Institution wide policies
Less coursework
Something better
Better enforcement of classroom behavior
Loosen deadlines
Better preparation
Better communication
Cancel the semester
Return to face-to-face learning
Include results in GPA
More flexibility
Smoother transition
More classroom interactions
More effective instruction
Maintain service quality
Reflecting on your transition to online instruction, what was the most negative
Thematic Category
Distractions
Demotivation
Poor performance
Poor instruction
Social isolation
Increased workload
Financial problems
Too much screen time
Social isolation
Teacher suspicions of student misconduct
Less effective learning
Grades not included in GPA
Evaluation
Less effective learning
Less classroom interaction
Poor performance
increased workload
Communication issues
Trouble concentrating
Technical issues
Lack of flexibility
Lack of institution wide policies
D.J. Lemay et al.
Computers in Human Behavior Reports 4 100130
to online learning often took the form of a video conference call, with all
the technical interruptions and the intrusions of private lives into the
public sphere.
6.1. Limitations
As a cross-sectional survey study, we caution against any causal in­
ferences. Moreover, the limited sample size recommends against
generalizing findings to the larger population. At most, these findings
are indicative of general tendencies. To show how our results might
generalize, we highlight many points of convergence between our
findings and the latest research on student perceptions of online
learning. Our study could have been strengthened by the inclusion of
other stakeholder perspectives and more in-depth qualitative analysis
methods; however, we believe that our findings regarding student per­
ceptions of online learning during the transition adds to the literature
and helps to understand the encouraging and discouraging factors
contributing to successful transitions to online learning.
6.2. Future directions
Future research should attempt to replicate our findings with other
samples to compare results across populations to understand how
institutional and contextual factors influence student perceptions of
online learning. Researchers might employ more in-depth qualitative
analysis methods to explore how instructional decisions interact with
the social and affective dimensions and influence student receptibility to
online learning.
No funding to report.
Compliance with ethical standards
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest.