Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 963–973,
Hong Kong, China, November 3–7, 2019. c⃝2019 Association for Computational Linguistics
Multilingual Neural Machine Translation with Language Clustering
Xu Tan§∗, Jiale Chen†∗, Di He‡, Yingce Xia§, Tao Qin§ and Tie-Yan Liu§
§Microsoft Research
†University of Science and Technology of China
‡Peking University
{xuta,taoqin,tyliu}@microsoft.com
Multilingual
translation
(NMT), which translates multiple languages
using a single model, is of great practical importance due to its advantages in
simplifying the training process, reducing
online maintenance costs,
and enhancing
low-resource and zero-shot translation. Given
there are thousands of languages in the world
and some of them are very different, it is
extremely burdensome to handle them all
in a single model or use a separate model
for each language pair.
Therefore, given a
ﬁxed resource budget, e.g., the number of
models, how to determine which languages
should be supported by one model is critical
to multilingual NMT, which, unfortunately,
has been ignored by previous work. In this
work, we develop a framework that clusters
languages into different groups and trains
one multilingual model for each cluster. We
study two methods for language clustering:
(1) using prior knowledge, where we cluster
languages according to language family, and
(2) using language embedding, in which we
represent each language by an embedding
vector and cluster them in the embedding
space. In particular, we obtain the embedding
vectors of all the languages by training a
universal neural machine translation model.
Our experiments on 23 languages show that
the ﬁrst clustering method is simple and
easy to understand but leading to suboptimal
translation accuracy, while the second method
sufﬁciently captures the relationship among
languages well and improves the translation
accuracy for almost all the languages over
baseline methods.
Introduction
Neural machine translation (NMT) has witnessed rapid progress
in recent years, from novel model structure developments to achieving performance comparable to humans .
Although a conventional NMT model can
handle a single language translation pair (e.g.,
German→English, Spanish→French) well, training a separate model for each language pair is unaffordable considering there are thousands of languages in the world. A straightforward solution to
reduce computational cost is using one model to
handle the translations of multiple languages, i.e.,
multilingual translation. Johnson et al. ; Firat et al. ; Ha et al. ; Lu et al. 
propose to share part of (e.g., attention mechanism) or all models for multiple language pairs
and achieve considerable accuracy improvement.
While they focus on how to translate multiple language pairs in a single model and improve the performance of the multilingual model, they do not
investigate which language pairs should be trained
in the same model.
Clearly, it is extremely heavy to translate all
language pairs in a single model due to the diverse and large amount of languages; instead
we cluster language pairs into multiple clusters
and train one model for each cluster, considering that: (1) language pairs that differ a lot (e.g.,
German→English and Chinese→English) may
negatively impact the training process if handling
them by one model, and (2) similar language pairs
(e.g., German→English and French→English) are
likely to boost each other in model training. Then
the key challenge is how to cluster language pairs,
which is our focus in this paper.
In this paper, we consider the many-to-one settings where there are multiple source languages
and one target language (English), and one-to-
many settings where there are multiple target languages and one source language (English)1. In this
way, we only need to consider the languages in the
source or target side for the determination of training in the same model, instead of language pairs.
We consider two methods for language clustering. The ﬁrst one is clustering based on prior
knowledge, where we use the knowledge of language family to cluster languages.
The second
one is a purely learning based method that uses
language embeddings for similarity measurement
and clustering. We obtain the language embeddings by training all the languages in a universal NMT model, and add each language with a
tag to give the universal model a sense of which
language it currently processes. The tag of each
language (language embedding) is learned end-toend and used for language clustering. Language
clustering based on language family is easy to obtain and understand, while the end-to-end learning method may boost multilingual NMT training,
since the language clustering is derived directly
from the learning task and will be more useful to
the task itself.
languages→English and English→23 languages
in IWSLT dataset, we have several ﬁndings: (1)
Language embeddings can capture the similarity
between languages, and correlate well with the
ﬁne-grained hierarchy (e.g., language branch)
in a language family.
(2) Similar languages, if
clustered together, can indeed boost multilingual
performance.
(3) Language embeddings based
clustering outperforms the language family based
clustering on the 23 languages↔English.
Background
Neural Machine Translation
Given the bilingual translation pair (x, y),
an NMT model
learns the parameter θ by maximizing the loglikelihood log P(y|x, θ).
The encoder-decoder
framework is adopted to model
the conditional probability P(y|x, θ), where the
encoder maps the input to a set of hidden representations h and the decoder generates each target
1Many-to-many translation can be bridged through manyto-one and one-to-many translations. Our methods can be
also extended to the many-to-many setting with some modi-
ﬁcations. We leave this to future work.
token yt using the previous generated tokens y<t
and the representations h.
Multilingual NMT
NMT has recently been extended from the translation of a language pair to
multilingual translation . Dong et al. use a single encoder
but separate decoders to translate one source language to multiple target languages (i.e., one-tomany translation). Luong et al. combine
multiple encoders and decoders, one encoder for
each source language and one decoder for each
target language respectively, to translate multiple
source languages to multiple target languages (i.e.,
many-to-many translation). Firat et al. use
different encoders and decoders but share the attention mechanism for many-to-many translation.
Similarly, Lu et al. propose the neural interlingua, which is an attentional LSTM encoder
to link multiple encoders and decoders for different language pairs. Johnson et al. ; Ha et al.
 use a universal encoder and decoder to handle multiple source and target languages, with a
special tag in the encoder to determine which target languages to output.
While all the above works focus on the design of better models for multilingual translation,
they implicitly assume that a set of languages are
pre-given, and do not consider which languages
(language pairs) should be in a set and share
one model. In this work we focus on determining which languages (language pairs) should be
shared in one model.
Multilingual NMT with Language
Clustering
Previous work trains a set of language pairs (usually the number is small, e.g., < 10 languages) using a single model and focuses on improving this
multilingual model. When facing a large amount
of languages (dozens or even hundreds), one single model can hardly handle them all, considering
that a single model has limited capacity, some languages are quite diverse and far different, and thus
one model will lead to degraded accuracy.
In this paper, we ﬁrst group the languages into
several clusters and then train one multilingual
NMT model for the translations in each cluster. By controlling the number of
clusters, we can balance translation accuracy and
computational cost: compared to using one model
for each language pair, our approach greatly reduces computational cost, and compared to using
one model for all language pairs, our approach delivers better translation accuracy. In this section,
we present two methods of language clustering to
enhance multilingual NMT.
Prior Knowledge Based Clustering
Several kinds of prior knowledge can be leveraged
to cluster languages , such as language family, language typology or other language characteristics from the URIEL database . Here we do not aim to give a comprehensive study of diverse prior knowledge based clusterings. Instead, we choose the commonly used
language family taxonomy as
the prior knowledge for clustering, to provide a
comparison with the language embedding based
clustering.
Language family is a group of languages related through descent from a common ancestral
language or parental language2.
There are different kinds of taxonomies for language family in
the world, among which, Ethnologue 3 is one of the most authoritative and commonly accepted taxonomies.
The 7,472 known
languages in the world fall into 152 families according to Paul et al. . We regard the languages in the same family as similar languages and
group them into one cluster.
Language Embedding Based Clustering
When training a multilingual model, it is common practice to add a tag to the input of encoder to indicate which language the model is
currently processing . The embeddings of the tag
is learned end-to-end and depicts the characteristics of the corresponding language, which is called
language embeddings, analogous to word embeddings .
We ﬁrst train a universal model to translate all
the language pairs.
As shown in Figure 1, the
2 family
3 
Language Embedding
Ru/Sk/Ja/Tr/Ar/De/Fr/Es/Pt or En
En or Ru/Sk/Ja/Tr/Ar/De/Fr/Es/Pt
Figure 1: The illustration of learning language embeddings for clustering. For both many-to-one (other languages to English) and one-to-many (English to other
languages) setting, we add the language embeddings to
the encoder.
encoder of the universal NMT model takes both
word embeddings and language embedding as inputs. After model training, we get an embedding
vector for each language. We regard the embedding vector as the representation of a language
and cluster all languages using the embeddings4.
There exist many clustering methods.
loss of generality, we choose hierarchical clustering to cluster the embedding vectors in our experiments.
Discussions
We analyze and compare the two clustering methods proposed in this section. Clustering based on
prior knowledge (language family) is simple. The
taxonomy based on language family is consistent
with the human knowledge, easy to understand,
and does not change with respect to data/time.
This method also has drawbacks. First, the taxonomy built on language family does not cover all
the languages in the world since some languages
are isolate5.
Second, there are many language
families ),
which means that we still need a large number of
models to handle all the languages in the world.
Third, language family cannot characterize all the
features of a language to fully capture the similarity between languages.
Since language embeddings are learnt in a universal NMT model, which is consistent with the
4One may argue that considering training one universal
model for all the languages can not ensure the best translation accuracy, how could the learned language embeddings be
accurate? We ﬁnd the learned language embeddings are not
that sensitive to translation accuracy and relatively stable during the later training process even when the universal model
has not converged to the best translation accuracy. Therefore,
the cost to get the language embeddings is much smaller than
training a multilingual model to get good accuracy.
5 isolate
downstream multilingual NMT task, clustering
based on language embeddings is supposed to
capture the similarity between different languages
well for NMT. As is shown in our experiments, the
clustering results implicitly capture and combine
multiple aspects of language characteristics and
boost the performance of the multilingual model.
Experiment Setup
We evaluate our method on the IWSLT
datasets which contain multiple languages from
TED talks. We collect datasets from the IWSLT
evaluation campaign6 from years 2011 to 2018,
which consist of the translation pairs of 23
languages↔English. The detailed description of
the training/validation/test set of the 23 translation pairs can be found in Supplementary Materials (Section 1). All the data has been tokenized
and segmented into sub-word symbols using Byte
Pair Encoding (BPE) . We
learn the BPE operations for all languages together, which results in a shared vocabulary of
90K BPE tokens.
Conﬁgurations
Transformer as the basic
NMT model considering that it achieves state-ofthe-art performance on multiple NMT benchmark
tasks and is a popular choice for recent research
on NMT. We use the same model conﬁguration for
each cluster with model hidden size dmodel = 256,
feed-forward hidden size dff = 1024 and the layer
number is 2. The size of language embeddings is
set to 256.
Training and Inference
We up-sample the
training data of each language to be roughly the
same during training. For the multilingual model
training, we concatenate training sentence pairs of
all the languages in the same mini-batch. We set
the batch size of each language to roughly 4096
tokens, and thus the total batch size is 4096 ∗|Ck|,
where |Ck| is the number of languages in cluster k.
The corresponding language embedding is added
on the word embedding of each source token. We
train the model with 8 NVIDIA Tesla M40 GPU
cards, each GPU card with roughly 512 ∗|Ck| tokens in terms of batch size. We use Adam optimizer with β1 = 0.9,
β2 = 0.98, ε = 10−9 and follow the learning rate
schedule in Vaswani et al. .
6 
Indo-European
Sino-Tibetan
Afroasiatic
Austroasiatic
Bg Cs De El Es
Fa Fr It Nl Pl
Pt Ro Ru Sk Sl
Figure 2: Language clustering of the 23 languages in
IWLST dataset according to language family. There
are 8 different language families in this dataset, which
includes Indo-European, Uralic, Turkic, Afroasiatic,
Sino-Tibetan, Japonic, Kra-Dai and Austroasiatic.
During inference, each source token is also
added with the corresponding language embedding in order to give the model a sense of the language it is currently processing. We decode with
beam search and set beam size to 6 and length
penalty α = 1.1 for all the languages. We evaluate
the translation quality by tokenized case sensitive
BLEU with multi-bleu.pl7.
Our codes are implemented based on tensor2tensor 8 and we will release the codes once the paper is open to the public.
In this section, we mainly show the experiment results and analyses on the many-to-one setting in
Section 5.1-5.3. The results on the one-to-many
setting are similar and we brieﬂy show the results
in Section 5.4 due to space limitations.
Results of Language Clustering
The language clustering based on language family
is shown in Figure 2, which results in 8 groups
given our 23 languages. All the language names
and their corresponding ISO-639-1 code9 can be
found in Supplementary Materials (Section 2).
We use hierarchical clustering 10 method to group the languages
based on language embeddings. We use the elbow method to automatically
decide the optimal number of clusters K. Note
that we have tried to extract the language embeddings from multiple model checkpoints randomly
7 
master/scripts/generic/multi-bleu.perl
8 
9 
10 
0.18.1/reference/generated/ scipy.cluster.hierarchy.linkage.html
Figure 3: The hierarchical clustering based on language embeddings. The Y-axis represents the distance between
two languages or clusters. Languages in the same color are divided into the same cluster, where blue color agglomerates different clusters together. If a language is marked as blue, then it forms a cluster itself. Cluster #1: Vi;
Cluster #2: Th; Cluster #3: Zh; Cluster #4: Ja, Tr, Hu; Cluster #5: He, Ar, Fa; Cluster #6: Ru, El, Sk, Sl, Bg, Cs,
Pl; Cluster #7: De, Nl, Ro, It, Fr, Es, Pt.
Figure 4: The optimal number of clusters determined by the
elbow method for 23 languages→English based on language
embeddings. The elbow method plots the curve of clustering
performance (which is deﬁned as the intra-cluster variation,
i.e., the within-cluster sum of squares) according to different
number of clusters, and ﬁnd the location of a bend (knee) in
the curve as the optimal number of clusters (7 as shown in the
chosen in the later training process, and found that
the clustering results based on these language embeddings are stable.
Figure 3 demonstrates the
clustering results based on language embeddings.
Each color represents a language cluster and there
are 7 clusters according to the elbow method (the
details of how this method determines the optimal
number of clusters are shown in Figure 7). Figure 3 clearly shows the agglomerative process of
the languages and demonstrates the ﬁne-grained
relationship between languages.
We have several interesting ﬁndings from Figure 2 and 3:
• Language embeddings capture the relationship in the language family well.
Cluster #7 in Figure 3 roughly covers the Germanic and Romance languages (De, Nl, Ro,
It, Fr, Es, Pt) which are two different language branches in the Indo-European family
but both adopt Latin alphabets. It can be further exactly divided into Germanic (De, Nl)
and Romance (Ro, It, Fr, Es, Pt) branches.
Cluster #6 is very close to Cluster #7 as they
all belong to the Indo-European family. The
difference is that the languages in Cluster #6
(Ru, El, Sk, Sl, Bg, Cs, Pl) mostly belong to
Slavic branch11.
• Language embeddings can also capture the
knowledge of morphological typology . Ja (Japanese), Tr (Turkish), Hu
(Hungarian) in Cluster #4 of Figure 3 are
all Synthetic-Fusional languages. Language
embedding based method can cluster them
together by learning their language features
end-to-end with the embeddings despite they
are in different language families.
• Language embeddings capture the regional,
cultural, and historical inﬂuences. The languages in Cluster #5 (He, Ar, Fa) of Figure 3 are close to each other in geographical location (West Asia). Ar (Arabic) and He
(Hebrew) share the same Semitic language
branch in Afroasiatic language family, while
Fa (Persian) has been inﬂuenced much by
Arabic due to history and religion in West
Asia12. Language embedding can implicitly
learn this relationship and cluster them together.
11It also contains El (Greek) probably due to that most
Slavic languages are inﬂuenced by Middle Greek through the
Eastern Orthodox Church .
12 vocabulary#Arabic
Table 1: BLEU score of 23 languages→English with multilingual models based on different methods of language clustering:
Random, Family (Language Family) and Embedding (Language Embedding).
These ﬁndings show that language embeddings
can incorporate different prior knowledge such
as language family, or some other implicit information like regional, cultural, and historical in-
ﬂuence, and can well fuse the information together for clustering. In the next subsection, we
show how our language embedding based clustering boosts the performance of multilingual NMT
compared with the language family based clustering.
Translation Accuracy
After dividing the languages into several clusters,
we train the models for the languages in each cluster with a multilingual NMT model based on different clustering methods and
list the BLEU scores of each language→English
in Table 1. We also show the results of random
clustering (Random) and use the same number of
clusters as the language embedding based clustering, and average the BLEU scores on multiple
times of random clustering (3 times in our experiments) for comparison. It can be seen that Random
performs worst, and language embedding (Embedding) based clustering outperforms the language family (Family) based clustering for most
languages13, demonstrating the superiority of the
learning based method over prior knowledge.
We further compare the language embedding
based clustering with two extreme settings: 1)
Each language trained with a separate model (Individual), 2) All languages trained in a universal
model (Universal), to analyze how language clustering performs on each language. As shown in
Table 2, we have several observations:
• First, Universal in general performs the worst
due to the diverse languages and limited
13Embedding performs worse than Family on only 2 languages.
model capacity. Universal only performs better on Ja (Japanese) and Sl (slovene) due to
their small amount of training data, which
will be discussed in the next observation.
• Second, Embedding outperforms Individual
(mostly by more than 1 BLEU score) on
12 out of 23 languages14, which demonstrates that clustering can indeed bring performance gains with fewer models, especially for languages with relatively small data
size. For these languages, clustering together
with similar languages may act as some kind
of data augmentation, which will beneﬁt the
model training. An extreme case is that Sl
(slovene) training together with all the languages gets the best accuracy as shown in
Table 2, since Sl is extremely low-resource,
which beneﬁts a lot from more training data.
This can be also veriﬁed by the next observation.
• Third, similar languages can help boost performance. For example, Hu (Hungarian) and
Ja (Japanese) are similar as they are typical
agglutinative languages in terms of morphological typology . When they
are clustered together based on Embedding,
the performance of both languages improves
(Hu: 19.07→21.89, Ja: 9.90→11.57).
Clustering Results with respect to
Training Data Scale
We further study how the clustering results based
on language embeddings change with varying
training data, in order to study the robustness of
14Embedding performs slightly worse (mostly within 0.5
BLEU gap) than Individual on 8 languages, mainly due to
the plenty of training data on these languages. In this case,
Individual with more number of models will help.
Individual (23)
Universal (1)
Embedding (7)
Individual (23)
Universal (1)
Embedding (7)
Table 2: BLEU score of 23 languages→English with different number of clusters: Universal (all the languages share one
model), Individual (each language with separate models, totally 23 models)), Embedding (Language Embedding with 7 models). Data size shows the training data for each language→English.
our language embedding based clustering, which
is important in the low-resource multilingual setting. We reduce the training data of each language
to 50%, 20% and 5% to check how stable the language embeddings based clustering is, as shown
in Figure 5. It can be seen that most languages
are clustered stably when training data is relatively
large (50% or even 20%), except for Sl (Slovene)
which has the least training data (14K) among the
23 languages and thus reducing the training data of
Sl to 50% and 20% will inﬂuence the learning of
language embeddings and further inﬂuence clustering results. If further reducing the training data
to 5%, more languages are inﬂuenced and clustered abnormally as most languages have less than
(a) 50% of training data
(b) 20% of training data
(c) 5% of training data
Figure 5: The results of language embedding based clustering with varying amount of training data.
10K training data. Even so, the similar languages
such as Fr (French), It (Italian), Es (Spanish), and
Pt (Portuguese) are still clustered together.
Results of One-to-Many Translation
We ﬁnally show experiment results of one-tomany translation, i.e., English→23 languages. We
ﬁrst train a universal model that covers all languages to get the language embeddings, and then
perform clustering like in the many-to-one setting.
The optimal number of clusters is 5, which is automatically determined by the elbow method (we
show the ﬁgure of the elbow method in Figure 1 in
the Supplementary Materials).
Figure 6 shows the clustering results based
on language embeddings, and Table 3 shows the
BLEU score of multilingual models clustered by
different methods. We also have several ﬁndings:
• In one-to-many setting, language embeddings still depict the relationship among language families. Cluster #1 in Figure 6 covers the Romance (Ro, Fr, It, Es, Pt) branch in
Indo-European language family while Cluster #2 contains the Germanic (De, Nl) branch
in Indo-European language family. The languages in Cluster #3 (Sl, Bg, El, Ru, Sk,
Cs, Pl) are mostly from the Slavic branch
in Indo-European language family. We ﬁnd
that the cluster results of Indo-European language family is more ﬁne-grained than manyto-one setting, which divides each language
into their own branches in a language family.
• Language embedding can capture regional,
cultural, and historic inﬂuence.
For Cluster #4 in Figure 6, Zh (Chinese) and Ja
(Japanese) are in different language families
Figure 6: The hierarchical clustering based on language embedding in one-to-many setting. The Y-axis represents
the distance between two languages or clusters. Languages in the same color are divided into the same cluster.
Cluster #1: Ro, Fr, It, Es, Pt; Cluster #2: De, Nl; Cluster #3: Sl, Bg, El, Ru, Sk, Cs, Pl; Cluster #4: Tr, Hu, Zh, Ja;
Cluster #5: Vi, Th, He, Ar, Fa.
Individual
Individual
Table 3: BLEU score of English→23 languages with multilingual models based on different methods of language
clustering: Universal (all the languages share one model), Individual (each language with separate model), Family
(Language Family), Embedding (Language Embedding).
but inﬂuence each other through the history
and culture. Th (Thai) and Vi (Vietnamese) in
Cluster #5 that are close to each other in geographical location can be captured by their
language embeddings.
These ﬁndings show that language embeddings
can stably characterize relationships among languages no matter in one-to-many setting or in
many-to-one setting. Although there exist some
differences in the clustering results between oneto-many setting and many-to-one setting due to
the nature of the learning based clustering method,
most of the clustering results are reasonable. Our
experiment results shown in Table 3 demonstrate
that the language embedding can provide more
reasonable clustering than prior knowledge, and
thus result in higher BLEU score for most of the
languages.
We also ﬁnd from Table 3 that each language
with separate model (Individual) perform best on
nearly 10 languages, due to the abundant model
However, there are still several languages on which our clustering methods (Family
or Embedding) largely outperform Individual. The
reason is similar as the many-to-one setting that
some languages are of smaller data sizes. In this
situation, similar languages clustered together will
boost the accuracy compared with separate model.
Conclusion
In this work, we have studied language clustering for multilingual neural machine translation. Experiments on 23 languages→English and
English→23 languages show that language embeddings can sufﬁciently characterize the similarity between languages and outperform prior
knowledge (language family) for language clustering in terms of the BLEU scores.
For future work, we will test our methods for
many-to-many translation. We will consider more
languages (hundreds or thousands) to study our
methods in larger scale setting. We will also study
Table 4: The size of training data for 23 language↔English in our experiments.
Portuguese
Vietnamese
Table 5: The ISO 639-1 code of each language in our experiments.
how to obtain language embeddings from monolingual data, which will make our method scalable to cover those languages with little or without bilingual data. On the other hand, we will also
consider other pre-training methods for multilingual and low-resource NMT.
Dataset Description
We evaluate our experiments on IWSLT datasets.
We collect 23 languages↔English translation
pairs form IWSLT evaluation campaign from year
2011 to 2018. The training data sizes of each languages are shown in Table 4 and we use the default
validation and test set for each language pairs. For
Bg (Bulgarian), El (Greek), Hu (Hungarian) and
Ja (Japanese), there are no available validation and
test data in IWSLT, we randomly split 1K sentence
pairs from the corresponding training set as the
validation and test data respectively.
Language Name and Code
The language names and their corresponding language codes according to ISO 639-1 standard are
listed in Table 5.
The Elbow Method for One-to-Many
The optimal number of clusters is 5 in one-tomany setting, which is automatically determined
by the elbow method as shown in Figure 7.
Figure 7: The optimal number of clusters determined
by the elbow method for English→23 languages based
on language embeddings. The detailed description of
the elbow method can be seen in Figure 4 in the main