Research in Social Sciences and Technology (RESSAT)
Volume 5 Issue 2, 2020
Tarman, B. . Editorial: Reflecting in the shade of pandemic.
Research in Social Sciences and Technology © Copyright 2020
E-ISSN: 2468-6891 ressat.org
Editorial: Reflecting in the Shade of Pandemic
Bulent Tarman
Editor-in-Chief, RESSAT
 
DOI: 10.46303/ressat.05.02.ed
Tarman, B. . Editorial: Reflecting in the Shade of Pandemic. Research in Social Sciences and Technology, 5(2), I-IV.
doi.org/10.46303/ressat.05.02.ed
I hope this editorial note finds you well and healthy, especially amid the uncertainty due
to COVID-19. We are concerned about our children, families, neighbors, colleagues, and
ourselves. We are contending with daily reports of death presented as the centerpiece headline
news while we are dealing with grief and uncertainty. The impact of this current pandemic on
society, in general, is increasingly visible, and we find ourselves in a permanent state of
transformation due to the dizzying proliferation of technologies. This pandemic expedites the
vital role of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) that drives the modern world in
education as well as in all other areas. On the other hand, as schools and higher education
institutions rapidly move their learning, teaching, and assessment online in response to the
worldwide pandemic, academics feel improvised, inefficiently supported, and deeply fearful
 .1
I hope all of you are doing your best at adapting and finding the way of your teaching
styles and courses, grace, and humanity that still exist despite the difficulties we face during
this pandemic. I feel the joy of being home with my family and having more hours to
contemplate the existing issues humanity faces and how it will end up and what changes it will
bring to our social, cultural, and professional lives. We do not know what new panic tomorrow
will bring; however, it seems doubtless that “this pandemic will teach people many lessons”
1 This is based on the findings of a recent study: “In total, an excess of 1400 responses were generated from
academics working in higher education institutions across 40 country contexts. These are voices of experience
representing all the major disciplinary areas and career stages from which transpire the enormous challenges that
this pandemic presents to academic lives and careers… The physical closure of university campuses by the Covid-
19 pandemic has almost overnight changed ‘how we do what we do’ as academics, and the nature of our daily
routines” .
Research in Social Sciences and Technology © Copyright 2020
E-ISSN: 2468-6891 ressat.org
 . Some people have already started criticizing (including self-critics) the
existing systems in almost all areas, asking whether this happens because of the injustice and
unfairness occurring everywhere at every level (individual, local, national, and global) since the
majority stay silent and do not show any reaction to these injustices. No matter what/who the
cause of this pandemic is and how it ends, we all understand the fact that we were not aware
enough until we lost our blessings. I hope that we as people remember the lessons we are
learning now about responsibility, citizenship, and what really matters in life.
Keeping our scholarly activities in mind, “There is nothing like a crisis to make you realize
what is important and this could not be truer than in the world of scholarly communication”
 . The real purpose of scholarly communication is not to allocate credit for career
advancement but to communicate with each other, to share insights for the benefit of
Presented in this edition are eight articles that discuss the points of view of various areas
of education from several different parts of the world. It is our intention to contribute to the
analysis and discussion of empirical research and theoretical aspects linked to the development
of technologies in formal and informal learning processes showing significant approaches in a
Global World.
The first article, written by Alvyra Galkiene and Giedre Puskoriene, is Development of
Adaptation Tools for Pupils on the Autism Spectrum in Microsystems. In their research, the
authors investigate the possibilities for the development of adaptation tools for pupils on the
autism spectrum (AS) studying in the first and second forms within their microsystems. The
result of this research reveals that the development of adaptation tools in children on the AS is
determined by a mesosystem that covers various combinations of microsystems, and the
synergy between the factors of the microsystems creates conditions for a child’s gradual
transfer from one microsystem to another, perceiving the mechanisms of its functioning and
adapting within them.
Raymond Chee-Yen Loh and Chin-Siang Ang are the authors of Unravelling Cooperative
Learning in Higher Education: A Review of Research. The authors start by defining cooperative
learning, discuss the elements inherent in this pedagogy, and outline the theoretical
perspectives relating to cooperative learning (CL). This review study concludes that CL is an
Research in Social Sciences and Technology © Copyright 2020
E-ISSN: 2468-6891 ressat.org
effective teaching and learning approach in higher education. Findings appear to be consistent
with the notion that CL helps to enhance academic, affective, and social development of
students. The authors also emphasize the role of culture on determining how CL is valued in a
particular cultural context.
In #Education: The Potential Impact of Social Media and Hashtag Ideology on the
Classroom, Ellen Watson analyzes scholarly works discussing the use of hashtags with K-12
students to answer this question: How can the hashtag inform the K-12 classroom? Findings of
the study indicate four themes that could inform the alignment of K-12 classrooms with hashtag
ideology: encouraging voice and user-generated content, the potential of self-organization,
network hetero/homogeneity, and connecting to space without a common physical space.
Marta Camarero-Figuerola, Jorge-Manuel Dueñas, and Ana-Inés Renta-Davids are the
authors of The Relationship Between Family Involvement and Academic Variables: A Systematic
Review. This research reveals that family participation is a variable that protects against
academic failure and that this relationship is stronger in vulnerable populations and ethnic
minorities.
In The Impact of Teacher-Initiated Activities on Identifying and Verbalizing Ways of
Metacognitive Monitoring and Control in Six-Year-Old Children, Ona Monkevičienė, Jelena
Vildžiūnienė, and Galina Valinčienė explore the impact of teacher-initiated activities on six-yearold children’s metacognitive monitoring and control abilities. The results of the research show
that teacher-initiated activities stimulate and encourage children to find and apply more
diverse ways of metacognitive monitoring and control.
Malliga K. Govindasamy and Ngu Moi Kwe are the authors of Scaffolding Problem Solving
in Teaching and Learning the DPACE Model - A Design Thinking Approach. This research intends
to validate the effectiveness of the DPACE model in facilitating pre-service teachers in planning
and executing a solution for an identified instructional problem. The result of this research
validates that the DPACE model is a powerful approach to thinking and problem solving, as the
concepts are grounded in sound pedagogical theories.
In Comparing Pre-service Civic Education Teachers’ TPACK Confidence Across Course
Modes: Insights for Future Teacher Education Programs, Imam Fitri Rahmadi, Eti Hayati, and
Research in Social Sciences and Technology © Copyright 2020
E-ISSN: 2468-6891 ressat.org
Aulia Nursyifa compare pre-service civic education teachers’ TPACK confidence across three
course modes of a pre-service teacher education program in Indonesia.
In the last article of this issue, Multidimensional Analysis of the Teaching Process of the
Critical Thinking Skills, Seyat Polat evaluates critical thinking skills in a multidimensional way by
focusing on the level of teachers’ critical thinking skills. The author analyzes how teachers
conceptualize critical thinking, their practices of critical thinking in the classroom, and if the
critical thinking is referred enough in the curriculum by using a mixed-method research design.
We are honored to present this issue, and we thank the authors and reviewers for their
contribution to RESSAT. We hope you will enjoy and be challenged by the articles in this issue,
and we look forward to seeing your contribution to the development of RESSAT in the future.