Unbiased Look at Dataset Bias
Antonio Torralba
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
 
Alexei A. Efros
Carnegie Mellon University
 
Datasets are an integral part of contemporary object
recognition research. They have been the chief reason for
the considerable progress in the ﬁeld, not just as source
of large amounts of training data, but also as means of
measuring and comparing performance of competing algorithms. At the same time, datasets have often been blamed
for narrowing the focus of object recognition research, reducing it to a single benchmark performance number. Indeed, some datasets, that started out as data capture efforts
aimed at representing the visual world, have become closed
worlds unto themselves (e.g. the Corel world, the Caltech-
101 world, the PASCAL VOC world). With the focus on
beating the latest benchmark numbers on the latest dataset,
have we perhaps lost sight of the original purpose?
The goal of this paper is to take stock of the current state
of recognition datasets. We present a comparison study using a set of popular datasets, evaluated based on a number
of criteria including: relative data bias, cross-dataset generalization, effects of closed-world assumption, and sample
value. The experimental results, some rather surprising,
suggest directions that can improve dataset collection as
well as algorithm evaluation protocols. But more broadly,
the hope is to stimulate discussion in the community regarding this very important, but largely neglected issue.
1. Introduction
It is a capital mistake to theorize before one has data.
SHERLOCK HOLMES
Let’s play a game we call Name That Dataset! Shown in
Figure 1 are three most discriminable (to be explained in a
moment) images from twelve popular recognition datasets.
The goal is to guess which images came from which dataset
(go ahead, try it, we will wait... ﬁnished? Now check your
answers below1). In theory, this should be a very difﬁcult
task, considering that the datasets contain thousands to millions of images. Moreover, most of these datasets were collected with the expressed goal of being as varied and rich as
possible, aiming to sample the visual world “in the wild”.
Yet in practice, this task turns out to be relatively easy for
Figure 1. Name That Dataset: Given three images from twelve
popular object recognition datasets, can you match the images
with the dataset? (answer key below)
anyone who has worked in object and scene recognition (in
our labs, most people got more than 75% correct).
Intrigued, we decided to perform a toy experiment: to
train a classiﬁer to play Name That Dataset. We randomly
sampled 1000 images from the training portions of each of
the 12 datasets, and trained a 12-way linear SVM classi-
ﬁer. The classiﬁer was tested on 300 random images from
each of the test sets, repeated 20 times. Figure 2(left) shows
classiﬁer performance for four popular image descriptors
(32x32 thumbnail, both grayscale and color , gist ,
and bag of HOG visual words) as a function of training
set size (log scale). Curiously, the best classiﬁer performs
rather well at 39% (chance is 1/12 = 8%), and what is even
more intriguing – there is no evidence of saturation as more
training data is added.
1Answer key: 1) Caltech-101, 2) UIUC, 3) MSRC, 4) Tiny Images, 5)
ImageNet, 6) PASCAL VOC, 7) LabelMe, 8) SUNS-09, 9) 15 Scenes, 10)
Corel, 11) Caltech-256, 12) COIL-100.
Figure 2. Computer plays Name That Dataset. Left: classiﬁcation
performance as a function of dataset size (log scale) for different
descriptors (notice that performance does not appear to saturate).
Right: confusion matrix.
Figure 2(right) shows the confusion matrix, grouped by
similarity. Apart from two outliers (UIUC test set is not the
same as its training set and COIL is a lab-based dataset),
there is strong grouping of scene-centric datasets vs. objectcentric datasets (in the latter, Caltech101 and Caltech256
are predictably confused with each other). Still, despite the
small sample size, there is a clearly pronounced diagonal,
suggesting that each dataset possesses a unique, identiﬁable
“signature”. We can try to visualize this signature by looking at the most discriminable images within each dataset,
i.e. the images placed furthest from the decision boundary by the SVM. That is, in fact, what we did for Figure 1.
We could also do the opposite: for a given dataset, look at
the images placed closest to the decision boundary separating it from another dataset (Figure 3). This shows how one
dataset can “impersonate” a different dataset.
The lesson from this toy experiment is that, despite the
best efforts of their creators, the datasets appear to have a
strong build-in bias. Of course, much of the bias can be accounted for by the divergent goals of the different datasets:
some captured more urban scenes, others more rural landscapes; some collected professional photographs, others the
amateur snapshots from the Internet; some focused on entire scenes, others on single objects, etc. Yet, even if we
try to control for these capture biases by isolating speciﬁc
objects of interest, we ﬁnd that the biases are still present in
some form. As a demonstration, we applied the same analysis that we did for full images to object crops of cars from
ﬁve datasets where car bounding boxes have been provided
(PASCAL, ImageNet, SUN09, LabelMe, Caltech101). Interestingly, the classiﬁer was still quite good at telling the
different datasets apart, giving 61% performance (at 20%
chance). Visually examining the most discriminable cars
(Figure 4), we observe some subtle but signiﬁcant differences: Caltech has a strong preference for side views, while
ImageNet is into racing cars; PASCAL have cars at noncanonical view-points; SUNS and LabelMe cars appear to
be similar, except LabelMe cars are often occluded by small
objects, etc. Clearly, whatever we, as a community, are trying to do to get rid of dataset bias is not quite working.
Figure 4. Most discriminative cars from 5 datasets
Hence the aim of this paper is two-fold. First, to try to
understand some of the subtle ways in which bias sneaks
into our datasets and affects detection and classiﬁcation performance. Second, to raise awareness in the recognition
community about this important issue that is, sadly, not getting the attention it deserves.
2. Prologue: The Promise and Perils of Visual
We are in the midst of a data revolution. Ubiquitous access to image datasets has been responsible for much of the
recent progress in object recognition after decades of
proverbial wandering in the desert. For instance, it was the
availability of face training data (both positive and negative), more than the perceived advances in machine learning, that produced the ﬁrst breakthrough in face detection (while neural networks were central to , subsequent approaches showed similar performance with very
different techniques). And it is the dataset of millions of
photographs of consumer products, as much as the clever
feature matching, that allowed visual search engines like
GOOGLE GOGGLES to become reality. Datasets have also
played the leading role in making object recognition research look less like a black art and more like an experimental science. The fact that today, unlike just a few years
ago, it is virtually impossible to publish a CVPR paper in
recognition without a quantitative evaluation attests to the
sea-change brought forward by data.
Alas, like any proper revolution, this one has brought
with it new problems to replace the old ones. Many people
are worried that the ﬁeld is now getting too obsessed with
evaluation, spending more time staring at precision-recall
curves than at pixels. There is concern that research is becoming too incremental, since a completely new approach
will initially have a hard time competing against estab-
Figure 3. Dataset Look-alikes: Above, ImageNet is trying to impersonate three different datasets. Here, the samples from ImageNet that
are closest to the decision boundaries of the three datasets are displayed. Look-alikes using PASCAL VOC are shown below.
lished, carefully ﬁne-tuned methods. For instance, one major issue for many popular dataset competitions is “creeping
overﬁtting”, as algorithms over time become too adapted
to the dataset, essentially memorizing all its idiosyncrasies,
and losing ability to generalize . Fortunately, this problem can be greatly alleviated by either changing the dataset
regularly , or withholding the test set and limiting the number of times a team
can request evaluation on it .
Another concern is that our community gives too much
value to “winning” a particular dataset competition, regardless of whether the improvement over other methods is statistically signiﬁcant. For PASCAL VOC, Everingham et
al use the Friedman/Nemenyi test, which, for example,
showed no statistically signiﬁcant difference between the
eight top-ranked algorithms in the 2010 competition. More
fundamentally, it may be that the right way to treat dataset
performance numbers is not as a competition for the top
place, but rather as a sanity check for new algorithms and
an efﬁcient way of comparing against multiple baselines.
This way, fundamentally new approaches will not be forced
to compete for top performance right away, but will have a
chance to develop and mature.
Luckily, the above issues are more behavioral rather than
scientiﬁc, and should be alleviated as our ﬁeld develops
benchmarking best practices similar to those in other ﬁelds.
However, there is a more fundamental question: are the
datasets measuring the right thing, that is, the expected
performance on some real-world task? Unlike datasets in
machine learning, where the dataset is the world, computer vision datasets are supposed to be a representation
of the world. Yet, what we have been witnessing is that
our datasets, instead of helping us train models that work
in the real open world, have become closed worlds unto
themselves, e.g. the Corel world, the Caltech101 world, the
PASCAL VOC world, etc. This is particularly unfortunate
since, historically, the development of visual datasets has
been driven, in no small part, by the desire to be a better,
more authentic representation of the visual world.
2.1. The Rise of the Modern Dataset
Any good revolution needs a narrative of struggle against
perceived unfairness and bias, and the history of dataset development certainly provides that. From the very beginning, every new dataset was, in a way, a reaction against
the biases and inadequacies of the previous datasets in explaining the visual world. The famous single-image-dataset
Lena, one of the ﬁrst “real” images was a reaction against all the carefully controlled lab stock images, the “dull stuff dating back
to television standards work” . In the same spirit, the
COIL-100 dataset (a hundred household objects on
a black background) was a reaction against model-based
thinking of the time (which focused mostly on staplers), and
an embrace of data-driven appearance models that could
capture textured objects like Tylenol bottles. Professional
collections like Corel Stock Photos and 15 Scenes were
a reaction against the simple COIL-like backgrounds and
an embrace of visual complexity.
Caltech-101 (101
objects mined using Google and cleaned by hand) was
partially a reaction against the professionalism of Corel’s
photos, and an embrace of the wilderness of the Internet.
MSRC and LabelMe (both researcher-collected
sets), in their turn, were a reaction against the Caltech-like
single-object-in-the-center mentality, with the embrace of
complex scenes with many objects . PASCAL Visual
Object Classes (VOC) was a reaction against the lax
training and testing standards of previous datasets . Finally the batch of very-large-scale, Internet-mined datasets
– Tiny Images , ImageNet , and SUN09 – can
be considered a reaction against the inadequacies of training and testing on datasets that are just too small for the
complexity of the real world.
On the one hand, this evolution in the development of
datasets is perhaps a sign of progress. But on the other hand,
one could also detect a bit of a vicious cycle. Time and
again, we as a community reject the current datasets due to
their perceived biases. Yet time and again, we create new
datasets that turn out to suffer from much the same biases,
though differently manifested. What seems missing, then,
is a clear understanding of the types and sources of bias,
without which, we are doomed to repeat our mistakes.
3. Measuring Dataset Bias
Granted, it makes little sense to talk about a bias-free
representation of the visual world without specifying the
observer and the task (e.g. a wandering human perceives
a completely different visual reality than, say, a wandering
bird). Still, for the purposes of object recognition, most existing datasets assume roughly the same general task: given
the typical visual environments encountered by people, to
detect commonly occurring objects. Using that as the deﬁnition of our visual world, can we evaluate how well does a
particular dataset represent it? Alas, to correctly measure a
dataset’s bias would require comparing it to the real visual
world, which would have to be in form of a dataset, which
could also be biased... so, not a viable option. So, here we
will settle for a few standard checks, a diagnostic of dataset
health if you will.
3.1. Cross-dataset generalization
The biggest warning sign that something is rotten in the
state of today’s datasets is that there are virtually no papers demonstrating cross-dataset generalization, e.g. training on ImageNet, while testing on PASCAL VOC (but
see for an encouraging study). Surely, if our datasets
were truly representative of the real world, this would be
a very easy thing to do, and would give access to more of
the much needed labelled data. To be sure, there are methods for transferring a model learned on one dataset onto another , where the target dataset is considered to
be in a different “domain”. But from our perspective, all the
datasets are really trying to represent the same domain – our
visual world – and we would like to measure how well or
badly they do it.
So, we would like to ask the following question: how
well does a typical object detector trained on one dataset
generalize when tested on a representative set of other
datasets, compared with its performances on the “native”
test set? To answer this question, we picked a set of six
representative datasets that are: 1) in active research use
today, and 2) have some annotated objects in common:
SUN09 , LabelMe , PASCAL VOC 2007 , ImageNet , Caltech-101 , and MSRC . Since each of
the datasets has objects labeled with bounding boxes, two
testing regimes are possible: a) classiﬁcation – ﬁnd all images containing the desired object; and b) detection – in all
images, ﬁnd all bounding boxes containing the desired object. Notice that the detection task is basically the same as
classiﬁcation if you think of bounding boxes as images –
Figure 5. Cross-dataset generalization for “car” classiﬁcation (full
image) task, trained on MSRC and tested on (one per row): SUN,
LabelMe, PASCAL, ImageNet, Caltech-101, and MSRC.
those that contain the object are positives, these that don’t
are negatives. Importantly, for detection the number of negatives is naturally much larger and more diverse.
For the object detection task, we use the most standard,
off-the-shelf approach of Dalal&Triggs (HOG detector followed by a linear SVM), that has been quite popular in recent years, and is the basis of the currently bestperforming detector of Felzenszwalb et al . Likewise, for
the classiﬁcation task, we used the most standard and popular bag-of-words approach with a non-linear SVM (Gaussian kernel).
We picked two objects that were common
among all the datasets and are also popular with various
algorithms: “car” and “person”. Each classiﬁer was trained
with 500 positive and 2000 negative for the classiﬁcation
task and 100 positive and 1000 negative examples for the
detection task for each dataset (these numbers were the
maximum ones possible because some of the datasets are
quite small). The test was performed with 50 positive and
1000 negative examples for classiﬁcation and 10 positive
and 20000 negative for detection. For testing, each classi-
ﬁer was run 20 times and the results averaged.
Table 1 shows a summary of results. Each column corresponds to the performance obtained when testing on one
dataset and training on all datasets. Each row corresponds
to training on one dataset and testing on all the others. Note
that since our training and testing protocol is necessarily
different from the ones traditionally used for each of the
datasets, the actual performance numbers will not be too
meaningful; rather it’s the differences in performance which
are telling. The ﬁrst observation is that, as expected, the best
results are typically when training and testing on the same
dataset. By looking at the values across one row, we can
evaluate how good is one dataset at generalizing over the
others. By looking at the values across each column, we can
evaluate how easy is one dataset for the other datasets. As
Table 1. Cross-dataset generalization. Object detection and classiﬁcation performance (AP) for “car” and “person” when training on one
dataset (rows) and testing on another (columns), i.e. each row is: training on one dataset and testing on all the others. “Self” refers to
training and testing on the same dataset (same as diagonal), and “Mean Others” refers to averaging performance on all except self.
Caltech101
classiﬁcation
Caltech101
Mean others
Caltech101
Mean others
classiﬁcation
Caltech101
Mean others
Caltech101
Mean others
one could expect, both Caltech 101 and MSRC are the easiest datasets (column averages) across all tasks. PASCAL
and ImageNet are, most of the time, the datasets that generalize the best (row averages), although they score higher in
object-centric datasets such as Caltech 101 and MSRC, than
in scene-centric datasets such as SUN09 and LabelMe. In
general there is a dramatic drop of performance in all tasks
and classes when testing on a different test set. For instance,
for the ”car” classiﬁcation task the average performance
obtained when training and testing on the same dataset is
53.4% which drops to 27.5%. This is a very signiﬁcant drop
that would, for instance, make a method ranking ﬁrst in the
PASCAL competition become one of the worst. Figure 5
shows a typical example of car classiﬁcation gone bad. A
classiﬁer trained on MSRC “cars” has been applied to six
datasets, but it can only ﬁnd cars in one – MSRC itself.
Overall the results look rather depressing, as little generalization appears to be happening beyond the given dataset.
This is particularly surprising given that most datasets are
collected from the same source – the Internet. Why is this
happening? There are likely several culprits. First, there is
clearly some selection bias, as we’ve shown in Section 1 –
datasets often prefer particular kinds of images (e.g. street
scenes, or nature scenes, or images retrieved via Internet
keyword searches). Second, there is probably some capture
bias – photographers tending to take pictures of objects in
similar ways (although this bias might be similar across the
different datasets). Third, there is category or label bias.
This comes from the fact that semantic categories are often poorly deﬁned, and different labellers may assign differing labels to the same type of object (e.g. “grass”
vs. “lawn”, “painting” vs. “picture”). Finally, there is the
negative set bias. The negative set deﬁnes what the dataset
considers to be “the rest of the world”. If that set is not
representative, or unbalanced, that could produce classiﬁers
that are overconﬁdent and not very discriminative. Of all
the above, the negative set bias seems to receive the least attention, so in the next section we will investigate it in more
3.2. Negative Set Bias
Datasets deﬁne a visual phenomenon (e.g. object, scene,
event) not just by what it is (positive instances), but also
by what it is not (negative instances). Alas, the space of
all possible negatives in the visual world is astronomically
large, so datasets are forced to rely on only a small sample.
Figure 6. Cross-dataset generalization for “car” detection as function of training data
But is this negative sample representative or even sufﬁcient?
To answer the ﬁrst question, we designed an experiment
to evaluate the relative bias in the negative sets of different datasets (e.g. is a “not car” in PASCAL different from
“not car” in MSRC?). The idea is to approximate the realworld negative set by a super-set of dataset negatives via
combining the negative sets of each of the 6 datasets in the
evaluation pool. First, for each dataset, we train a classi-
ﬁer on its own set of positive and negative instances. Then,
during testing, the positives come from that dataset, but the
negatives come from all datasets combined. The number
of negatives is kept the same as the number of negatives of
the original test, to keep chance performance at the same
level. We ran a detection task with 100 positives and 1000
negatives. For testing, we did multiple runs of 10 positive
examples for 20,000 negatives.
The results for “car” and “person” detection are shown
in Table 2. Each column shows performance obtained when
training on each of the 6 datasets evaluated, and testing on
1) the original test set and 2) on a new negative test superset. For three popular datasets (SUN09, LabelMe and PAS-
CAL) we observe a signiﬁcant (20%) decrease in performance, suggesting that some of the new negative examples coming from other datasets are confounded with positive examples. On the other hand, ImageNet, Caltech 101
and MSRC do not show a drop. The reasons for this lack
of change are likely different for each dataset. ImageNet
beneﬁts from a large variability of negative examples and
does not seem to be affected by a new external negative set,
whereas Caltech and MSRC appear to be just too easy.
A much harder question is whether the negative data
sample is sufﬁcient to allow a classiﬁer to tease apart the
important bits of the visual experience. This is particularly
important for classiﬁcation tasks, where the number of negatives is only a few orders of magnitude larger than the number of positives for each class. For example, if we want to
ﬁnd all images of “boats” in a PASCAL VOC-like classiﬁcation task setting, how can we make sure that the classiﬁer
focuses on the boat itself, and not on the water below, or
shore in the distance (after all, all boats are depicted in water)? This is where a large negative set (including rivers,
lakes, sea, etc, without boats) is imperative to “push” the
lazy classiﬁer into doing the right thing. Unfortunately, it’s
not at all easy to stress-test the sufﬁciency of a negative set
in the general case since it will require huge amounts of
labelled (and unbiased) negative data. While beyond the
scope of the present paper, we plan to evaluate this issue
more fully, perhaps with the help of Mechanical Turk.
4. Measuring Dataset’s Value
Given a particular detection task and benchmark, there
are two basic ways of improving the performance. The ﬁrst
solution is to improve the features, the object representation and the learning algorithm for the detector. The second
solution is to simply enlarge the amount of data available
for training. However, increasing the amount of training
data might be harder than it seems. The ﬁrst issue is that
to achieve a signiﬁcant improvement in performance, the
increase in training data must be very signiﬁcant (performance has an annoying logarithmic dependency on amount
of training data). The second issue is that, as discussed in
the previous section, if we add training data that does not
match the biases of the test data this will result in a less
effective classiﬁer.
These two problems are illustrated in Fig. 6. As shown,
performance increases with increasing dataset size (note the
log scaling for the horizontal axis), and the performance using data from another dataset almost always under the performance with the original training dataset. The vertical
gap between two curves represents the decrease in performance resulting from training on a different dataset. The
horizontal shift corresponds to the increase in amount of
data needed to reach the same level of performance. One
could also expect that different datasets saturate at different
points, but there are no signs of saturation in the experiments we performed, with a linear relationship, in a log-log
plot, between the amount of training data, log(n), and the
error log(1−AP), with AP being average precision-recall.
Let’s say we decide to increase the amount of training
data available in PASCAL VOC. We will undoubtedly ﬁrst
check what alternative sources of data are available, e.g. can
we use, say, LabelMe to improve our performance? The
question is: what is the relative value of a training example
from LabelMe with respect to the value of a training example from PASCAL?
Table 2. Measuring Negative Set Bias.
Negative Set:
Positive Set:
Caltech101
percent drop
percent drop
Table 3. “Market Value” for a “car” sample across datasets
SUN09 market
LabelMe market
PASCAL market
ImageNet market
Caltech101 market
1 SUN09 is worth
0.91 LabelMe
0.72 pascal
0.41 ImageNet
1 LabelMe is worth
0.41 SUN09
0.26 pascal
0.31 ImageNet
1 pascal is worth
0.29 SUN09
0.50 LabelMe
0.88 ImageNet
1 ImageNet is worth
0.17 SUN09
0.24 LabelMe
0.40 pascal
1 ImageNet
1 Caltech101 is worth
0.18 SUN09
0.23 LabelMe
0.28 ImageNet
Basket of Currencies
0.41 SUN09
0.58 LabelMe
0.48 pascal
0.58 ImageNet
0.20 Caltech
Given the performance AP j
i (n) obtained when training
on dataset i and testing on dataset j as a function of the
number of training samples n, we deﬁne the sample value
(α) as Apj
j(n) = Apj
i(n/α). In the plots of Fig. 6 this
corresponds to a horizontal shift and can be estimated as
the shift needed to align each pair of graphs. For instance,
1 LabelMe car sample is worth 0.26 PASCAL car samples on the PASCAL benchmark. This means that if we
want to have a modest increase (maybe 10% AP) in performance on the car detector trained with 1250 PASCAL
samples available on PASCAL VOC 2007, we will need
1/0.26 × 1250 × 10 = 50000 LabelMe samples!
Table 3 shows the “market value” of training samples
from different datasets2. One observation is that the sample
values are always smaller than 1 – each training sample gets
devalued if it is used on a different dataset. There is no
theoretical reason why this should be the case and it is only
due to the strong biases present in actual datasets. So, what
is the value of current datasets when used to train algorithms
that will be deployed in the real world? The answer that
emerges can be summarized as: “better than nothing, but
not by much”.
5. Discussion
Is it to be expected that when training on one dataset and
testing on another there is a big drop in performance? One
could start by arguing that the reason is not that datasets are
bad, but that our object representations and recognition algorithms are terrible and end up over-learning aspects of the
visual data that relates to the dataset and not to the ultimate
visual task. In fact, a human learns about vision by living
in a reduced environment with many potential local biases
and yet the visual system is robust enough to overcome this.
However, let us not put all the blame on the algorithms, at
least not yet. If a dataset deﬁnes a “car” to be the rear view
2We have also experimented with “incremental market value” – how
much does data from other datasets help after using all the original data.
We found that this quickly converges to the absolute “market value”.
of a race-car, then there is no reasonable algorithm that will
say that a side view of a family sedan is also a “car”.
So, how well do the currently active recognition datasets
stack up overall?
Unsurprisingly, our results show that
Caltech-101 is extremely biased with virtually no observed
generalization, and should have been retired long ago . Likewise, MSRC has also fared
very poorly. On the other hand, most modern datasets, such
as PASCAL VOC, ImageNet and SUN09, have fared comparatively well, suggesting that perhaps things are starting
to move in the right direction.
Should we care about the quality of our datasets? If the
goal is to reduce computer vision to a set of feature vectors
that can be used in some machine learning algorithm, then
maybe not. But if the goal is to build algorithms that can
understand the visual world, then, having the right datasets
will be crucial. In next section we outline some recommendations for developing better datasets.
6. Epilogue
Is there any advice that can be offered to researchers
thinking of creating a new dataset on how to detect and
avoid bias? We think that a good ﬁrst step would be to
run any new dataset on the battery of tests that have been
outlined in this paper (we will be happy to publish all code
and data online). While this will not detect all potential
sources of bias, it might help ﬁnding the main problematic
issues quickly and early, not years after the dataset has been
released. What about tips on how to avoid, or at least minimize, the effects of bias during the dataset construction itself? Here we brieﬂy go over a few suggestions for minimizing each type of bias:
Selection Bias: As suggested by Figure 2, datasets that
are gathered automatically fare better than these collected
manually. However, getting images from the Internet does
not in itself guarantee a fair sampling, since keyword-based
searches will return only particular types of images. Obtaining data from multiple sources (e.g. multiple search engines
from multiple countries ) can somewhat decrease selection bias. However, it might be even better to start with a
large collection of unannotated images and label them by
crowd-sourcing.
Capture Bias: Professional photographs as well as photos collected using keyword search appear to suffer considerably from the capture bias. The most well-known bias
is that the object is almost always in the center of the image. Searching for “mug” on Google Image Search will
reveal another kind of capture bias: almost all the mugs has
a right-facing handle. Beyond better data sampling strategies, one way to deal with this is to perform various data
transformations to reduce this bias, such as ﬂipping images
left-right (but note that any text will appear the wrong
way), or jittering the image , e.g. via small afﬁne transformations . Another fruitful direction might be generating various automatic crops of the image.
Negative Set Bias: As we have shown, having a rich and
unbiased negative set is important to classiﬁer performance.
Therefore, datasets that only collect the things they are interested in might be at a disadvantage, because they are not
modeling the rest of the visual world. One remedy, proposed in this paper, is to add negatives from other datasets.
Another approach, suggested by Mark Everingham, is to
use a few standard algorithms (e.g. bag of words) to actively
mine hard negatives as part of dataset construction from a
very large unlabelled set, and then manually going through
them to weed out true positives. The down side is that the
resulting dataset will be biased against existing algorithms.
This paper is only the start of an important conversation
about datasets. We suspect that, despite the title, our own biases have probably crept into these pages, so there is clearly
much more to be done. All that we hope is that our work
will start a dialogue about this very important and underapprechiated issue.
Acknowledgements: The authors would like to thank
the Eyjafjallajokull volcano as well as the wonderful kirs
at the Buvette in Jardin du Luxembourg for the motivation
(former) and the inspiration (latter) to write this paper. This
work is part of a larger effort, joint with David Forsyth and
Jay Yagnik, on understanding the beneﬁts and pitfalls of using large data in vision. The paper was co-sponsored by
ONR MURIs N000141010933 and N000141010934.
Disclaimer: No graduate students were harmed in the
production of this paper. Authors are listed in order of increasing procrastination ability.