Clinical Approach to Parkinson’s Disease:
Features, Diagnosis, and Principles of
Management
Joa˜o Massano1,2 and Kailash P. Bhatia1
1Sobell Department of Motor Neuroscience and Movement Disorders, Institute of Neurology,
University College London, Queen Square, London, United Kingdom
2Movement Disorders and Functional Surgery Unit, Department of Neurology Hospital de Sa˜o Joa˜o
and Faculty of Medicine University of Porto, Porto, Portugal
Correspondence: 
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is one of the most common neurodegenerative disorders. The condition causes a heavy burden both on those affected, as well as their families. Accurate
diagnosis is critical and remains founded on clinical grounds as no speciﬁc diagnostic test
is available so far. The clinical picture of PD is typical in many instances; however, features
distinguishing it from other disorders should be thoroughly sought. Monogenic forms of PD
also have some distinctive characteristics in many cases. This text is a roadmap to accurate
diagnosis in PD, as it approaches clinical features, diagnostic methodology, and leading
differential diagnoses. Therapeutic issues are also brieﬂy discussed.
early 200 years have passed since the publication of James Parkinson’s succinct observations in An Essay on the Shaking Palsy . Remarkably, the original clinical
description of the disease remains a landmark
reference, especially with regard to the motor
features. Parkinson’s disease (PD), as Jean MartinCharcotcalleditafewdecadeslater , is a common and often disabling
disorder seen in people from all races and geographical locations, with clinical signs emerging
also in a wide age range, including the young
 , with prevalence rates ranging from 65.6 to 12,500 per
100,000 population . In 2005, more than 4 million PD patients
existed in the world . Annual
incidence rates range from 8.6 to 19 per 100,000
 . PD is the second most common neurodegenerative disorder after Alzhei-
Editor: Serge Przedborski
Additional Perspectives on Parkinson’s Disease available at www.perspectivesinmedicine.org
Copyright # 2012 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; all rights reserved; doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a008870
Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2012;2:a008870
www.perspectivesinmedicine.org
mer’s disease, with a male-to-female ratio of
about 3:2 in most studies . It occurs infrequently
under 40 years of age, with early onset increasing the probability that genetic causes might be
involved .
The cause of PD is unknown, although complex interactions between genetic and environmental factors are probably involved. Various
risk factors have been found for sporadic PD,
including exposure to pesticides and other toxics, positive family history, and oophorectomy,
but age remains the most important one documented so far . Thus,
disease prevalence is expected to increase dramatically in the next decades as the population
ages, which might raise serious issues at aworldwide level with regard to social security and
health care systems. This might be particularly true for developing countries such as China
or India . Conversely, there
have been data showing that protective factors
might exist, the most robust association with
smoking, but also coffee or black tea drinking,
and possibly nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory
drugs . In this regard, an interesting ﬁnding concerns high uric acid levels,
which seem to protect from PD, and are apparently also associated with decreased rates of
disease progression .
CLINICAL FEATURES
Motor Symptoms
From the motor standpoint PD is characterized
by a clinical syndrome universally known as
parkinsonism, which includes four cardinal features: bradykinesia, rest tremor, rigidity, and
postural and gait impairment. One should bear
in mind that these are not always observed in
every patient, at least in a given time frame.
1. Bradykinesia refers to slowness of movements with a progressive loss of amplitude
or speed during attempted rapid alternating
movements ofbodysegments . It is crucial to distinguish true bradykinesia from simple slowness, which is frequently seen in patients
with decreased muscle power (paresis), spasticity, or reduced motivation (e.g., depression). In fact, failing to acknowledge this is
a major source of misdiagnosis. Clinically,
bradykinesia can be assessed by asking the
patient to perform some repetitive movements as quickly and widely as possible,
namely, opening and closing the hand, tapping thumb and index ﬁngers, or tapping the
foot on the ground (see online Movies 1 and
2 at www.perspectivesinmedicine.org). The
examiner must pay attention to the emergence of progressive slowness and/or loss
of amplitude, which might ultimately bring
the movement to full arrest (freezing, see
online Movie 2). Bradykinesia can also be
searched for globally by observing the patient’s spontaneous movements while sitting, standing up from a chair, or walking
(see online Movies 3 and 4 at www.perspectivesinmedicine.org). Other clinical displays
of bradykinesia are hypomimia (decreased
facial expression and eye blinking, termed
“poker face” in milder stages, see online
Movie 2), hypophonia (softer voice), micrographia (progressively smaller handwriting),
and difﬁculty swallowing.
2. Rest tremor (sometimes also called parkinsonian tremor) is a rhythmic oscillatory involuntary movement that comes about when
the affected body part is relaxed and supported bya surface, thus removing the action
of gravitational forces . It vanishes
with active movement, and typically can reappear after a few seconds when the arms are
held outstretched (reemergent tremor). In
PD, rest tremor frequency is usually in the
low to mid-range (3–6 Hz), whereasthe amplitude is quite variable, from less than 1 cm
to .10 cm wide (see online Movies 1, 3, 5,
and 6 at www.perspectivesinmedicine.org).
The most distinguishing tremor in this dis-
J. Massano and K.P. Bhatia
Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2012;2:a008870
www.perspectivesinmedicine.org
order is the so-called “pill-rolling” type, a
visual portrayal resulting from the simultaneous rubbing movements of thumb and index ﬁngers against each other (see online
Movie 1). Other forms of tremor movements
can be seen, such as ﬁnger ﬂexion-extension
or abduction-adduction. Tremor can also be
present in the lower limbs, jaw (see online
Movie 5), and tongue. Head tremor is not
typical of PD; in fact, it should prompt careful diagnostic reconsideration. An additional
form of tremor, postural (e.g., occurs immediately on stretching out the arms), faster
(6–8 Hz), can be occasionally seen in PD,
but this is noncontributory to the diagnosis.
In clinical practice, tremor is best observed
while the patient is focused on a particular
mental task (e.g., countdown from 100 with
eyes closed), which facilitates limb muscle
relaxation.
3. Rigidity refers to an increased muscle tone felt
during examination by passive movement of
the affected segment (limbs or neck), involving both ﬂexor and extensor muscle groups
 . This resistance is felt
throughout the full range of movement, and
does not increase with higher mobilization
speed, which distinguishes it from spasticity
owing to upper motor neuron lesions. When
resting tremorcoexiststhe classical “cogwheel
rigidity” can be felt during passive limb mobilization, especially in the wrist. Rigidity in
the examined segment is very typically increasedbyvoluntary movement ofother body
parts (Froment’s maneuver), and this is a useful way to detect mild rigidity in many cases.
4. Postural and gait impairment. Parkinsonian
patients tend to adopt a stooped posture (see
online Movie 7 at www.perspectivesinmedicine.org), owing to the loss of postural re-
ﬂexes, a major contributor to falls . In
some cases extreme anterior truncal ﬂexion
may supervene (camptocormia). Parkinsonian gait is slow, occurs on a narrow base,
and is characterized by short shufﬂing steps,
which gives the observer the impression that
the patient is chasing his own center of gravity. There is decreased arm swing, turning
around is slow and performed with multiple small steps (see online Movies 3 and 5),
whereas freezing of gait can occur (see online
Movie 8 at www.perspectivesinmedicine.org),
especially in crowded or narrow places . In certain
circumstances there is festination, in which
a very fast succession of steps is seen, with
the patient at times only able to stop when
meeting some sort of obstacle. Walking and
turning becomes more difﬁcult or even impossible in parkinsonian patients if an additional cognitive load is imposed (e.g., dual
tasking) . Clinically, one should
observe posture and gait both on an open
corridor and while passing through narrow
doorways or spaces. The “pull test” is performed in order to assess postural stability;
the examiner stands behind the supine patient who is previously warned of the “pull”
applied to his/her shoulders, then allowing
him/her to step back in order to regain balance—some patients will fall without any
sort of postural response.
Nonmotor Symptoms and the Premotor
Phase of PD
PD has been traditionally regarded as a motor
disorder, perhaps because the original account
of the clinical features emphasized these symptoms, while failing to recognize the important
nonmotor aspects of the disease. In addition,
motor symptoms often meet the eye straightaway, even for untrained observers. However,
in recent years there has been an increasing interest in nonmotor symptoms of PD (Table 1),
because their recognition is useful for diagnostic purposes, but also because they are a major
source of deterioration in quality of life, and
warrant speciﬁc management .
Theworkfrom Braak and coworkers showed
that disease symptoms correlate with the extension of the pathology affecting the nervous sys-
Clinical Approach to Parkinson’s Disease
Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2012;2:a008870
www.perspectivesinmedicine.org
tem . Because of long-term pathological progression,
some of these nonmotor features may be present
before any of the classical motor signs are noticeable, sometimes for years or decades, which
confers them potential diagnostic utility in early disease stages, such as hyposmia, rapid eye
movement (REM) behavior disorder, constipation, and depression . Some patients will
have unexplained shoulder pain or fatigue before overt motor symptoms emerge. On the other hand, features like dementia and hallucinations occur late in the course of disease, which is
useful for distinguishing PD from other disorders. Mild cognitive dysfunction is apparent in
many cases from early stages, but recent data has
shown that frank dementia will occur in .80%
of patients after 20 years of disease , although there are a
few notable exceptions to this with regard to the
pathological diagnosis. From a practical perspective, the ﬁrst step for the diagnosis of PD
is careful history taking. Thorough questioning
of the patient and family should be performed,
trying to deﬁne which symptoms emerged and
their sequence, as well as perceived anatomical
involvement. Inquiry about the presence of premotor symptoms including sleep-related REM
sleep behavior, loss of smell, and constipation
can be helpful if present. Drug intake history,
both past and present, especially concerning
drugs able to cause parkinsonian symptoms, is
paramount. Likewise, possible exposure to environmental toxics should also be searched for
(e.g., manganese in welders). Past and present
medical disorders should be systematically recorded. Family history is also an important
stage, and should include neurological disorders in other family members, as well as inquiry
about ethnic ancestry as monogenic forms of
PD are more prevalent in some (e.g., Ashkenazi
Jewish and North African Arabs who have a
higher frequency of LRRK2 genetic PD).
Table 1. Nonmotor symptoms in Parkinson’s disease
Neuropsychiatric features
Anxiety, panic attacks
Mood disorders, especially depression
Hallucinations, illusions, delusions
Cognitive deterioration, ranging from mild
impairment to dementia
Dysautonomia
Orthostatic hypotension
Constipation
Urinary dysfunction (urgency, retention)
Sexual dysfunction
Excessive sweating
Sialorrhea (i.e., drooling, also attributable to
decreased swallowing movements)
Sleep disorders
REM behavior disorder
Restless legs syndrome
Periodic limb movements in sleep
Excessive daytime sleepiness
Sensory dysfunction
Hyposmia (i.e., loss of sense of smell)
Decreased visual contrast and color discrimination
Decreased visual motion perception
Abnormal sensations, such as paresthesias , with gait and balance being affected later in the course of disease. Moreover,
it is important to conﬁrm that parkinsonian
features are the only clinical signs—implying
that pyramidal, sensory, and cerebellar deﬁcits
should be excluded, as well as dementia (early in
disease course), and other movement disorders
(e.g., chorea, myoclonus, tics, unexpected type
of tremor), with the exception of dystonia as this
can be seen insome cases,particularly theyoungonset forms of PD. Eye movements in PD should
be full range and display normal latency (e.g.,
immediate movement after command), speed,
and accuracy. Some ﬁndings should raise doubts
about the diagnosis of PD, and other disorders
should be considered instead, whenever any of
these are observed (Table 2). In some cases who
have receivedlevodopatreatment,thepresence of
typical limb choreiform dyskinesias is also a useful sign suggesting IPD.
In typical circumstances, a restricted number of investigations are necessary to establish
the clinical diagnosis of PD. A few treatable conditions, which might cause asthenia or “slowness” (not true bradykinesia), such as anemia
and hypothyroidism, should be ruled out by
appropriate laboratory testing. Other speciﬁc
suspicions guide further investigations. Brain
structural imaging, either by computed tomography(CT)ormagneticresonanceimaging(MRI)
should always be performed; where available the
latter is preferred, because some positive ﬁndings occasionally reveal other diagnostic entities
 . CT scan should be used whenever calcium deposits are being searched for (e.g., Fahr’s
disease). Dopamine functional imaging might
be considered to conﬁrm that degenerative
parkinsonism is the cause of symptoms. Positron emission tomography (PET) with ﬂuorodopa is one of the technologies available, but
the costs and limited accessibility make it difﬁcult to use. In this regard, dopamine transporter
(DAT) imaging with single-photon emission
CT (DAT-SPECT) is a very useful approach, because it is sensitive for the detection of presynaptic dopaminergic neuron degeneration in the
striatum . None of these
methods is able to distinguish PD from other
causes of degenerative parkinsonism, but presynaptic dopamine imaging is normal in essential tremor, dystonic tremor, drug-induced,
psychogenic tremor, and psychogenic parkinsonism . In appropriate circumstances,
genetic testing might be considered; whenever a
pathogenic mutation is found, a deﬁnitive diagnosis of PD is achieved in vivo. Another way of
sanctioning the diagnosis of PD is through the
observation of the clinical beneﬁt gained from
an acute challenge of oral levodopa or subcutaneous apomorphine, which should markedly
Table 2. “Red ﬂags” for an incorrect diagnosis of PD
Absence of symptom asymmetry
Severe axial or lower limb involvement, especially in
early stages
Frequent falls, especially in early stages
Fast disease progression (e.g., Hoehn and Yahr stage 3
in less than 3 years)
Eye movement disorders (e.g., supranuclear palsy,
dysmetric or slow saccades)
Other unexpected movement disorder, such as
myoclonus, tics, and chorea
Pyramidal or cerebellar dysfunction
Bulbar or pseudobulbar features
Parietal associative sensory disturbances
(agraphesthesia, astereognosis)
Alien limb
Severe cognitive deterioration or psychosis early in
disease course
Marked autonomic dysfunction in early stages
Insufﬁcient clinical beneﬁt gained from adequate
trial of levodopa or apomorphine
The features listed here are not typical of Parkinson’s
disease, and should raise suspicion about alternative
diagnoses. Hoehn and Yahr staging is described in Goetz
et al. 2004.
Clinical Approach to Parkinson’s Disease
Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2012;2:a008870
www.perspectivesinmedicine.org
improve the clinical symptoms—otherwise, other diagnostic possibilities should be considered,
although some PD patients will only respond to
long-term high doses of levodopa. Dopaminergic
drugs confer a sustained beneﬁt in PD. The UK
Parkinson’s Disease Society Brain Bank clinical
diagnostic criteria (the Queen Square Brain
Bank criteria) are routinely used to make the diagnostic process as objective and accurate as possible. Three major steps are required for the diagnosis of PD, as depicted in Table 3.
Currently, MRI is preferred over CT, and
family history is not regarded as an exclusion
criterion, because a numberof Mendelian forms
of PD have been described.
Differential Diagnosis
PD can be confused with many disorders, and
diagnostic accuracy improves with increasing
clinical experience. The entities most commonly confused with PD are 
1. Vascular parkinsonism: In this situation parkinsonian symptoms predominate in the
lower limbs, and gait tends to be quite affected, hence the designation “lower body parkinsonism”; rest tremor is uncommon. Other signs of brain vascular lesion might be
present, such as spasticity, hemiparesis, and
pseudobulbar palsy, whereas response to levodopa is usually scarce . Structural brain imaging is especially important to rule out or
support this diagnosis.
2. Drug-induced parkinsonism (DIP): Parkinsonian signs tend to present symmetrically
and a coarse postural tremor is often present.
Otherdrug-induceddisordersmightbepresent, such as orolingual dyskinesias, tardive
dystonia, or akathisia, especially in those
cases in which the culprit drug is an antipsychotic. For the diagnosis of DIP it is important that symptoms have emerged after the
drug has been introduced . In true DIP symptoms improve
Table 3. The UK Parkinson’s Disease Society Brain
Bank clinical diagnostic criteria
Step 1: Diagnosis of parkinsonian
Bradykinesia (slowness of initiation of voluntary
movement with progressive reduction in speed and
amplitude or repetitive actions)
And at least one of the following:
Muscular rigidity
4–6 Hz rest tremor
Postural instability not caused by primary visual,
vestibular, cerebellar, or proprioceptive
dysfunction
Step 2: Exclusion criteria for Parkinson’s
History of repeated strokes with stepwise progression
of parkinsonian features
History of repeated head injury
History of deﬁnite encephalitis
Oculogyric crises
Neuroleptic treatment at onset of symptoms
More than one affected relativea
Sustained remission
Strictly unilateral features after 3 years
Supranuclear gaze palsy
Cerebellar signs
Early severe autonomic involvement
Early severe dementia with disturbances of memory,
language, and praxis
Babinski sign
Presence of a cerebral tumor or communicating
hydrocephalus on CT scan
Negative response to large doses of levodopa
(if malabsorption excluded)
MPTP exposure
Step 3: Supportive positive criteria of Parkinson’s
Three or more required for diagnosis of deﬁnite
Parkinson’s disease:
Unilateral onset
Rest tremor present
Progressive disorder
Persistent asymmetry affecting the side onset most
Excellent response (70%–100%) to L-dopa
Severe levodopa-induced chorea
Levodopa response for 5 years or more
Clinical course of 10 years or more
Visual hallucinations
aThis criterion is no longer used .
J. Massano and K.P. Bhatia
Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2012;2:a008870
www.perspectivesinmedicine.org
markedly or remit a few months after complete drug withdrawal, but symptoms remain at least partially in those patients
with a concomitant cause for parkinsonism
(e.g., PD).
3. Tremor disorders: Essential tremor (ET) is often confusedwith tremulous PD , but careful observation
will result in a correct diagnosis, because the
characteristics of ET are quite distinct; it is
a largely symmetric postural or kinetic hand
tremor reaching a frequency of up to 12 Hz,
infrequently observed at rest, and unaccompanied by any parkinsonian signs or abnormal posturing . In a large series,
Bain and coworkers found that autosomal-dominant inheritance was archetypal,
with the mean age at onset of tremor being 15
yearsold;halfofthepatientsdisplayedalcohol
responsiveness, and head tremor was mild
when present. A few interesting and mind
provocative reﬂections about ET have recently
been published . Another
group of tremor patients frequently misdiagnosed as PD were more recently characterized
 —Thesepatients have SWEDDs (“scans
without evidence of dopaminergic deﬁcits”),
hence named owing to the fact that DAT
imaging is normal, thus ruling out striatal
presynaptic degeneration. In these patients,
tremor at rest or asymmetry are frequent, as
well as head tremor, but no true akinesia is
seen, although decreased arm swing may be
apparent. This group shows clinical and electrophysiological characteristics resembling
dystonia, which should be actively searched
for clinically .
4. Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB): Dementia is the fundamental feature of this disorder, whereas parkinsonism is seen either
early or along the course of the disease, in
striking contrast with PD. These patients,
usually elderly, suffer from marked daily
ﬂuctuations in alertness and cognition, as
well as very detailed and colorful visual hallucinations, involving human ﬁgures (children is a very typical motif ) and animals.
Other features frequently seen are REM sleep
behavior disorder, extreme sensitivity to the
effects of neuroleptic drugs, and dysautonomia . Because of common clinical and
pathological ﬁndings, a lively debate still revolves around the fact that DLB and PD
could belong to the same spectrum of a common disease or, in contrast, represent truly
separate disorders.
5. Multiple system atrophy: This is one of the
most common causes of degenerative parkinsonism, with age at onset of symptoms
usually in the late 6th or early 7th decades.
Classically, patients present with a core combination of dysautonomia, cerebellar features,
and parkinsonism; in most patients the latter
predominates, except in Japanese populations. A jerky postural tremor is frequently
seen, as well as pyramidal signs, such as generalized hyperreﬂexia and extensor plantar re-
ﬂexes. Parkinsonism will respond to levodopa
in up to roughly a third of patients, but this is
usually a suboptimal and short-lived beneﬁt
 . Other suggestive features
of this disorder are severe dysarthria or dysphonia, orofacial dystonia, marked antecollis,
and inspiratory sighing . MRI may help in the
diagnosis, by disclosing ﬁndings such as cerebellar and pontine atrophy, the “hot cross
bun” sign, or a hypertense rim surrounding
theputameninT2-weightedsequences .
6. Progressive supranuclear palsy: The classical
phenotype (Richardson syndrome, RS) will
be hardly confused with PD, as patients present with a largely symmetric akinetic-rigid
syndrome, with predominant axial involvement, including impairment of gait and balance, with falls occurring as early as the ﬁrst
year of symptoms. Tremor is infrequently
seen in these patients. Other typical signs
of RS are vertical gaze supranuclear palsy
 , pseudobulbar symptoms,
retrocollis, and continuous activity of the
frontalis muscle, with eyes permanently wide
open (e.g., “staring eyes”). Frontal-subcortical cognitive deﬁcits are usually evident.
Levodopa is usually of no beneﬁt .
However, other patients present with a parkinsonian syndrome resembling PD: symptoms are asymmetric, at times with rest
tremor, with few axial involvement, delayed
onset, or no eye movement disorder, and
displaying levodopa responsiveness, even if
partial. This syndrome has been called PSP-P
(“PSP-parkinsonism”) and survival is longer
than in RS .
7. Fragile X-tremor ataxia syndrome (FXTAS):
This is a late-onset (usually .50 years of
age) neurodegenerative disorder seen in patients (especially men) who carry an abnormal number of CGG repeats in the FMR1
gene, in the premutation range (55–200 repeats). Core symptoms are cerebellar gait
ataxia and postural/intention tremor, variably accompanied by parkinsonism, dysautonomia, cognitive decline of the frontal
type, and peripheral neuropathy. Disease
progression is usually slow. Parkinsonian
symptoms resembling the classical picture
of PD have been described. Women carrying
the premutation tend to display mitigated
symptoms, as well as premature ovarian failure and menopause. MRI may be a useful
adjunct to the diagnosis, as many patients
will show T2 hyperintensities in the middle
cerebellar peduncles (“MCP sign”), especially affected males. Conﬁrmation of diagnosis
is achieved through molecular testing. Children in the family of those affected with
FXTAS may have the classical fragile-X syndrome, owing to meiotic repeat expansion to
the full mutation range .
Many other parkinsonian disorders have been
described (Table 4), and some of them are at
times confused with PD, although they tend
to present speciﬁc clinical features, frequently
with complex phenotypes.
HEREDITARY FORMS OF PARKINSON’S
DISEASE AND THEIR CLINICAL FEATURES
A small but signiﬁcant number of PD patients
have a family history compatible with Mendelian autosomal inheritance (10%–15%), either
dominant or recessive. Many of these are classi-
ﬁed as young-onset (,40 yr) or juvenile-onset
PD (,21 yr) . A number of levodopa-responsive parkinsonian syndromes have been described and linked to a
speciﬁc locus or gene in the last few years, and
some of them have been classiﬁed as PARK syndromes . Some
of these denote true PD, whereas others represent more complex phenotypes and dissimilar
diseases. Only the former group will be brieﬂy
approached here, as the clinical phenotype may
be a useful pointer for the diagnosis in daily
practice, guiding subsequent molecular testing.
For more details on the genetics of PD please
refer to Klein and Westenberger .
1. Autosomal-dominant (AD) PD:
a. PARK1/PARK4(geneSNCA,a-synuclein):
Mean age at onset of symptoms is in the 30s
(PARK4) or 40s (PARK1). Progression appears to be faster than in sporadic PD and
dementia is a frequent ﬁnding; at times the
clinical picture resembles DLB, but mean
age at onset is much lower than in sporadic
cases . PARK1
and PARK4 are attributable to SNCA mutations and duplications/triplications, respectively.
b. PARK3 (gene unknown): Researchers described a groupoffamilieswith parkinsonism closely resembling that of sporadic PD,
including age of onset (mean 59 yr); the
locushasbeenmappedto2p13.Penetrance
wasestimatedtobebelow40% . It has not been clearly deﬁned
whether this represents a disease susceptibilitylocusoratrueMendelianformofPD.
c. PARK5 (gene UCHL1, ubiquitin carboxyterminal hydrolase 1): Only one family has
been reported with PD and a mutation in
UCHL1,providingfrailevidencethatthisis
J. Massano and K.P. Bhatia
Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2012;2:a008870
www.perspectivesinmedicine.org
a true locus for inherited PD. The clinical
picture resemblesthat of sporadic PD, with
age at onset of symptoms around 50 years
of age .
d. PARK8 (gene LRRK2, leucine-rich repeat
kinase 2 or dardarin): Probably the most
commontype of inheritedPD. The clinical
picture resembles that of late-onset sporadic PD; abduction-adduction lower limb
tremor could be a useful diagnostic hint
 .
Mutation frequency may be as high as
40% in North African Arabs and Ashkenazi Jewish populations; countries from
southern Europe also have high mutation
frequency .Thereisconsiderable neuropathological heterogeneity in these patients .
2. Autosomal recessive (AR) PD:
a. PARK2 (gene Parkin): This is by far the
most common disorder in the group of
theARandoneofthemostcommonforms
of monogenic PD. Age at onset of symptoms ranges from childhood to mid-50s.
It accounts for most PD cases under the
ageof30yr.Typicalclinicalfeaturesinclude
early prominent dystonia (especially foot
dystonia), exquisite response to levodopa
Table 4. Causes of parkinsonism
Heredodegenerative
Dementia with Lewy bodies, multiple system atrophy, progressive supranuclear palsy, corticobasal syndrome,
fragile X-tremor ataxia syndrome, neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (includes pantothenate
kinase-associated neurodegeneration, PLA2G6-associated neurodegeneration or PARK 14, neuroferritinopathy, aceruloplasminemia, and FA2H-associated neurodegeneration), pallido-pyramidal syndromes
(includes Kufor-Rakeb disease or PARK9, and neurodegeneration associated with FBXO7 mutations or
PARK 15), Perry syndrome (DCTN1 mutations), X-linked dystonia parkinsonism (DYT3, Lubag), doparesponsive dystonia (DYT5), rapid-onset dystonia parkinsonism (DYT12), autosomal recessive dystonia
parkinsonism (DYT16), dopamine transporter deﬁciency syndrome (mutations in SLC6A3), SENDA
syndrome, Huntington’s disease, Huntington disease-like type 2, chorea-acanthocytosis, MacLeod
syndrome, some spinocerebellar ataxias (SCA3, SCA6, SCA8, SCA13, and SCA17), dentato-rubro-pallidoluysian atrophy, hereditary spastic paraparesis types 11 (SPG11) and 15 (SPG15), frontotemporal dementia
with parkinsonism (FTDP-17), prion disease (Creutzfeldt-Jakob, Gertsmann-Stra¨ussler-Scheinker),
parkinsonism-dementia-ALS complex of Guam (Lytico-Bodig), Fahr’s disease, intraneuronal cytoplasmic
inclusion disease, and neuroﬁlament inclusion body disease
Structural brain lesions
Cerebrovascular disease, infectious brain lesions (e.g., cryptococcosis, neurosyphilis), postencephalitic (e.g.,
encephalitis lethargica), postanoxic injury, posttraumatic (e.g., dementia pugilistica), toxic (e.g., MPTP,
ephedrone, manganese, carbon monoxide, cyanide), metabolic disorders (Wilson, Niemann-Pick Type C,
Gaucher, GM1 gangliosidosis, phenylketonuria, cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis, maple syrup urine disease,
mitochondrial disorders with striatal necrosis, ceroid neuronal lipofuscinosis), secondary Fahr’s syndrome, non-
Wilsonian acquired hepatocerebral degeneration, hemiparkinsonism-hemiatrophy syndrome, hydrocephalus,
and intracranial tumors
Drug-induced
Typical antipsychotics (e.g., haloperidol, chlorpromazine), most atypical antipsychotics (riperidone, olanzapine),
tetrabenazine, reserpine, methyldopa, metoclopramide, ﬂunarizine, cinnarizine, verapamil, valproic acid,
lithium, and others
Psychogenic (functional)
Table compiled with data from Schrag and Schott 2006; Wijemanne and Jankovic 2007; Alvarez and Evidente 2008; Edwards
et al. 2008c; Farrer et al. 2009; Klein et al. 2009; Schneider et al. 2009; Kruer et al. 2010; Schneider and Bhatia 2010; Carecchio
et al. 2011; Kurian et al. 2011.
Most disorders in the ﬁrst group are degenerative.
Abbreviations: ALS, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; MPTP, 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine.
Clinical Approach to Parkinson’s Disease
Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2012;2:a008870
www.perspectivesinmedicine.org
and anticholinergic drugs, slow disease
progression, diurnal ﬂuctuations, sleep
beneﬁt, susceptibility to levodopa-induced
peak-dose dyskinesias, and wearing-off
phenomenon. Hyperreﬂexia is a common
feature. Other possible presentations include exercise-induced dystonia, focal dystonia, tremor-predominant cases, and early
impairmentofgaitandbalance . Nonmotorsymptomsseemtobelessprevalentthan
in sporadic PD, except anxiety . Lewy bodies were absent in most
patients that came to autopsy .
b. PARK6 (gene PINK1, PTEN-induced putative kinase 1): It is characterized by early
onset in most patients (mean age at onset
in the 30s, ranging from childhood until
the seventh decade of life), dystonia at
onset or symptom symmetry in some
cases, slow disease progression, excellent
levodopa responsiveness, early peak-dose
dyskinesias; hyperreﬂexia has been described; rare cases with very earlyonset display sleep beneﬁt and diurnal ﬂuctuations
 . Psychiatric disturbances such as depression, anxiety, and psychosis are a frequent ﬁnding . Lewy bodies
are a recently described neuropathological
ﬁnding .
c. PARK7 (gene DJ-1): This seems to be a
rare disorder, with a clinical phenotype
similar to PARK6. Notably, some cases
have been associated with blepharospasm, whereas amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and dementia have been described in
one family .
Other candidate genes have been associated with
parkinsonism, namely, Nurr1 ,
synphylin-1 , and POLG (polymerase gamma) , but furtherconﬁrmation inlarge case series isstill awaited. Exciting observations have been made in the
last few years in families with members suffering
from Gaucher’s disease (GD), an AR disorder
caused by homozygous mutations in the GBA
gene encoding the lysosomal enzyme glucocerebrosidase. Heterozygous carriers, who do not
have GD,are athigherriskofdevelopingsporadic
PDorDLB . Thus, interest
emerged in the putative role of ceramide in the
pathogenesis of Lewy body disorders .
Dementia symptoms are improved by cholinesteraseinhibitors ormemantine . An array of drugs is used to
treat motor symptoms in PD (availability varies
from country to country): levodopa plus peripheral dopa decarboxylase inhibitor (carbidopa or
benserazide), dopamine agonists (ergot derivatives: bromocriptine, pergolide, cabergoline, dihydroergocryptine; non-ergot derivatives: ropinirole, pramipexole, rotigotine, apomorphine),
monoamine oxidase B inhibitors (selegiline, rasagiline), catechol-O-methyltransferase inhibitors (entacapone, tolcapone), anticholinergics
(trihexyphenidyl, benztropine), and amantadine. Currently, there is no consensus on the
most adequate timing and drug of choice for
therapy initiation in PD, but dopaminergic
therapy is usually deferred until deteriorating
quality of life demands treatment, owing to the
future potential motor complications brought
J. Massano and K.P. Bhatia
Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2012;2:a008870
www.perspectivesinmedicine.org
about by these drugs, such as peak-dose dyskinesias (see online Movie 9 at www.perspectivesinmedicine.org), wearing off, and sudden off
states . Levodopa seems to pose higher risks in this regard as
compared with dopamine agonists, although recent data brought conﬂicting views on this matter . Nevertheless, levodopa is the most effective drug in the control of motor symptoms, and
PDpatientstypicallyshowmarkedandsustained
beneﬁts from it for several years . Dopamine agonists may cause peripheral
edema, ﬁbrotic reactions (most ergot derivatives), excessive daytime somnolence, and impulse control disorders .
In advanced PD, functional neurosurgery is a
valuable therapeutic option, provided that patients are carefully selected .
Deepbrainstimulationofeither thesubthalamic
nucleus or internal globus pallidus is an effective
andgenerallysafeprocedure . In advanced
PD it may be more effective for the control of
motor symptoms than the best medical therapy,
either alone or in combination with it .
CONCLUDING REMARKS
PD is a common and potentially disabling
disorder. Suitable efforts should be performed
to achieve accurate diagnosis, communicate a
plausible prognosis to the patient and family,
and proceed with the best therapeutic interventions. Remarkable progress has been made in
the last two decades in the ﬁeld of genetics,
pathophysiology, and clinical imaging, but the
diagnosis of PD still sits inevitably on clinical
skills and exploration, which emphasizes the
importance of a solid clinical knowledge about
the disease.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the patients who generously contribute every day by willingly consenting to video
capture and educational display.