Towards Adversarial Retinal Image Synthesis
A. Galdran
M.I. Meyer
INESC TEC Porto, Instituto de Engenharia de Sistemas e Computadores - Tecnologia e Ciência
Porto, E-4200, Portugal
{pedro.costa, adrian.galdran, maria.i.meyer}@inesc.pt
M. D. Abràmoff
Stephen A Wynn Institute for Vision Research,
University of Iowa Hospital and Clinics
Iowa City, IA 52242, USA
 
M. Niemeijer
Iowa City, IA 52246, USA
 
A.M. Mendonça
A. Campilho
Faculty of Engineering, University of Porto
Porto, E-4200-464, Portugal
{amendon, campilho}@fe.up.pt
Synthesizing images of the eye fundus is a challenging task that has been previously
approached by formulating complex models of the anatomy of the eye. New images
can then be generated by sampling a suitable parameter space. In this work, we
propose a method that learns to synthesize eye fundus images directly from data.
For that, we pair true eye fundus images with their respective vessel trees, by means
of a vessel segmentation technique. These pairs are then used to learn a mapping
from a binary vessel tree to a new retinal image. For this purpose, we use a recent
image-to-image translation technique, based on the idea of adversarial learning.
Experimental results show that the original and the generated images are visually
different in terms of their global appearance, in spite of sharing the same vessel
tree. Additionally, a quantitative quality analysis of the synthetic retinal images
conﬁrms that the produced images retain a high proportion of the true image set
Introduction
Modern machine learning methods require large amounts of data to be trained. This data is rarely
available in the ﬁeld of medical image analysis, since obtaining clinical annotations is often a costly
process. Therefore, the possibility of synthetically generating medical visual data is greatly appealing,
and has been explored for years. However, the realistic generation of high-quality medical imagery
still remains a complex unsolved challenge for current computer vision methods.
Early methods for medical image generation consisted of digital phantoms, following simpliﬁed
mathematical models of human anatomy . These models slowly evolved to more complex
techniques, able to reliably model relevant aspects of the different acquisition devices. When
combined with anatomical and physiological information arising from expert medical knowledge,
realistic images can be produced . These are useful to validate image analysis techniques , for
medical training , therapy planning , and a wide range of applications.
 
Figure 1: Overview of the proposed retinal image generation method.
However, the traditional top-down approach of observing the available data and formulating mathematical models that explain it (image simulation) implies modeling complex natural laws by unavoidably
simplifying assumptions. More recently, a new paradigm has arisen in the ﬁeld of medical image
generation, exploiting the bottom-up approach of directly learning from the data the relevant information. This is achieved with machine learning systems able to automatically learn the inner variability
on a large training dataset . Once trained, the same system can be sampled to output a new but
plausible image (image synthesis).
In the general computer vision ﬁeld, the synthesis of natural images has recently experimented a
dramatic progress, based on the general idea of adversarial learning . In this context, a generator
component synthesizes images from random noise, and an auxiliary discriminator system trained on
real data is assigned the task of discerning whether the generated data is real or not. In the training
process, the generator is expected to learn to produce images that pose an increasingly more difﬁcult
classiﬁcation problem for the discriminator.
Although adversarial techniques have achieved a great success in the generation of natural images,
their application to medical imaging is still incipient. This is partially due to the lack of large amounts
of training data, and partially to the difﬁculty of ﬁnely controlling the output of the adversarial
generator. In this work, we propose to apply the adversarial learning framework to retinal images.
Notably, instead of generating images from scratch, we propose to generate new plausible images
from binary retinal vessel trees. Therefore, the task of the generator remains achievable, as it only
needs to learn how to generate part of the retinal content, such as the optical disk, or the texture of
the background (Figure 1).
The remaining of this work is organized as follows: we ﬁrst describe a recent generative adversarial
framework that can be employed on pairs of vessel trees and retinal images to learn how to
map the former to the latter. Then, we brieﬂy review U-Net, a Deep Convolutional Neural Network
architecture designed for image segmentation, which allows us to generate pairs of retinal images
and corresponding binary vessel trees. This model provides us with a dataset of vessel trees and
corresponding retinal images that we then use to train an adversarial model, producing new goodquality retinal images out of a new vessel tree. Finally, the quality of the generated images is evaluated
qualitatively and quantitatively, and a description of potential future research directions is presented.
Adversarial Retinal Image Synthesis
Adversarial Translation from Vessel Trees to Retinal Images
Image-to-image translation is a relatively recent computer vision task in which the goal is to learn a
mapping G, called Generator, from an image x into another representation y . Once the model
has been trained, it is able to predict the most likely representation G(xnew) for a previously unseen
image xnew.
Figure 2: Overview of the generative model mapping vessel trees to retinal images.
However, for many problems a single input image can correspond to many different correct representations. If we consider the mapping G between a retinal vessel tree v and a corresponding retinal
fundus image r, variations in color or illumination may produce many acceptable retinal images that
correspond to the same vessel tree, i.e. G(v) = {r1, r2, . . . , rn}. Directly related to this is the choice
of the objective function to be minimized while learning G, which turns out to be critical. Training a
model to naively minimize the L2 distance between G(vi) and ri for a collection of training pairs
given by {(r1, v1), . . . , (rn, vn)} is known to produce low-quality results with lack of detail , due
to the model selecting an average of many equally valid representations.
Instead of explicitly deﬁning a particular loss function for each task, it is possible to employ Generative
Adversarial Networks to implicitly build a more appropriate loss . In this case, the learning process
attempts to maximize the misclassiﬁcation error of a neural network (called Discriminator, D) that
is trained jointly with G, but with the goal of discriminating between real and generated images.
This way, not only G but also the loss are progressively learned from examples, and adapt to each
other: while G tries to generate increasingly more plausible representations G(vi) that can deceive
D, D becomes better at its task, thereby improving the ability of G to generate high-quality samples.
Speciﬁcally, the adversarial loss is deﬁned by:
Ladv(G, D) = Ev,r∼pdata(v,r)[logD(v, r)] + Ev∼pdata(v)[log(1 −D(v, G(v)))],
where Ev,r∼pdata represents the expectation of the log-likelihood of the pair (v, r) being sampled
from the underlying probability distribution of real pairs pdata(v, r), while pdata(v) corresponds to
the distribution of real vessel trees. An overview of this process is shown in Figure 2.
To generate realistic retinal images from binary vessel trees, we follow recent ideas from ,
which propose to combine the adversarial loss with a global L1 loss to produce sharper results. Thus,
the loss function to optimize becomes:
L(G, D) = Ladv(G, D) + λEv,r∼pdata(v,r) (||r −G(v)||1) ,
where λ balances the contribution of the two losses. The goal of the learning process is thus to ﬁnd
an equilibrium of this expression. The discriminator D attempts to maximize eq. (2) by classifying
each N × N patch of a retinal image, deciding if it comes from a real or synthetic image, while the
generator aims at minimizing it. The L1 loss controls low-frequency information in images generated
by G in order to produce globally consistent results, while the adversarial loss promotes sharp results.
Once G is trained, it is able to produce a realistic retinal image from a new binary vessel tree.
Obtaining Training Data
The model described above requires training data in the form of pairs of binary retinal vessel trees and
corresponding retinal images. Since such a large scale manually annotated database is not available,
Figure 3: Overview of the U-Net architecture. Each box corresponds to a multi-channel feature map.
we apply a state-of-the-art retinal vessel segmentation algorithm to obtain enough data for the model
to learn the mapping from vessel trees to retinal images. There exist a large number of methods
capable of providing reliable retinal vessel segmentations. Here we employ a supervised method
based on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), namely the U-Net architecture, ﬁrst proposed
in for the segmentation of biomedical images. This technique is an extension of the idea of
Fully-Convolutional Networks, introduced in , adapted to be trained with a low number of images
and produce more precise segmentations.
The architecture of the U-Net consists of a downsampling and an upsampling block. The ﬁrst half
of the network follows a typical CNN architecture, with stacked convolutional layers of stride two
and Rectiﬁed Linear Unit (ReLU) activations. The second part of the architecture upsamples the
input input feature map symmetrically to the downsampling path. The feature map of the last layer of
the downsampling path is upsampled so that it has the same dimension of the second last layer. The
result is concatenated with the feature map of the corresponding layer in the downsampling path, and
this new feature map undergoes convolution and activation. This is repeated until the upsampling
path layers reach the same dimensions as the ﬁrst layer of the the network.
The ﬁnal layer is a convolution followed by a sigmoid activation in order to map each feature vector
into vessel/non-vessel classes. The concatenation operation allows for very precise spatial localization,
while preserving the coarse-level features learned during the downsampling path. A representation of
this architecture as used in the present work is depicted in Figure 3.
Implementation
For the purpose of retinal vessel segmentation, the DRIVE database was used to train the method
described in the previous Section. The images and the ground truth annotations were divided into
overlapping patches of 64 × 64 pixels and fed randomly to the U-Net, with 10% of the patches being
used for validation. The network was trained using the Adam optimizer and binary crossentropy
as the loss function.
Retinal vessel segmentation using the U-Net was evaluated on DRIVE’s test set, achieving a 0.9755
AUC, aligned with state-of-the-art results . The optimal binarization threshold maximizing the
Youden index was selected. Messidor images were cropped, in order to only display the
ﬁeld of view, and downscaled to 512 × 512. Then, the segmentation method was applied to these
images. Messidor contains 1200 images annotated with the corresponding diabetic retinopathy grade,
and displays more color and texture variability than DRIVE’s 20 training images. Due to the U-Net
being trained and tested in different datasets, some of the produced segmentations were not entirely
correct. This may be related to DRIVE only containing 7 examples of images with signs of mild
diabetic retinopathy (grade 1). For this reason, we decided to retain only pairs of images and vessel
trees in which the corresponding image had grade 0, 1, and 2.
The ﬁnal dataset collected for training our adversarial model consisted of 946 Messidor image pairs.
This dataset was further randomly divided into training (614 pairs), validation (155 pairs) and test
(177 pairs) sets. Regarding image resolution, the original model in used pairs of 256×256 images,
with a U-Net-like generator G. We modiﬁed the architecture to handle 512 × 512 pairs, which is
closer to the resolution of DRIVE images. For that, we added one layer to the downsampling part and
another to the upsampling part of G. The discriminator D classiﬁes 16 × 16 overlapping patches of
size 63 × 63. The implementation was developed in Python using Keras1 . The learning process
starts by training D with real (v, r) and generated pairs (v, G(v)). Then, G is trained with real (v, r)
pairs. This process is repeated iteratively until the losses of D and G stabilize.
1Code to reproduce our results is available at 
Figure 4: Results of our model. First row: True retinal images from our test set, not used during
training. Second row: Vessel trees obtained after segmenting images in the ﬁrst row. Third row:
Corresponding retinal images generated by our model. All images have 512 × 512 resolution.
Experimental Evaluation
For a subjective visual evaluation of the images generated by our model, we show in Figure 4 some
results. The ﬁrst row depicts a random sample of real images extracted from the held-out test set,
which was not used during training. The second row shows vessel trees segmented from those images
with the method outlined in Section 2.2, and the bottom row shows the synthetic retinal images
produced by the proposed technique. We see that the original and the generated images share some
global geometric characteristics. This is natural, since they approximately share the same vascular
structure. However, the synthetic images have markedly different high-level visual features, such as
the color and tone of the image, or the illumination. This information was extracted by our model
from the training set, and effectively applied to the input vessel trees in order to produce realistic
retinal images.
The ﬁrst seven columns of Figure 4 show results in which the model behaved as expected: the vessel
trees retrieved from the images in the ﬁrst row were approximately correct, and provided sufﬁcient
information for the generator to create new consistent information in the synthetic image, shown in
the last row. The last column in Figure 4 shows a failure case of the proposed technique. Therein, the
segmentation technique described in Section 2.2 failed to produce a meaningful vessel network out
of the original image. This is probably due to the high degree of defocus that the input image had. In
this situation, the binary vessel tree supplied to the generator contained too few information, leading
to the appearance of spurious artifacts and chromatic noise in the synthetic image. Fortunately, the
amount of cases in which this happens was relatively low: out of our test set of 177 images, 6 were
found to suffer from artifacts.
Objective image quality veriﬁcation is known to be a hard challenge when no reference is available
 . In addition, for generative models it has been recently observed that specialized evaluation
should be performed for each problem . In our case, to achieve a meaningful objective quantitative
evaluation of the quality of the generated images, we apply two different retinal image quality metrics,
namely the Qv score, proposed in , and the Image Structure Clustering (ISC) metric . Both
metrics have been employed previously to assess the quality of retinal images. While the Qv score
focuses more on the assessment of contrast around vessel pixels, the ISC metric performs a more
global evaluation. Thus, together they provide an appropriate mechanism to quantitatively evaluate
the correctness of a synthetically generated retinal image.
It is worth noting that in cases where artifacts and distortions were generated due to the undercomplete
vessel network problem explained above, the ISC metric tended to artiﬁcially rise the quality of the
synthetic image, as compared to the real one. Due to this, synthetic images containing this class of
degradations were manually identiﬁed and removed from the ISC metric analysis below, together
with their real counterparts. A more detailed discussion of both of the employed retinal image quality
metrics, and their behavior when distorted images where supplied to them is provided in appendix A,
together with supplementary results generated by the proposed technique.
Mean ISC score
Mean Qv score
Mean Qv score
Real Images
Synthetic Images
Table 1: Result of computing the ISC and Qv quality measures on real/synthetic images.
Statistically signiﬁcant results are shown in bold.
The ISC score was computed on a reduced test set of 171 images (after removing the 6 images
with visual artifacts), while the Qv score was computed on all the 177 images. The statistical
analysis performed on both quality score distributions showed that both were normal according
to the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. The resulting data was therefore expressed as mean ± standard
deviation, and compared with the paired Student’s t-test. All p-values were two-tailed and p < 0.05
was considered signiﬁcant. Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 7 (Graphpad
Software Inc.) software. Results obtained with this methodology are shown in Table 1.
In the case of the ISC metric, the synthetic images produced a slightly higher quality score, with the
difference between them not statistically signiﬁcant (p = 0.2188). For the Qv score, the real images
were considered to be of better quality with regard to their synthetic counterparts, the difference being
statistically signiﬁcant (p < 0.05). However, it should be considered that the Qv score consists of an
anisotropy measure weighted by the values of a simple vessel detector (see Appendix A.1). In this
case, it can be expected that image regions around the vessels of a synthetic image won’t probably be
of a better quality than the original ones. On the other hand, results on the ISC metric, which has a
more global nature, point to a similar quality in the real and synthetic images, which agrees with the
subjective visual quality found in the produced images, see Appendix A.2.
Conclusions and Future Work
The above visual and quantitative results demonstrate the feasibility of learning to synthesize new
retinal images from a dataset of pairs of retinal vessel trees and corresponding retinal images,
applying current generative adversarial models. In addition, the dimension of the produced images
was 512 × 512, which is greater than commonly generated images on general computer vision
problems. We believe that achieving this resolution was only possible due to the constrained class of
images in which the method was applied: contrarily to generic natural images, retinal images show
a repetitive geometry, where high-level structures such as the ﬁeld of view, the optical disc, or the
macula, are usually present in the image, and act as a guide for the model to learn how to produce
new texture and background intensities.
The main limitation of the presented method is its dependence on a pre-existing vessel tree in order to
generate a new image. Furthermore, if the vessel tree comes from the application of a segmentation
technique to the original image, the potential weaknesses of the segmentation algorithm will be
inherited by the synthesized image. We are currently working on overcoming these challenges.
Acknowledgments
This work is ﬁnanced by the ERDF – European Regional Development Fund through the Operational
Programme for Competitiveness and Internationalisation - COMPETE 2020 Programme, by National
Funds through the FCT – Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia (Portuguese Foundation for Science
and Technology) within project CMUP-ERI/TIC/0028/2014 and by the North Portugal Regional
Operational Programme , under the PORTUGAL 2020 Partnership Agreement within
the project "NanoSTIMA: Macro-to-Nano Human Sensing: Towards Integrated Multimodal Health
Monitoring and Analytics/NORTE-01-0145-FEDER-000016". MDA is the recipient of the Robert
C. Watzke Professor of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences. IDx LLC has no interest in any of the
algorithms discussed in this study.
Synthetic Retinal Image Quality Evaluation - Discussion
Image Quality Metrics
We discuss now the technical details of the two retinal image quality metrics employed in this work.
Regarding the Qv score , it is a no-reference quality metric that proceeds by computing a local
degree of vesselness around each pixel. This is achieved by building a multiscale version of the input
image, represented by the local Hessian matrix around each pixel extracted from the green channel.
Frangi’s vesselness measure is then computed , and used as an estimate of visible vessel pixels.
Following, an anisotropy measure based on a local Singular Value Decomposition is computed ,
and the ﬁnal quality score is obtained as a weighted average of the vesselness map and the local
anisotropy values. This way, only vessel pixels are considered in this metric, since these are expected
to be good candidates for a reliable contrast and focus estimate.
On the other hand, the Image Structure Clustering (ISC) proposed in follows a substantially
different approach. Even if it is also a no-reference quality metric, it is trained on a dataset of
retinal images. This dataset contained 1000 images (independent of our training set) that had been
previously labeled by medical experts, depending on whether they showed enough visibility to
perform diagnosis. The ISC metric assesses a correct distribution of pixel intensities corresponding
to the relevant anatomical structures present in the retina. This is achieved by extracting features
consisting of intensities and Gaussian derivatives of the R, G, and B channels, and then employing
k-means to group them into 5 different clusters. These are observed to be sufﬁcient to model the
relevant regions of a retinal image (vessels, optical disk, macula, background-to-foreground and
foreground-to-background transitions). Histograms of counts of the computed features are then
passed to an SVM, which is trained to predict if the presence and proportion of pixels associated to
those structures is consistent, according to the training set correspondent quantities.
Both metrics seem thus quite complementary, since the ISC technique considers regions from the
image that are not addressed by the Qv score. In our experiments, however, we noticed that the
artifacts produced when the generative model was provided an undercomplete vessel tree tended to
rise the ISC score. This drawback was not observed when the Qv score was computed.
We believe that the reason for this was the following: starting from a real synthetic image, our method
employs the vessel tree extracted from it to synthesize a new image; thus, the amount of vessel pixels
present in a real image will always be greater than in the corresponding synthetic image, favoring
the Qv score. The ISC metric does not only rely on vessels, but on other anatomical structures. In
addition, it considers the three color channels, while the Qv score employs only one of them. When
supplied an image with artifacts such as those in Figure 5, the ISC score ﬁnds that the proportion
of colors and edges is not adequate, but still relatively acceptable (note that the scores assigned to
the synthetic images are not high in these cases). This situation was detected only on 6 images from
the entire 177 images present in our test set. Accordingly, for a fair comparison, those images were
removed from the statistical experiments that involved the ISC score. Since the Qv score seemed to
be unaffected by this problem, we include every test image on its analysis.
(a) Qv = 0.482/0.053, ISC = 0.000/0.517
(b) Qv = 0.115/0.097, ISC = 0.707/0.703
Figure 5: A couple of pathological results, in which the generated artifacts artiﬁcially rised the ISC
quality metric in favor of the synthetic images.
We believe that current retinal image quality metrics are reasonably suitable to assess the visual
quality of synthetic images. However, the study of the anatomical plausibility of these images may
beneﬁt of speciﬁcally designed quality metrics, that may involve different aspects (local and global)
of existing quality assessment approaches.
Supplementary Results
Below we show a random sample of the results produced by our model, together with their real
counterparts.
(a) Qv = 0.081/0.087, ISC = 0.993/1.0
(b) Qv = 0.133/0.109, ISC = 0.983/1.0
(c) Qv = 0.111/0.102, ISC = 0.96/0.983
(d) Qv = 0.114/0.116, ISC = 1.0/1.0
(e) Qv = 0.121/0.103, ISC = 1.0/1.0
(f) Qv = 0.124/0.098, ISC = 1.0/0.996
(g) Qv = 0.126/0.116, ISC = 1.0/0.993
(h) Qv = 0.126/0.099, ISC = 1.0/0.996
(i) Qv = 0.133/0.084, ISC = 1.0/1.0
(j) Qv = 0.152/0.093, ISC = 1.0/1.0
(k) Qv = 0.119/0.099, ISC = 1.0/0.996
(l) Qv = 0.126/0.129, ISC = 1.0/0.99
Figure 6: A subset of the generated images. For each block, left: the segmented vessel tree; center:
the corresponding real image; right: the synthetic image. Below we show the Qv and ISC scores for
the real (green) and synthetic (red) images. All images are of resolution 512 × 512.
Further results are displayed below:
(a) Qv = 0.136/0.091, ISC = 1.0/1.0
(b) Qv = 0.137/0.086, ISC = 1.0/1.0
(c) Qv = 0.150/0.112, ISC = 1.0/1.0
(d) Qv = 0.139/0.090, ISC = 1.0/1.0
(e) Qv = 0.129/0.096, ISC = 1.0/1.0
(f) Qv = 0.101/0.099, ISC = 0.99/1.0
(g) Qv = 0.112/0.114, ISC = 0.92/0.99
(h) Qv = 0.116/0.094, ISC = 1.0/1.0
(i) Qv = 0.073/0.117, ISC = 0.996/0.993
(j) Qv = 0.162/0.106, ISC = 1.0/1.0
(k) Qv = 0.107/0.088, ISC = 0.95/0.96
(l) Qv = 0.133/0.090, ISC = 0.983/1.0
Figure 7: A subset of the generated images. For each block, left: the segmented vessel tree; center:
the corresponding real image; right: the synthetic image. Below we show the Qv and ISC scores for
the real (green) and synthetic (red) images. All images are of resolution 512 × 512.