METHODS ARTICLE
published: 06 January 2014
doi: 10.3389/fninf.2013.00048
Nengo: a Python tool for building large-scale functional
brain models
Trevor Bekolay*, James Bergstra , Eric Hunsberger, Travis DeWolf , Terrence C. Stewart,
Daniel Rasmussen, Xuan Choo , Aaron Russell Voelker and Chris Eliasmith
Centre for Theoretical Neuroscience, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
Edited by:
Andrew P. Davison, Centre National
de la Recherche Scientiﬁque, France
Reviewed by:
Marc De Kamps, University of
Ján Antolík, Centre National de la
*Correspondence:
Trevor Bekolay, Centre for
Theoretical Neuroscience, David R.
Cheriton School of Computer
Science, University of Waterloo,
200 University Avenue West,
Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1, Canada
e-mail: 
Neuroscience currently lacks a comprehensive theory of how cognitive processes can be
implemented in a biological substrate. The Neural Engineering Framework (NEF) proposes
one such theory, but has not yet gathered signiﬁcant empirical support, partly due to the
technical challenge of building and simulating large-scale models with the NEF. Nengo is a
software tool that can be used to build and simulate large-scale models based on the NEF;
currently, it is the primary resource for both teaching how the NEF is used, and for doing
research that generates speciﬁc NEF models to explain experimental data. Nengo 1.4,
which was implemented in Java, was used to create Spaun, the world’s largest functional
brain model . Simulating Spaun highlighted limitations in Nengo 1.4’s
ability to support model construction with simple syntax, to simulate large models quickly,
and to collect large amounts of data for subsequent analysis. This paper describes Nengo
2.0, which is implemented in Python and overcomes these limitations. It uses simple and
extendable syntax, simulates a benchmark model on the scale of Spaun 50 times faster
than Nengo 1.4, and has a ﬂexible mechanism for collecting simulation results.
Keywords: neural engineering framework, nengo, Python, neuroscience, theoretical neuroscience, control theory,
simulation
1. INTRODUCTION
Modeling the human brain is one of the greatest scientiﬁc challenges of our time. Computational neuroscience has made signiﬁcant advancements from simulating low-level biological parts
in great detail, to solving high-level problems that humans ﬁnd
difﬁcult; however, we still lack a mathematical account of how
biological components implement cognitive functions such as
sensory processing, memory formation, reasoning, and motor
control. Much work has been put into neural simulators that
attempt to recreate neuroscientiﬁc data in precise detail with
the thought that cognition will emerge by connecting detailed
neuron models according to the statistics of biological synapses
 . However, cognition has not yet emerged from
data-driven large scale models, and there are good reasons to
think that cognition may never emerge . At the other end of the spectrum, cognitive architectures
 and machine learning
approaches have solved highdimensional statistical problems, but do so without respecting
biological constraints.
Nengo1 is a neural simulator based on a theoretical framework
proposed by Eliasmith and Anderson called the Neural
Engineering Framework (NEF). The NEF is a large-scale modeling approach that can leverage single neuron models to build
neural networks with demonstrable cognitive abilities. Nengo and
1Nengo is available for download through the Python Package Index at
 The full source is available at https://
github.com/ctn-waterloo/nengo.
the NEF has been used to build increasingly sophisticated neural subsystems for the last decade [e.g., path integration , working memory , list memory , inductive reasoning , motor control , decision making ]
culminating recently with Spaun, currently the world’s largest
functional brain model . Spaun is a network of 2.5 million spiking neurons that can perform eight
cognitive tasks including memorizing lists and inductive reasoning. It can perform any of these eight tasks at any time by being
presented the appropriate series of images representing the task to
be performed; for example, sequentially presenting images containing the characters A3 instructs Spaun to memorize the
list 1234. If asked to recall the memorized list, Spaun generates
motor commands for a simulated arm, writing out the digits
1234. While the tasks that Spaun performs are diverse, all of the
tasks use a common set of functional cortical and subcortical
components. Each functional component corresponds to a brain
area that has been hypothesized to perform those functions in the
neuroscientiﬁc literature.
The NEF provides principles to guide the construction of
a neural model that incorporates anatomical constraints, functional objectives, and dynamical systems or control theory.
Constructing models from this starting point, rather than from
single cell electrophysiology and connectivity statistics alone,
produces simulated data that explains and predicts a wide variety of experimental results. Single cell activity , response timing , behavioral
Frontiers in Neuroinformatics
www.frontiersin.org
January 2014 | Volume 7 | Article 48 | 1
NEUROINFORMATICS
Recherche Scientiﬁque, France
Bekolay et al.
Nengo in Python
errors , and age-related cognitive
decline , of NEF-designed models match physiological and psychological ﬁndings without being
built speciﬁcally into the design. These results are a consequence
of the need to satisfy functional objectives within anatomical and
neurobiological constraints.
The transformation principle of the NEF proposes that the
connection weight matrix between two neural populations can
compute a non-linear function, and can be factored into two
signiﬁcantly smaller matrices. By using these factors instead of
full connection weight matrices, NEF-designed models are more
computationally efﬁcient, which allows Nengo to run large-scale
neural models on low-cost commodity hardware.
In order to make Nengo more simple, extensible, and fast,
we have rewritten Nengo 2.0 from scratch in Python, leveraging NumPy for manipulating large amounts
of data. While NumPy is its only dependency, Nengo contains optional extensions for plotting if Matplotlib is available
 and for interactive exploration if IPython is available . Since Nengo only depends on
one third-party library, it is easy to integrate Nengo models in
arbitrary CPython programs, opening up possibilities for using
neurally implemented algorithms in web services, games, and
other applications.
Nengo 2.0 has a simple object model, which makes it easy to
document, test, and modify. Model creation and simulation are
decoupled, allowing for models to be run with other simulators
as drop-in replacements for Nengo 2.0’s platform-independent
reference simulator. To date, we have implemented one other
simulator that uses PyOpenCL to take
advantage of a GPU or multicore CPU. The OpenCL simulator can simulate large models on the scale of Spaun at least
50 times faster than Nengo 1.4 using inexpensive commodity
In all, Nengo 2.0 provides a platform for simulating larger and
more complex models than Spaun, and can therefore further test
the NEF as a theory of neural computation.
2. NEURAL ENGINEERING FRAMEWORK (NEF)
The Neural Engineering Framework proposes three quantitatively speciﬁed principles that enable the construction of large-scale neural models.
Brieﬂy, this mathematical theory deﬁnes:
1. Representation: A population of neurons collectively represents a time-varying vector of real numbers through nonlinear encoding and linear decoding.
2. Transformation: Linear and non-linear functions on those
vectors are computed by linear decodings that are used to
analytically compute the connections between populations of
3. Dynamics: The vectors represented by neural populations
can be considered state variables in a (linear or non-linear)
dynamical system, and recurrent connections can be computed using principle 2.
Figure 1 provides a graphical summary of these three principles.
2.1. REPRESENTATION
Information is encoded by populations of neurons. The NEF represents information with time-varying vectors of real numbers,
allowing theorists to propose possible neural computations by
manipulating that information using conventional mathematics.
The NEF suggests that we can characterize the encoding of those
vectors by injecting speciﬁc amounts of current into single neuron models based on the vector being encoded. This drives the
neuron, causing it to spike. With enough neurons, the originally
encoded vector can be estimated through a decoding process. This
idea is a kind of population coding , but generalized to vectors of arbitrary
dimensionality.
In the encoding process, the input signal drives each neuron
based on its tuning curve, which describes how likely that neuron is to respond to a given input signal. The tuning curve is a
function of the gain of a neuron (how quickly the activity rises),
the bias (the activity of a neuron given no signal), and the encoding weight (the direction in the input vector space that causes the
neuron to be the most active). Importantly, tuning curves can
be determined for any type of neuron, and therefore the encoding process (and the NEF as a whole) is not dependent on any
particular neuron model.
In the decoding process, the spike trains are ﬁrst ﬁltered with
an exponentially decaying ﬁlter accounting for the process of a
spike generating a postsynaptic current. Those ﬁltered spike trains
are summed together with weights that are determined by solving
a least-squares minimization problem. Note that these decoding
weights do not necessarily depend on the input signal; instead, we
typically perform this minimization on points sampled from the
vector space that the population represents.
In Nengo, the representation principle can be seen in the
Ensemble object (see section 3.1).
2.2. TRANSFORMATION
Neurons communicate through unidirectional connections called
synapses. When a neuron spikes, it releases neurotransmitter
across the synapse, which typically causes some amount of current to be imparted in the postsynaptic (downstream) neuron.
Many factors affect the amplitude of the imparted current; we
summarize those factors in a scalar connection weight representing the strength of the connection between two neurons. In
order to compute any function, we set the connection weights
between two populations to be the product of the decoding
weights for that function in the ﬁrst population, the encoding weights for the downstream population, and any linear
transform.
This implies that the NEF makes a hypothesis about synaptic weight matrices; speciﬁcally, that they have low rank, and
can be factored into encoders, decoders, and a linear transform.
Note that, in practice, we rarely use the full connection weight
matrix, and instead store the encoders, decoders, and linear transform separately (i.e., the three factors of the connection weight
matrix). This provides signiﬁcant space and time savings during
simulation.
In Nengo, the transformation principle can be seen in the
Connection object (see section 3.3).
Frontiers in Neuroinformatics
www.frontiersin.org
January 2014 | Volume 7 | Article 48 | 2
Bekolay et al.
Nengo in Python
FIGURE 1 | Summary of the three principles of the Neural Engineering
Framework (NEF). (A) By the representation principle, signals are
encoded in neural populations based on the tuning curve of each neuron
(top). The tuning curve describes how active a neuron is given some input
signal. If we drive the eight neurons in the top panel with the input signal
in the middle panel, we see the spike trains in the bottom panel. (B) By
the representation principle, the spiking activity of a neural population can
be decoded to recover the original input signal, or some transformation of
that input signal. First, the ﬁring pattern shown in the top panel is ﬁltered
with a decaying exponential ﬁlter (middle panel). The ﬁltered activity is
then summed together with a set of weights that approximates the input
signal (bottom panel, green) and the cosine of the input signal (bottom
panel, purple). (C) A sine wave is encoded by population A (top panel); the
negative of that signal is projected to population B (middle panel) and the
square of that signal is projected to population C (bottom panel). By the
transformation principle, populations of neurons can send signals to
another population by decoding the desired function from the ﬁrst
population and then encoding the decoded estimate into the second
population. These two steps can be combined into a single step by
calculating a set of weights that describe the strength of the connections
between each neuron in the ﬁrst population and each neuron in the second
population. (D) A neurally implemented dynamical system has negative
feedback across its two dimensions, resulting in a harmonic oscillator. The
oscillator is plotted across time (top) and in state space (bottom). By the
dynamics principle, signals being represented by population of neurons can
be thought of as state variables in a dynamical system.
2.3. DYNAMICS
While feedforward vector transformations sufﬁce to describe
some neural systems, many require persistent activity through
recurrent connections. When recurrent connections are introduced, the vectors represented by neural populations can be
thought of as state variables in a dynamical system. The equations governing dynamics in such a system can be designed and
analyzed using the methods of control theory, and translated
into neural circuitry using the principles of representation and
transformation.
In Nengo, dynamics can be seen when an Ensemble is connected to itself. Several of the Networks implemented in Nengo
also exhibit dynamics.
2.4. NEF AND NENGO
Large models can be built by using the principles of the NEF
as connectable components that describe neural systems, just
as a circuit diagram describes an electronic circuit. The goal of
Nengo is to enable modelers to create and connect those components. Ensembles describe what information is being represented,
and connections describe how that information is transformed.
Nengo implements those descriptions with its object model, and
translates those objects to a network of interconnected neurons,
situating it as a “neural compiler” that translates a high-level
functional model to a low-level neural model.
3. NENGO OBJECT MODEL
To describe an NEF model, Nengo deﬁnes six core objects.
1. The Ensemble contains a group of neurons that encodes a
time-varying vector of real numbers.
2. The Node represents non-neural information, such as sensory
inputs and motor outputs.
3. The Connection describes how nodes and ensembles are
connected.
4. The Probe gathers data during a simulation for later analysis.
5. The Network encapsulates a functionally related group of
interconnected nodes and ensembles.
6. The Model encapsulates a Nengo model.
These six objects contain symbolic information about a Nengo
model, enabling a strict division between model construction and
simulation. This allows a Nengo model to be run on multiple
simulators.
Frontiers in Neuroinformatics
www.frontiersin.org
January 2014 | Volume 7 | Article 48 | 3
Bekolay et al.
Nengo in Python
3.1. ENSEMBLE
An Ensemble is a population of neurons that represents information in the form of a real-valued vector. When creating an
ensemble, the user must provide a name, an object that describes
a population of neurons, and the dimensionality (i.e., the length
of the vector it represents). For example,
nengo.Ensemble(nengo.LIF(50,
tau_ref=0.002), 1)
describes an ensemble that uses 50 leaky integrate-and-ﬁre neurons with a 2 ms refractory period to represent
a one-dimensional vector. The nengo.LIF class deﬁnes the
parameters of the LIF neurons symbolically so that each simulator
can compute the LIF non-linearity efﬁciently. The neuron model
used by the ensemble is changed by passing in a different symbolic
neuron object; however, the simulator used must be aware of that
type of neuron.
Other attributes of the Ensemble, such as its encoding
weights, can be speciﬁed either as keyword arguments to the
Ensemble constructor, or by setting an attribute on the instantiated object. While an ensemble makes a hypothesis about
the information being represented by neurons, these additional
attributes allow modelers to set neural parameters according to in
vivo electrophysiology data. If these attributes are not set, Nengo
attempts to maintain neurobiological constraints by using default
parameters consistent with neocortical pyramidal cells.
A Node contains a user-deﬁned Python function that directly
calculates the node’s outputs from its inputs at each timestep.
Available inputs include the simulator timestep, the decoded output of an ensemble, or the output of another node. However,
unlike ensembles, there are no constraints on the type of function
that the node computes. A node can track any number of variables
internally, and use the state of those variables when computing
its function. For example, it can interact directly with hardware, and interface with other programs using shared memory or
Generally, a node represents information that cannot be
decoded from an ensemble. As a simple example, a node can be
used to model sensory stimuli that are predeﬁned functions of
time. As a more sophisticated example, a node can be used to
model a complex experimental environment that both provides
input to the neural model and responds to the neural model’s
output. Nodes allow Nengo to represent neural components, the
body that those components drive, and the environment that
body interacts with in a single uniﬁed model. This makes Nengo
models more explicit, and enables simulators to control and
optimize node execution.
3.3. CONNECTION
Ensembles and nodes can be connected together in several ways.
A Connection contains symbolic information about how two
objects are connected. That information either includes a factored
or full connection weight matrix, or includes enough information
to generate weights during simulation.
When an ensemble is connected to another object, the connection implements the NEF’s transformation principle. In other
words, the Connection allows ensembles to project encoded
information—or a transformation of that information—to
another ensemble or node. This functionality is what enables
Nengo models to appear conceptual, even though the underlying implementation can translate that connection to synaptic
However, neurons in an ensemble can be directly connected to
neurons in another ensemble with synaptic connection weights
by connecting an ensemble’s neurons directly to another ensemble’s neurons [e.g., nengo.Connection(ens1.neurons,
ens2.neurons, ...)]. All connections can be temporally
ﬁltered, and the weights involved in the connection can be modi-
ﬁed over time with learning rules.
3.4. PROBE
A Probe monitors a particular part of another object in order
to record its value throughout a simulation. Nengo models contain many variables that change over time, including membrane
potentials, spike events, and encoded vectors. It is resource intensive to store the values of large numbers of variables at each
timestep, and it is also not necessary, as typically only a small
fraction of these variables are analyzed after a simulation. The
modeler chooses which variables to record by creating a probe
Like nodes, a probe could be implemented outside of the neural model. However, doing so requires detailed knowledge of
the simulator, and can incur signiﬁcant overhead if not implemented carefully. For these reasons, we have made probes a core
component of a Nengo model, and are therefore explicit and optimizable. Further, since probes are described at a symbolic level,
the underlying implementation can output probed data in many
different formats. Currently, simulators store probed data directly
in memory, but the ability to store data in ﬁles or to stream data
directly to sockets is forthcoming.
3.5. NETWORK
A network is a collection of interconnected ensembles and nodes.
Networks provide a way of grouping together a set of connected objects that collectively perform a complex function.
Encapsulating them in a network makes its purpose explicit
and hides the complexity of the function (see section 5.3
for an example). This grouping can be hierarchical networks.
Network is a base class designed to be subclassed by modelers. The code that creates and connects several objects in a
model can be grouped into a Network subclass with only
minor changes. Nengo comes with several networks already
implemented which can be used directly, or can be used as
a template for modelers wanting to implement their own
As a simple example, the Integrator network is composed
of only one recurrently connected ensemble. By encapsulating
that logic in a network, the purpose of that ensemble is made
explicit. As a complex example, the BasalGanglia network
is composed of ﬁve groups of ensembles connected with several
speciﬁc functions that together implement a “winner-take-all”
Frontiers in Neuroinformatics
www.frontiersin.org
January 2014 | Volume 7 | Article 48 | 4
Bekolay et al.
Nengo in Python
circuit. Encapsulating the code to create those ensembles and
connections in a network makes a complicated section of code
easy to include in many different models.
3.6. MODEL
The Model object is a container for Nengo objects. Conceptually,
they are similar to networks, but are privileged in that simulators must have a model passed into their constructor, making the
Model akin to a network that contains all of the objects deﬁned
for a Nengo model. A simulator’s job is to simulate a model.
4. NENGO SIMULATORS
Decoupling model creation and simulation has been done previously by PyNN . In PyNN, the same Python
script can be used to run a model on four different simulators.
Nengo follows this programming model by decoupling neural
model creation and simulation, which enables Nengo simulators to allocate memory and schedule computations in the most
efﬁcient ways possible. Simulators are given a Model as an argument; this Model is a static symbolic description. The simulator
can take the model description and build whatever data structures
are best suited to implement the simulation.
We have implemented a platform-independent reference simulator as an example for simulator designers. This simulator is
not a speciﬁcation; any object that accepts a Nengo Model as an
argument is considered a Nengo simulator. To show that model
creation and simulation are fully decoupled, we have also implemented an OpenCL simulator that uses PyOpenCL to parallelize
computations on GPUs and multicore CPUs. However, in the
remainder of this section, we will describe the reference simulator implementation; the OpenCL simulator shares many of the
reference simulator’s architectural choices, but the details of its
implementation include OpenCL-speciﬁc optimizations that are
beyond the scope of this paper.
4.1. NENGO REFERENCE SIMULATOR
The Nengo reference simulator makes a copy of the objects in the
model and ﬁlls in many of the details not speciﬁed at the symbolic level. For example, encoders are often not speciﬁed when
the model is created, so the reference simulator randomly chooses
them as unit vectors in the space that the ensemble is representing. After ﬁlling in these details, the reference simulator builds a
reduced set of objects that describe the computations occurring in
the model. Speciﬁcally, the simulator uses signals, which represent
values, and operators, which represent computations performed
on signals. Figure 2 shows the signals and operators used in a
simple model.
4.1.1. Signals
A Signal represents any number that will be used by the simulator. Several signals are created for each high-level Nengo object;
for example, for each ensemble, the simulator creates signals that
represent the high-level input signal that will be encoded to input
currents, and the encoding weights. The ensemble also contains
a neural population, for which the simulator creates signals that
represent input currents, bias currents, membrane voltages, and
refractory times for each cell.
As can be seen in Figure 2, the signals used in a Nengo simulation can be conceptually grouped into those that track low-level
neural signals, and those that track high-level signals deﬁned by
the NEF. Other neural simulators only track low-level signals.
Operators commonly map between related low- and high-level
4.1.2. Operators
Operators represent computations to be performed on signals on
each timestep. Once the model has been built, only a small set of
mathematical operations are necessary for simulation.
Many of the computations done in a simulation are linear transformations (e.g., the decoding and encoding steps in
Figure 2), and therefore can share a common operator; this
is helpful for parallelizing computations. Non-linear functions,
however, require speciﬁc operators. Each supported neuron
model and learning rule has an associated operator. The simulator explicitly maps from symbolic neuron objects in ensembles
and from symbolic learning rule objects in connections to their
associated operators.
4.1.3. Reference simulator
Before the ﬁrst timestep, the reference simulator
1. ﬁlls in unspeciﬁed details of high-level objects,
2. translates high-level objects to a set of signals and operators,
3. allocates NumPy arrays for each signal, and
4. sorts operators based on a dependency graph.
On each timestep, the reference simulator
1. computes each operator in order, and
2. copies probed signals to memory.
Figure 2 depicts the state of the reference simulator after two
timesteps of a simple model; all subsequent timesteps perform the
same operations as the ﬁrst two.
5. EXAMPLE SCRIPTS
The scripting interface provides a simple way to add Nengo
objects to a model, simulate that model, and extract data collected
during the simulation. Rather than list the functions in the scripting interface, we instead provide three concrete example scripts
that highlight the types of models that can be built with Nengo.
We have also implemented two of these three examples in PyNN
to provide a comparison for the length and clarity of the code
describing the models.
5.1. COMMUNICATION CHANNEL
As detailed in section 2, NEF models are based on the principles of representation, transformation, and dynamics. One of the
most important operations in a large neural model is to route
represented information from one ensemble to another without
any change. For example, in the visual system of Spaun, a highdimensional representation of the visual ﬁeld is compressed to a
low-dimensional representation, and then sent unchanged to several areas, including the working memory and action selection
networks. This routing is implemented with a transformation
Frontiers in Neuroinformatics
www.frontiersin.org
January 2014 | Volume 7 | Article 48 | 5
Bekolay et al.
Nengo in Python
FIGURE 2 | Detailed breakdown of the Nengo reference simulator
running a simple model for two timesteps. (A) Code describing the model
being simulated. It consists of ensemble A projecting the sine of its encoded
signal to ensemble B, which is recurrently connected. (B) Diagram depicting
the model being simulated. (C) A detailed diagram of how the reference
simulator organizes this model. Signals (blue) represent the values tracked in
the simulation. Operators (red) represent the computations done on signals.
Signals can be grouped as low-level neural signals that are used to compute
the non-linear functions underlying neuron models, and high-level NEF
signals that are used to drive neurons and track the signals that the neurons
are representing. The operators that implement the decoding and encoding
steps map between the low-level neural signals and the high-level NEF
signals. (D) The signals tracked at the low level can be interpreted as a model
commonly seen in computational neuroscience literature; a population of
leaky integrate-and-ﬁre neurons is driven by some time-varying input current,
J(t). These neurons project to a population of recurrently connected neurons.
The connection weights between the two populations, and from the second
population to itself, can be computed by the NEF’s transformation principle,
bypassing the need for the high-level NEF signals used by the reference
simulator for speed and data collection purposes. (E) The signals tracked at
the high level can be interpreted as a dynamical system. State variable A
simply represents its input, and passes its state to a sine function which
becomes the input to B. State variable B is a simple linear system that can be
described with the typical ˙x(t) = Ax(t) + Bu(t) equation. These dynamical
systems can be simulated directly, without the use of spiking neurons, in
order to quickly analyze system behavior, if desired.
called a communication channel. This transform simply implements the identity function, f (x) = x.
Figure 3 depicts a scalar communication channel in which
band-limited Gaussian white noise is represented in one ensemble
and projected to another ensemble.
The communication channel is a simple enough model that
it can be readily implemented in PyNN. Figure 4 compares the
code for implementing a communication channel in Nengo and
PyNN. This ﬁgure highlights many of the differences between
Nengo models and conventional neural models; we also use these
script for benchmarking (see section 6).
5.2. LORENZ ATTRACTOR NETWORK
While the communication channel exempliﬁes the representation
and transformation principles of the NEF, the Lorenz attractor
exempliﬁes the dynamics principle. Many models in theoretical
Frontiers in Neuroinformatics
www.frontiersin.org
January 2014 | Volume 7 | Article 48 | 6
Bekolay et al.
Nengo in Python
FIGURE 3 | A communication channel implemented with Nengo.
(A) Diagram depicting the model. Ensemble A projects its encoded signal
to ensemble B unchanged. (B) Nengo code to build and simulate the
model for 1 s. (C) The results of the simulation. The input signal (top
panel) is white noise limited to 0–5 Hz. The signal is well-represented by
both ensemble A (middle panel) and ensemble B (bottom panel) despite
the neural ﬁring patterns (underlaid in middle and bottom panels) being
different.
neuroscience are based on attractor networks . The NEF has been used in the past to implement many different types of attractor networks by recurrently
connecting ensembles with functions that implement dynamical
systems . Figure 5 depicts a Nengo implementation of the Lorenz chaotic attractor with a single ensemble
composed of 2000 leaky integrate-and-ﬁre neurons. We have
implemented the Lorenz attractor in PyNN for benchmarking
purposes (code not shown; the PyNN script is ∼100 lines long,
while the Nengo script in Figure 5 is 20 lines long).
5.3. CIRCULAR CONVOLUTION
Communication channels and attractor networks show up in
many Nengo models, but are still relatively simple to implement
without Nengo, as can be seen with the PyNN implementation
in Figure 4. As the NEF has been used to construct larger models
that have the capabilities of non-neural cognitive models, a theory called the Semantic Pointer Architecture has
emerged. This theory uses high-dimensional vectors as symbollike structures that can be combined together to form novel
One of the functions that is performed on these vectors is to
compress two n-dimensional vectors into a single n-dimensional
vector, which can be decompressed into noisy versions of the
two originally compressed vectors. We implement this compression using the circular convolution function. Circular convolution is best implemented in a two-layer network, rather than
in a single connection, which we have simpliﬁed through the
CircularConvolution network. The complexity encapsulated in that network can be seen in Figure 6.
Unlike the previous two examples, we do not implement circular convolution in PyNN. The resulting script would be too long
to be instructive.
6. BENCHMARKS
While benchmark models are not indicative of performance on all
models, increasing simulation speed was a primary goal of Nengo
2.0. To validate that performance has improved, we ran the models described in section 5 for various numbers of neurons and
dimensions for each ensemble.
The communication channel and Lorenz attractor are small
models that demonstrate the principles of the NEF. Their small
size enables us to write PyNN scripts that implement roughly
the same functionality with Brian ,
NEURON , and NEST 2.
We ran each parameter set ﬁve times on the same machine, and
plot the mean time elapsed in Figure 7. In most cases, the coefﬁcient of variation for the ﬁve sample times is well below 0.1, except
for two outliers with coefﬁcients of 0.18 and 0.22, overall indicating that the reported means are robust. The results, shown in
Figures 7A,B, suggest that all versions of Nengo are signiﬁcantly
faster than the simulators accessible through PyNN, especially as
the size of models increases. This is likely due to Nengo’s use of
factorized weight matrices, rather than storing and computing
with the entire weight matrix on each timestep. While NEST and
NEURON were not run on multiple cores using message passing,
the reference simulator of Nengo also only uses one CPU core.
The results further suggest that Nengo 2.0’s simulators are faster
than Nengo 1.4’s simulator.
As a larger-scale example, we have also benchmarked the circular convolution model. Circular convolution is an important
test case, as a signiﬁcant portion of Spaun’s 2.5 million neurons
are used to implement circular convolution. In this case, only
2We were unable to compile PCSim on the machine on
which we ran benchmarks.
Frontiers in Neuroinformatics
www.frontiersin.org
January 2014 | Volume 7 | Article 48 | 7
Bekolay et al.
Nengo in Python
FIGURE 4 | Implementation of the communication channel (left) in Nengo and (right) in PyNN. Solving for decoding weights takes approximately 40 lines
of code, which are not included in this ﬁgure.
versions of Nengo were tested. Instead of running each simulation
multiple times, we instead ran the simulator for 10 timesteps in
order to ﬁll various levels of CPU or GPU cache, and then ran
the simulator for 1000 more timesteps; there is very little variance
using this method. As can be seen in Figure 7C, for large models,
the OpenCL simulator performs much faster than Nengo 1.4; in
particular, a Radeon 7970 GPU performs 500-dimensional circular convolution with about half a million neurons faster than real
time, and 50 times faster than Nengo 1.4. In the 50-dimensional
case, the Radeon 7970 GPU is 200 times faster than Nengo 1.4.
Additionally, although both Nengo 1.4 and the OpenCL simulator
on CPUs use all available CPU cores, Nengo’s OpenCL simulator
is many times faster.
7. DISCUSSION
7.1. COMPARISON TO SIMILAR PROJECTS
There are many other neural simulators dedicated to building
large-scale neural models [e.g., ], and many tools for simulating cognitive phenomena with various levels of biologically
plausibility [e.g., ]. However, Nengo is unique in that it is built on
a theoretical framework that has enabled a cognitive architecture
(the Semantic Pointer Architecture) that maintains a high level of
biological plausibility, and has been validated through the Spaun
model and other past work.
The most closely related projects in terms of software design
are PyNN and Topographica , both of which provide a high-level scripting interface
to low-level neural simulators. PyNN in particular is similar to
the high-level object model in Nengo, and provides a convenient interface to the three most widely used neural simulators,
according to a survey by Hanke and Halchenko .
The APIs of Nengo and PyNN are similar, but differ signiﬁcantly in how groups of neurons are connected together.
In Nengo, connections commonly describe the mathematical operation that is performed through the connection
between two ensembles; e.g., nengo.Connection(A, B,
function=square) connects ensemble A to ensemble
Frontiers in Neuroinformatics
www.frontiersin.org
January 2014 | Volume 7 | Article 48 | 8
Bekolay et al.
Nengo in Python
FIGURE 5 | A Lorenz attractor implemented with Nengo. (A) Nengo
code to build and simulate the model for 6 s. (B) Diagram depicting the
model. The state ensemble is recurrently connected with a complex
function implementing the dynamics of the Lorenz attractor. Note that
this population does not receive any input that might drive its initial
value; instead, the initial value is determined by the baseline ﬁring of
the 2000 leaky integrate-and-ﬁre neurons that make up the state
ensemble. (C) The trajectory that the state ensemble takes in its
three-dimensional state space. For the parameters chosen, the trajectory
takes the well-known butterﬂy shape. (D) The state vector plotted over
time. (E) The spikes emitted by a random sample of 25 neurons from
the state ensemble. Some neurons ﬁre uniformly across the 6 s
simulation, but most change depending on the state being tracked due
to the recurrent connection.
FIGURE 6 | Circular convolution implemented with Nengo. (A) Nengo
code to build and simulate the model for 0.2 s. (B) Diagram depicting the
model. The input vectors, A and B, represent four-dimensional vectors which
are mapped onto six ensembles within the circular convolution network
through complicated transformation matrices that implement a discrete
Fourier transform. Each ensemble within the network represents a
two-dimensional vector. The product of the two dimensions is projected
through another complicated transformation matrix that implements the
inverse discrete Fourier transform, computing the ﬁnal four-dimensional
result. Note that the complicated parts of the model are contained within the
network; the number of ensembles and the transform matrices shown are
automatically generated by the network depending on the dimensionality of
the input vectors. (C) The result of the simulation. Straight horizontal lines
represent the target values that each ensemble should represent. Wavy lines
represent the decoded values for each dimension represented by the A, B,
and Result ensembles (top, middle, and bottom panels, respectively). The
ensembles represent the correct values, after a startup transient of less
than 0.1 s.
Frontiers in Neuroinformatics
www.frontiersin.org
January 2014 | Volume 7 | Article 48 | 9
Bekolay et al.
Nengo in Python
FIGURE 7 | Benchmark results for several simulators on the example
models described in section 5. In (A) and (B), all of the simulators
except the Nengo OpenCL simulator were run on an Intel Core i7-965.
Nengo 1.4 used all 4 cores of this processor; all other simulator used only
1 core. The Nengo OpenCL simulator was run on an NVidia GTX280 GPU.
(A) Benchmark results from simulating the communication channel for 10
simulated seconds at a 1 ms timestep. For all model sizes, Nengo
simulators are faster than Nengo 1.4, which is signiﬁcantly faster than
NEURON and NEST, which are signiﬁcantly faster than Brian. The full Brian
results are not shown; for the largest model, the Brian simulation takes
∼768 s. (B) Benchmark results from simulating the Lorenz attractor for 10
simulated seconds at a 1 ms timestep. For most model sizes, the results
are the same as (A), except that NEURON is notably faster. The full results
for Brian and NEST are not shown; for the largest model, simulations in
Brian and NEST take ∼1467 and ∼601 s, respectively. (C) Benchmark
results from simulating circular convolution for 1 simulated second at a
1 ms timestep. For the blue lines, the simulator used was the Nengo
OpenCL simulator. The CPU used for Nengo 1.4 and the Nengo reference
simulator was an Intel Core i7-3770; all 4 cores were used by Nengo 1.4,
while Nengo’s reference simulator only used one core. For all model sizes,
the OpenCL simulator is faster than the Nengo 1.4 simulator, which is
faster than the Nengo reference simulator. The reference simulator was
only run up to 50 dimensions. The full results for Nengo 1.4 are not
shown; for the largest model, simulation with Nengo 1.4 takes ∼45 s.
B, transmitting the square of the value represented by A
to B. In PyNN, connections commonly describe features
of the connection weight matrix between two populations;
e.g., FixedProbabilityConnector(0.5) connects two
ensembles together, with a probability of 0.5 that there will be
a connection between a pair of neurons in the two populations.
This difference reﬂects the fundamental difference that Nengo is
built on a theoretical framework that enables modelers to think
about information processing in the brain at a conceptual level.
On the neural simulator side, we have shown that both
Nengo’s reference simulator and OpenCL simulator are able
to simulate two benchmark models much faster than Brian,
NEST and NEURON (see Figure 7). This is, in part, because
Nengo stores the factors of the connection weight matrix, rather
than storing the entire matrix. However, these simulators are
able to simulate many detailed neuron models and learning
rules, and have access to a wealth of existing neuron models
and learning rules. Because Nengo 2.0 is in an earlier development stage, many of these detailed neuron models and learning
rules remain to be added. Neural simulators like Brian, NEST,
and NEURON are therefore currently better suited for simulating a wider range of single cell models, while Nengo is
designed for large networks of simple neural models that are
connected together according to the principles of the Neural
Engineering Framework, and can simulate these types of models
efﬁciently.
One key difference between Nengo’s simulators and traditional neural simulators is the target platform. While NEST and
NEURON can be run on commodity hardware, networks of
modest size are typically simulated in high-performance computing environments by using the Message-Passing Interface (MPI).
Nengo enables large-scale neural simulation on commodity hardware, allowing researchers and hobbyists without access to large
computing clusters the ability to experiment with theoretical neuroscience as is currently practiced in cutting edge research. In
particular, GPUs are a powerful, low-cost computing resource
that are available in most modern workstations. The OpenCL
simulator makes full use of GPUs, while the previously discussed
simulators currently do not.
7.2. FUTURE WORK
Our short-term goal is to implement the Nengo 1.4 use cases not
currently covered by Nengo 2.0. While we have ensured that all
of the models currently used by Nengo 1.4 tutorials can be run
in Nengo 2.0, several large models, like Spaun, include custom
extensions written in Java. We will incorporate useful extensions in Nengo’s API directly, and reimplement more speciﬁc
extensions to use Nengo’s API.
We are also developing two simulators that will take the same
NEF model description as the existing simulators, but will target
two pieces of neuromorphic hardware to achieve greater speed
and power efﬁciency than the OpenCL simulator.
Frontiers in Neuroinformatics
www.frontiersin.org
January 2014 | Volume 7 | Article 48 | 10
Bekolay et al.
Nengo in Python
Our long-term goal is to create a graphical interface to build
models and interactively inspect simulations. Nengo 1.4 includes
a graphical interface that includes an interactive simulation
inspector. We will use our experience building that interface to
construct an improved interface for Nengo 2.0.
Additionally, we hope that in the future some work in Nengo
will be done through outside contributions. Nengo 2.0 is a complete rewrite that has started with a deliberately minimal base and
a well-deﬁned API in order to make development easier than in
previous versions.
8. CONCLUSION
Nengo 2.0 is the next generation of Nengo. It has been rewritten from scratch, but can already simulate most models that have
been built using Nengo 1.4. It does this with 11% as many lines
of code as its predecessor, and interacts seamlessly with other
scientiﬁc Python tools. While the reference simulator is simple
and easy to understand, the OpenCL simulator is extremely fast;
it can simulate circular convolution models 50–200 times faster
than Nengo 1.4, which itself is faster than alternative simulators
on simpler models. This makes the creation and simulation of
models that are many times larger than Spaun tractable with current hardware. These models will further test the NEF as a theory
of neural computation; Nengo makes those models accessible to
anyone with a modern computer.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Trevor Bekolay led development of Nengo’s object model and
scripting interface, wrote the text of the paper, and prepared
all of the ﬁgures. James Bergstra led development of the Nengo
reference simulator and OpenCL simulator, edited text, created
an early version of Figure 2, and ran the benchmarks shown in
Figure 7C. Eric Hunsberger contributed signiﬁcantly to Nengo
and both of its simulators, and edited text. Travis DeWolf led
development of a Theano-backed version of Nengo that identi-
ﬁed issues with Theano, and provided the base for the version of
Nengo described in this paper. Terrence C. Stewart contributed to
Nengo, helped implement the PyNN scripts used in sections 5 and
6, and implemented the Nengo 1.4 scripting interface on which
the Nengo object model is based. Daniel Rasmussen contributed
to Nengo and the reference simulator, and edited text. Xuan
Choo contributed to Nengo and the reference simulator. Aaron
Russell Voelker ran the benchmarks shown in Figures 7A,B.
Chris Eliasmith oversaw all development, contributed to Nengo,
wrote the NEF appendix, and co-created the NEF with Charles
Discovery,
Fellowships,
Fellowship,
(N000141310419)
(FA8655-13-1-3084).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Bryan Tripp for editing this paper, contributing to
Nengo and the Nengo OpenCL simulator and for creating Nengo
1.4, which has been indispensable for the past 6 years, and will
continue to be used for many years to come. We thank Peter
Blouw and Brent Komer, who have contributed to Nengo by providing examples, unit tests, and bugﬁxes. Finally, we thank the two
reviewers who have provided constructive feedback on this paper.