LS-CAT: A Large-Scale CUDA AutoTuning Dataset
Lars Bjertnes, Jacob O. Tørring, Anne C. Elster
Department of Computer Science
Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU)
Trondheim, Norway
 , , 
Abstract—The effectiveness of Machine Learning (ML) methods depend on access to large suitable datasets. In this article,
we present how we build the LS-CAT (Large-Scale CUDA
AutoTuning) dataset sourced from GitHub for the purpose of
training NLP-based ML models. Our dataset includes 19 683
CUDA kernels focused on linear algebra. In addition to the
CUDA codes, our LS-CAT dataset contains 5 028 536 associated
runtimes, with different combinations of kernels, block sizes and
matrix sizes. The runtime are GPU benchmarks on both Nvidia
GTX 980 and Nvidia T4 systems. This information creates a
foundation upon which NLP-based models can ﬁnd correlations
between source-code features and optimal choice of thread block
There are several results that can be drawn out of our LS-CAT
database. E.g., our experimental results show that an optimal
choice in thread block size can gain an average of 6% for
the average case. We thus also analyze how much performance
increase can be achieved in general, ﬁnding that in 10% of the
cases more than 20% performance increase can be achieved by
using the optimal block. A description of current and future work
is also included.
Index Terms—CUDA codes, Autotuning, NLP, Machine Learning (ML), dataset, GitHub
I. INTRODUCTION
To get full system usage, software implementations have to
target each system. However, With the increase in hardware
variations, the interface between software and hardware is
becoming more complex. However, by parameterizing the
software, this interface could be conﬁgurable. By tuning the
parameters, the software could more efﬁciently interact with
the hardware, resulting in increased performance. The challenge is that there are a lot of different parameters, that each
usually have certain speciﬁc limits and legal values. Setting
good parameters for a program requires high competence,
while also being a time consuming process.
Autotuning attempts to solve this problem by computerizing
the parameter adjustments. The system adjusts each parameter
to some extent, then compiles, executes and measures the program. By comparing different results, the optimal combination
of parameters can be found.
There is usually a complex relation between a speciﬁc
parameter and the total change in performance. A naive search
through the parameter space is therefore typically not optimal.
Since searching through all possible legal combinations of
parameters is also a highly time consuming process, some
methods have been developed – to search through the
parameters more efﬁciently.
However, these methods are still reliant on compiling and
executing the program to do gradual adjustments, which still
takes a lot of time. A better alternative would be to have an
autotuner that can ﬁnd good parameters without compiling or
executing the program.
A dataset consisting of the results for each legal combination of hardware systems, and all other information that can
change the performance or the run-time, could be used to ﬁnd
the absolute optimal combination of parameters for any given
conﬁguration. Unfortunately creating such a dataset would, as
mentioned above, take incredibly long time, and the amount
of data required would make the dataset huge. However, one
could create a smaller dataset, that has a good enough coverage
of the parameter space. This dataset could be used to ﬁnd
good parameters without compiling and executing everything,
if there were a method to use this smaller dataset that is almost
as good as having the entire dataset. Machine Learning (ML)
is well suited in situations where there is enough data, and
there is an unclear relationship between the start and end
point. There are several machine learning models, but they all
conceptually create an internal mathematical model typically
consisting of activation’s, weights, and biases. The weights and
biases are adjusted depending on how the models output value
compares to the target value. The model ”learns” patterns this
way, and can be used in a wide range of applications.
ML-assisted autotuning implementations have mostly focused on only the parameters and hardware information, and
mostly using source code meta features . However, the
entirety of the source code plays a role in the software and
should be taken into consideration.
ML-based attempts at using the whole source code for
autotuning include ﬁnding the run time of parallel programs
 , device mapping , or multiple tasks – . These
attempts have usually focused on the programming languages
C, C++ and OpenCL. OpenCL is a programming language
that makes it possible to utilize the GPU for more general purpose programming. CUDA is designed speciﬁcally for Nvidia
GPUs. The upside is that CUDA has a higher performance
compared to OpenCL .
The earlier attempts at using source code to do MLbased autotuning on OpenCL, while getting good results, have
limited themselves to a low number of distinct source codes.
A lot of the data is sourced from libraries, which might not
be representative of most written code. In this paper, we will,
however, present how we generated a larger CUDA dataset
sourced from a collection of independent developers.
II. BACKGROUND
A. GPU and CUDA
GPUs have high core count that can process a lot of data
simultaneously. CUDA, which is C++ based targets Nvidia
GPUs. CUDA functions that run on the GPU are called
kernels, and are either marked as global if run from the
host system, or device if called from the global kernel. The
global kernels take blocks of threads issued over a grid. The
block parameter is a three dimensional representation of a
collection of threads. Each block should be divisible by 32,
which is known as the warp size. A warp executes all threads
simultaneously. A block can at most run 1024 threads at
the same time. The optimal number of threads per block is
not always 1024, as several smaller blocks would have more
unhindered register access, for instance.
B. Machine learning and NLP
Machine learning relies on two important concepts, the
forward and backward pass. The forward pass is done by
iterating over mathematical functions using an input parameter.
In supervised learning, the output is then compared with the
target value for the input. This comparison is done using a loss
function that tries to ﬁnd an accurate number for the difference
of all output and target values at that given training step. This
loss gives the model an adjustment target. A backward pass is
then done by adjusting its internal weights and biases.
By repeating the process of forward and backward passes,
the weights are adjusted to minimize the loss function. This, in
turn, achieves outputs with similar values to the target values.
As datatypes fed into a machine learning model have to
be represented numerically, source code can’t without any
processing be fed directly into the model.
Natural language processing (NLP), is focused on how to
best represent text as numerical vectors. By using NLP techniques, source code can be transformed into distinct vectors,
which can in turn be used for machine learning.
III. RELATED WORKS
A. end2end-dl/deeptune
Manually crafted heuristics are usually not ideal and can be
challenging to create. Deeptune by Cummins et al. therefore used an end-to-end ML-based model to create heuristics
automatically. The dataset itself consists of a handful of unique
OpenCL kernels, executed with different hardware systems
on the GPU or CPU, and with varying number of threads.
The source code is stored as raw code, but is pre-processed,
discarding unnecessary information. Each line of code is then
turned into a sequence of tokens, and turned into embeddings
by the model.
By using some of the methods from NLP, combined with
code dependencies, NCC tries to create an embedded
representation of code based on LLVM IR or an intermediate
representation of the code. Since it uses LLVM IR, the model
should work on languages that can be compiled with LLVM.
The embedder ”inst2vec” can therefore be trained on a larger
general purpose dataset, consisting of library sources. NCC
then train on a smaller dataset that has a speciﬁc task, and the
OpenCL dataset from DeepTune is reused for the same tasks.
CDFG uses graph-based ML-techniques, unlike Deep-
Tune and NCC, who focus on the sequenced part of source
code learning. CDFG focuses on device mapping and thread
coarsening using the same DeepTune and inst2vec datasets.
One signiﬁcant change made to the dataset is the addition of
an abstract syntax tree (AST). The AST is a graph representation of how the code parts depend on each other. CDFG also
labels all the connections so that they are not interchanged.
D. ProGraML
ProGraML further build upon using graph representations, by using three different graphs derived from source code.
The goals are device mapping and algorithm classiﬁcation, on
the same DeepTune dataset.
The three graphs used are control ﬂow, data ﬂow, and call
ﬂow. The control ﬂow graph represents the order the statements are executed in based on their sequence and branching.
The data ﬂow graph is a data dependency graph. The call ﬂow
graph connects the original instruction jumps and the destinations, or the connection between called functions and where
they were called from. This combined graph representation is
made by using IR that has been normalized using inst2vec.
ProGraML does not compare itself with CDFG, but with
both DeepTune and NCC. Here ProGraML achieved the best
results when compared with the others in device mapping, and
algorithm classiﬁcation.
E. Public source code datasets and GH Archive
To make our large structured source code dataset from
GitHub we use GH Archive, which is a public archive of
GitHub audit logs from the period of 2011 to now. Each log
includes the JSON-encoded events reported by the GitHub
API. The entire GH Archive is also available as a public
dataset on Google BigQuery, enabling SQL searches on the
IV. DATA GENERATION PIPELINE
A. Source code gathering
The GH Archive dataset consist of several ﬁelds, the
important ones in this case are the repository URL and
payload. The payload contains meta data, and for instance
the repository languages that have been used. To ﬁnd which
of the repositories that have a connection with CUDA or is
CUDA related an SQL query to match the word CUDA can
be used. In total there were 18534 unique repositories with
the keyword CUDA.
There are several different ways to get the source code from
GitHub. GitHub has multiple APIs that can be used by for
instance Python. It is also possible to script the GitHub cloning
function. The last way to retrieve the data is by downloading
a repository as a zip ﬁle, which can also be automated by
Python. Both methods were evaluated and timed, to ﬁnd the
faster one. Downloading as a zip using Python proved to be
around twice as fast as cloning.
The script that downloads the repositories creates a folder
structure that corresponds to the indices in the repository URL
ﬁle. Repositories from GitHub more often than not contains
unneeded ﬁle types, by ﬁltering out ﬁles based on ﬁle ending.
Each repository were left with just C, C++, CUDA ﬁles and
headers for the different languages.
The total amount of downloaded repositories were lower
than the amount of URLs, which is explained by either the
repositories being changed from public to private or that the
repositories have been removed. In total 16247 repositories
were downloaded successfully.
B. Combining and executing code
This section describes how we formatted and made the
CUDA source code runnable.
To get any type of performance results from a repository,
one might naively try to compile and execute the repository.
This, however, is not a simple process at all – especially if this
process needs to be automated. The ﬁrst part of compiling the
repository is very dependent on a good Makeﬁle or something
similar, and even then any reliance on an external library
would halt the automation signiﬁcantly.
Out of a hundred random repositories, only three managed
to compile ”out of the box”. Even if all the repositories compiled ﬂawlessly, an even bigger problem arises. How would
one measure the performance, and the impact of modiﬁcations,
on a random program? One might measure the entire program
execution, or each CUDA kernel, but this would require to
know speciﬁc program characteristics especially if the program
had any kind of user interference.
The solution to both of these issues were to ﬁnd, isolate,
and build each CUDA global function. Then each CUDA
kernel could be run on its own, and measured accurately, with
different modiﬁcations. The scripting for this process was done
in Python, due to its ease of interacting with folders, ﬁles, and
text. This is a multi-step process which can be summarized as
• Identify all global and device functions in repository.
• For each global function, ﬁnd all relevant includes and
device functions.
• Store global function as new ﬁle in new sub-folder.
• For each include any iterative dependency is found and
added to the sub-folder.
• Find, format and store all global input parameters as list
of tuples with names and types.
• Lastly, a generator uses the parameter information and
naming to create a main ﬁle that can initialize all the
needed variables.
• This main ﬁle can then issue a call to the global function.
C. Sampling and restructuring
Even though the kernels are built, they still need to run, and
additional work is needed to identify working kernels. With
extra measures taken to ﬁx broken kernels. To ﬁnd out if a
kernel has been properly isolated and can also be executed,
a script is responsible for restructuring and compiling all
the isolated kernels. With Python sub-processes, Python can
execute any Linux command, including using the NVCC
compiler and executing the kernels.
This process of repeatedly ﬁxing and compiling in Fig. 1
increased the amount of working kernels in the trial phase
from around 22% to 29%.
Fig. 1: Restructuring and sampling
After the time consuming process of compiling and ﬁxing
the potential kernels was done, 20 251 isolated kernels were
compiling and could be executed as is. Additionally since all
the errors were stored, potential improvements in the process
of isolating the kernels could be identiﬁed by looking through
the error messages.
To get the results a new script was made which purpose was
to modify the variables belonging to the kernel, compiling and
executing, reading the outputted results and storing them.
D. Benchmarking
Our experiments showed signiﬁcant variations in run time
for the same program. These were likely caused by external
uncontrollable hardware and system processes. Bad results
could make a machine learning model learn the wrong features. To mitigate some of these discrepancies, the ofﬁcial
NVIDIA benchmark guide was followed .
This guide is divided into two parts, locking hardware GPU
and CPU clock speeds, and preheating the GPU. To preheat
the GPU the program has to be executed once before any
measurement is done on the actual program execution. This
preheating ensures that the GPU spends minimal time going
from an idle to active state, as this transition would impact
run time. Similarly locking the hardware clock speed ensures
that each program execution is stable without any boosting.
Both of these changes decreases performance, but increases
the accuracy of run time readings. On top of this the kernel
itself is executed 1000 times, to minimize the variation of
single run times.
The NVIDIA guide improved the accuracy slightly, but there
would still be some run time outliers large enough to impact
the coherency of the result data. One way of tackling this is
running the program several times, and aggregating the result
again, in a way that makes the outputted result the most stable.
Five different simple methods were tested out, by creating
a dataset of 100 000 run times, then randomly selecting ten
and aggregating, by repeating this process the variations after
aggregation can be measured. Out of the different aggregation
methods tested the median performed the best with a variation
of around one percent.
V. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
We did initial tests of our dataset using a desktop Nvidia
GeForce GTX 980 card based on Nvidia´s Maxwell architecture with 2048 CUDA Cores and 4GB of memory. We also
used a newer system with 20 Nvidia T4s based on Nvidia´s
Turing architecture with 2560 cores and 16GB memory each.
A. Choice of parameters
Of all the different parameters that could be tested the
most reasonable ones to test, were matrix sizes and thread
block sizes. This makes it also possible to compare with past
OpenCL projects – .
To ﬁnd parameter values that would be both reasonable to
pick, and not too exhaustive as this would drastically increase
the run-time, both the CUDA guidelines and similar projects
were taken into consideration.
The ofﬁcial CUDA guidelines, suggests using thread block
sizes divisible by 32 and as large as possible. The largest
block is 1024, and all blocks should be 32 divisible, leaving
32 different block sizes to be tested out, which is quite high.
Lim et al. used the blocks in range of 0-1024 which
were divisible by 64, this should be enough to achieve
good results while also halving the amount of search space
required. Additionally the 2D blocks of sizes (8,8) (16,16),
(24,24) and (32,32) were also tested. To ﬁnd a varying set of
matrix dimensions some inspiration was taken from the Intel
guide ”measure the performance of matrix multiplications by
dimensions” . In the end there were seven matrix sizes
and twenty thread block sizes for a total of 140 combinations.
B. Kernel executor
The last step is the execution of all the runnable kernels,
with all the conﬁgurations needed. As the kernels were ﬁltered
into the ones that could execute and those that could not, the
next step was modifying and setting variables, so that results
could be extracted for every parameter combination.
The variable values were set mainly by their name, as the
name-space proved to be a signiﬁcant indicator for what kind
of values they were supposed to take, w for width for instance
or n for total size. The variables are split into either being
set to the width, height, size, or 1 as some variables such
as stride should remain static and within a reasonable range.
Most, around 90% of the variables, were covered by either
width, height, or size or any other common name-space used
in scientiﬁc applications, like k, the rest were also just set to
The script decides ﬁrst what type of template to use, and
compiles the kernel using that template. After compilation
the output executable can be executed with the Python subprocess, and each result is stored in a Pandas dataframe with
the parameter combination, path, function name and result.
An important note is that when using the Python sub-process
module the Linux timeout functionality should be used. The
original reason it was implemented was to timeout kernel
executions that were ”hanging” and taking signiﬁcantly longer
time than other kernels. This does in effect ﬁlters out some of
the kernels that might take too long to execute, and a potential
ratio of how many kernel runs can be achieved vs the total
time cost. For two seconds of timeout around one third of
the kernels had enough time to execute, and at 120 seconds
timeout only 1 in 500 did not execute, as a lower reasonable
value, 30 seconds of timeout was used for the ﬁnal multi GPU
run. While two seconds as a test, were used on the GTX 980
system. A full execution on the GTX 980 took approximately
The cudaOccupancyMaxPotentialBlockSize is Nvidias own
solution to ﬁnd the optimal thread block size for a kernel,
and was tested to see if it did indeed ﬁnd the best size. These
results could also be used in comparison with the ﬁnal product,
to do a comparative evaluation of a potential machine learnt
model and this API. The cudaOccupancyMaxPotentialBlock-
Size API took signiﬁcant less amount of time to execute,
but was stopped halfway as the results indicated no result
difference across matrix size.
The next step was executing this script with the same source
data on our Nvidia Tesla T4 system. The T4 system has 20
GPUs. By using cudaSetDevice, the additional GPUs could
run the script in parallel.
VI. RESULTS
A. GTX 980 System
After the ﬁrst full execution on the GTX 980 system we
generated a dataset with 2140796 rows, and 97% non NaN
We can see from Fig. 2 the downward trend in execution
time caused by increase in thread block size, which both
substantiate the claims by Nvidia regarding picking larger
thread block sizes being the way to go, and that the results
that were achieved were realistic.
Now if the average was the best indicator and the variance
between kernels thread block performance was low, then just
picking a large thread block would always be the optimal
choice. However if the graph of just one kernel is shown Fig. 3,
this no longer seems to be the case.
Fig. 2: GTX 980 average performance of thread block sizes
on matrix sizes
Fig. 3: GTX 980 performance of thread block sizes on matrix
sizes on the kernel euclidean kernel
In this case the best performing thread block was not the
largest one, and this was also true for 83% of the kernels. The
largest block did perform on average of 98.7% of the best
block, but in around 1% of the kernels this ranges from 40
to 85%, which would signify a large performance increase, if
the better block size was used instead.
B. T4 System
There was some small changes made to the matrix sizes, and
an increase in timeout factor which did increase the amount
Fig. 4: T4 Average performance of thread block sizes on
matrix sizes
Fig. 5: T4 performance of thread block sizes on matrix sizes
on the kernel euclidean kernel
of kernels with a run-time to 19683.
For the average kernel thread performance for each matrix
size, there was quite a difference compared to GTX 980 Fig. 4.
No longer is the average 1024 the best in all the average
cases, which might either be due to increase in the amount of
kernels which were recorded, or the change in hardware.
Results from the same single kernel as in GTX 980, Fig. 5.
It becomes quite evident that 1024 is not the perfect size
in all cases, and a closer look shows that the 1024 block size
has a 86% performance compared to the best block. In 12%
of the cases a 1024 block would perform less than 85% in
comparison with the optimal block.
VII. DISCUSSION
Compared to the other related works which are based upon
Cummins et al. original dataset, our LS-CAT dataset is
signiﬁcantly larger. We present over 19 683 kernels compared
to the Cummins et al. dataset of 256 kernels . The amount
of variance in our dataset’s programming style should also be
impactful.
The range of different ”topics” covered by the sheer difference in kernel amount would also be of help to more
realistically evaluate the efﬁciency of machine learning on
code, as unsupervised topic modeling could be used to see
if some kernel topics are easier to evaluate than others.
To actually check the quality of the LS-CAT dataset for
machine learning purposes, the dataset has to be used with a
thread coarsening task in future works. If the machine learnt
model performs well, the dataset is of sufﬁcient quality. If
the model performs poorly then either the dataset, or the
methodology of using kernel code to ﬁnd thread blocks is
insufﬁcient.
If the LS-CAT dataset is proven to be insufﬁcient, for
whatever reason, there is enough modularity in the data
processing pipeline and enough error information, from stored
logs, to reconﬁgure the process to either increase data volume
or quality. The public LS-CAT dataset will be updated in this
Another key ﬁnding was that 1024 proved to be a reasonable
thread size for most cases, it might therefore be easier to
identify the kernels for which this is not the case, than to
ﬁnd the best block for each kernel.
VIII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In machine learning (ML), access to large enough datasets
are very important for how well the resulting models perform.
Previous work on using ML for autotuning CUDA codes, have
had mixed results due to the lack of access to suitable code
databases.
In this paper, we described how we generated a largescale real-world dataset of CUDA kernels (LS-CAT1) for the
purpose of training NLP-based ML-models for autotuning. The
kernels were constructed by using source codes from GitHub
via the GH Archive project .
We successfully downloaded 16 247 projects, out of the
18 534 projects that GH Archive showed as available, after
pruning old and non-existent ones. Out of these, 20 251
runnable kernels were generated and compiled, and out of
them again, 19 683 have results that we could use as a database
of runable CUDA codes.
In addition to the CUDA codes, our LS-CAT dataset contains 5 028 536 associated runtimes (including both GTX 980
and T4 results), with different combinations of kernels, block
sizes and matrix sizes.
1Available through 
Our experimental results coincided with what NVIDIA
themselves have found, that increase in thread block size is
usually enough, however, this is only true for the average case.
The results also indicate that always picking the optimal
block over the largest, would net a 6% performance increase
on average, and in 10% of the cases more than 20% performance increase can be achieved by using the optimal block.
Both of these ﬁndings are promising.
The cudaOccupancyMaxPotentialBlockSize API was also
tested to some extent, but proved insensitive to matrix sizes
which does play a role in choice of blocks.
Current and future work includes testing our LS-CAT
dataset using NLP-ML models.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the Department of Computer Science and its HPC-Lab at NTNU for their support
which enabled this project. The authors and the SFI Center
for Geophysical Forecasting also plan to build on our LS-CAT