BioMed Central
 
(page number not for citation purposes)
BMC Neuroscience
Open Access
BMC Neuroscience
Research article
Assessing the molecular genetics of attention networks
John Fossella*1, Tobias Sommer1, Jin Fan1, Yanhong Wu2,
James M Swanson1, Donald W Pfaff3 and Michael I Posner1
Address: 1Sackler Institute of Developmental Psychobiology, Department of Psychiatry, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, 1300 York
Avenue, New York, New York, 10021, USA, 2Department of Psychology, Peking University, China and 3Laboratory of Neurobiology and Behavior,
Rockefeller University, 1230 York Avenue, New York, New York, 10021, USA
E-mail: John Fossella* - ; Tobias Sommer - ; Jin Fan - ;
Yanhong Wu - ; James M Swanson - ; Donald W Pfaff - ;
Michael I Posner - 
*Corresponding author
Background: Current efforts to study the genetic underpinnings of higher brain functions have
been lacking appropriate phenotypes to describe cognition. One of the problems is that many
cognitive concepts for which there is a single word (e.g. attention) have been shown to be related
to several anatomical networks. Recently, we have developed an Attention Network Test (ANT)
that provides a separate measure for each of three anatomically defined attention networks.
Results: In this study we have measured the efficiency of neural networks related to aspects of
attention using the ANT in a population of 200 adult subjects. We then examined genetic
polymorphisms in four candidate genes (DRD4, DAT, COMT and MAOA) that have been shown
to contribute to the risk of developing various psychiatric disorders where attention is disrupted.
We find modest associations of several polymorphisms with the efficiency of executive attention
but not with overall performance measures such as reaction time.
Conclusions: These results suggest that genetic variation may underlie inter-subject variation in
the efficiency of executive attention. This study also shows that genetic influences on executive
attention may be specific to certain anatomical networks rather than affecting performance in a
global or non-specific manner. Lastly, this study further validates the ANT as an endophenotypic
assay suitable for assessing how genes influence certain anatomical networks that may be disrupted
in various psychiatric disorders.
Background
An inability to select and maintain mental focus is commonly observed in many heritable psychiatric disorders.
For example, patients with schizophrenia exhibit difficulties in sensorimotor gating , smooth pursuit eye-tracking , set-shifting and working memory tasks .
Children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD) exhibit abnormal performance in sustained attention tasks while studies on autism reveal slowed
covert orienting of visual spatial attention and patients
with Alzheimer's disease show covert orienting deficits
 . Interestingly, all of these disorders show familial patterns of inheritance and increased concordance in
monozygotic (MZ) vs. dizygotic (DZ) twins . Recent
Published: 4 October 2002
BMC Neuroscience 2002, 3:14
Received: 13 August 2002
Accepted: 4 October 2002
This article is available from: 
© 2002 Fossella et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This article is published in Open Access: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted
in all media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.
BMC Neuroscience 2002, 3
 
 
(page number not for citation purposes)
family studies have also shown that some unaffected first
degree relatives of schizophrenic patients show impaired
performance in assays of auditory attention and working
memory . This suggests that deficits in attentional performance may contribute to the genetic susceptibility or
liability of complex psychiatric disorders.
Consistent with this notion, attentional performance in
normal subjects appears to be influenced by genetic factors.
Studies using the Continuous Performance Task (CPT)
have shown that the d' signal detection component (a
measure of how readily a signal can be detected above
background noise) of CPT performance has a heritability
among normal subjects of 0.49 . The Span of Apprehension task (SPAN), a visual search task, has been shown
to have an heritability among normal subjects of 0.65 
and the P/N ratio of the Spontaneous Selective Attention
Task (SSAT) was shown to have an heritability among normal subjects of 0.41 . Twin studies using normal control twins show that spatial working memory, divided
attention, choice reaction time and selective attention
 and attentional set-shifting are underlain by inherited factors. Studies on infants suggest that effortful
control and duration of orienting are heritable as well
 . Lastly, molecular gene association studies on normal
populations have shown that orienting of visual attention
is associated with variation in the APOE gene and
that maternal ratings of attention in children are associated with the DRD4 gene . The use of these endophenotypic measures are potentially advantageous for genetics
studies since they may show increased sensitivity to specific dimensions related to complex psychiatric disorders.
Attention Network Task (ANT) as a suitable endophenotype for genetic studies
While each of the attentional measures described above is
well suited for genetic studies, we have chosen an alternate assay for genetic studies of attention. Our approach
is based functional neuroimaging studies which have
yielded evidence on neural areas involved in aspects of attention . Imaging data have supported the presence of three networks related to different aspect of
attention. These networks carry out the functions of alerting, orienting and executive control . Alerting is
defined as achieving and maintaining a state of high sensitivity to incoming stimuli; orienting is the selection of
information from sensory input; and executive control is
defined as involving the mechanisms for resolving conflict among thoughts, feelings and responses. Functional
imaging studies have shown that maintaining an alert
state involves activation of right frontal and parietal lobes
while orienting to visual stimuli activates areas of the pulvinar, superior colliculus and posterior parietal lobe. Executive function tasks activate frontal areas such as the
anterior cingulate cortex and lateral prefrontal cortex, an
area for which certain anatomical aspects have been
shown to be highly heritable . Recently, we described
the Attention Network Test (ANT) that measures the efficiency of these three major neural networks . The ANT
is advantageous for genetic studies, insofar as it distinguishes between separate functions of attention (alerting,
orienting and executive) that are correlated with the activation of these specific neuroanatomical circuits. The heritability of the ANT has been examined in a preliminary
twin study using normal adult twins . The efficiency of
the executive network was found to be highly heritable
(hF2 = 0.89) while lower heritabilities were observed for
alerting and median reaction time (hF2 = 0.18 and 0.16 respectively). The heritabilities of these measures suggest
that candidate gene association studies are reasonable to
pursue. It remains an open question however, whether
such candidate genes will relate to overall attentional performance and reaction time, or whether the candidate
genes will show specific associations with specific neural
As an initial assessment of this approach, we chose four
candidate genes (DRD4, DAT1, COMT and MAOA) that
are among the most widely studied and repeatedly associated with various psychiatric disorders where attention is
found to be disrupted. The longstanding interest in these
candidate genes stems mainly from pharmacological evidence implicating dopamine and norepinephrine in attentional processes as well as biochemical studies that
have related alleleic variants to differences in protein activity and expression levels. Studies showing the expression of dopamine receptors in the anterior cingulate
cortex and that activation of mesocortical dopaminergic neurons via apomorphine enhances activity in the
prefrontal cortex suggest that dopaminergic modulation influences the efficiency of the executive attention
network. Similarly, pharmacological studies with alert
monkeys have related the alerting network to the brain's
norepinepherine system whose cell bodies are located in
the locus coeruleus. Drugs like clonidine and guanfacine
act to block norepinepherine, and reduce or eliminate the
normal effect of warning signals on reaction time, but
have no influence on orienting to the target location .
Dopamine D4 receptor (DRD4)
The dopamine D4 receptor is located on chromosome
11p15 . Many association studies have evaluated a 48
base-pair variable nucleotide tandem repeat (VNTR) polymorphism in exon III. The most common isoform of the
DRD4 contains 4-repeats, while two less common isoforms contain 2-repeats and 7-repeats. Pharmacological
studies show that the 7-repeat isoform is less responsive to
dopamine stimulation . Recently, a formal meta analysis was conducted on the growing body of literature
of this DRD4 polymorphism and its association with AD-
BMC Neuroscience 2002, 3
 
 
(page number not for citation purposes)
HD. Based on 7 case control studies (4 positive) and 14
family-based studies (9 positive), the meta analysis concluded that a "...statistically significant association between ADHD and the 7-repeat allele of DRD4" existed,
with a relative risk of 1.9 for 7 case-control studies and 1.4
for 14 family-based studies. In addition to the exon III
polymorphism, Barr and colleagues examined the
distributions of a 120-bp repeat 1.2 kilobases upstream to
the transcription start site and a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) defined by a C to T substitution at position -521 in ADHD populations. The T-521 allele results
in 40% less DRD4 transcription . Studies looking at
polymorphisms in DRD4 and infant attention as well
as disorders such as obsessive compulsive disorder ,
Tourette syndrome and schizophrenia as well as
underlying dimensions of novelty seeking , attachment and temperament have also shown associations. In this study, we examine each of these
polymorphisms.
Dopamine transporter (DAT1)
The dopamine transporter (DAT1 or SLC6A3) gene is located on chromosome 5p15.3 . Methylphenidate, the
primary stimulant used in pharmacological treatment of
ADHD, was shown by PET imaging to block the
dopamine transporter . ADHD patients have also
been found to show higher levels of DAT1 in the striatum
 . The most well studied polymorphism is a VNTR in
the 3' untranslated region of the DAT gene . Since this
VNTR is not in the coding region of the DAT gene, it does
not affect the protein sequence of the dopamine transporter, but may affect the translational efficiency and thus
the amount of protein expressed. Subjects homozygous
for the 10-repeat allele showed significantly lower
dopamine transporter binding than carriers of the 9-repeat allele . Cook summarized the results of an
additional 11 family-based studies in a meta analysis and
concluded that the association between the DAT gene and
ADHD was highly significant (p < .0001). Associations
with other disorders including, bipolar disorder , alcoholism and temperamental dimensions have
been found.
Catecholamine-O-methyl transferase (COMT)
The catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) gene is located on chromosome 22q11 and catalyzes the degradation of catecholamines in conjuction with monoamine
oxidase. In the prefrontal cortex, the breakdown of synaptic dopamine through the COMT pathway is more critical
since PFC is characterized by greater extracellular diffusion & slower clearance of dopamine than elsewhere in
the brain . The most widely examined polymorphisms in COMT were identified by Lachman who
found a G-to-A change at codons 108 and 158 of the
COMT gene, resulting in Valine-to-Methionine substitutions which account for 3- to 4-fold differences in COMT
activity in red blood cells and liver. A recent finding
showed that COMT genotype was related to performance
on the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test of executive cognition
 . In addition, those subjects with the Methionine alleles needed less prefrontal cortical activity, as judged by
fMRI, to show the same level of performance on the Nback task. The Valine allele was shown to be preferentially
transmitted to ADHD probands and was associated with
impulsive false alarm errors on a continuous performance
task . Several studies on obsessive compulsive disorder have found associations with COMT . Associations with bipolar disorder and temperamental
dimensions have also been reported.
Monoamine oxidase (MAOA)
The MAOA and MAOB genes are located on the X chromosome (Xp11) and code for enzymes that catalyze
the deamination of biogenic amines including the neurotransmitters norephinephrine, dopamine and serotonin.
MAOA shows expression primarily in neurons and preferentially catalyzes the deamination of serotonin and noradrenaline. Because of its metabolic role, drugs which
interfere with MAOA such as clorgyline have been used to
treat ADHD . The most notable of MAOA polymorphism was a nonsense mutation that led to a complete
loss of MAOA function in males showing extreme forms
of impulsive behavior and aggression . More recently,
the association with aggression was replicated in a study
showing that maltreated children with certain alleles of
MAOA were more likely to show aggressive behaviors
 . MAOA male knockout mice also show high levels of
aggression . Less severe genetic variants are known to
exist in MAOA which have been studied as candidates to
explain various dimensions of psychiatric illness. The
MAOA gene-linked polymorphic region (MAOA-LPR) is a
30 bp repetitive sequence that resides 1.2 kb upstream of
the start codon. The 3 and 4-repeat copy alleles are the
most common and the 2-, 3.5- and 5-repeat copy alleles
are rare. Transfection experiments show that the 3-repeat
allele results in a 5-fold lower transcriptional induction
than the 4-repeat allele . The second polymorphism
we examined is a silent C to T change at position 1460 in
exon 14. MAOA associations with ADHD , bipolar
disorder panic disorder and alcoholism
 have been reported.
Population distributions of RT, alerting and executive
Table 1I summarizes attention network scores and overall
reaction time (RT) for the subject population. The distributions (not shown) for each endophenotype are roughly
bell shaped, symmetrical and show that approximately 70
% of the variation lies within 1 standard deviation. This
BMC Neuroscience 2002, 3
 
 
(page number not for citation purposes)
suggests that standard parametric statistical tests are appropriate for subsequent analysis. An examination of pairwise correlation coefficients for each network shows no
significant correlation between alerting and orienting or
executive attention and orienting, suggesting that these attention networks are largely independent. Both alerting
and executive attention scores showed correlations with
mean reaction time (P < 0.05 and 0.01 respectively) as
well as a negative correlation with each other (r = -0.18, P
< 0.01). This negative correlation appears to arise because
with no warning the subjects are generally slower to respond and some conflict resolution may occur during the
longer overall RT. To reduce the potential confounding effect of overall RT, raw attention network scores were divided by overall RT and resulting ratio scores were used in the
genetic analysis.
Since the ANT relies on RT measurements, it is important
to consider how non-genetic factors such as age and intrinsic factors such as speed accuracy trade-offs might potentially contribute to overall variation before proceeding
to draw genetic inferences. Previous studies have demonstrated the overall slowing of reaction times in aged subjects . The mean population age here 28  10 years is
well below an aged range and no correlation was observed
between age and reaction time (data not shown). Speed
accuracy trade-offs constitute another potential confound.
If a subject responds too quickly, more errors are likely to
be committed. On the other hand, the same subject may
intentionally slow down to reduce errors and overall reaction times will be higher. Traditionally, this phenomena is
addressed by the use of d' as a dependent variable. In the
study here, accuracy rates were high for all conditions
(0.96–1.0) permitting the use of RT's and corresponding
ratio scores. Lastly, it is also possible that gender differences exist in overall RT. The population was composed of
males (40 %) and females (60%) and no significant sex
differences (as judged by t-test) were seen for overall reaction time, alerting and executive attention.
Genotypic analysis of the DRD4 gene showed that the
exon III 48-bp repeat allele was present at frequencies of
0.10 (2-repeat), 0.72 (4-repeat) and 0.14 (7-repeat). Other rare variants were also present but not included in the
analysis. The 120-bp repeat alleles were present at frequencies of 0.73 (long) and 0.27 (short) and the C/T SNP
at -521 was present at frequencies of 0.43 and 0.57, respectively. Chi-square analyses of observed and expected
frequencies of each genotypic class showed no linkage disequilibrium between the exon III 7-repeat and the -521
site or the 120 bp repeat polymorphism. The lack of disequilibrium between these sites and the 7-repeat has been
observed previously . The distribution of alerting
score, executive attention score and overall reaction time
as a function of each genotypic class were examined by
ANOVA, linear regression and non-linear regression analysis. Each polymorphism was considered independently
under a model where alleles were treated as additive (AA
vs. AB vs. BB) and also as dominant (AA vs. (AB + BB)).
The 120-bp repeat showed no significant association with
any attention network score or overall reaction time. The
C/T SNP at -521 showed an additive influence on executive attention as shown in Figure 1B where the mean executive attention scores of the C/C and T/T genotypic classes
showed a nominally significant difference (P = 0.06). The
exon III VNTR was also examined in this manner. In this
case, each genotypic class of repeats (2/2, 2/4, 4/4, 4/7, 7/
7) were treated independently. No significant associations
between genotypic classes and attention network scores
nor overall reaction time were observed. Each genotypic
class was also grouped into various larger classes (2present vs. 2-absent etc.). The results for one such grouping are shown in Figure 1A. A t-test for equality of means
(equal variances not assumed) shows that those subjects
carrying a 4-repeat show significantly (P = 0.004) higher
executive attention scores than the 2,2 and 7,7 classes
combined. Univariate linear regression of genotypes
shows that DRD4 exon III genotypic variation contributes
3.9% (R-squared value) to the overall variation in executive attention score.
The Methionine alleles were present at a frequency of
0.39. No statistical trends or effects for overall reaction
time or alerting were found. As shown in Figure 2A, a
modest statistical trend toward additively higher executive
attention scores was seen, and a post-hoc analysis shows
that the 2 homozygous classes (Val/Val and Met/Met)
show only slightly different executive attention scores (P
Table 1: Summary ANT values for large mixed population of normal subjects Summary means and standard deviations of attention
network scores (ms) and overall reaction time.
Reaction Time
BMC Neuroscience 2002, 3
 
 
(page number not for citation purposes)
< 0.1). Prior reports of sex differences in COMT expression
in humans as well as effects of gender on behavior in
COMT loss-of-function mouse models and reports of
preferential transmission of the low activity Methionine
alleles in females with OCD suggested that gender
could interact with ANT performance. When males and females were analyzed as independent populations, no significant associations were seen for overall reaction time or
any of the network scores for either males or females. Females homozygous for the low activity Methionine allele
did however, show the highest executive attention scores
among all (Sex  Genotypic) classes.
The 10-repeat allele was present at a frequency of 0.75 and
the 9-repeat allele at 0.23. As shown in Figure 2B, subjects
homozygous for the rare 9-repeat allele showed modestly
lower score than the pooled scores for the more common
10-repeat homozygotes and 9/10 heterozygotes. No
trends were seen for accuracy, mean RT and/or the efficiency of alerting.
Genotypes obtained at the promoter repeat (LPR) polymorphism showed frequencies of 0.42 (3-repeat) and
0.53 (4-repeat) and genoptypes at the C1460T polymorphism showed frequencies of 0.55 (C allele) and 0.45 (T
allele). Since MAOA is located on the X-chromosome,
males are genetically hemizygous and females are functionally hemizygous due to random X-inactivation. For
this reason, heterozygous females were excluded from the
analysis. This permitted a comparison of hemizygous
male and homozygous female 3-repeat vs. 4-repeat classes
only. No significant main effect or trend was observed for
either MAOA polymorphism and overall reaction time. As
shown in Figure 3A, the MAO-LPR showed a significant
influence on alerting (P < 0.01) and on executive attention (P < 0.05) as seen in Figure 3B. The C1460T polymorphism showed no significant association with alerting,
but shows a modest association with executive attention
(P < 0.05). When the executive attention scores for subjects carrying the C1460T (T), LPR (3-repeat) haplotype
were compared with executive attention scores for subjects carrying the C1460T (C), LPR (4-repeat) haplotype,
modestly significant differences (P = 0.03) were observed.
This haplotype accounted for approximately 2% of the total variation.
Comparison of 'high' vs. 'low' dopamine alleles
Previous biochemical studies on MAO and COMT have
shown that the COMT Valine isoforms have 4-fold higher
levels of enzymatic activity than the Methionine isoform.
Biochemical studies on the MAO-LPR promoter repeat
have shown that the 4-repeat allele has 5-fold higher levels of expression than the 3-repeat allele. This biochemical
evidence permits a noninvasive inference of relative
dopamine levels among subjects. In order to assess the
role of dopamine on executive attention network efficiency, it would be useful to compare the distributions of executive attention scores for these 2 polymorphisms and
ask whether those individuals who are expected to have
higher levels of dopamine (COMT Methionine and
MAOA 3-repeat) show differences in executive attention
when compared to those individuals with lower levels of
dopamine. Figure 4 shows the distributions for 30 subjects who carry the (Val/Val and 4/4) genotype and 20
DRD4 and executive attention The Y-axis shows normalized executive attention scores (mean  SE). The X-axis
shows distributions for each genotypic class. Panel A shows
the distribution of executive attention score as a function of
exon III VNTR genotype in the 4-repeat absent vs. 4-repeat
present groups. Panel B shows distribution of executive
attention score as a function of a single nucleotide genotype
(CC, CT and TT) at position -521.
COMT and DAT1 and executive attention Distributions of COMT and DAT1 genotypes vs. executive attention
score. The Y-axis shows normalized executive attention
scores (mean + SE). The X-axis shows the distribution for
each genotypic class. Panel A shows the executive attention
scores for each genotypic class at the COMT Valine 108/158
Methionine polymorphism. Panel B shows the relationship
between normalized executive attention scores and genotypes at the DAT1 3' UTR repeat polymorphism.
10-present
BMC Neuroscience 2002, 3
 
 
(page number not for citation purposes)
subjects who carry the (Met/Met and 3/3) genotypes at
COMT and MAOA respectively. A post-hoc analysis
showed that the difference in efficiency between these
subjects is highly significant (P = 0.0002) and that this
particular combination of alleles contributes 3.9% to the
overall variation. No significant differences were found
between either the extreme 'high' or 'low' genotypic classes and each of the numerous heterozygous and compound heterozygous genotypic classes whose mean
efficiency values fell within the extremes (data not
Discussion
The goal of this study was to evaluate the utility of the
ANT by examining whether candidate genes frequently associated psychopathology would be related to specific attentional networks as measured by the ANT. If significant
associations were found, then it would be reasonable to
use the ANT for exploratory genetic studies aimed at the
identification of polymorphisms that contribute to the
risk of various psychiatric disorders. Genetic modelling
studies suggest that when many genes underlie a complex
trait or disorder, great difficulty is expected in detecting
significant associations of single candidate genes . In
an effort to overcome this difficulty, we employed an endophenotypic measure that is (i) highly heritable (ii)
highly sensitive to several core dimensions of various psychiatric disorders, and (iii) dependent on specific anatomical brain areas. As a first step in evaluating the suitability
of the ANT, we chose several candidate genes that (i) have
been repeatedly associated with disorders where attention
is disrupted (ii) pharmacologically related to each attention network, and (iii) have been biochemically characterized so that each allelic class is associated with a difference
in biochemical activity or expression level.
Variation in the DRD4 gene at the exon III VNTR and the
SNP at -521 showed a modest influence on executive attentional efficiency, but no such association with reaction
time or alerting. The finding that the 4-repeat absent
group showed lower executive attention scores is consistent with previous findings on ADHD populations. Swanson and colleagues showed that ADHD subjects with
the 7-repeat allele did not show cognitive deficits on cueddetection, color-word and go-change neuropsychological
tasks designed to measure various attentional functions.
Although the 7-repeat allele has often been associated
with ADHD, it may not contribute to a loss of attentional
efficiency, but perhaps to other dimensions that underlie
the development of ADHD. Moreover, recent studies on
the phylogenetic history of the DRD4 exon III VNTR show
that the 4-repeat is phylogenetically ancient while the 7and 2-repeat alleles appeared recently in human populations suggesting that the differences in executive attention between the 4-present vs. 4-absent groups may
relate in some way to the geographic dispersal of these alleles.
MAOA and alerting and executive attention Distributions of MAOA-LPR genotypes vs. alerting (Panel A) and
executive attention (Panel B) scores. The Y-axis shows normalized alerting or executive attention scores (mean + SE).
The X-axis shows the distribution for each genotypic class at
the repeat polymorphism in the promoter of MAOA. Genotypic classes are a combination of males and females however
only homozygous females were chosen, given the random
nature of X-chromosome inactivation.
Effect of 'high' vs. 'low' dopamine alleles on executive
attention Comparison of normalized executive attention
scores in genotypic classes expected to show high and low
levels of dopamine. The Y-axis shows normalized executive
attention scores (mean + SE). From the entire population, 30
subjects carried the COMT (Val, Val) and MAOA-LPR (4repeat, 4-repeat) genotypes and are expected to have relatively lower dopamine levels than 20 subjects who carried
the COMT (Met, Met) and MAOA-LPR (3-repeat, 3-repeat)
genotypes. These distributions are referred to as 'low'
dopamine and 'high' dopamine and are shown above.
Val, Val : 4, 4
Met, Met : 3, 3
BMC Neuroscience 2002, 3
 
 
(page number not for citation purposes)
Non significant trends were observed for DAT or COMT in
measures of executive attention, while no trends or significant associations were observed for the other attentional
network scores, mean RT and/or accuracy. The lack of any
association is surprising given previous reports of associations with ADHD and other disorders. In particular, the
results of Egan et al., show an influence of COMT on
the efficiency of prefrontal cortical activation during an
executive function task. Since functional imaging studies
show that dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) is activated during the flanker task, and since anatomical studies
 show that the structure of DLPFC is highly heritable,
we might have expected to see a stronger association with
COMT. The linear trend shown in Figure 2A does suggest
that there may be some weak effect of COMT on executive
attention as measured by the ANT although it is below detection in this population of normal subjects.
Polymorphisms in MAOA were found to be associated
with executive attention. This was expected mainly due to
the important role of MAOA in catecholamine metabolism. The additional finding of an association with alerting efficiency is consistent with the role of MAOA in the
clearance of noradrenaline as well as dopamine. This role
of MAOA in alerting may be related to the findings of Lim
et al., showing a significant association of the MAOA
locus to susceptibility for bipolar disorder. Studies on depression and mood have shown deficits in simple reaction
time tasks in patients that report sadness or depression
 . These RT deficits are specific to left visual field (right
hemisphere) and are consistent with the right frontal and
parietal networks involved in alerting. Changes in the efficiency of the alerting network as a consequence of mood
and depression are further supported by the findings of Liotti and Tucker where subjects induced into sadness
showed no improvement in RT when given alerting cues
before target stimuli were presented.
Given that the polymorphisms examined in this study
have been characterized biochemically or in other functional assays, it is worth examining in which direction (ie.
more vs. less efficiency) each allele contributes. Such information might be useful for evaluating responses to
treatment in disorders where medications are administered to raise or lower catecholamine levels. In the case of
the DRD4 exon III polymorphism, the 4-repeat allele has
been shown to have a more sensitive response to pharmacological agonists suggesting a higher response to endogenous dopamine. This allele was associated with higher
(less efficient) executive attention scores. The 10-repeat allele of the DAT1 3'-VNTR polymorphism also showed
higher (less efficient) executive attention scores. This is of
interest since subjects with 10-repeat alleles have shown
lower levels of DAT1 and hence are predicted to have
relatively higher levels of dopamine. While the low activity COMT Methionine allele showed no associations, the
mean executive attention scores of this allele were higher
(less efficient). Again, this allele should result in higher
levels of endogenous dopamine. Finally, the MAOA-LPR
3-repeat allele was shown to have lower levels of transcriptional induction and thus should result in relatively
higher dopamine levels. This allele showed a trend toward
lower alerting scores (less efficient) and higher executive
attention scores (less efficient). Interestingly, all 4 of these
polymorphisms show the same directionality. That is, all of
the alleles which are predicted to result in higher levels of
extrasynaptic dopamine or dopamine signal transduction
(DRD4-4 repeat, DAT1-10 repeat, COMT Methionine and
MAOA-LPR 3 repeat) show higher (less efficient) executive attention scores. While this study demonstrates that
the individual effect of each polymorphism is quite small,
the combined effect of these polymorphisms could summate to exert significant behavioral effects. Since pharmacologic studies have not yet been performed on the ANT,
it is not clear whether increasing relative dopamine levels
results in less efficient executive attention scores. In cognitive studies of subjects and patients where dopamine levels are manipulated via medications that raise or lower
dopamine levels, however, evidence of an inverted U
shaped function is frequently seen .
Recommendations for molecular genetic studies on the
The ANT is freely available for public download . For
investigators who wish to probe the genetic basis of executive attention, this study highlights many design and implementation issues. Firstly, it is evident that individual
polymorphisms exert extremely weak main effects. The results of this study show that a population of even 200 subjects lacks the needed statistical power since the modest
statistical associations are well below the standards set for
the reporting of true association . In order to adhere
strictly to these guidelines, power estimates suggest that N
= 600 subjects will be needed to reach these criteria for genetic studies of executive attention using the ANT. Other
statistical approaches such as non-linear models or nonparametic tests may prove to be more sensitive when examining single polymorphisms or multiple polymorphic
sites within a gene. Lastly, caution should be used when
interpreting genetic association data on single polymorphisms since spurious associations may arise due to linkage disequilibrium at closely linked genetic loci. One
encouraging aspect of this study however, is the finding
that no associations or statistical trends were observed for
global measures of performance such as overall reaction
time. This suggests that there may be specificity in the role
of genetic factors in contributing to specific neural functions.
BMC Neuroscience 2002, 3
 
 
(page number not for citation purposes)
Conclusions
Modest statistical associations of variation in executive attention were observed with genetic polymorphisms in
candidate genes that affect dopaminergic signalling. These
associations were not seen for global measures of performance such as reaction time, but rather for the efficiency of specific, anatomically characterised neural networks.
This suggests that the ANT is a suitable endophenotypic
assay for further large scale studies on the genetics of executive attention.
Subjects were recruited in the vicinity of New York Hospital via newspaper advertisement. 25 subjects who were recruited from the vicinity of Peking University and
participated in a previous heritability study were also included. Paid volunteers traveled to the Department of Psychiatry to undergo a pre-test interview. Subjects with a
history of psychopathology and/or taking medication
were excluded. A total of 220 adult subjects, ages 18–50
years old met inclusion criteria. All participants reported
normal or corrected to normal vision. While smoking
preference was recorded, only 2 subjects reported smoking regularly.
Behavioral data
The ANT was performed as previously described . Briefly, participants viewed the stimuli and responses were collected via two mouse buttons. Stimuli consisted of a row
of 5 visually presented horizontal black lines, with arrowheads pointing leftward or rightward, against a gray background where the target was a leftward or rightward
arrowhead at the center. This target was flanked on either
side by two arrows in the same direction (congruent condition), or in the opposite direction (incongruent condition), or by lines (neutral condition).
The participants' task was to identify the direction of the
centrally presented arrow by pressing one button for the
left direction and a second button for the right direction.
Cues consisted of a 100 msec asterisk presented 400 msec
before the target. There were four cue conditions: (1) nocue, participants were shown a cross which was the same
as the first fixation for 100 ms; (2) central-cue, which was
at the central fixation point; (3) double-cue, in which cues
were presented on the two possible target locations simultaneously (both above and below the fixation point); and
(4) spatial-cue, cue was presented right on the target location (either above, below the central fixation point).
A session consisted of a 24-trial practice block and three
experimental blocks of trials. Each experimental block
consisted of 96 trials (12 conditions: 4 warning levels  2
target locations  2 target directions  3 congruency conditions, with2 repetitions). The presentation of trials was
in a random order. Participants were instructed to focus
on a centrally located fixation cross throughout the task,
and to response as fast, also as accurately as possible.
Calculation of attention network efficiencies
Values for attention network efficiency were calculated
from the raw reaction time data as previously described.
Medians were calculated for each test conditions (4 cue
levels by 3 target levels, 12 conditions in total) to avoid
the influence of the outliers. The alerting effect was calculated by subtracting the mean RT of the conditions with
double cue from the mean RT of the conditions with no
cue. Since neither of these conditions provides information on the spatial location of the target, the subtraction
gives a pure measure of alerting. The orienting effect was
calculated by subtracting the mean RT of the conditions
with spatial (up/down) cue from the mean RT of the conditions with center cue. In both conditions the subject is
alert but only the spatial cue provided spatial information
on where to orient. The executive effect was calculated by
subtracting the mean RT of congruent conditions from the
mean RT of incongruent conditions.
Genetic sample collection and genotyping methods
Buccal swabs were obtained via buccal cell brush from
consenting subjects and prepared as directed by the manufacturer. We used the MasterAMP ™ Buccal Swab DNA
Extraction Kit (Epicentre Technologies, Madison, WI).
Yields range from 0.5 to 3 g of DNA from each buccal
sample. Yields were determined spectrophotometrically
by absorbance at 260 nm. Taq polymerase, PCR buffer
and dNTPs were obtained from QIAGEN and used at recommended concentrations for a 20 ul PCR reaction. PCR
reactions and restriction digests (PCR-RFLP) are optimized for each marker and performed on the PTC-100
Programmable Thermal Controller (MJ Research) outfitted with a heated lid for oil-free amplifications. For most
markers, a 'touchdown' PCR cycling regimen and the addition of DMSO (10% final v:v) was used in order to automatically optimize the hybridization stringency. Gel
electrophoresis in either LE or Metaphor agarose followed
by staining in ethidium bromide was used to resolve and
visualise DNA fragments.
For genotyping of the DRD4 exon III VNTR, primers were
used at 200 uM and were designed as described in .
Forward: 5'-GCGACTACGTGGTCTACTCG-3'; Reverse: 5'-
AGGACCCTCATGGCCTTG-3'. Many investigators have
noted difficulties in obtaining reliable and specific amplification of this polymorphism when using template DNA
from buccal swabs. We substituted Q-solution (QIAGEN)
and an optimized 'touchdown' thermocycling regime to
achieve reliable and robust amplification. For genotyping
of the DRD4 120-bp tandem duplication upstream of the
BMC Neuroscience 2002, 3
 
 
(page number not for citation purposes)
start-codon as described in , we used Forward: 5'-GTT-
GTCTGTCTTTTCTCATTGTTTCCATTG-3'
GAAGGAGCAGGCACCGTGAGC-3' primers. For genotyping of the DRD4 C to T change at position -521 as described
CGGGGGCTGAGCACCAGAGGCTGCT-3' and Reverse 5'-
GCATCGACGCCAGCGCCATCCTACC-3' were used followed by digestion with FspI. For genotyping of the DAT1
40 bp-repeat (VNTR) polymorphism in the 3 untranslated
region as described in , Forward: 5'-TGTGGTGTAG-
GGAACGGCCTGAG-3'
5'-CTTCCTGGAGGT-
CACGGCTCAAGG-3' primers were used. For genotyping
of the COMT Val to Met change at position 108 as described in , Forward: 5'-ACTGTGGCTACTCAGCT-
GTG-3' and Reverse 5'-CCTTTTTCCAGGTCTGACAA-3'
primers were used followed by restriction digestion with
NlaIII. For genotyping of the MAOA 30-bp repeat in promotor as described , Forward: 5'-
ACAGCCTGACCGTGGAGAAG-3'
GAACGGACGCTCCATTCGGA-3' primers were used. The
C to T change at poition 1460 in exon 14 was genotyped
according to . Forward: 5'-TTAAATGGTCTCG-
GGAAGG-3' and Reverse 5'-GCCCAATGACACAGCCTTT-
3' primers were used followed by digestion with EcoRV.
Statistical analysis of genetic vs. behavioral variation
Attention network scores were calculated using MS Excel.
In order to perform genotype by network score associations, biallelic loci were assigned a '1' for A/A homozygotes, a '2' for A/B heterozygotes and a '3' for B/B
heterozygotes. SPSS was used to perform one-way ANO-
VAs and 2-tailed t-tests where genotype was considered an
independent variable. Dominant effects were assessed by
grouping genotypic classes. Based on earlier analyses of
the small effect size of the DRD4 exon III VNTR polymorphism, we estimated statistical power for genotypic associations for different sample sizes and the allele
frequencies 4-present and 4-absent (0.7 and 0.3 respectively). A minimum significance level for type I errors (alpha) of P < 0.0001 is based on the recommendations of
Lander and Kruglyak . Using a computer-based power
determination algorithm, a minimum sample size of N =
600 is required to achieve a power of 95%. A power of
80% was estimated for the current sample size. Linkage
disequilibrium between pairs of alleles was determined
using the method of Weir . In this method, allele frequencies were compared to expected genotypic frequencies via chi-square analysis with a null hypothesis of no
disequilibrium.
Authors' contributions
John Fossella and Tobias Sommer and Yanhong Wu were
responsible for the collection of the behavioral data and
genotyping. Jin Fan, James Swanson, Donald Pfaff and
Michael Posner were responsible for the development and
implementation of the ANT.
Acknowledgements
We wish to acknowledge the help and support of the members of the Sackler Institute of Developmental Psychobiology for helpful comments during
the data collection and interpretation phases of this project.