Survey of the State of the Art in Natural
Language Generation: Core tasks, applications
and evaluation∗
Albert Gatt
Institute of Linguistics and Language Technology (iLLT)
University of Malta,
Tal-Qroqq, Msida MSD2080, Malta
 
Emiel Krahmer
Tilburg center for Cognition and Communication (TiCC),
Tilburg University, P.O.Box 90153, NL-5000 LE,
Tilburg, The Netherlands
 
January 30, 2018
This paper surveys the current state of the art in Natural Language
Generation (nlg), deﬁned as the task of generating text or speech from
non-linguistic input. A survey of nlg is timely in view of the changes that
the ﬁeld has undergone over the past two decades, especially in relation
to new (usually data-driven) methods, as well as new applications of nlg
technology. This survey therefore aims to (a) give an up-to-date synthesis
of research on the core tasks in nlg and the architectures adopted in
which such tasks are organised; (b) highlight a number of recent research
topics that have arisen partly as a result of growing synergies between
nlg and other areas of artiﬁcial intelligence; (c) draw attention to the
challenges in nlg evaluation, relating them to similar challenges faced in
other areas of nlp, with an emphasis on diﬀerent evaluation methods and
the relationships between them.
∗This article appears in Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research (JAIR), volume 61, pp.
 
Introduction
What is Natural Language Generation?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Why a Survey on Natural Language Generation? . . . . . . . . .
Goals of this Survey
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Content Determination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Text Structuring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sentence Aggregation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lexicalisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Referring Expression Generation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Linguistic Realisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Templates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Hand-Coded Grammar-Based Systems . . . . . . . . . . .
Statistical Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
NLG Architectures and Approaches
Modular Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Planning-Based Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Planning through the Grammar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Stochastic Planning under Uncertainty using Reinforcement Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Other Stochastic Approaches to NLG
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Acquiring Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
NLG as a Sequential, Stochastic Process . . . . . . . . . .
NLG as Classiﬁcation and Optimisation . . . . . . . . . .
NLG as ‘Parsing’ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Deep Learning Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Encoder-Decoder Architectures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Conditioned Language Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The Vision-Language Interface: Image Captioning and Beyond 42
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The Core Tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Image Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Text Generation or Retrieval
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
How is Language Grounded in Visual Data? . . . . . . . . . . . .
Vision and Language: Current and Future Directions for NLG
Variation: Generating Text with Style, Personality and Aﬀect 50
Generating with Style: Textual Variation and Personality . . . .
Generating with Feeling: Aﬀect and Politeness
. . . . . . . . . .
Stylistic Control as a Challenge for Neural nlg . . . . . . . . . .
Style and Aﬀect: Concluding Remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Generating Creative and Entertaining Text
Generating Puns and Jokes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Generating Metaphors and Similes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Generating Narratives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Generating Creative Language: Concluding Remarks . . . . . . .
Evaluation
Intrinsic Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Subjective (Human) Judgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Objective Humanlikeness Measures Using Corpora . . . .
Evaluating Genre Compatibility and Stylistic Eﬀectiveness 71
Extrinsic Evaluation Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Black Box Versus Glass Box Evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
On the Relationship Between Evaluation Methods
. . . . . . . .
Metrics Versus Human Judgements . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Using Controlled Experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Evaluation: Concluding Remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Discussion and Future Directions
Why (and How) Should NLG be Used?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Does NLG Include Text-to-Text? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Theories and Models in Search of Applications? . . . . . . . . . .
Where do We Go from Here? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Conclusion
References
Introduction
In his intriguing story The Library of Babel , Jorge
Luis Borges describes a library in which every conceivable book can be found. It
is probably the wrong question to ask, but readers cannot help wondering: who
wrote all these books? Surely, this could not be the work of human authors?
The emergence of automatic text generation techniques in recent years provides
an interesting twist to this question. Consider Philip M. Parker, who oﬀered
more than 100.000 books for sale via Amazon.com, including for example his The
2007-2012 Outlook for Tufted Washable Scatter Rugs, Bathmats, and Sets That
Measure 6-Feet by 9-Feet or Smaller in India. Obviously, Parker did not write
these 100,000 books by hand. Rather, he used a computer program that collects
publicly available information, possibly packaged in human-written texts, and
compiles these into a book. Just like the library of Babel contains many books
that are unlikely to appeal to a broad audience, Parker’s books need not ﬁnd
many readers. In fact, even if only a small percentage of his books get sold a
few times, this would still make him a sizeable proﬁt.
Parker’s algorithm can be seen to belong to a research tradition of so-called
text-to-text generation methods, applications that take existing texts as
their input, and automatically produce a new, coherent text as output. Other
example applications that generate new texts from existing (usually humanwritten) text include:
• machine translation, from one language to another ;
• fusion and summarization of related sentences or texts to make them more
concise ;
• simpliﬁcation of complex texts, for example to make them more accessible
for low-literacy readers or for children ;
• automatic spelling, grammar and text correction ;
• automatic generation of peer reviews for scientiﬁc papers ; and
• automatic generation of questions, for educational and other purposes
 .
Often, however, it is necessary to generate texts which are not grounded in
existing ones. Consider, as a case in point, the minor earthquake that took
place close to Beverly Hills, California on March 17, 2014. The Los Angeles
Times was the ﬁrst newspaper to report it, within 3 minutes of the event,
providing details about the time, location and strength of the quake.
report was automatically generated by a ‘robo-journalist’, which converted the
incoming automatically registered earthquake data into a text, by ﬁlling gaps
in a predeﬁned template text .
Robo-journalism and associated practices, such as data journalism, are examples of what is usually referred to as data-to-text generation. They have
had a considerable impact in the ﬁelds of journalism and media studies . The technique used by the Los
Angeles Times was not new; many applications have been developed over the
years which automatically generate text from non-linguistic data including, but
not limited to, systems which produce:
• soccer reports ;
• virtual ‘newspapers’ from sensor data and news reports on current aﬀairs ;
• text addressing environmental concerns, such as wildlife tracking , personalised environmental information , and enhancing engagement of
citizen scientists via generated feedback ;
• weather and ﬁnancial reports ;
• summaries of patient information in clinical contexts ;
• interactive information about cultural artefacts, for example in a museum
context ; and
• text intended to persuade , or motivate behaviour modiﬁcation .
These systems may diﬀer considerably in the quality and variety of the texts
they produce, their commercial viability and the sophistication of the underlying
methods, but all are examples of data-to-text generation. Many of the systems
mentioned above focus on imparting information to the user.
On the other
hand, as shown by the examples cited above of systems focussed on persuasion
or behaviour change, informing need not be the exclusive goal of nlg. Nor is it
a trivial goal in itself, since in order to successfully impart information, a system
needs to select what to say, distinguishing it from what can be easily inferred
(possibly also depending on the target user), before expessing it coherently.
Generated texts need not have a large audience. There is no need to automatically generate a report of, say, the Champions League European football ﬁnal,
which is covered by many of the best journalists in the ﬁeld anyway. However,
there are many other games, less important to the general public (but presumably very important to the parties involved). Typically, all sports statistics (who
played?, who scored? etc.) for these games are stored, but such statistics are not
as a rule perused by sport-reporters. Companies like Narrative Science1 ﬁll this
niche by automatically generating sport reports for these games. Automated
Insights2 even generates reports based on user-provided ‘fantasy football’ data.
In a similar vein, the automatic generation of weather forecasts for oﬀshore oil
platforms , or from sensors monitoring the performance of
gas turbines , has proven to be a fruitful application of datato-text techniques. Such applications are now the mainstay of companies like
Arria-NLG.3
Taking this idea one step further, data-to-text generation paves the way for
tailoring texts to speciﬁc audiences. For example, data from babies in neonatal
care can be converted into text diﬀerently, with diﬀerent levels of technical
detail and explanatory language, depending on whether the intended reader is a
doctor, a nurse or a parent . One could also easily
imagine that diﬀerent sport reports are generated for fans of the respective
teams; the winning goal of one team is likely to be considered a lucky one from
the perspective of the losing team, irrespective of its ‘objective’ qualities .
A human journalist would not dream of writing separate
reports about a sports match (if only for lack of time), but for a computer this
is not an issue and this is likely to be appreciated by a reader who receives a
more personally appropriate report.
What is Natural Language Generation?
Both text-to-text generation and data-to-text generation are instances of Natural Language Generation (nlg). In the most widely-cited survey of nlg
methods to date , nlg is characterized as ‘the sub-
ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence and computational linguistics that is concerned with
the construction of computer systems than can produce understandable texts in
English or other human languages from some underlying non-linguistic representation of information’ . Clearly this deﬁnition ﬁts
data-to-text generation better than text-to-text generation, and indeed Reiter
and Dale focus exclusively on the former, helpfully and clearly describing
the rule-based approaches that dominated the ﬁeld at the time.
It has been pointed out that precisely deﬁning nlg is rather diﬃcult : everybody seems to agree on what the output of an nlg
system should be (text), but what the exact input is can vary substantially
 . Examples include ﬂat semantic representations, numerical
data and structured knowledge bases. More recently, generation from visual
input such as image or video has become an important challenge .
A further complication is that the boundaries between diﬀerent approaches
are themselves blurred.
For example, text summarisation was characterized
1 
2 
3 
above as a text-to-text application. However, many approaches to text-to-text
generation (especially abstractive summarisation systems, which do not extract
content wholesale from the input documents) use techniques which are also used
in data-to-text, as when opinions are extracted from reviews and expressed in
completely new sentences . Conversely, a data-totext generation system could conceivably rely on text-to-text generation techniques for learning how to express pieces of data in diﬀerent or creative ways
 .
Considering other applications of nlg similarly highlights how blurred boundaries can get. For example, the generation of spoken utterances in dialogue systems is another
application of nlg, but typically it is closely related to dialogue management,
so that management and realisation policies are sometimes learned in tandem
 .
The position taken in this survey is that what distinguishes data-to-text
generation is ultimately its input. Although this varies considerably, it is precisely the fact that such input is not – or isn’t exclusively – linguistic that is
the main challenge faced by most of the systems and approaches we will consider. In what follows, unless otherwise speciﬁed in context, the terms ‘Natural
Language Generation’ and ‘nlg’ will be used to refer to systems that generate
text from non-linguistic data.
Why a Survey on Natural Language Generation?
Arguably Reiter and Dale is still the most complete available survey of
nlg. However, the ﬁeld of nlg has changed drastically in the last 15 years, with
the emergence of successful applications generating tailored reports for speciﬁc
audiences, and with the emergence of text-to-text as well as vision-to-text generation applications, which also tend to rely more on statistical methods than
traditional data-to-text. None of these are covered by Reiter and Dale .
Also notably absent are discussions of applications that move beyond standard,
‘factual’ text generation, such as those that account for personality and aﬀect,
or creative text such as metaphors and narratives. Finally, a striking omission
by Reiter and Dale is the lack of discussion of evaluation methodology.
Indeed, evaluation of nlg output has only recently started to receive systematic
attention, in part due to a number of shared tasks that were conducted within
the nlg community.
Since Reiter and Dale published their book, various other nlg overview
texts have also appeared. Bateman and Zock cover the cognitive, social
and computational dimensions of nlg. McDonald oﬀers a general characterization of nlg as ‘the process by which thought is rendered into language’
(p. 121). Wanner zooms in on automatic generation of reports, while Di
Eugenio and Green look at speciﬁc applications, especially in education
and health-care. Various specialized collections of articles have also been published, including that by Krahmer and Theune , which targets data-driven
approaches; and by Bangalore and Stent , which focusses on interactive
systems. The web oﬀers various unpublished technical reports, such as the survey by Theune on dialogue systems; the reports by Piwek and
Belz on aﬀective nlg; and the survey by Gkatzia on content selection. While useful, these resources do not discuss recent developments or
oﬀer a comprehensive review. This indicates that a new state-of-the-art survey
is highly timely.
Goals of this Survey
The goal of the current paper is to present a comprehensive overview of nlg developments since 2000, both in order to provide nlg researchers with a synthesis
and pointers to relevant research, and to introduce the ﬁeld to researchers who
are less familiar with nlg. Though nlg has been a part of ai and nlp from the
early days , as a ﬁeld it has arguably
not been fully embraced by these broader communities, and has only recently
began to take full advantage of recent advances in data-driven, machine learning
and deep learning approaches.
Following Reiter and Dale , our main focus, especially in the ﬁrst part
of the survey, will be on data-to-text generation. In any case, doing full justice
to recent developments in the various text-to-text generation applications is
beyond the scope of a single survey, and many of these are covered in other
surveys, including those by Mani and Nenkova and McKeown 
for summarisation; Androutsopoulos and Malakasiotis on paraphrasing;
and Piwek and Boyer on automatic question generation. However, we
will in various places discuss connections between data-to-text and text-to-text
generation, both because – as noted above – the boundaries are blurred, but
also, and perhaps more importantly, because text-to-text systems have long been
couched in the data-driven frameworks that are becoming increasingly popular
in data-to-text generation, also giving rise to some hybrid systems that combine
rule-bused and statistical techniques .
Our review will start with an updated overview of the core nlg tasks that
were introduced by Reiter and Dale , followed by a discussion of architectures and approaches, where we pay special attention to those not covered in
the Reiter and Dale survey. These two sections constitute the ‘foundational’ part of the survey. Beyond these, we highlight several new developments,
including approaches where the input data is visual; and research aimed at generating more varied, engaging or creative and entertaining texts, taking nlg
beyond the factual, repetitive texts it is sometimes accused of producing. We
believe that these applications are not only interesting in themselves, but may
also inform more ‘utility’-driven text generation application. For example, by
including insights from narrative generation we may be able to generate more
engaging reports and by including insights from metaphor generation we may be
able to phrase information in these reports in a more original manner. Finally,
we will discuss recent developments in evaluation of natural language generation
applications.
In short, the goals of this survey are:
• To give an up-to-date synthesis of research on the core tasks in nlg, as
well as the architectures adopted in the ﬁeld, especially in view of recent
developments exploiting data-driven techniques (Sections 2 and 3);
• To highlight a number of relatively recent research issues that have arisen
partly as a result of growing synergies between nlg and other areas of
artiﬁcial intelligence, such as computer vision, stylistics and computational
creativity (Sections 4, 5 and 6);
• To draw attention to the challenges in nlg evaluation, relating them to
similar challenges faced in other areas of nlp, with an emphasis on diﬀerent
evaluation methods and the relationships between them (Section 7).
Traditionally, the nlg problem of converting input data into output text was
addressed by splitting it up into a number of subproblems. The following six
are frequently found in many nlg systems ; their
role is illustrated in Figure 1:
1. Content determination: Deciding which information to include in the text
under construction,
2. Text structuring: Determining in which order information will be presented in the text,
3. Sentence aggregation: Deciding which information to present in individual
sentences,
4. Lexicalisation: Finding the right words and phrases to express information,
5. Referring expression generation: Selecting the words and phrases to identify domain objects,
6. Linguistic realisation: Combining all words and phrases into well-formed
sentences.
These tasks could be thought of in terms of ‘early’ decision processes (which
information to convey to the reader?) to ‘late’ ones (which words to use in
a particular sentence, and how to put them in their correct order?).
we refer to ‘early’ and ‘late’ tasks by way of distinguishing between choices
that are more oriented towards the data (such as what to say) and choices
that are of an increasingly linguistic nature (e.g., lexicalisation, or realisation).
This characterization reﬂects a long-running distinction in nlg between strategy
and tactics . This
distinction also suggests a temporal order in which the tasks are executed, at
least in systems with a modular, pipeline architecture (discussed in Section
(a) Content Determination
bradycardia
(17:06:03)
bradycardia
(17:03:57)
bradycardia
(17:01:15)
(b) Text Structuring
existential
{b1, b2, b3}
(c) Lexicalisation etc.
down to 69
three successive bradycardias
(d) Realisation
Figure 1: Tasks in nlg, illustrated with a simpliﬁed example from the neonatal
intensive care domain. First the system has to decide what the important events
are in the data (a, content determination), in this case, occurrences of low heart
rate (bradycardias). Then it has to decide in which order it wants to present
data to the reader (b, text structuring) and how to express these in individual
sentence plans (c, aggregation, lexicalisation, reference). Finally, the resulting
sentences are generated (d, linguistic realisation).
3.1): for example, the system ﬁrst needs to decide which input data to express
in the text, before it can order information for presentation. However, such
ordering of modules is nowadays increasingly put into question in the datadriven architectures discussed below (Section 3).
In this section, we brieﬂy describe these six tasks, illustrating them with
examples, and highlight recent developments in each case.
As we shall see,
while the ‘early’ tasks are crucial for the development of nlg systems, they are
often intimately connected to the speciﬁc application. By contrast, ‘late’ tasks
are more often investigated independently of an application, and hence have
resulted in approaches that can be shared between applications.
Content Determination
As a ﬁrst step in the generation process, the nlg system needs to decide which
information should be included in the text under construction, and which should
not. Typically, more information is contained in data than we want to convey
through text, or the data is more detailed than we care to express in text. This is
clear in Figure 1a, where the input signal – a patient’s heart rate – only contains
a few patterns of interest. Selection may also depend on the target audience
does it consist of experts or novices, for example) and on the overall
communicative intention (e.g. should the text inform the reader or convince
him to do something).
Content determination involves choice. In a soccer report, we may not want
to verbalise each pass and foul committed, even though the data may contain this information.
In the case of neonatal care, data might be collected
continuously from sensors measuring heart rate, blood pressure and other physiological parameters. Data thus needs to be ﬁltered and abstracted into a set
of preverbal messages, semantic representations of information which are often
expressed in a formal representation language, such as logical or database languages, attribute-value matrices or graph structures. They can express, among
other things, which relations hold between which domain entities, for example,
expressing that player X scored the ﬁrst goal for team Y at time T.
Though content determination is present in most nlg systems , approaches are typically closely related to the domain of application. A notable exception is the work of Guhe , which oﬀers a cognitively
plausible, incremental account of content determination based on studies of
speakers’ descriptions of dynamic events as they unfold. This work belongs to
a strand of research which considers nlg ﬁrst and foremost as a methodology
eminently suitable for understanding human language production.
In recent years, researchers have started exploring data-driven techniques
for content determination . Barzilay and Lee
 , for example, used Hidden Markov Models to model topic shifts in a particular domain of discourse (say, earthquake reports), where the hidden states
represented ‘topics’, modelled as sentences clustered together by similarity. A
clustering approach was also used by Duboue and McKeown in the biography domain, using texts paired with a knowledge base, from which semantic
data was clustered and scored according to its occurrence in text. In a similar
vein Barzilay and Lapata use a database of American football records
and corresponding text. Their aim was not only to identify bits of information
that should be mentioned, but also dependencies between them, since mentioning a certain event (say, a score by a quarterback) may warrant the mention
of another (say, another scoring event by a second quarterback). The solution
proposed by Barzilay and Lapata was to compute both individual preference
scores for events, and a link preference score.
More recently, various researchers have addressed the question of how to automatically learn alignments between data and text, also in the broader context
of grounded language acquisition, i.e., modelling how we learn language by looking at correspondences between objects and events in the world and the way we
refer to them in language .
For example, Liang et al. extended the work by Barzilay and Lapata
 to multiple domains (soccer and weather), relying on weakly supervised
techniques; in a similar vein, Koncel-Kedziorski et al. presented a weakly
supervised multilevel approach, to deal with the fact that there is no one-to-one
correspondence between, for example, soccer events in data and sentences in associated soccer reports. We shall return to these methods as part of a broader
discussion of data-driven approaches below (Section 3.3).
Text Structuring
Having determined what messages to convey, the nlg system needs to decide
on their order of presentation to the reader.
For example, Figure 1b shows
three events of the same type (all bradycardia events, that is, brief drops in
heart rate), selected (after abstraction) from the input signal and ordered as a
temporal sequence.
This stage is often referred to as text (or discourse or document) structuring.
In the case of the soccer domain, for example, it seems reasonable to start with
general information (where and when the game was played, how many people
attended, etc.), before the goals are described, typically in temporal order. In
the neonatal care domain, a temporal order can be imposed among speciﬁc
events, as in Figure 1b, but larger spans of text may reﬂect ordering based on
importance, and grouping of information based on relatedness (e.g. all events
related to a patient’s respiration) . Naturally, alternative
discourse relations may exist between separate messages, such as contrasts or
elaborations. The result of this stage is a discourse, text or document plan,
which is a structured and ordered representation of messages.
These examples again imply that the application domain imposes constraints
on ordering preferences.
Early approaches, such as McKeown , often
relied on hand-crafted, domain-dependent structuring rules (which McKeown
called schemata).
To account for discourse relations between messages, researchers have alternatively relied on Rhetorical Structure Theory ,
which also typically involved domain-speciﬁc rules. For example, Williams and
Reiter used rst relations to identify ordering among messages that would
maximise clarity to low-skilled readers.
Various researchers have explored the possibilities of using machine learning
techniques for document structuring , sometimes doing this in tandem with content
selection .
General approaches for information
ordering have been proposed, which automatically try to ﬁnd an optimal ordering of ‘information-bearing items’. These
approaches can be applied to text structuring, where the items to be ordered are
typically preverbal messages; however, they can also be applied in (multidocument) summarisation, where the items to be ordered are sentences from the
input documents which are judged to be summary-worthy enough to include
 .
Sentence Aggregation
Not every message in the text plan needs to be expressed in a separate sentence; by combining multiple messages into a single sentence, the generated
text becomes potentially more ﬂuid and readable , although there are also situations where it has been argued that
aggregation should be avoided (discussed in Section 5.2). For instance, the three
events selected in Figure 1b are shown as ‘merged’ into a single pre-linguistic
representation, which will be mapped to a single sentence.
The process by
which related messages are grouped together in sentences is known as sentence
aggregation.
To take another example, from the soccer domain, one (unaggregated) way
to describe the fastest hat-trick in the English Premier League would be:
Sadio Mane scored for Southampton after 12 minutes and 22 seconds.
Sadio Mane scored for Southampton after 13 minutes and 46 seconds.
Sadio Mane scored for Southampton after 15 minutes and 18 seconds.
Clearly, this is rather redundant, not very concise or coherent, and generally
unpleasant to read. An aggregated alternative, such as the following, would
therefore be preferred:
Sadio Mane scored three times for Southampton in less than three
In general, aggregation is diﬃcult to deﬁne, and has been interpreted in
various ways, ranging from redundancy elimination to linguistic structure combination. Reape and Mellish oﬀer an early survey, distinguishing between
aggregation at the semantic level (as illustrated in Figure 1c) and at the level
of syntax, illustrated in the transition from (1-3) to (4) above.
It is probably fair to say that much early work on aggregation was strongly
domain-dependent.
This work focussed on domain- and application-speciﬁc
rules (e.g.
‘if a player scores two consecutive goals, describe these in the
same sentence’), that were typically hand-crafted . Once again, more recent work is gradually moving towards
data-driven approaches, where aggregation rules are acquired from corpus data
 . Barzilay and Lapata 
present a system that learns how to aggregate on the basis of a parellel corpus
of sentences and corresponding database entries, by looking for similarities between entries. As was the case with the content selection method of Barzilay
and Lapata , Barzilay and Lapata view the problem in terms of
global optimisation: an initial classiﬁcation is done over pairs of database entries which determines whether they should be aggregated or not on the basis of
their pairwise similarity. Subsequently, a globally optimal set of linked entries is
selected based on transitivity constraints (if ⟨ei, ej⟩and ⟨ej, ek⟩are linked, then
so should ⟨ei, ek⟩) and global constraints, such as how many sentences should
be aggregated in a document. Global optimisation is cast in terms of Integer
Linear Programming, a well-known mathematical optimization technique .
With syntactic aggregation, it is arguably more feasible to deﬁne domainindependent rules to eliminate redundancy . For example, converting (5) into (6) below
Sadio Mane scored in the 12th minute and he scored again in the 13th
Sadio Mane scored in the 12th minute and again in the 13th.
could be achieved by identifying the parallel verb phrases in the two conjoined
sentences and eliding the subject and verb in the second.
Recent work has
explored the possibility of acquiring such rules from corpora automatically. For
example, Stent and Molina describe an approach to the acquisition of
sentence-combining rules from a discourse treebank, which are then incorporated
into the sparky sentence planner described by Walker et al. . A more
general approach to the same problem is discussed by White and Howcroft
Arguably, aggregation on the syntactic level can only account for relatively
small reductions, compared to aggregation at the level of messages. Furthermore, syntactic aggregation assumes that the sentence planning process (which
includes lexicalisation) is complete. Hence, while traditional approaches to nlg
view aggregation as part of sentence planning, which occurs prior to syntactic
realisation, the validity of this claim depends on the type of aggregation being
performed .
Lexicalisation
Once the content of the sentence has been ﬁnalised, possibly also as a result
of aggregation at the message level, the system can start converting it into
natural language. In our example (Figure 1c), the outcome of aggregation and
lexicalisation are shown together: here, the three events have been grouped, and
mapped to a representation that includes a verb (be) and its arguments, though
the arguments themselves still have to be rendered in a referring expression (see
below). This reﬂects an important decision, namely, which words or phrases
to use to express the messages’ building blocks. A complication is that often
a single event can be expressed in natural language in many diﬀerent ways. A
scoring event in a soccer match, for example, can be expressed as ‘to score a
goal’, ‘to have a goal noted’, ‘to put the ball in the net’, among many others.
The complexity of this lexicalisation process critically depends on the number of alternatives that the nlg system can entertain. Often, contextual constraints play an important role here as well: if the aim is to generate texts with
a certain amount of variation , the system can decide
to randomly select a lexicalisation option from a set of alternatives (perhaps
even from a set of alternatives not used earlier in the text). However, stylistic
constraints come into play: ‘to score a goal’ is an unfortunate way of expressing
an own goal, for example. In other applications, lexical choice may even be informed by other considerations, such as the attitude or aﬀective stance towards
the event in question . Whether or not nlg systems aim for variation in their output or not
depends on the domain. For example, variation in soccer reports is presumably
more appreciated by readers than variation in weather reports ; it may also depend on where in a text the variation occurs.
For example, variation in expressing timestamps may be less appreciated than
variation in referential forms .
One straightforward model for lexicalisation – the one assumed in Figure 1
– is to operate on preverbal messages, converting domain concepts directly into
lexical items. This might be feasible in well-deﬁned domains. More often, lexicalisation is harder, for at least two reasons :
First, it can involve selection between semantically similar, near-synonymous
or taxonomically related words . Second, it is not always straightforward to model lexicalisation in
terms of a crisp concept-to-word mapping. One source of diﬃculty is vagueness,
which arises, for example, with terms denoting properties that are gradable.
For example, selecting the adjectives ‘wide’ or ‘tall’ based on the dimensions
of an entity requires the system to reason about the width or height of similar objects, perhaps using some standard of comparison .
A similar issue has been noted in the context of presenting numerical information, such as timestamps and quantities . For example, Reiter et al. discussed time expressions in the context of weather-forecast generation, pointing out that a timestamp 00:00 could
be expressed as late evening, midnight, or simply evening . Not surprisingly, humans (including the professional forecasters that
contributed to Reiter et al.’s evaluation), show considerable variation in their
lexical choices.
It is interesting to note that many issues related to lexicalisation have also
been discussed in the psycholinguistic literature on lexical access . Among these is the question of how speakers home in on
the right word and under what conditions they are liable to make errors, given
that the mental lexicon is a densely connected network in which lexical items are
connected at multiple levels (semantic, phonological, etc). This has also been a
fruitful topic for computational modelling . In contrast
to cognitive modelling approaches, however, research in nlg increasingly views
lexicalisation as part of surface realisation (discussed below) . A fundamental contribution
in this context is by Elhadad et al. , who describe a uniﬁcation-based
approach, unifying conceptual representations (i.e., preverbal messages) with
grammar rules encoding lexical as well as syntactic choices.
Referring Expression Generation
Referring Expression Generation (reg) is characterised by Reiter and Dale
 as “the task of selecting words or phrases to identify domain entities”. This characterisation suggests a close similarity to lexicalisation, but
Reiter and Dale point out that the essential diﬀerence is that referring
expression generation is a “discrimination task, where the system needs to communicate suﬃcient information to distinguish one domain entity from other
domain entities”. reg is among the tasks within the ﬁeld of automated text
generation that has received most attention in recent years . Since it can be separated relatively easily from a
speciﬁc application domain and studied in its own right, various ‘standalone’
solutions for the reg problem exist.
In our running example, the three bradycardia events shown in Figure 1b
are later represented as a set of three entities under the theme argument of be,
following lexicalisation (Figure 1c). How the system refers to them will depend,
among other things, on whether they’ve already been mentioned (in which case,
a pronoun or deﬁnite description might work) and if so, whether they need to
be distinguished from any other similar entities (in which case, they might need
to be distinguished by some properties, such as the time when they occurred).
The ﬁrst choice is therefore related to referential form: whether entities
are referred to using a pronoun, a proper name or an (in)deﬁnite description,
for example. This depends partly on the extent to which the entity is ‘in focus’ or ‘salient’ and indeed such notions underlie
many computational accounts of pronoun generation . Choosing referential
forms has recently been the topic of a series of shared tasks on the Generation of Referring Expressions in Context , using data
from Wikipedia articles, which included choices such as reﬂexive pronouns and
proper names. Many systems participating in this challenge framed the problem in terms of classiﬁcation among these many options. Still, it is probably
fair to say that much work on referential form has focussed on when to use
pronouns. Forms such as proper names remain understudied, although recently
various researchers have highlighted the problems of proper name generation
 .
Determining the referential content usually comes into play when the chosen
form is a description. Typically, there are multiple entities which have the same
referential category or type in a domain (more than one player, for example, or
several bradycardias). As a result, other properties of the entity will need to be
mentioned if it is to be identiﬁed by the reader or hearer. Earlier reg research
often worked with simple visual domains, such as Figure 2a or its corresponding
tabular representation, taken from the gre3d corpus .
In this example, the reg content selection problem is to ﬁnd a set of properties
for a target (say d1) that singles it out from its two distractors (d2 and d3).
reg content determination algorithms can be thought of as performing a
search through the known properties of the referent for the ‘right’ combination
(a) Visual domain from the gre3d corpus 
Domain objects
(b) Table of objects and attributes.
beh: ‘behind’; bef: ‘before’; nt: ‘next
Figure 2: Visual domain and corresponding tabular representation
that will distinguish it in context. What constitutes the ‘right’ combination
depends on the underlying theory. Too much information in the description (as
in the small blue ball before the large green cup) might be misleading or even
boring; too little (the ball) might hinder identiﬁcation. Much work on reg has
appealed to the Gricean maxim stating that speakers should make sure that
their contributions are suﬃciently informative for the purposes of the exchange,
but not more so . How this is interpreted has been the subject of
a number of algorithmic interpretations, including:
• Conducting an exhaustive search through the space of possible descriptions
and choosing the smallest set of properties that will identify the target
referent, the strategy incorporated by the Full Brevity procedure . In our example domain, this would select size.
• Selecting properties incrementally, but choosing the one which rules out
most distractors at each step, thereby minimising the possibility of including information that isn’t directly relevant to the identiﬁcation task.
This is the underlying idea of the Greedy Heuristic algorithm , and it has more recently been revived in stochastic utility-based
models such as Frank et al. . In our example scene, such an algorithm would once again consider size ﬁrst.
• Selecting properties incrementally, but based on domain-speciﬁc preference or cognitive salience. This is the strategy incorporated in the Incremental Algorithm , which would predict that color
should be preferred over size in our example.
While these heuristics focus exclusively on the requirement that a referent
be unambiguously identiﬁed, research on reference in dialogue has shown that under certain conditions, referring expressions
may also include ‘redundant’ properties in order to achieve other communicative
goals, such as conﬁrmation of a previous utterance by an interlocutor. Similarly,
White et al. present a system which generates user-tailored descriptions
in spoken dialogue, arguing that, for example, a frequent ﬂyer would prefer
diﬀerent descriptions of ﬂights than a student who only ﬂies occasionally.
These various algorithms compute (possibly diﬀerent) distinguishing descriptions for target referents (more precisely: they select sets of properties that distinguish the target, but that still need to be expressed in words; see Section 2.6
below). Various strands of more recent work can be distinguished . Some researchers have focussed on extending
the expressivity of the ‘classical’ algorithms, to include plurals (the two balls)
and relations (the ball in front of a cube) . Other work has cast the problem in probabilistic terms; for example,
FitzGerald et al. frame reg as a problem of estimating a log-linear distribution over a space of logical forms representing expressions for sets of objects.
Other work has concentrated on evaluating the performance of diﬀerent reg
algorithms, by collecting controlled human references and comparing these with
the references predicted by various algorithms . In a similar vein,
researchers have also started exploring the relevance of reg algorithms as psycholinguistic models of human language production use a synchronous grammar that directly relates surface
strings to target referents, using a chart to compute the possible expressions
for a given target. This work bears some relationship to planning-based approaches we discuss in Section 3.2 below, which exploit grammatical formalisms
as planning operators , solving realisation and content determination problems in tandem (including reg
as a special case).
Finally, in earlier work visual information was typically ‘simpliﬁed’ into a
table (as we did above), but there has been substantial progress on reg in more
complex scenarios. For example, the give challenge , provided impetus for the exploration of situated reference to objects in a virtual
environment . More
recent work has started exploring the interface between computer vision and
reg to produce descriptions of objects in complex, realistic visual scenes, including photographs . This forms part of a broader set of developments focussing on the
relatonship between vision and language, which we turn to in Section 4.
Linguistic Realisation
Finally, when all the relevant words and phrases have been decided upon, these
need to be combined to form a well-formed sentence. The simple example in
Figure 1d shows the structure underlying the sentence there were three successive
bradycardias down to 69, the linguistic message corresponding to the portion
selected from the original signal in Figure 1a.
Usually referred to as linguistic realisation, this task involves ordering constituents of a sentence, as well as generating the right morphological forms
(including verb conjugations and agreement, in those languages where this is
relevant). Often, realisers also need to insert function words (such as auxiliary
verbs and prepositions) and punctuation marks. An important complication at
this stage is that the output needs to include various linguistic components that
may not be present in the input (an instance of the ‘generation gap’ discussed
in Section 3.1 below); thus, this generation task can be thought of in terms
of projection between non-isomorphic structures .
Many diﬀerent approaches have been proposed, of which we will discuss
1. human-crafted templates;
2. human-crafted grammar-based systems;
3. statistical approaches.
When application domains are small and variation is expected to be minimal,
realisation is a relatively easy task, and outputs can be speciﬁed using templates
 , such as the following.
$player scored for $team in the $minute minute.
This template has three variables, which can be ﬁlled with the names of a player,
a team, and the minute in which this player scored a goal. It can thus serve to
generate sentences like:
Ivan Rakitic scored for Barcelona in the 4th minute.
An advantage of templates is that they allow for full control over the quality
of the output and avoid the generation of ungrammatical structures.
Modern variants of the template-based method include syntactic information in the
templates, as well as possibly complex rules for ﬁlling the gaps , making it diﬃcult to distinguish templates from more sophisticated methods . The disadvantage of templates is that they are
labour-intensive if constructed by hand . They also do not scale
well to applications which require considerable linguistic variation.
Hand-Coded Grammar-Based Systems
An alternative to templates is provided by general-purpose, domain-independent
realisation systems. Most of these systems are grammar-based, that is, they
make some or all of their choices on the basis of a grammar of the language
under consideration. This grammar can be manually written, as in many classic
oﬀ-the-shelf realisers such as fuf/surge , mumble
 , kpml , nigel , and RealPro . Hand-coded grammar-based
realisers tend to require very detailed input. For example, kpml is based on Systemic-Functional Grammar , and realisation is modelled as a traversal of a network in which choices
depend on both grammatical and semantico-pragmatic information. This level
of detail makes these systems diﬃcult to use as simple ‘plug-and-play’ or ‘oﬀ
the shelf’ modules , something which has motivated the
development of simple realisation engines which provide syntax and morphology
apis, but leave choice-making up to the developer For Barcelona, Ivan Rakitic scored in minute four.
(11) Barcelona player Ivan Rakitic scored after four minutes.
Statistical Approaches
Recent approaches have sought to acquire probabilistic grammars from large
corpora, cutting down on the amount of manual labour required, while increasing coverage. Essentially, two approaches have been taken to include statistical
information in the realisation process. One approach, introduced by the seminal work of Langkilde and Knight on the halogen/nitrogen systems, relies on a two-level approach, in which a small, hand-crafted grammar is used to generate alternative
realisations represented as a forest, from which a stochastic re-ranker selects
the optimal candidate. Langkilde and Knight rely on corpus-based statistical
knowledge in the form of n-grams, whereas others have experimented with more
sophisticated statistical models to perform reranking . The second approach does
not rely on a computationally expensive generate-and-ﬁlter approach, but uses
statistical information directly at the level of generation decisions. An example
of this approach is the pcru system developed by Belz , which generates
the most likely derivation of a sentence, given a corpus, using a context-free
grammar. In this case, the statistics are exploited to control the generator’s
choice-making behaviour as it searches for the optimal solution.
In both approaches, the base generator is hand-crafted, while statistical
information is used to ﬁlter outputs. An obvious alternative would be to also
rely on statistical information for the base-generation system. Fully data-driven
grammar-based approaches have been developed by acquiring grammatical rules
from treebanks. For example, the Openccg framework presents a broad coverage English surface realizer, based on Combinatory Categorial Grammar ,
relying on a corpus of ccg representations derived from the Penn Treebank
 and using statistical language models for reranking. There are several other approaches to realisation that adopt a similar
rationale, based on a variety of grammatical formalisms, including Head-Driven
Phrase Structure Grammar , Lexical-Functional Grammar and
Tree Adjoining Grammar . In many of these
systems, the base generator uses some variant of the chart generation algorithm
 to iteratively realise parts of an input speciﬁcation and merge them
into one or more ﬁnal structures, which can then be ranked . The existence of stochastic realisers with
wide-coverage grammars has motivated a greater focus on subtle choices, such
as how to avoid structural ambiguity, or how to handle choices such as explicit
complementiser insertion in English . In a
somewhat similar vein, the statistical approach to microplanning proposed by
Gardent and Perez-Beltrachini focuses on interactions between surface
realization, aggregation, and sentence segmentation in a joint model.
Other approaches to realisation also rely on one or more classiﬁers to improve outputs.
For example, Filippova and Strube describe an
approach to linearisation of constituents using a two-step approach with Maximum Entropy classiﬁers, ﬁrst determining which constituent should occupy
sentence-initial position, then ordering the constituents in the remainder of the
sentence. Bohnet et al. present a realiser using underspeciﬁed dependency structures as input, in a framework based on Support Vector Machines,
where classiﬁers are organised in a cascade. An initial classiﬁer decodes semantic
input into the corresponding syntactic features, while two subsequent classiﬁers
ﬁrst linearise the syntax and then render the correct morphological realisation
for the component lexemes.
Modelling choices using classiﬁer cascades is not restricted to realisation
Indeed, in some cases, it has been adopted as a model for the nlg
process as a whole, a topic we will return to in Section 3.3.3. One outcome of
this view of nlg is that the nature of the input representation also changes: the
more decisions that are made within the statistical generation system, the less
linguistic and more abstract the input representation becomes, paving the way
for integrated, end-to-end stochastic generation systems, such as Konstas and
Lapata , which we also discuss in the next section.
Discussion
This section has given an overview of some classic tasks that are found in most
nlg systems. One of the common trends that can be identiﬁed in each case
is the steady move from early, hand-crafted approaches based on rules, to the
more recent stochastic approaches that rely on corpus data, with a concomitant
move towards more domain-independent approaches. Historically, this was the
case already for individual tasks, such as referring expression generation or realisation, which became topics of intensive research in their own right. However,
as more and more approaches to all nlg tasks begin to take a statistical turn,
there is increasing emphasis on learning techniques; the domain-speciﬁc aspect
is, as it were, incidental, a property of the training data itself. As we shall see in
the next section, this trend has also inﬂuenced the way diﬀerent nlg tasks are
organised, that is, the architecture of systems for text generation from data.
NLG Architectures and Approaches
Having given an overview of the most common sub-tasks that nlg systems incorporate, we now turn to the way such tasks can be organised. Broadly speaking,
we can distinguish between three dominant approaches to nlg architectures:
1. Modular architectures: By design, such architectures involve fairly crisp
divisions among sub-tasks, though with signiﬁcant variations among them;
2. Planning perspectives: Viewing text generation as planning links it to a
long tradition in ai and aﬀords a more integrated, less modular perspective
on the various sub-tasks of nlg;
3. Integrated or global approaches: Now the dominant trend in nlg (as it is in
nlp more generally), such approaches cut across task divisions, usually by
placing a heavy reliance on statistical learning of correspondences between
(non-linguistic) inputs and outputs.
The above typology of nlg is based on architectural considerations.
orthogonal question concerns the extent to which a particular approach relies
on symbolic or knowledge-based methods, as opposed to stochastic, data-driven
methods. It is important to note that none of the three architectural types listed
above is inherently committed to one or the other of these. Thus, it is possible
for a system to have a modular design but incorporate stochastic methods in
several, or even all, sub-tasks. Indeed, our survey of the various tasks in Section
2 included several examples of stochastic approaches. Below, we will also discuss
a number of data-driven systems whose design is arguably modular. Similarly,
it is possible for a system to take a non-modular perspective, but eschew the
use of data-driven models (this is a feature of some planning-based nlg systems
discussed in Section 3.2 below, for instance).
The fact that many modular nlg systems are not data-driven is largely due
to historical reasons since, of the three designs outlined above, the modular one is
Figure 3: Classical three-stage NLG architecture, after Reiter and Dale .
Darker segments illustrate the three main modules; lighter segments show the
the oldest. As we will show below, however, challenges to the classical modular
pipeline architecture – once designated by Reiter as the consensus at
the time – have included blackboard and revision-based architectures that were
not stochastic. At the same time, it must be acknowledged that the large-scale
adoption of integrated, non-modular approaches has been impacted signiﬁcantly
by the uptake of data-driven techniques within the nlg community and the
development of repositories of data to support training and evaluation.
In summary, there are at least two orthogonal ways of classifying nlg systems, based on their design or on the methods adopted in their development.
Our survey in this section follows the typology outlined above for convenience
of exposition. The caveats raised here should, however, be borne in mind by
the reader, and will in any case be brought up repeatedly in what follows, as
we discuss diﬀerent approaches under each heading.
Modular Approaches
Existing surveys of nlg, including those by Reiter and Dale and Reiter , typically refer to some version of the pipeline architecture displayed
in Figure 3 as the ‘consensus’ architecture in the ﬁeld. Originally introduced
by Reiter , the pipeline was a generalisation based on actual practice and
was claimed to have the status of a ‘de facto standard’. This, however, has been
contested repeatedly, as we shall see.
Diﬀerent modules in the pipeline incorporate diﬀerent subsets of the tasks described in Section 2. The ﬁrst module, the Text Planner (or Document Planner,
or Macroplanner), combines content selection and text structuring (or document
planning). Thus, it is concerned mainly with strategic generation , the choice of ‘what to say’. The resulting text plan, a structured representation of messages, is the input to the Sentence Planner (or microplanner),
which typically combines sentence aggregation, lexicalisation and referring expression generation . If text planning amounts to deciding
what to say, sentence planning can be understood as deciding how to say it.
All that remains then is to actually say it, i.e., generate the ﬁnal sentences in
a grammatically correct way, by applying syntactic and morphological rules.
This task is performed by the Linguistic Realiser. Together, sentence planning
and realisation encompass the set of tasks traditionally referred to as tactical
generation.
The pipeline architectures shares some characteristics with a widely-used
architecture in text summarisation ,
where the process is sub-divided into (a) analysis of source texts and selection of
information; (b) transformation of the selected information to enhance ﬂuency;
and (c) synthesis of the summary.
A second related architecture, which was also noted by Reiter , is
that proposed in psycholinguistics for human speech production, where the
most inﬂuential psycholinguistic model of language production, proposed by
Levelt , makes a similar distinction between deciding what to say
and determining how to say it. Levelt’s model allows for a limited degree of
self-monitoring through feedback loops, a feature that is absent in Reiter’s nlg
pipeline, but continues to play an important role in psycholinguistics , though here too there has been increasing emphasis on
more integrated models.
A hallmark of the architecture in Figure 3 is that it represents clear-cut
divisions among tasks that are traditionally considered to belong to the ‘what’
(strategic) and the ‘how’ (tactical).
However, this does not imply that this
division is universally accepted in practice. In an earlier survey, Mellish et al.
 concluded that while several nlg systems incorporate many of the core
tasks outlined in Section 2, their organisation varies considerably from system
to system. Indeed, some tasks may be split up across modules. For example, the
content determination part of referring expression generation might be placed
in the sentence planner, but decisions about form (such as whether to use an
anaphoric np, and if so, what kind of np to produce) may have to wait until
at least some realisation-related decisions have been taken.
Based on these
observations, Mellish et al. proposed an alternative formalism, the ‘objects-andarrows’ framework, within which diﬀerent types of information ﬂow between nlg
sub-tasks can be accommodated. Rather than oﬀering a speciﬁc architecture,
this framework was intended as a formalism within which high-level descriptions
of diﬀerent architectures can be speciﬁed.
However, it retains the principle
that the tasks, irrespective of their organisation, are relatively well-deﬁned and
distinguished.
Another recent development in relation to the pipeline architecture in Figure
3 is a proposal by Reiter to accommodate systems in which input consists of raw (often numeric) data that requires some preprocessing before it can
undergo the kind of selection and planning that the Text Planner is designed to
execute. The main characteristic of these systems is that input is unstructured,
in contrast to systems which operate over logical forms, or database entries. Examples of application domains where this is the case include weather reporting
 , where the input often
takes the form of numerical weather predictions; and generation of summaries
from patient data . In such cases, nlg systems often need to perform some
form of data abstraction (for example, identifying broad trends in the data), followed by data interpretation. The techniques used to perform these tasks range
from extensions of signal processing techniques to the
application of reasoning formalisms based on fuzzy set theory . Reiter’s proposal accommodates these steps by extending
the pipeline ‘backwards’, incorporating stages prior to Text Planning.
Notwithstanding its elegance and simplicity, there are challenges associated
with a pipeline nlg architecture, of which two are particularly worth highlighting:
• The generation gap refers to mismatches between strategic
and tactical components, so that early decisions in the pipeline have unforeseen consequences further downstream. To take an example from Inui
et al. , a generation system might determine a particular sentence
ordering during the sentence planning stage, but this might turn out to
be ambiguous once sentences have actually been realised and orthography
has been inserted;
• Generating under constraints: Itself perhaps an instance of the generation
gap, this problem can occur when the output of a system has to match
certain requirements, for example, it cannot exceed a certain length . Formalising this constraint might appear
possible at the realisation stage – by stipulating the length constraint in
terms of number of words or characters, for instance – but it is much
harder at the earlier stages, where the representations are pre-linguistic
and their mapping to the ﬁnal text are potentially unpredictable.
These, and related problems, motivated the development of alternative architectures. For instance, some early nlg systems were based on an interactive
design, in which a module’s initially incomplete output could be ﬂeshed out
based on feedback from a later module . An even more ﬂexible stance is taken in blackboard architectures, in which task-speciﬁc procedures are not rigidly pre-organised, but perform their tasks reactively as the output, represented in a data structure shared
between tasks, evolves . Finally, revision-based architectures allow a limited form of feedback between modules under monitoring,
with the possibility of altering choices which prove to be unsatisfactory . This has the advantage of not requiring
‘early’ modules to be aware of the consequences of their choices for subsequent
modules, since something that goes wrong can always be revised . Revision need not be carried out exclusively to rectify shortcomings.
For instance, Robin used revision in the context of sports summaries;
an initial draft was revised to add historical background information that was
made relevant by the events reported in the draft, also taking decisions as to
where to place them in relation to the main text. The price that all of these
alternatives potentially incur is, of course, a reduction in eﬃciency, as noted by
De Smedt et al. .
Despite early criticisms of the modular approach, the strategic versus tactical
division continues to inﬂuence recent data-driven approaches to nlg, including
a number of those discussed in Sections 3.3 and 3.3.5 below .
However, other alternatives to pipelines often end up blurring the boundaries
between modules in the nlg system. This is a feature that is more evident in
some planning-based and integrated approaches proposed in recent years. It is
to these that we now turn.
Planning-Based Approaches
In ai, the planning problem can be described as the process of identifying a
sequence of one or more actions to satisfy a particular goal. An initial goal
can be decomposed into sub-goals, satisﬁed by actions each of which has its
preconditions and eﬀects.
In the classical planning paradigm , actions are represented as tuples of such preconditions and
The connection between planning and nlg lies in that text generation can
be viewed as the execution of planned behaviour to achieve a communicative
goal, where each action leads to a new state, that is, a change in a context
that includes both the linguistic interaction or discourse history to date, but
also the physical or situated context and the user’s beliefs and actions .
This perspective
on nlg is therefore related to the view of ‘language as action’ ,
itself rooted in a philosophical tradition inaugurated by the work of Austin
 and Searle . Indeed, some of the earliest ai work in this tradition
 sought an explicit
formulation of preconditions (akin to Searle’s felicity conditions) for speech acts
and their consequences.
Given that there is in principle no restriction on what types of actions can
be incorporated in a plan, it is possible for plan-based approaches to nlg to cut
across the boundaries of many of the tasks that are normally encapsulated in
the classic pipeline architecture, combining both tactical and strategic elements
by viewing the problems of what to say and how to say it as part and parcel
of the same set of operations. Indeed, there are important precedents in early
work for a uniﬁed view of nlg as a hierarchy of goals, the kamp system being among the best known examples. For instance, to generate referring expressions in kamp, the starting point was reasoning about interlocutors’
beliefs and mutual knowledge, whereupon the system generated sub-goals that
percolated all the way down to property choice and realisation, ﬁnally producing a referential np whose predicted eﬀect was to alter the hearer’s belief state
about the referent .
One problem with these perspectives, however, is that deep reasoning about
beliefs, desires and intentions requires highly expressive formalisms and incurs considerable computational expense. One solution is to avoid general-purpose reasoning formalisms
and instead adapt a linguistic framework to the planning paradigm for nlg.
Planning through the Grammar
The idea of interpreting linguistic formalisms in planning terms is again preﬁgured in early nlg work. For example, some early systems were
based on Systemic-Functional Grammar ,
which can be seen as a precursor to contemporary planning-based approaches,
since sfg models linguistic constructions as the outcome of a traversal through
a decision network that extends backwards to pragmatic intentions. In a similar
vein, both Hovy and Moore and Paris interpreted the relations of
Rhetorical Structure Theory as operators for text
Some recent approaches integrate much of the planning machinery into the
grammar itself, viewing linguistic structures as planning operators. This requires grammar formalisms which integrate multiple levels of linguistic analysis,
from pragmatics to morpho-syntax. It is common for contemporary planningbased approaches to nlg to be couched in the formalism of Lexicalised Tree
Adjoining Grammar , though other formalisms,
such as Combinatory Categorial Grammar have also been
shown to be adequate to the task .
In an ltag, pieces of linguistic structure (so-called elementary trees in a
lexicon) can be coupled with semantic and pragmatic information that specify
(a) what semantic preconditions need to obtain in order for the item to be
felicitously used; and (b) what pragmatic goals the use of that particular item
will achieve . As an example of how
such a formalism could be deployed in a planning framework, let us focus on
the task of referring to a target entity.
Koller and Stone formulated
the task in a way that obviates the need to distinguish between the content
determination and realisation phases . Furthermore, they do not separate sentence planning, reg and
realisation, as is done in the traditional pipeline. Consider the sentence Mary
likes the white rabbit. Simplifying the formalism for ease of presentation, we
can represent the lexical item likes as follows :
(12) likes(u, x, y) action:
preconditions:
• The proposition that x likes y is part of the knowledge base (i.e.
the statement is supported);
• x is animate;
• The current utterance u can be substituted into the derivation S
under construction;
• u is now part of S
• New np nodes for x in agent position and y in patient position have
been set up (and need to be ﬁlled).
As in strips, an operator consists of preconditions and eﬀects. Note that
the preconditions associated with the lexical item require support in the knowledge base (thus making reference to the input kb, which normally would not be
accessible to the realiser), and include semantic information (such as that the
agent needs to be animate). Having inserted likes as the sentence’s main verb,
we have two noun phrases which need to be ﬁlled by generating nps for the
arguments x and y. Rather than deferring this task to a separate reg module,
Koller and Stone build referring expressions by associating further pragmatic
preconditions on the linguistic operators (elementary trees) that will be incorporated in the referential np. First, the entity must be part of the hearer’s
knowledge state, since an identifying description (say, to x) presupposes that
the hearer is familiar with it. Second, an eﬀect of adding words to the np (such
as the predicates rabbit or white) is that the phrase excludes distractors, i.e.
entities of which those properties are not true. In a scenario with one human
being and two rabbits, only one of which (the y in our example) is white, the
derivation would proceed by ﬁrst updating the np corresponding to y with rabbit, thereby excluding the human from the distractor set, but leaving the goal
to distinguish y unsatisﬁed (since y is not the only rabbit). The addition of
another predicate to the np (white) does the trick.
A practical advantage to planning-based approaches is the availability of a
signiﬁcant number of oﬀ-the-shelf planners. Once the nlg task is formulated in
an appropriate plan description language, such as the Planning Domain Deﬁnition Language , it becomes possible in principle to
use any planner to generate text. However, planners remain beset by problems
of eﬃciency. In a set of experiments on nlg tasks of diﬀering complexity, Koller
and Petrick noted that planners tend to spend signiﬁcant amounts of
time on preprocessing, though solutions could often be found eﬃciently once
preprocessing was complete.
Stochastic Planning under Uncertainty using Reinforcement
The approaches to planning we have discussed so far are largely rule-based and
tend to view the relationship between a planned action and its consequences
(that is, its impact on the context), as ﬁxed .
As Rieser and Lemon note, this view is unrealistic. Consider a system
that generates a restaurant recommendation. The consequences of its output
(that is, the new state it gives rise to) are subject to noise arising from several
sources of uncertainty. In part, this is due to trade-oﬀs, for example, between
needing to include the right amount of information while avoiding excessive
prolixity. Another source of uncertainty is the user, whose actions may not be
the ones predicted by the system. An instance of Meteer’s generation
gap can rear its head, for instance if a stochastic realiser renders the content of
a message in an ambiguous, or excessively lengthy utterance , a problem that could be addressed by allowing diﬀerent sub-tasks to
share knowledge sources and be guided by overlapping constraints .
In short, planning a good solution to reach a communicative goal could be
viewed as a stochastic optimisation problem (a theme we revisit in Section 3.3.3
below). This view is shared by many recent approaches based on Reinforcement
Learning , especially those that
tackle nlg within a dialogue context. In this framework, generation can be
modelled as a Markov decision process where states are associated with possible
actions and each state-action pair is associated with a probability of moving
from a state at time t to a new state at t + 1 via action a. Crucially for the
learning algorithm, transitions are associated with a reinforcement signal, via a
reward function that quantiﬁes the optimality of the generated output. Learning
usually involves simulations in which diﬀerent generation strategies or ‘policies’
– essentially, plans corresponding to possible paths through the state space –
come to be associated with diﬀerent rewards. The rl framework has been argued
to be better at handling uncertainty in dynamic environments than supervised
learning or classiﬁcation, since these do not enable adaptation in a changing
context . Rieser et al. showed that this approach
is eﬀective in optimising information presentation when generating restaurant
recommendations.
Janarthanam and Lemon used it to optimise the
choice of information to select in a referring expression, given a user’s knowledge.
The system learns to adapt its user model as the user acquires new knowledge
in the course of a dialogue.
An important contribution of this work has been in exploring joint optimisation, where the policy learned satisﬁes multiple constraints arising from
diﬀerent sub-tasks of the generation process, by sharing knowledge across the
sub-tasks. Lemon showed that joint optimisation can learn a policy that
determines when to generate informative utterances or queries to seek more
information from a user. Similarly, Cuay´ahuitl and Dethlefs used hierarchical rl to jointly optimise the problem of ﬁnding and describing a short
route description, while adapting to a user’s prior knowledge, giving rise to a
strategy whereby the user is guided past landmarks that they are familiar with,
while avoiding potentially confusing junctions. Also in a route-ﬁnding setting,
Dethlefs and Cuay´ahuitl develop a hierarchical model comprising a set
of learning agents whose tasks range from content selection through realisation.
They show that a joint framework in which agents share knowledge, outperforms an isolated learning framework in which each task is modelled separately.
For example, the joint policy learns to give high-level navigation instructions,
but switches to low-level instructions if the user goes oﬀ-track. Furthermore,
utterances produced by the joint policy are less verbose and lead to shorter
interactions overall.
The joint optimisation framework is of course not unique to Reinforcement
Learning and planning-based approaches. A number of approaches to content
determination discussed in earlier sections, including the work of Marciniak
and Strube and Barzilay and Lapata , also use joint optimisation
in their approach to content determination and realisation (see Sections 2.1),
as does the work of Lampouras and Androutsopoulos .
We return to
optimisation in Section 3.3.3 below.
In summary, nlg research within the planning paradigm has highlighted
the desirability of developing uniﬁed formalisms to represent constraints on the
generation process at multiple levels, whether this is done using ai-based planning formalisms , or stochastically via Reinforcement
Learning. Among its contributions, the latter line of work has shed light on
the value of (a) hierarchical relationships among sub-problems; and (b) joint
optimisation of diﬀerent sub-tasks. Indeed, the latter trend belongs to a much
broader range of research on integrated approaches to nlg, to which we turn
our attention immediately below.
Other Stochastic Approaches to NLG
As we noted at the start of this section, whether a system is data-driven or
not is independent of its architectural organisation. Indeed, some of the earliest
challenges to a modular or pipeline approach described in Section 3.1 above,
including revision-based and blackboard architectures, were symbolic in their
methodological orientation. At the same time, the shift towards data-driven
methods and the availability of data sources has given greater impetus to integrated approaches to nlg, although this shift began somewhat later that in
other areas of nlp. As a result, a discussion of integrated approaches will necessarily tend to emphasise statistical methods.
In the remainder of this section, we start with an overview of methods used
to acquire training data for nlg – in particular, pairings of inputs (data) and
outputs (text) – before turning to an overview of techniques and frameworks.
One of the themes that will emerge from this overview is that, as in the case
of planning, statistical methods often take a uniﬁed or ‘global’, rather than a
modularised, view of the nlg process.
Acquiring Data
As noted in Section 2, some nlg tasks support the transition to a stochastic
approach fairly easily. For example, research on realisation often exploits the
existence of treebanks from which input-output correspondences can be learned.
Similarly, the emergence of corpora of referring expressions representing both
input domains and output descriptions has facilitated the development of probabilistic reg algorithms. Shared tasks have also contributed to
the development of both data sources and methods (see Section 7). As we show
in Section 4 below, recent work on image-to-text generation has also beneﬁted
from the availability of large datasets. For statistical, end-to-end generation in
other domains, there is less of an embarrassment of riches. However, this situation is improving as methods to automatically align input data with output
text are developed. Still, it is worth emphasising that many of these alignment
approaches use data which is semi-structured, rather than the raw, numerical
input (e.g., signals) used by the data-to-text systems that Reiter , among
others, drew attention to.
Currently, there are a number of data-text corpora in speciﬁc domains, notably weather forecasting 
and sports summaries . These
usually consist of database records paired with free text. A promising recent
trend is the introduction of statistical techniques that seek to automatically
segment and align such data and text . In an inﬂuential paper, Liang et al.
 described this framework in terms of a generative model that deﬁnes a
distribution p(w∥s), for sequences of words w and input states s, with latent
variables specifying the correspondence between w and s in terms of three main
components: (i) the likelihood of database records being selected, given s; (ii)
the likelihood of certain ﬁelds being chosen for some record; (iii) the likelihood
that a string of a certain length is generated given the records, ﬁelds and states.
The parameters of the model can be found using the Expectation Maximization
(em) algorithm. An example alignment is shown in Figure 4.
These models perform alignment by identifying regular co-occurrences of
segments of data and text. Koncel-Kedziorski et al. go beyond this by
proposing a model that exploits linguistic structure to align at varying resolutions. For example, (13) below is related to two observations in a soccer game
log (an aerial pass and a miss), but can be further analysed into two sub-parts
(indicated by indices 1 and 2 in our example), which individually map to these
two sub-events.
(13) (Chamakh rises highest)1 and (aims a header towards goal which is
narrowly wide)2.
A diﬀerent approach to data acquisition is described by Mairesse and Young
 , who use crowd-sourcing techniques to elicit realisations for semantic/pragmatic
inputs describing dialogue acts in the restaurant domain .
2016b, for another recent approach to crowd-sourcing in a similar domain). The
key to the success of this technique is the development of a semantics that is suf-
ﬁciently transparent for use with non-specialists. In an earlier paper, Mairesse
et al. describe a method to cut down on the amount of training data
required for generation by using uncertainty sampling ,
whereby a system can be trained on a relatively small amount of input data;
subsequently, the learned model is applied to new data, from which the system
samples the cases of which it is least certain, forwarding these to a (possibly
human) oracle for feedback, which potentially leads to a new training cycle.
Many of the stochastic end-to-end systems we discuss below rely on welldeﬁned formalisms and typically need fairly precise alignments between inputs
and portions of the output. One of the limitations of these approaches is that
the reliance on alignment makes such systems highly domain-speciﬁc, as noted
by Angeli et al. .
More recent stochastic methods obviate the need for alignment between input data and output strings. This is the case for many systems based on neural
networks as well as other machine-learning
approaches . For example, Duˇsek and Jurˇc´ıˇcek use the dialogue acts from the bagel dataset
 as meaning representations; the bagel reference texts are
parsed using an oﬀ-the-shelf deep syntactic analyser. They deﬁne a stochastic
sentence planner, a variant of the A∗algorithm, which builds optimal sentence
plans using a base generator and a scoring function to rank candidates. Realisation is conducted using a rule-based realiser. The approach of Lampouras
and Vlachos , also uses unaligned mr-text pairs from bagel, as well as
the related sf hotel and restaurant dataset by Wen et al. . Here, content determination and realisation are both conceived as classiﬁcation problems
(choosing an attribute from the mr, or choosing a word for the output), but are
optimised jointly in an iterative training algorithm using imitation learning.
NLG as a Sequential, Stochastic Process
Given an alignment between data and text, one way of modelling the nlg process is to remain faithful to the division between strategic and tactical choices,
using the statistical alignment to inform content selection, while deploying nlp
techniques to acquire rules, templates or schemas to drive
sentence planning and realisation.
Recall that the generative model of Liang et al. pairs data to text
based on a sequential, Markov process, combining strategic choices (of db
records and ﬁelds) with tactical choices (of word sequences) into a single probabilistic model. In fact, Markov-based language modelling approaches continue
to feature prominently in data-driven nlg. One of the earliest examples is the
work of Oh and Rudnicky in the context of a dialogue system in the
travel domain, where the input takes the form of a dialogue act (e.g. a query
that the system needs to make to obtain information about the user’s travel
plans) with the attributes to include (e.g. the departure city). Oh and Rudnicky’s approach encompasses both content planning and realisation. It relies on
dialogue corpora annotated with utterance classes, that is, the type of dialogue
act that each utterance is intended to fulﬁl. On this basis, they construct separate n-gram language models for each utterance class, as well as for word-classes
that can appear in the input (for example, words corresponding to departure
city). Content planning is handled by a model that predicts which attributes
should be included in an utterance on the basis of recent dialogue history. Realisation is handled using a combination of templates and n-gram models. Thus,
generation is conceived as a two-step (planning followed by realisation) process.
The reliance on standard language models has one potential drawback, in
that such models are founded on a local history assumption, limiting the extent
to which prior selections can inﬂuence current choices. An alternative, discriminative model 
is logistic regression (Maximum Entropy). The foundations for this approach in
nlg can be found in the work of Ratnaparkhi , who focussed primarily on
realisation (albeit combined with elements of sentence planning). He compared
two stochastic nlg systems based on a maximum entropy learning framework,
to a baseline nlg system. The ﬁrst of these (nlg2 in Ratnaparkhi’s paper)
uses a conditional language model that generates sentences in an incremental,
left-to-right fashion, by predicting the best word given both the preceding history (as in standard n-gram models) and the semantic attributes that remain
to be expressed. The second (nlg3) augments the model with syntactic dependency relations, performing generation by recursively predicting the left and
right children of a given constituent. In an evaluation based on judgements of
correctness, Ratnaparkhi found that the system augmented with dependencies
was generally preferred.
In later work, Angeli et al. describe an end-to-end nlg system that
maintains a separation between content selection, sentence planning and realisation, modelling each process as a sequence of decisions in a log-linear framework,
where choices can be conditioned on arbitrarily long histories of previous deci-
Figure 5: Tree structure for a dialogue act, after Mairesse and Young .
Leaves correspond to word sequences.
Non-terminal nodes are semantic attributes, shown at the bottom as semantic stacks.
Stacks in bold represent
mandatory content.
sions. This enables them to handle long-range dependencies, such as coherence
relations, more ﬂexibly . The separation of tasks is maintained insofar as a diﬀerent set of
features can be used to inform decisions at each stage of the process. Sentence
planning and realisation decisions are based on templates acquired from corpus
texts: a template is selected based on its likelihood given the database ﬁelds
selected during content selection.
Mairesse and Young describe a diﬀerent approach, which also relies
on alignments between database records and text, and seeks a global solution
to generation, without a crisp distinction between strategic and tactical components. In this case, the basic representational framework is a tree of the sort
shown in Figure 5. The root indicates a dialogue act type (in the example,
the dialogue act seeks to inform). Leaves in the tree correspond to words or
word sequences, while nonterminals are semantic stacks, that is, the pieces of
input to which the words correspond. In this framework, content selection and
realisation can be solved jointly by searching for the optimal stack sequence
for a given dialogue act, and the optimal word sequence corresponding to that
stack sequence.
Mairesse and Young use a factored language model (flm),
which extends n-gram models by conditioning probabilities on diﬀerent utterance contexts, rather than simply on word histories. Given an input dialogue
act, generation works by applying a Viterbi search through the flm at each
of the following stages: (a) mandatory semantic stacks are identiﬁed for the
dialogue act; (b) these are enriched with possible non-mandatory stacks (those
which are not in boldface in Figure 5), usually corresponding to function words;
(c) realisations are found for the stack sequence. The approach is also extended
to deal with n−best realisations, as well as to handle variation, in the form of
paraphrases for the same input.
NLG as Classiﬁcation and Optimisation
An alternative way to think about nlg decisions at diﬀerent levels is in terms
of classiﬁcation, already encountered in the context of speciﬁc tasks, such as
content determination and realisation . Since generation is ultimately about choice-making
at multiple levels, one way to model the process is by using a cascade of classiﬁers, where the output is constructed incrementally, so that any classiﬁer Ci
uses as (part of) its input the output of a previous classiﬁer Ci−i. Within this
framework, it is still possible to conceive of nlg in terms of a pipeline.
Marciniak and Strube note, an alternative way of thinking about it is
in terms of a weighted, multi-layered lattice, where generation amounts to a
best-ﬁrst traversal: at any stage i, classiﬁer Ci produces the most likely output, which leads to the next stage Ci+1 along the most probable path. This
generalisation is conceptually related to the view of nlg in terms of policies in
the Reinforcement Learning framework (see Section 3.2.2 above), which deﬁne
a traversal through sequences of states which may be hierarchically organised
 .
Marciniak and Strube start from a small corpus of manually annotated texts of route descriptions, dividing generation into a series of eight classiﬁcation problems, from determining the linear precedence of discourse units,
to determining the lexical form of verbs and the type of their arguments. Generation decisions are taken using the instance-based KStar algorithm, which is
shown to outperform a majority baseline on all classiﬁcation decisions. Instancebased approaches to nlg are also discussed by Varges and Mellish , albeit in an overgenerate-and-rank approach where rules overgenerate candidates,
which are then ranked by comparison to the instance base.
A similar framework was recently adopted by Zarrieß and Kuhn , once
again taking as their starting point textual data annotated with a dependency
representation, as shown in (14) below, where referents are marked v and p and
the implicit head of the dependency is underlined.
(14) Junge
Familiev:0
dem Heimwegposs:v
the way home
ausgeraubtag:p
‘A young family was robbed on their way home.’
These authors use a sequence of classiﬁers to perform referring expression
generation and realisation. They use a ranking model based on Support Vector
Machines which, given an input dependency representation extracted from annotated text such as (14), performs two tasks in either order: (a) mapping the
input to a shallow syntactic tree for linearisation; and (b) inserting referring expressions. Interestingly, Zarrieß and Kuhn observe that the performance
of either task is order-dependent, in that both classiﬁcation tasks perform worse
when they are second in the sequence. They observe a marginal improvement
when the tasks are performed in parallel, but achieve the best performance in
a revision-based architecture, where syntactic mapping is followed by referring
expression insertion, followed by a revision of the syntax.
Classiﬁcation cascades for nlg maintain a clean separation between tasks,
but research in this area has echoed earlier concerns about pipelines in general
(see Section 3.1), the main problem being error propagation. Infelicitous choices
will of course impact classiﬁcation further downstream, a situation analogous to
the problem of the generation gap. The conclusion by Zarrieß and Kuhn 
in favour of a revision-based architecture, brings our account full circle, in that
a well-known solution is shown to yield improvements in a new framework.
Our discussion so far has repeatedly highlighted the fact that a sequential
organisation of nlg tasks is susceptible to error propagation, whether this takes
the form of classiﬁer errors, or decisions in a rule-based module that have a
negative impact on downstream components. A potential solution is to view
generation as an optimisation problem, where the best combination of decisions is sought in an exponentially large space of possible combinations. We
have encountered the use of optimisation techniques, such as Integer Linear
Programming (ilp) in the context of aggregation and content determination
(Section 2.3). For example, Barzilay and Lapata group content units
based on their pairwise similarity, with an optimisation step to identify a set of
pairs that are maximally similar. ilp has also been exploited by Marciniak and
Strube , as a means to counteract the error propagation problem in
their original classiﬁcation-based approach. Similar solutions have been undertaken by Lampouras and Androutsopoulos , in the context of generating
text from owl ontologies. Lampouras and Androutsopoulos show that joint
optimization using Integer Linear Programming to jointly determine content
selection, lexicalisation and aggregation produces more compact verbalisations
of ontology facts, compared to a pipeline system .
Conceptually, the optimisation framework is simple:
1. Each nlg task is once again modelled as classiﬁcation or label-assignment,
but this time, labels are modelled as binary choices (either a label is
assigned or not), associated with a cost function, deﬁned in terms of the
probability of a label in the training data;
2. Pairs of tasks which are strongly inter-dependent 
have a cost based on the joint probability of their labels;
3. An ilp model seeks the global labelling solution that minimises the overall
cost, with the added constraint that if one of a pair of correlated labels
⟨li, lj⟩is selected, the other must be too.
Optimisation solutions have been shown to outperform diﬀerent versions of
the classiﬁcation pipeline , much as the
results of Dethlefs and Cuay´ahuitl , discussed above, showed that reinforcement learning of a joint policy produces better dialogue interactions than
learning isolated policies for separate nlg tasks. The imitation learning framework of Lampouras and Vlachos (discussed earlier in Section 3.3.1), which
seeks to jointly optimise content determination and realisation, was also shown
to achieve competitive results, approaching the performance of the systems of
Wen et al. on sf and of Duˇsek and Jurˇc´ıˇcek on bagel.
NLG as ‘Parsing’
In recent years, there has been a resurgence of interest in viewing generation
in terms of probabilistic context-free grammar (cfg) formalisms, or even as
the ‘inverse’ of semantic parsing. For example, Belz formalises the nlg
problem entirely in terms of cfgs: a base generator expands inputs (bits of
weather data in this case) by applying cfg rules; corpus-derived probabilities
are then used to control the choice of which rules to expand at each stage of the
process. The base generator in this work is hand-crafted. However, it is possible
to extract rules or templates from corpora, as has been done for aggregation
rules , and
also for more general statistical approaches to sentence planning and realisation
in a text-to-text framework . Similarly, approaches
to nlg from structured knowledge bases, expressed in formalisms such as rdf,
have described techniques to extract lexicalised grammars or templates from
such inputs paired with textual descriptions .
The work of Mooney and colleagues has compared a number of diﬀerent generation
strategies inspired by the wasp semantic parser , which
uses probabilistic synchronous cfg rules learned from pairs of utterances and
their semantic representations using statistical machine translation techniques.
Chen and Mooney use this framework for generation both by adapting wasp in a generation framework, and by further adapting it to produce a
new system, wasper-gen. While wasp seeks to maximise the probability of a
meaning representation (mr) given a sentence, wasper-gen does the opposite,
seeking the maximally probable sentence given an input mr, as it were, learning a translation model from meaning to text. When trained on a dataset of
sportscasts (the robocup dataset), wasper-gen outperforms wasp on corpusbased evaluation metrics, and is shown to achieve a level of ﬂuency and semantic correctness which approaches that of human text, based on subjective
judgements by experimental participants. Note, however, that this framework
focusses mainly on tactical generation. Content determination is performed separately, using a variant of the em-algorithm to converge on a probabilistic model
that predicts which events or predicates should be mentioned.
By contrast, the work of Konstas and Lapata , which also relies on cfgs, uses a uniﬁed framework throughout. The starting point is an
alignment of text with database records, extending the proposal by Liang et al.
The process of converting input data to output text is modelled in
terms of rules which implicitly incorporate diﬀerent types of decisions. For example, given a database of weather records, the rules might take the (somewhat
simpliﬁed) form shown below:
(15) R(windSpeed) →FS(temperature), R(rain)
(16) FS(windSpeed,min) →F(windSpeed,max)FS(windSpeed,max)
(17) FS(windSpeed,min) →W(windSpeed,min)
where R stands for a database record, FS is a set of ﬁelds, F(x, y) stands for ﬁeld
y in record x, W is a word sequence, and all rules have associated probabilities
that condition the rhs on the lhs, akin to the pcfgs used in parsing. These
rules specify that a description of windSpeed (15) should be followed in the
text by a temperature and a rain report.
According to rule (16), minimum
windspeed should be followed by a mention of the maximum windspeed with
a certain probability.
Rule (17) expands the minimum windspeed rule to a
sequence of words according to a bigram language model pack the set of rules acquired from the
alignment stage into a hypergraph, and treat generation as decoding to ﬁnd the
maximally likely word sequence.
Under this view, generation is akin to inverted parsing. Decoding proceeds
using an adaptation of the cyk algorithm. Since the model deﬁning the mapping
from input to output does not incorporate ﬂuency heuristics, the decoder is
interleaved with two further sources of linguistic knowledge by Konstas and
Lapata : (a) a weighted ﬁnite-state automaton (representing an n-gram
language model); and (b) a dependency model .
Deep Learning Methods
We conclude our discussion of data-driven nlg with an overview of applications
of deep neural network (nn) architectures. The decision to dedicate a separate
section is warranted by the recent, renewed interest in these models , as well as the comparatively small
(but steadily growing) range of nlg models couched within this framework to
date. We will also revisit nn models for nlg under more speciﬁc headings in
the following sections, especially in discussing stylistic variation (Section 5) and
the image captioning (Section 4), where they are now the dominant approach.
As a matter of fact, applications of nns in nlg hark back at least to Kukich
 , though her work was restricted to small-scale examples. Since the early
1990s, when interest in neural approaches waned in the nlp and ai communities,
cognitive science research has continued to explore their application to syntax
and language production . The
recent resurgence of interest in nns is in part due to advances in hardware
that can support resource-intensive learning problems .
More importantly, nns are designed to learn representations at increasing levels
of abstraction by exploiting backpropagation . Such representations are dense, low-dimensional, and distributed,
making them well-suited to capturing grammatical and semantic generalisations
 .
nns have also scored notable successes in sequential modelling using feedforward
networks , log-bilinear models
 and recurrent neural networks , including rnns with long short-term memory units . The latter are now the dominant type of rnn
for language modelling tasks. Their main advantage over standard language
models is that they handle sequences of varying lengths, while avoiding both
data sparseness and an explosion in the number of parameters through the
projection of histories into a low-dimensional space, so that similar histories
share representations.
A demonstration of the potential utility of recurrent networks for nlg was
provided by Sutskever et al. , who used a character-level lstm model for
the generation of grammatical English sentences. This, however, focussed exclusively on their potential for realisation. Models that generate from semantic
or contextual inputs cluster around two related types of models, descibed below.
Encoder-Decoder Architectures
An inﬂuential architecture is the Encoder-Decoder framework , where an rnn is used to encode the input into a vector representation,
which serves as the auxiliary input to a decoder rnn. This decoupling between
encoding and decoding makes it possible in principle to share the encoding
vector across multiple nlp tasks in a multi-task learning setting . Encoder-Decoder
architectures are particularly well-suited to Sequence-to-Sequence (seq2seq)
tasks such as Machine Translation, which can be thought of as requiring the
mapping of variable-length input sequences in the source language, to variablelength sequences in the target . It is easy to adapt this view to data-to-text nlg. For example,
Castro Ferreira et al. adapt seq2seq models for generating text from
abstract meaning representations (amrs).
A further important development within the Encoder-Decoder paradigm is
the use of attention-based mechanisms, which force the encoder, during training,
to weight parts of the input encoding more when predicting certain portions of
the output during decoding . This
mechanism obviates the need for direct input-output alignment, since attentionbased models are able to learn input-output correspondences based on loose
couplings of input representations and output texts .
In nlg, many approaches to response generation in an interactive context
(such as dialogue or social media posts) adopt this architecture. For example,
Wen et al. use semantically-conditioned lstms to generate the next act
in a dialogue; a related approach is taken by Sordoni et al. , who use rnns
to encode both the input utterance and the dialogue context, with a decoder
to predict the next word in the response . Goyal
et al. found an improvement in the quality of generated dialogue acts
when using a character-based, rather than a word-based rnn.
Duˇsek and Jurˇc´ıˇcek also use a seq2seq model with attention for
dialogue generation, comparing an end-to-end model where content selection
and realisation are jointly optimised (so that outputs are strings), to a model
which outputs deep syntax trees, which are then realised using an oﬀ-the-shelf
realiser . Like Wen et al. , they use
a reranker during decoding to rank beam search outputs, penalising those that
omit relevant information or include irrelevant information. Their evaluation, on
bagel, shows that the joint optimisation setup is superior to the seq2seq model
that generates trees for subsequent realisation. Mei et al. also explicitly
address the division into content selection and realisation, using weathergov
data .
They use a bidirectional lstm encoder to map
input records to a hidden state, followed by an attention-based aligner which
models content selection, determining which records to mention as a function of
their prior probability and the likelihood of their alignment with words in the
vocabulary; a further reﬁnement step weights the outcomes of the alignment
with the priors, making it more likely that more important records will be
verbalised. In this approach, lstms are able to learn long-range dependencies
between records and descriptors, which the log-linear model of Angeli factored
in explicitly (see Section 3.3.2 above). Comparable approaches are now also use
for automatic generation of poetry , a topic
to which we will return below.
Conditioned Language Models
A related view of the data-to-text process views the generator as a conditioned
language model, where output is generated by sampling words or characters
from a distribution conditioned on input features, which may include semantic,
contextual or stylistic attributes. For example, Lebret et al. restricts
generation to the initial sentence of wikipedia biographies from the corresponding wiki fact table and models content selection and realisation jointly in a
feedforward nn , conditioning output word probabilities
on both local context and global features obtained from the input table. This
biases the model towards full coverage of the contents of a ﬁeld. For example, a
ﬁeld in the table containing a person’s name typically consists of more than one
word and the model should concatenate the words making up the entire name.
While simpler than some of the models discussed above, this model can also
be thought of as incorporating an attentional mechanism. Lipton et al. 
use character-level rnns conditioned on semantic information and sentiment, to
generate product reviews, while Tang et al. generate such reviews using
an lstm conditioned on input ‘contexts’, where contexts incorporate both dis-
crete (user, location etc) and continuous information. Similar approaches have
been adopted in a number of models for stylistic and aﬀective generation .
Discussion
An important theme that has emerged from recent work is the blurring of boundaries between tasks that are encapsulated in traditional architectures. This is
evident in planning-based approaches, but perhaps the most radical break from
this perspective arises in stochastic data-to-text systems which capitalise on
alignments between input data and output text, combining content-oriented
and linguistic choices within a uniﬁed framework. Among the open questions
raised by research on stochastic nlg is the extent to which sub-tasks need to be
jointly optimised and, if so, which knowledge sources should be shared among
them. This is also seen in recent work using neural models, where joint learning
of content selection and realisation has been claimed to yield superior outputs,
compared to models that leave the tasks separate .
An outstanding issue is the balancing act between achieving adequate textual
output versus doing so eﬃciently and robustly. Early approaches that departed
from a pipeline architecture tended to sacriﬁce the latter in favour of the former;
this was the case in revision-based and blackboard architectures. The same is to
some extent true of planning-based approaches which are rooted in paradigms
with a long history in ai: As recent empirical work has shown , these too are susceptible to considerable computational cost, though this
comes with the advantage of a uniﬁed view of language generation that is also
compatible with well-understood linguistic formalisms, such as ltag.
Stochastic approaches present a diﬀerent problem, namely, that of acquiring the right data to construct the necessary statistical models. While plenty
of datasets have become available, for tasks such as recommendations in the
restaurant or hotel domains, brief weather reports, or sports summaries, it remains to be seen whether data-driven nlg models can be scaled up to domains
where large volumes of heterogeneous data (numbers, symbols etc) are the norm,
and where longer texts need to be generated. While such data is not easy to
come by, crowd-sourcing techniques can presumably be exploited .
As we have seen, systems vary in whether they require aligned data (by which
we mean data where strings are paired with the portion of the input to which
they correspond), or not. As deep learning approaches become more popular –
and, as we shall see in the next section, they are now the dominant approach
in certain tasks, such as generating image captions – the need for alignment is
becoming less acute, as looser input-output couplings can constitute adequate
training data, especially in models that incorporate attentional mechanisms.
As these techniques become better understood, they are likely to feature more
heavily in a broader range of nlg tasks, as well as end-to-end nlg systems.
A second possible outcome of the renewed interest in deep learning is its
impact on representation learning and architectures. In a recent opinion piece,
Manning suggested that the contribution of deep learning to nlp has to
date been mainly due to the power of distributed representations, rather than
the exploitation of the ‘depth’ of multi-layered models. Yet, as Manning also
notes, greater depth can confer representational advantages.
As researchers
begin to deﬁne complex architectures that ‘self-organise’ during training by
minimising a loss function, it might turn out that diﬀerent components of such
architectures acquire core representations pertaining to diﬀerent aspects of the
problem at hand. This raises the question whether such representations could
be reusable, in the same way that the layers of deep convolutional networks
in computer vision learn representations at diﬀerent levels of granularity which
turn out to be reusable in a range of tasks . A related aim, suggested by recent attempts
at transfer learning, especially in the seq2seq paradigm, is to attempt to learn
domain-invariant representations that carry over from one task to another.
Could nlp, and the ﬁeld of nlg in particular, be about to witness a renewed
emphasis on multi-levelled approaches to nlg, with ‘deep’ architectures whose
components learn optimal representations for diﬀerent sub-tasks, perhaps along
the lines detailed in Section 2 above?
And to what extent would such representations be reusable? As a number of other commentators have pointed
out, the prospect of learning domain-invariant linguistic representations that
facilitate transfer learning in nlp, remains somewhat elusive, despite certain
notable successes, not least those scored in the development of distributed word
representations.4 This could well be the next frontier in research on statistical
In the following sections, we turn our attention away from standard tasks
and the way they are organised, focussing on three broad topics – image-totext generation, stylistic variation and computational creativity – in which nlg
research has also intersected with research in other areas of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
The Vision-Language Interface: Image Captioning and Beyond
Over the past few years, there has been an explosion of interest in the task of
automatically generating captions for images, as part of a broader endeavour to
investigate the interface between vision and language . Image
captioning is arguably a paradigm case of data-to-text generation, where the
input comes in the form of an image. The task has become a research focus not
only in the nlg community but also in the computer vision community, raising
4For some remarks on this topic, see for example the blog entry by Ruder . A recent
note of caution against unrealistic claims of success of neural methods in nlg was sounded by
Goldberg .
the possibility of more eﬀective synergies between the two groups of researchers.
Apart from its practical applications, the grounding of language in perceptual
data has long been a matter of scientiﬁc interest in ai .
(a) The man at bat readies to swing at the pitch
while the umpire looks
on 
(b) This picture shows
one chair, and one potted
plant. The person is near
the green grass, and in the
The green grass
is by the chair, and near
the potted plant 
(c) A person is playing
a saxophone 
(d) A bus by the road
 
(e) A bus is driving down
a building (Mao et al.,
(f) A gecko is standing on
a branch of a tree 
Figure 6: Some caption generation examples
Figure 6 shows some examples of caption generation, sampled from publications spanning approximately 6 years. Current caption generation research
focusses mainly on what Hodosh et al. refer to as concrete conceptual
image descriptions of elements directly depicted in a scene. As Donahue et al.
 put it, image captioning is a task whose input is static and non-sequential
(an image, rather than, say, a video), whereas the output is sequential (a multiword text), in contrast to non-sequential outputs such as object labels .
Our discussion will be brief, since image captioning has recently been the
subject of an extensive review by Bernardi et al. , and has also been
discussed against the background of broader issues in research on the vision-
language interface by Barnard . While the present section draws upon
these sources, it is organised in a somewhat diﬀerent manner, also bringing out
the connections with nlg more explicitly.
A detailed overview of datasets is provided by Bernardi et al. . Ferraro
et al. oﬀer a systematic comparison of datasets for both caption generation and visual question answering with an accompanying online resource.5
Datasets typically consist of images paired with one or more human-authored
captions (mostly in English) and vary from artiﬁcially created scenes to real photographs. Among the latter, the most widely used are
Flickr8k , Flickr30k and ms-coco . Datasets such as the sbu1m Captioned Photo Dataset include naturally-occurring captions of user-shared photographs on
sites such as Flickr; hence the captions included therein are not restricted to
the concrete conceptual. There are also a number of specialised, domain-speciﬁc
datasets, such as the Caltech ucsd Birds datast .
There have also been a number of shared tasks in this area, including the
coco (‘Common Objects in Context’) Captioning Challenge6, organised as part
of the Large-Scale Scene Understanding Challenge (lsun)7 and the Multimodal
Machine Translation Task . We defer discussion of evaluation of image captioning systems to Section 7 of this paper, where it is discussed
in the context of nlg evaluation as a whole.
The Core Tasks
There are two logically distinguishable sub-tasks in an image captioning system,
namely, image analysis and text generation. This is not to say that they need
to be organised separately or sequentially. However, prior to discussing architectures as such, it is worth brieﬂy giving an overview of the methods used to
deal with these two tasks.
Image Analysis
There are three main groups of approaches to treating visual information for
captioning purposes.
Some systems rely on computer vision methods for the detection
and labelling of objects, attributes, ‘stuﬀ’ (typically mapped to mass nouns,
such as grass), spatial relations, and possibly also action and pose information.
This is usually followed by a step mapping these outputs to linguistic structures
visionandlanguage.net.
6 
7 
(‘sentence plans’ of the sort discussed in Section 2 and 3), such as trees or templates . Since performance depends on the coverage and accuracy of detectors , some work has also explored generation from gold
standard image annotations or artiﬁcially created scenes in which the components are
known in advance .
Holistic scene analysis
Here, a more holistic characterisation of a scene is
used, relying on features that do not typically identify objects, attributes and the
like. Such features include rgb histograms, scale-invariant feature transforms
 , or low-dimensional representations of spatial structure , among others. This kind of image processing
is often used by systems that frame the task in terms of retrieval, rather than
caption generation proper. Such systems either use a unimodal space to compare
a query image to training images before caption retrieval , or exploit a multimodal space representing proximity
between images and captions .
Dense image feature vectors
Given the success of convolutional neural
networks (cnn) for computer vision tasks , many
deep learning approaches use features from a pre-trained cnn such as AlexNet
 , vgg or Caﬀe . Most commonly, caption generators use an activation layer from
the pre-trained network as their input features .
Text Generation or Retrieval
Depending on the type of image analysis technique, captions can be generated
using a variety of diﬀerent methods, of which the following are well-established.
Using templates or trees
Systems relying on detectors can map the output to linguistic structures in a sentence planning stage. For example, objects
can be mapped to nouns, spatial relations to prepositions, and so on. Yao et al.
 use semi-supervised methods to parse images into graphs and then generate text via a simple grammar. Other approaches rely on sequence classiﬁcation
algorithms, such as Hidden Markov Models and conditional
random ﬁelds . Kulkarni et al. experiment with both templates and web-derived n-gram
language models, ﬁnding that the former are more ﬂuent, but suﬀer from lack
of variation, an issue we also addressed earlier, in connection with realisation
(Section 2.6).
In the Midge system , input images are represented as triples consisting of object/stuﬀdetections, action/pose detections and spatial relations. These are subsequently
mapped to ⟨noun, verb, preposition⟩triples and realised using a tree substitution grammar. This is further enhanced with the ability to ‘hallucinate’ likely
words using a probabilistic model, that is, to insert words which are not directly
grounded in the detections performed on the image itself, but have a high probability of occurring, based on corpus data. In a human evaluation, Midge was
shown to outperform both the system by Kulkarni et al. and Yang et al.
 on a number of criteria, including humanlikeness and correctness.
Elliott and Keller use visual dependency representations (vdr), a dependency grammar-like formalism to describe spatial relations between objects
based on physical features such as proximity and relative position. Detections
from an image are mapped to their corresponding vdr relations prior to generation . Ortiz
et al. use ilp to identify pairs of objects in abstract scenes before mapping them to a vdr. Realisation is framed as a machine translation task over vdr-text pairs. A similar concern with identifying
spatial relations is found in the work of Lin and Kong , who use scene
graphs as input to a grammar-based realiser. Muscat and Belz propose a
naive Bayes model to predict spatial prepositions based on image features such
as object proximity and overlap.
Using language models
Using language models has the potential advantage of facilitating joint training from image-language pairs. It may also yield
more expressive or creative captions if it is used to overcome the limitations
of grammars or templates . In some cases, n-gram models are trained on out-of-domain data, the
approach taken by Li et al. using web-scale n-grams, and by Fang et al.
 , who used a maximum entropy language model. Most deep learning architectures use language models in the form of vanilla rnns or long short-term
memory networks . These architectures model caption generation as a process
of predicting the next word in a sequence. Predictions are biased both by the
caption history generated so far (or the start symbol for initial words) and by
the image features which, as noted above, are typically features extracted from
a cnn trained on the object detection task.
Caption retrieval and recombination
Rather than generate captions, some
systems retrieve them based on training data. The advantage of this is that it
guarantees ﬂuency, especially if retrieval is of whole, rather than partial, captions. Hodosh et al. used a multimodal space to represent training images
and captions, framing retrieval as a process of identifying the nearest caption
to a query image. The idea of ‘wholesale’ caption retrieval has a number of
precedents.
For example Farhadi et al. use Markov random ﬁelds to
parse images into ⟨object,action, scene⟩triples, paired with parsed captions. A
caption for a query image is retrieved by comparing it to the parsed images in
the training data, ﬁnding the most similar based on WordNet. Similarly, the
Im2Text system ranks candidate captions for a query
image. Devlin et al. use a k nearest neighbours approach, with caption
similarity quantiﬁed using bleu and cider .
A diﬀerent view of retrieval is proposed by Feng and Lapata
 , who use extractive summarisation techniques to retrieve descriptions of
images and associated narrative fragments from their surrounding text in news
A potential drawback of wholesale retrieval is that captions in the training
data may not be well-matched to a query image. For instance, Devlin et al.
 note that the less similar a query is to training images, the more generic
the caption returned by the system. A possible solution is to use partial matches,
retrieving and recombining caption fragments.
Kuznetsova et al. use
detectors to match query images to training instances, retrieving captions in the
form of parse tree fragments which are then recombined. Mason and Charniak
 use a domain-speciﬁc dataset to extract descriptions and adapt them to
a query image using a joint visual and textual bag-of-words model. In the deep
learning paradigm, both Socher et al. and Karpathy et al. use word
embeddings derived from dependency parses, which are projected, together with
cnn image features, into a multimodal space. Subsequent work by Karpathy
and Fei-Fei showed that this ﬁne-grained pairing works equally well with
word sequences, eschewing the need for dependency parsing.
Recently, Devlin et al. compared nearest-neighbour retrieval approaches to diﬀerent types of language models for caption generation, speciﬁcally, the Maximum Entropy approach of Fang et al. , an lstm-based approach and rnns which are coupled with a cnn for image analysis . A comparison of
the linguistic quality of captions suggested that there was a signiﬁcant tendency
for all models to reproduce captions observed in the training set, repeating them
for diﬀerent images in the test set. This could be due to a lack of diversity in the
data, which might also explain why the nearest neighbour approach compares
favourably with language model-based approaches.
How is Language Grounded in Visual Data?
As the foregoing discussion suggests, views on the relationship between visual
and linguistic data depend on how each of the two sub-tasks is dealt with. Thus,
systems which rely on detections tend to make a fairly clear-cut distinction
between input processing and content selection on the one hand, and sentence
planning and realisation on the other . The link between linguistic expressions and visual
features is mediated by the outcomes of the detectors.
For example, Midge
 uses the object detections to determine which nouns to
mention, before ﬂeshing out the caption with attributes (mapped to adjectives)
and verbs. Similarly, Elliott and Keller uses vdrs to determine spatial
expressions.
Retrieval-based systems relying on unimodal or multimodal similarity spaces
represent the link between linguistic expressions and image features more indirectly. Here, similarity plays the dominant role. In a unimodal space , it is images which are compared, with (partial) captions retrieved
based on image similarity. A number of deep learning approaches also broadly
conform to this scheme. For example, both Yagcioglu et al. and Devlin
et al. retrieve and rank captions for a query image, using a cnn for the
representation of the visual space. By contrast, multimodal spaces involve a
direct mapping between visual and linguistic features , enabling systems to map from images
to ‘similar’ – that is, related or relevant – captions.
Much interesting work on vision-language integration is being carried out
with deep learning models. Kiros et al. introduced multimodal neural
language models (mrnn), experimenting with two main architectures. Their
Modality-Biased Log-Bilinear Model (mlbl-b) uses an additive bias to predict
the next word in a sequence based on both the linguistic context and cnn
image features. The Factored 3-way Log-Bilinear Model (mlbl-f) also gates
the representation matrix for a word with image features. In a related vein,
Donahue et al. propose a combined cnn + lstm architecture where the next word
is predicted as a function of both previous words and image features. In one
version of the architecture, they inject cnn features into the lstm at each timestep. In a second version, they use two stacked lstms, the ﬁrst of which takes
cnn features and produces an output which constitutes the input to the next
lstm to predict the word. Finally, Mao et al. experiment with various
mrnn conﬁgurations, obtaining their best results with an architecture in which
there are two word embedding layers preceding the recurrent layer, which is in
turn projected into a multimodal layer where linguistic features are combined
with cnn features. An example caption is shown in Figure 6e above.
These neural network models shed light on the consequences of combining
the two modalities at diﬀerent stages, reﬂecting the point made by Manning
 that this paradigm encourages a focus on architectures
and design. In particular, image features can be used to bias the recurrent,
language generation layer – at the start, or at each time-step of the rnn – as
in the work of Donahue et al. . Alternatively, the image features can be
combined with linguistic features at a stage following the rnn, as in the work
of Mao et al. .
Vision and Language: Current and Future Directions
Image to text generation is one area of nlg where there is a clear dominance of
deep learning methods. Current work focusses on a number of themes:
1. Generalising beyond training data is still a challenge, as shown by the
work of Devlin et al. . More generally, dealing with novel images
remains diﬃcult, though experiments have been performed on using outof-domain training data to expand vocabulary , learn
novel concepts or transfer features from image regions
containing known labels, to similar, but previously unattested ones . Progress in zero-shot learning, where the aim is to identify or categorise images for which little or no training data is available, is likely to
contribute to the resolution of data sparseness problems .
2. Attention is also being paid to what Barnard refers to as localisation, that is, the association of linguistic expressions with parts of images,
and the ability to generate descriptions of speciﬁc image regions. Recent
work includes that of Karpathy and Fei-Fei , Johnson et al. 
and Mao et al. , who focus on unambiguous descriptions of speciﬁc
image regions and/or objects in images (see Section 2.5 above for some
related work). Attention-based models are a further development on this
front. These have been exploited in various seq2seq tasks, notably for
machine translation . In the case of image captioning, the idea is to allocate variable weights to portions of captions in the
training data, depending on the current context, to reﬂect the ‘relevance’
of a word given previous words and an image region .
3. Recent work has also begun to explore generation from images that goes
beyond the concrete conceptual, for instance, producing explanatory descriptions . A further development is work on
Visual Question Answering, where rather than descriptive captions, the
aim is to produce responses to speciﬁc questions about images . Recently, a new dataset was proposed providing both concrete conceptual and ‘narrative’ texts coupled with images
 , a promising new direction for this branch of nlg.
4. There is a growing body of work that generalises the task from static
inputs to sequential ones, especially videos . Here, the challenges
include handling temporal dependencies between scenes, but also dealing
with redundancy.
Variation: Generating Text with Style, Personality and Aﬀect
Based on the preceding sections, the reader could be excused for thinking that
nlg is mostly concerned with delivering factual information, whether this is in
the form of a summary of weather data, or a description of an image. This bias
was also ﬂagged in the Introduction, where we gave a brief overview of some
domains of application, and noted that informing was often, though not always,
the goal in nlg.
Over the past decade or so, however, there has been a growing trend in
the nlg literature to also focus on aspects of textual information delivery that
are arguably non-propositional, that is, features of text that are not strictly
speaking grounded in the input data, but are related to the manner of delivery.
In this section, we focus on these trends, starting with the broad concept of
‘stylistic variation’, before turning to generation of aﬀective text and politeness.
Generating with Style: Textual Variation and Personality
What does the term ‘linguistic style’ refer to? Most work on what we shall
refer to as ‘stylistic nlg’ shies away from a rigorous deﬁnition, preferring to
operationalise the notion in the terms most relevant to the problem at hand.
‘Style’ is usually understood to refer to features of lexis, grammar and semantics that collectively contribute to the identiﬁability of an instance of language use as pertaining to a speciﬁc author, or to a speciﬁc situation (thus,
one distinguishes between levels of stylistic formality, or speaks of the distinctive characteristics of the style of William Faulkner). This implies that any
investigation of style must concern itself, at least in part, with variation among
the features that mark such authorial or situational variables. In line with this
usage, this section reviews developments in nlg in which variation is the key
concern, usually at the tactical, rather than the strategic, level, the idea being
that a given piece of information can be imparted in linguistically distinct, ways
 . This strategy was, for example, explicitly
adopted by Power et al. .
Given its emphasis on linguistic features, controlling style (however it is de-
ﬁned) is a problem of great interest for nlg since it directly addresses issues of
choice, which are arguably the hallmark of any nlg system .
Early contributions in this area deﬁned stylistic features using rules to vary generation according to pragmatic or stylistic goals. For example, McDonald and
Pustejovsky argued that “prose style is a consequence of what decisions
are made during the transition from the conceptual representation level to the
linguistic level” (p. 61), thereby placing the problem within the domain of sentence planning and realisation. This stance was also adopted by DiMarco and
Hirst , who focus on syntactic variation, proposing a stylistic grammar
for English and French. Sheikha and Inkpen proposed an adaptation
of the SimpleNLG realiser to handle formal versus informal
language, via speciﬁc features, such as contractions (are not vs. aren’t) and
lexical choice.
A related perspective on stylistic variation was adopted by Walker et al.
 , in their description of how the spot sentence planner was adapted to
learn strategies for diﬀerent communicative goals, as reﬂected in the rhetorical and syntactic structures of the sentence plans.
The planner was trained
using a boosting technique to learn correlations between features of sentence
plans and human ratings of the adequacy of a sample of outputs for diﬀerent
communicative goals.
Like Walker et al. , contemporary approaches to stylistic variation
have tended to eschew rules in favour of data-driven methods to identify relevant features and dimensions of variation from corpora, in what might be
thought of as an inductive view of style, where variation is characterised by the
distribution of whatever linguistic features are considered relevant. An important precedent for this view is Biber’s corpus-based multidimensional approach
to style and register variation , roughly a contemporary of the
grammar-inspired approach of DiMarco and Hirst .
Biber’s model was at the heart of work by Paiva and Evans , which exhibits some characteristics in common with the ‘global’ statistical approaches to
nlg discussed in Section 3.3, insofar as it exploits statistics to inform decisionmaking at the relevant choice points, rather than to ﬁlter the outputs of an
overgeneration module. Paiva and Evans used a corpus of patient information leaﬂets, conducting factor analysis on their linguistic features to identify
two stylistic dimensions. They then allowed their system to generate a large
number of texts, varying its decisions at a number of choice points (e.g. choosing a pronoun versus a full np) and maintaining a trace. Texts were then scored
on the two stylistic dimensions, and a linear regression model was developed
to predict the score on a dimension based on the choices made by the system.
This model was used during testing to predict the best choice at each choice
point, given a desired style. Style, however, is a global feature of a text, though
it supervenes on local decisions. These authors solved the problem by using a
best-ﬁrst search algorithm to identify the series of local decisions as scored by
the linear models, that was most likely to maximise the desired stylistic eﬀect,
yielding variations such as the following The dose of the patient’s medicine is taken twice a day. It is two grams.
(19) The two-gram dose of the patient’s medicine is taken twice a day.
(20) The patient takes the two-gram dose of the patient’s medicine twice a
Some authors have
noted that certain features, once selected, may ‘cancel’ or obscure the stylistic
eﬀect of other features. This raises the question whether style can in fact be
modelled as a linear, additive phenomenon, in which each feature contributes
to an overall perception of style independently of others (modulo its weight in
the regression equation).
A second question is whether stylistic variation could be modelled in a more
speciﬁc fashion, for example, by tailoring style to a speciﬁc author, rather than
to generic dimensions related to ‘formality’, ‘involvement’ and so on. For instance a corpus-based analysis of human-written weather forecasts by Reiter
et al. found that lexical choice varies in part based on the author. One
line of work has investigated this using corpora of referring expressions, such
as the tuna Corpus , in which multiple referring
expressions by diﬀerent authors are available for a given input domain. For
instance, Bohnet and Di Fabbrizio et al. explore statistical methods to learn individual preferences for particular attributes, a strategy also used
by Viethen and Dale . Herv´as et al. use case-based reasoning to
inform lexical choice when realising a set of semantic attributes for a referring
expression, where the case base diﬀerentiates between authors in the corpus to
take individual lexicalisation preferences into account , in the context of nlg for dialogue systems.
Here, the aim is to vary the output of a generator so as to project diﬀerent
personality traits.
Similar to the model of Biber , personality is here
given a multidimensional deﬁnition, via the classic ‘Big 5’ model , where personality is a combination of ﬁve major traits
(e.g. introversion/extraversion). However, while stylistic variation is usually
deﬁned as a linguistic phenomenon, the linguistic features of personality are
only indirectly reﬂected in speaking or writing ,
was developed in the restaurant domain. The subsequent, data-driven version
of the system takes as input a pragmatic goal and,
like the system of Paiva and Evans , a list of real-valued style parameters, this time representing scores on the ﬁve personality traits. The system
estimates generation parameters for stylistic features based on the input traits,
using machine-learned models acquired from a dataset pairing sample utterances
with human personality judgements. For example, an utterance reﬂecting high
extraversion might be more verbose and involve more use of expletives (21),
compared to a more introverted style, which might demonstrate more uncertainty, for example through the use of stammering and hedging (22).
(21) Kin Khao and Tossed are bloody outstanding. Kin Khao just has rude
staﬀ. Tossed features sort of unmannered waiters, even if the food is
somewhat quite adequate.
(22) Err... I am not really sure. Tossed oﬀers kind of decent food. Mmhm...
However, Kin Khao, which has quite ad-ad-adequate food, is a thai
place. You would probably enjoy these restaurants.
An interesting outcome of the evaluation with human subjects reported by
Mairesse and Walker is that readers vary signiﬁcantly in their judgements
of what personality is actually reﬂected by a given text. This suggests that the
relationship between such psychological features and their linguistic eﬀects is
far from straightforward. Walker et al. compared the ‘Big 5’ model
incorporated in the rule-based version of personage, to a corpus-based model
drawn from character utterances in ﬁlm scripts. These models were used to
generate utterances for characters in an augmented reality game; their main
ﬁnding was that modelling characters’ style directly using corpora of utterances
results in more speciﬁc and easily perceived traits than using a model based
on personality traits, where the relationship between personality and individual
style is more indirect. In another set of experiments on generating utterances
for characters in a role-playing game, Walker et al. report the successful
porting of personage to the new domain by tuning some of its parameters
on features identiﬁed in ﬁlm dialogue. Models learned from ﬁlm corpora were
found to be close in style to the characters they were actually based on.
Generating with Feeling: Aﬀect and Politeness
Personality is usually thought of in terms of traits, which are relatively stable
across time. However, language use may vary not only across individuals, as a
function of their stable characteristics, but also within individuals across time,
as a function of their more transient aﬀective states. ‘Aﬀective nlg’ is concerned with variation that reﬂects emotional
states which, unlike personality traits, are relatively transient. In this case, the
goals can be twofold: (i) to induce an emotional state in the receiver; or (ii) to
reﬂect the emotional state of the producer.
As in the case of personality, the relationship between emotion and language
is far from clear, as noted by Belz . For one thing, it isn’t clear whether
only surface linguistic choices need be aﬀected.
Some authors have argued
that a text’s aﬀective impact impinges on content selection; this stance has
been adopted, for example, in some applications in e-health where reporting
of health-related issues should be sensitive to their potential emotional impact
 .
Most work on aﬀective nlg has however focussed on tactical choices . Various linguistic features that can have emotional impact have been identiﬁed, from the increased use of redundancy to
enhance understanding of emotionally laden messages , to the increased use of ﬁrst-person pronouns and adverbs,
as well as sentence ordering to achieve emphasis or reduce adverse emotional
impact .
This research on aﬀective nlg relies on models of emotion of various degrees
of complexity and cognitive plausibility. The common trend underlying all these
approaches however is that emotional states should impact lexical, syntactic and
other linguistic choices. The question then is to what extent such choices are
actually perceived by readers or users of a system.
In an empirical study, van der Sluis and Mellish reported on two
experiments investigating the eﬀect of various tactical decisions on the emotional
impact of text on readers.
In one experiment, texts gave a (fake) report to
participants on their performance on an aptitude test, with manually induced
variations, such as these:
(23) Positive slant: On top of this you also outperformed most people in your
age group with your exceptional scores for Imagination and Creativity
(7.9 vs 7.2) and Logical- Mathematical Intelligence (7.1 vs. 6.5).
(24) Neutral/factual slant: You did better than most people in your age group
with your scores for Imagination and Creativity (7.9 vs 7.2) and
Logical-Mathematical Intelligence (7.1 vs. 6.5).
Evaluation of these texts showed that the extent to which aﬀective tactical
decisions inﬂuence hearer’s emotional states is dependent on a host of other
factors, including the degree to which the reader is directly implicated in what
the text says (in the case of an aptitude test, the reader would be assumed to
feel the outcomes have personal relevance). An important question raised by
this study is how aﬀect should be measured: van der Sluis and Mellish 
used a standardised self-rating questionnaire to estimate changes in aﬀect before
and after reading a text, but the best way to measure emotion remains an open
The emotional slant in the language used by an author or speaker may have
implications for the degree to which the listener or reader may feel ‘impinged
upon’. This becomes particularly relevant in interactive systems, where nlg
components are generating language in the context of dialogue. Consider, for
example, the diﬀerence between these requests:
(25) Direct strategy: Chop the tomatoes!
(26) Approval strategy: Would it be possible for you to chop the tomatoes?
(27) Autonomy strategy: Could you possibly chop the tomatoes?
(28) Indirect strategy: The tomatoes aren’t chopped yet.
The four strategies exempliﬁed above come across as having varying degrees
of politeness which, according to one inﬂuential account , depends on face. Positive face reﬂects the speaker’s desire that some of
her goals be shared with her interlocutors; negative face refers to the speaker’s
desire not to have her goals impinged upon by others. The connection with
aﬀect that we suggested above hinges on these distinctions: diﬀerent degrees of
politeness reﬂect diﬀerent degrees of ‘threat’ to the listener; hence, generating
language based on the right face strategy could be seen as a branch of aﬀective
In an early, inﬂuential proposal, Walker et al. proposed an interpretation of the framework of Brown and Levinson in terms of the four
dialogue strategies exempliﬁed in (25 – 28) above. Subsequently, Moore et al.
 used this framework in the generation of tutorial feedback, where a discourse planner used a Bayesian network to inform linguistic choices compatible
with the target politeness/aﬀect value in a given context .
Gupta et al. also used the four dialogue strategies identiﬁed by Walker
et al. in the polly system, which used strips-based planning to generate
a plan distributed among two agents in a collaborative task . An interesting ﬁnding in their evaluation is that perception of facethreat depends on the speech act; for example, requests can be more threatening.
Gupta et al. also note possible cultural diﬀerences in perception of face
threat (in this case, between uk and Indian participants).
Stylistic Control as a Challenge for Neural nlg
In the past few years, stylistic – and especially aﬀective – nlg has witnessed renewed interest by researchers working on neural approaches to generation. The
trends that can be observed here mirror those outlined in our general overview
of deep learning approaches (Section 3.3.5).
A number of models focus on response generation (in the context of dialogue,
or social media exchanges), where the task is to generate a response, given an
utterance. Thus, these models ﬁt well within the seq2seq or Encoder-Decoder
framework (see Section 3.3.5 for discussion). Often, these models exploit social media data, especially from Twitter, a trend which goes back at least to
Ritter et al. , who adapted a Phrase-Based Machine Translation model
to response generation. For example Li et al. proposed a persona-based
model in which the decoder lstm is conditioned on embeddings obtained from
tweets pertaining to individual speakers/authors. An alternative model conditions on both speaker and addressee proﬁles, with a view to incorporating not
only the ‘persona’ of the generator, but its variability with respect to diﬀerent
interlocutors. Herzig et al. , also working on Twitter data, condition their
decoder on personality features extracted from tweets based on the ‘Big Five’
model, rather than on speaker-speciﬁc embeddings. This has the advantage of
not enabling the generator to be tuned to speciﬁc personality settings, without
re-training to adapt to a particular speaker style. While their personality-based
model does not beat Li et al.’s model, a human evaluation showed that judges
were able to identify high-trait responses as more expressive than low-trait responses, suggesting that the conditioning was having a noticeable impact on
style. In a dialogue context, Asghar et al. proposed to achieve aﬀective
responses on three levels: (a) by augmenting word embeddings with data from
an aﬀective dictionary; (b) by decoding with an aﬀect-sensitive beam search;
and (c) by training with an aﬀect-sensitive loss function.
On the other hand, a number of models condition an lstm on attributes
reﬂecting aﬀective or personality traits, with a view to generating strings that
express such traits. Ghosh et al. used lstms trained on speech corpora
conditioned on aﬀect category and emotional intensity to drive lexical choice.
Hu et al. used variational auto-encoders and attribute discriminators,
to control the stylistic parameters of generated texts individually. They experimented on controlling sentiment and tense, but restricted the generation to
sentences of up to 16 words. By contrast, Ficler and Goldberg extend
the range of parameters used to condition the lstm, with two content-related
attributes (sentiment and theme) and four stylistic parameters (length, whether
the text is descriptive, whether it has a personal voice, and whether the style is
professional). Their generator is trained on a corpus of movie reviews. Similarly,
Dong et al. propose an attribute-to-sequence model for product review
generation based on a corpus of Amazon user reviews . The
conditioning includes the reviewer id, reminiscent of the persona-based response
model of Li et al. ; however, they also include the rating, which functions
to modulate the aﬀect in the output. Their model incorporates an attentional
mechanism to concentrate on diﬀerent parts of the input encoding when predicting the next word during decoding. For example, for a speciﬁc reviewer and
a speciﬁc product, changing the input rating from 1 to 5 yields the following
diﬀerence:
(29) (Rating: 1) im sorry to say this was a very boring book. i didnt ﬁnish it.
im not a new fan of the series, but this was a disappointment
(30) (Rating: 5) this was a very good book. i enjoyed the characters and the
story line. im looking forward to reading more in this series.
Style and Aﬀect: Concluding Remarks
Controlling stylistic, aﬀective and personality-based variation in nlg is still in
a rather ﬂedgling state, with several open questions of both theoretical and
computational import. Among these is the question of how best to model complex, multi-dimensional constructs such as personality or emotion; this question speaks both to the cognitive plausibility of the models informing linguistic
choices, and to the practical viability of diﬀerent machine learning strategies
that could be leveraged for the task (for example, linear, additive models versus more ‘global’ models of personality or style). Also important here is the
kind of data used to inform generation strategies: as we have seen above, a
lot of aﬀective nlg work relies on ratings by human judges. However, some
recent work in aﬀective computing has questioned the use of ratings, comparing
them to ranking-based and physiological methods . This and similar research is probably of high
relevance to nlg researchers. Some recent work relied on automatic extraction
of personality features using tools such as ibm’s Personality Insights . As such tools become more reliable and widely
available, we may see a turn towards less reliance on human elicitation.
A second important question is which linguistic choices truly convey the
intended variation to the reader or listener. While current systems use a range
of devices, from aggregation strategies to lexical choice, it is not clear which
ones are actually perceived as having the desired eﬀect.
A third important research avenue, which is especially relevant to interactive
systems, is adaptivity, that is, the way speakers (or systems) alter their linguistic
choices as a result of their interlocutors’ utterances , a theme that has also begun
to be explored in nlg .
Generating Creative and Entertaining Text
‘Good’ writers not only present their ideas in coherent and well-structured prose.
They also succeed in keeping the attention of the reader through narrative techniques, and in occasionally surprising the reader, for example, through creative
language use such as small jokes or well-placed metaphors . The
nlg techniques and applications discussed so far in this survey arguably do not
simulate good writers in this sense, and as a result automatically generated
texts can be perceived as somewhat boring and repetitive.
This lack of attention to creative aspects of language production within nlg
is not due to a general lack of scholarly interest in these phenomena. Indeed,
computational research into creativity has a long tradition, with roots that go
back to the early days of ai .
However, it is fair to say that, so far, there has been little interaction between researchers from the computational creativity and nlg communities respectively,
even though both groups in our opinion could learn a lot from each other. In
particular, nlg researchers stand to beneﬁt from insights into what constitutes
creative language production, as well as structural features of narrative that
have the potential to improve nlg output even in data-to-text systems . At the same time, researchers in computational creativity
could also beneﬁt from the insights provided by the nlg community where the
generation of ﬂuent language is concerned since, as we shall see, a lot of the focus
in this research, especially where narrative is concerned, is on the generation of
plans and on content determination.
In what follows, we give an overview of automatic approaches to creative
language production, starting from relatively simple jokes and metaphors to
more advanced forms, such as narratives.
Generating Puns and Jokes
(31) What’s the diﬀerence between money and a bottom?
One you spare and bank, the other you bare and spank.
(32) What do you call a weird market?
A bizarre bazaar.
These two (pretty good!)
punning riddles were automatically generated
by the jape system developed by Binsted and Ritchie . Punning
riddles form a speciﬁc joke genre and have received considerable attention in
the context of computational humor, presumably because they are relatively
straightforward to deﬁne, often relying on spelling or word sense ambiguities.
Many good, human-produced examples have been collected in joke books and
sites and may thus act as a source of inspiration or training data.
Simplifying somewhat, jape (Joke Analysis and Production Engine) relies
on a template-based nlg system, combining ﬁxed text (What’s the diﬀerence
between X and Y? or What do you call X?) with slots, which are the source
of the riddle. Various standard lexical resources are used for joke production,
including a British pronunciation dictionary (to ﬁnd diﬀerent words with a similar pronunciation, such as ‘bizarre’ and ‘bazaar’) and WordNet . jape uses various techniques to create the punning riddles, such as juxtaposition, in which
related words are simply placed next to each other and treated as a normal
construction, while making sure that the combination is novel (i.e., not in the
jape database already). It is interesting to observe that in this way jape may
automatically come up with existing jokes (a quick Google search reveals that
many bizarre bazaars, as well as bazaar bizarres, exist).
Following the seminal work of Binsted and Ritchie, various other systems
have been developed which can automatically generate jokes, including for example the hahacronym system of Stock and Strapparava , which produces
humorous acronyms, and the system of Binsted et al. , which focusses on
the generation of referential jokes (“It was so cold, I saw a lawyer with his hands
in his own pockets.”).
Petrovic and Matthews oﬀer an interesting, unsupervised alternative
to this earlier work, which does not require labelled examples or hard-coded rules
. Like their predecessors, Petrovic and Matthews also start from a template –
in their case I like my X like I like my Y, Z – where X and Y are nouns (e.g.,
coﬀee and war) and Z is an attribute (e.g., cold). Clearly, linguistic realisation
is not an issue, but content selection – ﬁnding ‘funny’ triples X, Y and Z – is a
challenge. Interestingly, the authors postulate a number of guiding principles for
‘good’ triples. In particular, they hypothesize that (a) the joke is funnier if the
attribute Z can be used to describe both nouns X and Y ; (b) the joke is funnier
if attribute Z is both common and ambiguous;and (c) the joke is funnier the
more dissimilar X and Y are. These three statements can be quantiﬁed relying
on standard resources such as Wordnet and the Google n-gram corpus , and using these measures their system outputs, for example:
(33) I like my relationships like I like my source, open.
It is probably fair to say that computational joke generation research to date
has mostly focussed on laying bare the basic structure of certain relatively simple
puns and exploiting these to good eﬀect . However, many
other kinds of jokes exist, often requiring sophisticated, hypothetical reasoning.
Presumably, many of the central problems within ai need to be solved ﬁrst
before generation systems will be capable of producing these kinds of advanced
Generating Metaphors and Similes
Whether you think something is funny or not may be subjective, but in any
case insights from joke generation can be useful as a stepping stone towards a
better understanding of creative language use, including metaphor, simile and
analogy. In all of these, a mapping is made between two conceptual domains, in
such a way that terminology from the source domain is used to say something
about the target domain, typically in a nonliteral fashion, which can be helpful
in computer-generated texts to illustrate complex information. For example,
Herv´as et al. study analogies in narrative contexts, such as Luke Skywalker was the King Arthur of the Jedi Knights, which immediately clariﬁes an
important aspect of Luke Skywalker for those not in the know. In a simile, the
two domains are compared (A ‘is like’ B); in a metaphor they are equated. Jokes
and metaphors/similes are related: the automatically generated jokes of Petrovic and Matthews are comparable to similes, while Kiddon and Brun ,
for example, frame the problem of identifying double entendre jokes as a type
of metaphor identiﬁcation. Nevertheless, one could argue that generating jokes
is more complex because of the extra funniness constraint.
Like computational humor, the automatic recognition and interpretation of
metaphorical, non-literal language has received considerable attention since the
early days of ai .
Martin , for example, focussed on the recognition of metaphor in the context of
Unix Support, as in the following examples:
(34) How can I kill a process?
(35) How can I enter lisp?
The ﬁrst one, for example, makes a mapping between ‘life’ (source) and
‘processes’ (target), and is by now so common that is almost a dead metaphor,
but this was not the case in the early days of Unix. Clearly, understanding of the
metaphors is a prerequisite for automatically answering these questions. Early
research on the computational interpretation of metaphor already recognised
that metaphors rely on semantic conventions that are exploited (‘broken’) to
express new meanings. A system for metaphor understanding, as well as one for
metaphor generation, therefore requires knowledge about what literal meanings
are, and how these can be stretched or translated into metaphoric meanings
 .
Recent work by Veale and Hao has shown that this kind of
knowledge can be acquired from the web, and used for the generation of new
metaphors and similes (comparisons). Their system, called Sardonicus, is capable of generating metaphors for user-provided targets (t), such as the following,
expressing that Paris Hilton is skinny:
(36) Paris Hilton is a stick
Sardonicus searches the web for nouns (n) that are associated with skinniness, which are included in a case-base and range from pole, pencil, and stick to
snake and stick insect. Inappropriate ones (like cadaver) are ruled out, based
on the theory of category-inclusion of Glucksberg . This list of potential
similes is then used to create Google queries, inspired by the work of Hearst
 , of the form n-like t (e.g., stick insect-like Paris Hilton, which actually
occurs on the web), giving a ranking of the potential similes to be generated.
A comparable technique is used by Veale to generate metaphors with
an aﬀective component, as in ‘Steve Jobs was a great leader, but he could be
such a tyrant’. The Google n-gram corpus is used to ﬁnd stereotypes suitable
for simile generation (e.g., ‘lonesome as a cowboy’), a strategy reminiscent of the
use of web-scale n−gram data to smooth the output of image-to-text systems
(see Section4). Next, an aﬀective dimension is added, based on the assumption
that properties occurring in a conjunction (‘as lush and green as a jungle’) are
more likely to have the same aﬀect than properties that do not. Using positive
(e.g., ‘happy’, ‘wonderful’) and negative (e.g., ‘sad’, ‘evil’) seeds, coordination
queries (e.g., ‘happy and X’) are used to collect positive and negative labels for
stereotypes, indicating, for instance, that babies are positively associated with
qualities such as ‘smiling’ and ‘cute’, and negatively associated with ‘crying’
and ‘sniveling’. This enables the automatic generation of positive (‘cute as a
baby’) and negative (‘crying like a baby’) similes. Veale even points out that
by collecting, for example, a number of negative metaphors for Microsoft being
a monopoly, and using these in a set of predeﬁned tropes, it becomes possible
to automatically generate a poem such as the following:
No Monopoly Is More Ruthless
Intimidate me with your imposing hegemony
No crime family is more badly organized, or controls more ruthlessly
Haunt me with your centralized organization
Let your privileged security support me
O Microsoft, you oppress me with your corrupt reign
In fact, automatic generation of poetry is an emerging area at the crossroads
of computational creativity and natural language generation . See the recent review by Goncalo Oliveira .
Generating Narratives
Computational narratology is concerned with computational models for the generation and interpretation of narrative texts . The starting point for many approaches to narrative generation is a view
of narrative coming from classical narratology, a branch of literary studies with
roots in the Formalist and Structuralist traditions . This ﬁeld has been concerned with analysing both the deﬁning
characteristics of narrative, such as plot or character, and more subtle features,
such as the handling of time and temporal shifts, focalisation (that is, the ability
to convey to the reader that a story is being recounted from a speciﬁc point of
view), and the interaction of multiple narrative threads, in the form of sub-plots,
parallel narratives, etc. An important recent development is the interest, on the
part of narratologists, in bringing to bear insights from Cognitive Science and
ai on their literary work, making this ﬁeld ripe for multi-disciplinary interaction
 .
Classical narratology makes a fundamental distinction between the ‘story
world’ and the text that narrates the story.
In line with the formalist and
structuralist roots of this tradition, the distinction is usually articulated as
a dichotomy between fabula (or story) and suzjet (or discourse).
There is a
parallel between this distinction and that between a text plan in nlg, versus
the actual text which articulates that plan. However, the crucial diﬀerence is
that in producing a plan for a narrative, a story generation system typically does
not use input data of the sort required by most of the nlg systems reviewed
thus far, since the story is usually ﬁctional. On the other hand, narratological
tools have also been successfully applied to real-world narratives, including oral
narratives of personal experience .
The focus of most work on narrative generation has been on the pre-linguistic
stage, that is, on generating plans within a story world for ﬁctional narratives,
usually within a speciﬁc genre whose structural properties are well-understood,
for example, fairy tales or Arthurian legends .
There are however links between the techniques used for such stories and those
we have discussed above in relation to nlg (see especially Section 3.2). Prominent among these are planning and reasoning techniques to model the creative
process as a problem-solving task. For example, minstrel uses
reasoning to model creativity from the author’s perspective, producing narrative plans based on authorial goals, such as the goal of introducing drama into
a narrative, while ensuring thematic consistency.
More recently, brutus used a knowledge base
of story schemas, from which one is selected and elaborated using planning
techniques to link causes and eﬀects .
John Bear is somewhat hungry.
John Bear wants to get some
John Bear wants to
get near the blueberries.
Bear walks from a cave entrance
to the bush by going through a
pass through a valley through a
John Bear takes the
blueberries.
John Bear eats the
blueberries.
The blueberries are
gone. John Bear is not very hungry.
(a) Excerpt from TaleSpin
Once upon a time a woodman and
his wife lived in a pretty cottage
on the borders of a great forest.
They had one little daughter, a
sweet child, who was a favorite
with every one. She was the joy
of her mother’s heart. To please
her, the good woman made her a
little scarlet cloak and hood. She
looked so pretty in it that everybody called her Little Red Riding
(b) Excerpt from storybook
Figure 7: Examples of automatically generated narratives. The left panel shows
an excerpt from a story produced by TaleSpin ; the right panel
is an excerpt from the Little Red Riding Hood fairy-tale, generated by the storybook system .
As Gerv´as notes, the focus on planning story worlds and modelling
creativity has often implied a sidelining of linguistic issues, so that rendering a
story plan into text has often been viewed as a secondary consideration. For
example Figure 7a shows an excerpt of a story produced by the talespin system
 : here, the emphasis is on using problem-solving techniques to
produce a narrative in which events follow from each other in a coherent fashion,
rather than on telling it in a ﬂuent way. An important exception to this trend
is the work of Callaway and Lester , who explicitly addressed the gap
between computational narratology and nlg. Their system took a narrative
plan as a starting point, but focussed on the process of rendering the narrative
in ﬂuent English, handling time shifts, aggregation, anaphoric nps and many
other linguistic phenomena, as the excerpt in Figure 7b shows. It is worth noting
that this system has since been re-used in the context of generating interactive
text for a portable museum guide by Stock et al. .
In addition, there have been a number of contributions from the generation
community on more speciﬁc issues related to narrative, such as how to convey
the temporal ﬂow of narrative discourse . This is a problem that deserves
more attention in nlg, since texts with a complex narrative structure often
narrate events in a diﬀerent order from which they occurred. For example, a
narrative or narrative-like text may recount events in order of importance rather
than in temporal order, even when they are grounded in real-world data . This makes the use of the right choices for tense, aspect
and temporal adverbials crucial to ensure clarity for the reader. This type of
complexity in narrative structure also emerges in interactive narrative ﬁction
 .
Beyond the focus on speciﬁc linguistic issues, there has also been some work
that leverages data-driven techniques to generate stories. For example, McIntyre and Lapata propose a story generation system whose input is a
database of entities and their interactions, extracted from a corpus of stories
by parsing them, retrieving grammatical dependencies, and building chains of
events in which speciﬁc entities play a role. The outcome is a graph encoding a
partial order of events, with edges weighted by mutual information to reﬂect the
degree of association between nodes. Sentence planning then takes place using
template-like grammar rules specifying verbs with subcategorisation information, followed by realisation using realpro . One
of the most interesting features of this work is the coupling of the generation
model with an interest model to predict which stories would actually be rated as
interesting by readers. This was achieved by training a kernel-based classiﬁer on
shallow lexical and syntactic features of stories, a novel take on an old problem
in narratology, namely, what makes a story ‘tellable’, thereby distinguishing it
from a mere report .
Most story generation work is restricted to (very) short stories. It is certainly true that planning a book-length narrative along the lines sketched above
is extremely challenging, but researchers have recently started exploring the
possibilities, for instance in the context of NaNoGenMon (National Novel Generation Month), in which participants write a computer program capable of
generating a ’novel’. Perhaps the best known example is World Clock which describes 1440 (24 × 60) events taking place around the world,
one randomly selected minute at a time. These are the ﬁrst two:
It is now exactly 05:00 in Samarkand. In some ramshackle dwelling a
person who is called Gang, who is on the small side, reads an entirely
made-up word on a box of breakfast cereal. He turns entirely around.
It is now right about 18:01 in Matamoros. In some dim yet decent
structure a man named Tao, who is no larger or smaller than one
would expect, reads a tiny numeric code from a recipe clipping. He
smiles a tiny smile.
The book was fully generated by 165 lines of Python code, written by the
author in a few hours, and later published (together with the software) by
Harvard Book Store press. There is even a Polish translation (by Piotr Marecki),
created by translating the terms and phrases used in the Python implementation
of the original algorithm.
Generating Creative Language: Concluding Remarks
In this section we have highlighted recent developments in the broad area of
creative language generation, a topic which is rather understudied in nlg. Nev-
ertheless, we would like to argue that nlg researchers can improve the quality
of their output by taking insights from computational creativity on board.
Work that exploits corpora and other lexical resources for the automatic
generation of jokes, puns, metaphors and similes has revealed diﬀerent ways in
which words are related and can be juxtaposed to form unexpected and possibly
even ‘funny’ or ‘poetic’ combinations. Given that, for example, metaphor is
pervasive in everyday language , not just in overtly creative uses, nlg researchers interested in enhancing
the readability – and especially the variability – of the text-generating capability
of their models would beneﬁt from a closer look at work in poetry, joke and
metaphor generation.
In a similar vein, work on narratology is rich in insights on the interaction
of multiple threads in a single narrative, and how the choice of events and their
ordering can give rise to interesting stories . These insights
are valuable, for example, in the development of more elaborate text planners
in domains where time and causality play a role. Similarly, narratological work
on character and focalisation can also help in the development of better nlg
techniques to vary output according to speciﬁc points of view, an area that we
touched on in Section 5,
We have deferred discussion of evaluation of creative nlg to Section 7, which
deals with evaluation in general. Anticipating some of that discussion, it is worth
noting that evaluation of creative language generation remains something of a
bottleneck. In part, this is because it is not always easy to determine the ‘right’
question to ask in an evaluation of creative text. For instance, in the case of
joke and poetry generators, demonstrating genre compatibility and recognition
(‘Is this a joke?’) is arguably already an achievement, insofar as it suggests that
a system is producing artefacts that conform to normative expectations (this is
discussed further in Section 7.1.3 below). In other types of creative language
generation, evaluation is more challenging because it is diﬃcult to carry out
without ensuring quality at all levels of the generation process, from planning
to realisation. In the case of narrative generation, for example, if the emphasis is
placed entirely on story planning, the perceived quality of the narrative will be
compromised if story plans are rendered using a an excessively simple realisation
strategy (as is the case in Figure 7a). This is an area where the consensus in the
ﬁeld is that much further research eﬀort is required . It is also an area in which nlg can potentially oﬀer
much to computational creativity researchers, including in the use of techniques
to render text ﬂuently and consistently, facilitating the evaluation of generated
artefacts with human subjects.
Evaluation
Though we have touched on the subject of evaluation at various points, it deserves a full discussion as a topic which has become a central methodological
concern in nlg. A factor that contributed to this development was the estab-
lishment of a number of nlg shared tasks, launched in the wake of an nsffunded workshop held in Virginia in 2007 . These tasks
have focussed on referring expression generation ; surface realisation ; generation of instructions in virtual
environments ; content
determination ; and question
generation . Recent proposals for new challenges extend these
to narrative generation , generation from structured
web data , and from pairs of meaning representations and
text . In image captioning,
shared tasks have helped the development of large-scale datasets and evaluation
servers such as ms-coco8 (cf. Section 4.1).
In general, however, nlg evaluation is marked by a great deal of variety and
it is diﬃcult to compare systems directly. There are at least two reasons why
this is the case.
Variable input
There is no single, agreed-upon input format for nlg systems . Typically,
one can only compare systems against a common benchmark if the input is
Examples are the image-captioning systems described in Section 4,
or systems submitted to one of the shared tasks mentioned above.
case a common ‘standard’ dataset is available for evaluation, comparison may
not be straightforward due to input variation, or due to implicit biases in the
input data. For example, Rajkumar and White observe that, despite
many realisers being evaluated against the Penn Treebank, they make diﬀerent
assumptions about the input format, including how detailed the pre-syntactic
input representation is, a problem also observed in the ﬁrst Surface Realisation
shared task . As Rajkumar and White note, a comparison of realisers on the basis of scores on the Penn Treebank shows that the
highest-ranking is the fuf/surge realiser (which is second in terms of coverage), based on experiments by Callaway . However, these experiments
required painstaking eﬀort to extract the input representations at the level of
detail needed by fuf/surge; other realisers support more underspeciﬁed input.
In a related vein, image captioning evaluation studies have shown that many
datasets contain a higher proportion of nouns than verbs, and few abstract
concepts , making systems that generate descriptions emphasising objects more likely to score better. The relevance of this observation
is shown by Elliott and De Vries , who note that the ranking of their
image captioning system based on visual dependency grammar depends in part
on the data it is evaluated on, with better performance on data containing more
images depicting actions (we return to this study below).
Multiple possible outputs
Even for a single piece of input and a single
system, the range of possible outputs is open-ended, a problem that arguably
8 
holds for any nlp task involving textual output, including machine translation
and summarisation. Corpora often display a substantial range of variation and
it is often unclear, without an independent assessment, which outputs are to
be preferred . In the image captioning literature, authors who have framed the problem in terms of retrieval have motivated the
choice in part based on this problem, arguing that ‘since there is no consensus
on what constitutes a good image description, independently obtained human
assessments of diﬀerent caption generation systems should not be compared
directly’ . While capturing variation may itself
be a goal , as we also saw in our discussion of style in Section 5,
this is not always the case. Thus, in a user-oriented evaluation, the SumTimemousam system weather forecasts were preferred by readers over those written
by forecasters because the latter’s lexicalisation decisions were susceptible to
apparently arbitrary variation ; similar outcomes were more
recently reported for statistical nlg systems trained on the SumTime corpus
 .
Rather than give an exhaustive review of nlg evaluation – hardly a realistic
prospect given the diversity we have pointed out – the rest of this section will
highlight some topical issues in current work. By way of an overview of these
issues, consider the hypothetical scenario sketched in Figure 8, which is loosely
inspired by work on various weather-reporting systems developed in the ﬁeld.
This nlg system is embedded in the environment of an oﬀshore oil-rig; the relevant features of the setup are
the system itself and its users, here a group of engineers. While the task of the
system is to generate weather reports from numerical weather prediction data,
its ultimate purpose is to facilitate users’ planning of drilling and maintenance
operations. Figure 8 highlights some of the common questions addressed in nlg
evaluation, together with a broad typology of the methods used to address them,
in particular, whether they are objective – that is measurable against an external criterion, such as corpus similarity or experimentally obtained behavioural
data – or subjective, requiring human judgements.
A fundamental methodological distinction, due to Sparck Jones and Galliers
 , is between intrinsic and extrinsic evaluation methods. In the case of
nlg, an intrinsic evaluation measures the performance of a system without
reference to other aspects of the setup, such as the system’s eﬀectiveness in
relation to its users. In our example scenario, questions related to text quality,
correctness of output and readability qualify as intrinsic, whereas the question
of whether the system actually achieves its goal in supporting adequate decisionmaking on the oﬀshore platform is extrinsic.
Intrinsic Methods
Intrinsic evaluation in nlg is dominated by two methodologies, one relying on
human judgements (and hence subjective), the other on corpora.
Figure 8: Hypothetical evaluation scenario: a weather report generation system
embedded in an oﬀshore oil platform environment. Possible evaluation methods,
focussing on diﬀerent questions, are highlighted at the bottom, together with
the typical methodological orientation (subjective/objective) adopted to address
Subjective (Human) Judgements
Human judgements are typically elicited by exposing naive or expert subjects
to system outputs and getting them to rate them on some criteria. Common
criteria include:
• Fluency or readability, that is, the linguistic quality of the text ;
• Accuracy, adequacy, relevance or correctness relative to the input, reﬂecting the system’s rendition of the content , a criterion often used in subjective
evaluations of image-captioning systems as well .
Though they are the most common, these two sets of criteria do not exhaust
the possibilities.
For example, subjective ratings have also been elicited for
argument eﬀectiveness in a system designed to generate persuasive text for
prospective house buyers . In image captioning, at
least one system was evaluated by asking users to judge the creativity of the
generated caption, with a view to assessing the contribution of web-scale ngram language models to the captioning quality . Below, we
also discuss judgements of genre compatibility (Section 7.1.3). In the case of
ﬁctional narrative, some evaluations have elicited judgments on qualities such
as novelty or believability of characters .
The use of scales to elicit judgements raises a number of questions. One
has to do with the nature of the scale itself. While discrete, ordinal scales are
the dominant method, a continuous scale – for example, one involving a visually
presented slider – might give subjects the
possibility of giving more nuanced judgements. For example, a text generated
by our hypothetical weather report system might be judged so disﬂuent as to
be given the lowest rating on an ordinal scale; if the following text is judged as
being worse, a subject would have no way of indicating this. A related question
is whether subjects ﬁnd it easier to compare items rather than judge each one
in its own right. This question has begun to be addressed in the nlp evaluation
literature, usually with binary comparisons, for example between the outputs
of two mt systems . In a recent study evaluating
causal connectives produced by an nlg system, Siddharthan and Katsos 
used Magnitude Estimation, whereby subjects are not given a predeﬁned scale,
but are asked to choose their own and proceed to make comparisons of each item
to a ‘modulus’, which serves as a comparison point throughout the experiment
 .9
Belz and Kow compared a preference-based
paradigm to a standard rating scale to evaluate systems from two diﬀerent
domains (weather reporting and reg), and found that the former was more
sensitive to diﬀerences between systems, and less susceptible to variance between
An additional concern with subjective evaluations is inter-rater reliability.
Multiple judgements by diﬀerent evaluators may exhibit high variance, a problem that was encountered in the case of Question Generation .
Recently, Godwin and Piwek suggested that such variance can be reduced by an iterative method whereby training of judges is followed by a period
of discussion, leading to the updating of evaluation guidelines. This, however,
is more costly in terms of time and resources.
It is probably fair to state that, these days, subjective, human evaluations
are often carried out via online platforms such as Amazon Mechanical Turk and
CrowdFlower, though this is probably more feasible for widely-spoken languages
such as English. A seldom-discussed issue with such platforms concerns their
ethical implications as well as the reliability of the data collected,
though measures can be put in place to ensure, for instance, that contributors
are ﬂuent in the target language and, optionally, smoothing .
A version of bleu with higher weighting for less frequent
n−grams and a diﬀerent length penalty .
Recall-oriented
noncontiguous n−grams and longest common subsequences .
Harmonic mean of unigram precision and recall, with options
for handling (near-synonymy) and stemming .
Word-Mover Distance, a similarity score between texts, based
on the (semantic) distance between words in the texts .
For nlp, distance is operationalised using normalised bag of words (nbow) representations .
Translation edit rate, a version of edit distance .
Version of ter optimised for correlations with adequacy judgements .
Content overlap
Dice/Jaccard
Set-theoretic measures of overlap between two unordered sets
(e.g. of predicates or other content units)
Measure of agreement between set-valued items, a weighted version of Jaccard 
Overlap measure relying on comparison of weighted Summarization Content Units (SCUs) 
Measure of overlap between candidate and reference texts based
on propositional content obtained by parsing the text into
graphs representing objects and relations, by ﬁrst parsing captions into scene graphs representing objects and relations 
Table 1: Intrinsic, corpus-based metrics based on string overlap, string distance,
or content overlap. The last column indicates the nlp sub-discipline in which a
metric originated, where applicable. Legend: mt = Machine translation; as =
automatic summarisation; ic = image captioning; ds = document similarity.
Objective Humanlikeness Measures Using Corpora
Intrinsic methods that rely on corpora can generally be said to be addressing
the question of ‘humanlikeness’, that is, the extent to which the system’s output
matches human output under comparable conditions.
From the developer’s
perspective, the selling point of such methods is their cheapness, since they
are usually based on automatically computed metrics.
A variety of corpusbased metrics, often used earlier in related ﬁelds such as Machine Translation
or Summarisation, have been used in nlg evaluation. Some of the main ones
are summarised in Table 1, which groups them according to their principal
characteristics, and for each adds a key reference.
Measures of n-gram overlap or string edit distance, usually originating in
Machine Translation or Summarisation are frequently used for evaluating surface realisation
 and occasionally also to evaluate short texts characteristic of
data-driven systems in domains such as weather reporting and image captioning . Edit distance metrics have been exploited for realisation
 , but also for reg .
The focus of these metrics is on the output text, rather than its ﬁdelity to
the input. In a limited number of cases, surface-oriented metrics have been used
to evaluate the adequacy with which output text reﬂects content .
However, if content determination is the focus,
a measure of surface overlap is at best a proxy, relying on an assumption of
a straightforward correspondence between input and output. This assumption
may be tenable if texts are brief and relatively predictable.
In some cases,
it has been possible to use metrics to measure content determination directly,
based on semantically annotated corpora. For instance, reg algorithms have
been evaluated in this fashion using set overlap metrics . Also relevant in this connection is the pyramid
method for summarisation, which relies on the
identiﬁcation of the content units (which maximally correspond to clauses) in
multiple human summaries. These are weighted and ordered by their frequency
of mention by human summarises. A candidate summary is scored according
to the ratio between the weight of the content units it includes, compared to
the weight of an ideal summary bearing the same number of content units .
Direct measurements of content overlap between generated and candidate
outputs will likely increase, as automatic data-text alignment techniques make
such ‘semantically transparent’ corpora more readily available for end-to-end
nlg . An important development away from pure surface overlap is
the use of semantic resources , or word embeddings , to compute
the proximity of output to reference texts beyond literal string overlap. In a
comparative evaluation of metrics for image captioning, Kilickaya et al. 
found an advantage for wmd compared to other metrics.
Evaluating Genre Compatibility and Stylistic Eﬀectiveness
A slightly diﬀerent question that has occasionally been posed in evaluation studies asks whether the linguistic artefact produced by a system is a recognisable
instance of a particular genre or style.
As noted in Section 5, it is diﬃcult
to ascertain to what extent readers actually perceive subtle stylistic variation.
Thus, Mairesse and Walker found inconsistent perceptions of personality in the evaluation of personage, which was complicated by the fact that
stylistic features interact and may cancel each other out.
Genre perception is a central question for approaches to generating creative
language (see Section 6). For example, Hardcastle and Scott describe an
evaluation of a generation system for cryptic crossword clues based on a Turing
test in which the objective was to determine whether the system’s outputs were
recognisably diﬀerent from human-authored clues. In a related vein, when evaluating the jape joke generation system, Binsted et al. 
presented 120 8-11 year old children with a number of punning riddles, some
automatically generated by jape and some selected from joke books. They also
included a number of non-joke controls, such as:
(37) What do you get when you cross a horse and a donkey?
For each stimulus that they were exposed to, children were asked to indicate
whether they thought it was a joke, and how funny they considered it. The
results revealed that computer generated riddles were recognised as jokes, and
considered funnier than non-jokes. Interestingly, the joke children rated highest
was automatically generated by jape (we urge the reader to inspect the original
paper), although in general, human-produced jokes were considered funnier by
children than automatically generated ones. In this evaluation study, therefore,
an extrinsic aspect of the generated text, concerning its eﬃcacy (here, its ‘funniness’) was found to be correlated with its recognisability as an instance of the
target genre.
Petrovic and Matthews evaluated their unsupervised approach to joke
generation by harvesting human-written jokes from Twitter, conforming to the
I like my X . . . template used by their system. Blind ratings by human judges
of human-written and automatically generated jokes showed that their bestperforming model was rated as funny in 16% of cases, compared to 33% of the
human jokes (itself a relatively low rate).
While the questions posed in these studies clearly have an intrinsic orientation (‘Is the text compatible with the expected genre conventions?’), they also
have a bearing on extrinsic factors, since the ability to recognise an artefact as
an instance of a genre or as exhibiting a certain style or personality is arguably
one of the sources of its impact, which in turn includes judgments of whether a
text is funny or interesting, for example.
Of course, the intention behind variation in style, personality or aﬀect may
well be to ultimately increase eﬀectiveness in achieving some ulterior goal. Indeed, any nlg system intended to be embedded in a speciﬁc environment will
need to address stylistic and genre-based issues. For example, our hypothetical
weather report generator might use a very brief, technical style given its professional pool of target users ;
in contrast, weather reports intended for public consumption, such as those in
the WeatherGov corpus, would probably be longer and less technical .
However, there is a diﬀerence between evaluating whether genre constraints
or stylistic variation help contribute to a goal, and evaluating whether the text
actually exhibits the desired variation. For example, Mairesse and Walker 
evaluated the personage system (see Section 5) by asking users to judge personality traits as reﬂected in generated dialogue fragments (rather than, say,
measuring whether users were more likely to eat at a restaurant if this was recommended by a conﬁguration of the system with a high degree of extraversion).
This is similar in spirit to the question about jokehood asked by Binsted et al.
 , in contrast to the more explicitly extrinsic evaluation of the standup
joke generator by Waller et al. , which asked whether the system actually
helped users improve their interactions with peers.
Extrinsic Evaluation Methods
In contrast to intrinsic methods, extrinsic evaluations measure eﬀectiveness in
achieving a desired goal. In the example scenario of Figure 8, such an evaluation
might address the impact on planning by the engineers who are the target users
of the system. Clearly, ‘eﬀectiveness’ is dependent on the application domain
and purpose of a system. Examples include:
• persuasion and behaviour change, for example, through exposure to personalised smoking cessation letters ;
• purchasing decision after presentation of arguments for and against options
on the housing market based on a user model ;
• engagement with ecological issues after reading blogs about migrating
birds ;
• decision support in a medical setting following the generation of patient
reports ;
• enhancing linguistic interaction among users with complex communication
needs via the generation of personal narratives ;
• enhancing learning eﬃcacy in tutorial dialogue , in many cases evaluation relies on some objective measure of
performance or achievement. This can be done with the target users in situ,
enhancing the ecological validity of the study, but can also take the form of a
task that models the scenarios for which the nlg system has been designed.
Thus, in the give Challenge , in which nlg systems
generated instructions for a user to navigate through a virtual world, a largescale task-based evaluation was carried out by having users play the give game
online, while various indices of success were logged, including the time it took a
user to complete the game. reg algorithms whose goal was to generate identifying descriptions of objects in visual domains, were evaluated in part based on
the time it took readers to identify a referent based on a generated description,
as well as their error rate . skillsum, a system to generate feedback reports from literacy assessments, was evaluated by measuring
how user’s self-assessment of their own literacy skills improved after reading
generated feedback, compared to control texts .
A potential drawback of extrinsic studies, in addition to time and expense,
is a reliance on an adequate user base (which can be diﬃcult to obtain when
users have to be sampled from a speciﬁc population, such as the engineers in our
hypothetical scenario in Figure 8) and the possibility of carrying out the study in
a realistic setting. Such studies also raise signiﬁcant design challenges, due to the
need to control for intervening and confounding variables, comparing multiple
versions of a system (e.g.
in an ablative design; see Section 7.3 below), or
comparing a system against a gold standard or baseline. For example, Carenini
and Moore note that evaluating the eﬀectiveness of arguments presented
in text needs to take into account aspects of a user’s personality which may
impact how receptive they are to arguments in the ﬁrst place.
An example of the trade-oﬀbetween design and control issues and ecological
validity is provided by the BabyTalk family of systems. A pilot system called
bt-45 , which generated patient summaries from 45-minute
spans of historical patient data, was evaluated in a task involving nurses and
doctors, who chose from among a set of clinical actions to take based on the
information given. These were then compared to ‘ground truth’ decisions by senior neonatal experts. This evaluation was carried out oﬀ-ward; hence, subjects
took clinical decisions in an artiﬁcial environment without direct access to the
patient. On the other hand, in the evaluation of bt-nurse, a successor to bt-
45 which summarised patient data collected over a twelve-hour shift , the system was evaluated on-ward using live patient data, but
ethical considerations precluded a task-based evaluation. For the same reasons,
comparison to ‘gold standard’ human texts was also impossible. Hence, the evaluation elicited judgements, both on intrinsic criteria such as understandability
and accuracy and on extrinsic criteria such as perceived clinical utility .
Black Box Versus Glass Box Evaluation
With the exception of evaluations of speciﬁc modules or algorithms, as in the
case of reg or surface realisers, most of the evaluation studies discussed so far
would be classiﬁed as ‘black box’ evaluations of ‘end-to-end’, or complete, nlg
systems. In a ‘glass box’ evaluation, on the other hand, it is the contribution of
individual components that is under scrutiny, ideally in a setup where versions of
a system with and without a component are evaluated in the same manner. Note
that the distinction between black box and glass box evaluation is orthogonal
to the question of which methods are used.
An excellent example of a glass-box evaluation is that by Callaway and Lester
 , who used an ablative design, eliciting judgements of the quality of the
output of their narrative generation system based on diﬀerent conﬁgurations
that omitted or included key components. In a related vein, Elliott and Keller
 compared image-to-text models that included ﬁne-grained dependency
representations of spatial as well as linguistic dependencies, to models with a
coarser-grained image representation, ﬁnding an advantage for the former.
However, exhaustive component-wise comparisons are sometimes diﬃcult
to make and may result in a combinatorial explosion of conﬁgurations, with
a concomitant reduction in data points collected per conﬁguration (assuming
subjects are limited and need to be divided among diﬀerent conditions) and
a reduction in statistical power. Alternatives do exist in the literature. Reiter
et al. elicited judgements on weather forecasts using human and machinegenerated texts, together with a ‘hybrid’ version where the content was selected
by forecasters, but the language was automatically generated.
This enabled
a comparison of human and automatic content selection. Angeli et al. 
used corpus-based and subjective measures to assess linguistic quality, coupled
with precision and recall-based measures to assess content determination of their
statistical system against human-annotated texts. In bt-nurse , nurses were prompted for free text comments (in addition to answering a
questionnaire targeting extrinsic dimensions), which were then manually annotated and analysed to determine which elements of the system were potentially
problematic.
On the Relationship Between Evaluation Methods
To what extent are the plethora of methods surveyed – from extrinsic, taskoriented to intrinsic ones relying on automatic metrics or human judgements
– actually related? It turns out that multiple evaluation methods seldom give
converging verdicts on a system, or on the relative ranking of a set of systems
under comparison.
Metrics Versus Human Judgements
Although corpus-based metrics used in mt and summarisation are typically validated by demonstrating their correlation with human ratings, meta-evaluation
studies in these ﬁelds have suggested that the correspondence is somewhat weak
 . Similarly, shared task evaluations on referring expression generation showed that
corpus-based, judgement-based and experimental or task-based methods frequently do not correlate . In their recent review Bernardi
et al. note a similar issue in image captioning system evaluation. Thus,
Kulkarni et al. found that their image description system did not outperform two earlier methods on bleu
scores; however, human judgements indicated the opposite trend, with readers
preferring their system .
Hodosh et al. compared the agreement (measured by Cohen’s κ) between human judgements and bleu or rouge scores for retrieved captions,
ﬁnding that outputs were not ranked similarly by humans and metrics, unless
the retrieved captions were identical to the reference captions.
On occasion, the correlation between a metric and human judgements appears to diﬀer across studies, suggesting that metric-based results are highly
susceptible to variation due to generation algorithms and datasets.
For instance, Konstas and Lapata (discussed in Section 3.3.4 above) ﬁnd that
on corpus-based metrics, the best-performing version of their model does not
outperform that of Kim and Mooney on the robocup domain, or that of
Angeli et al. on their weather corpus (weathergov), though it performs
better than Angeli et al.’s on the noisier atis travel dataset. However, an evaluation of ﬂuency and semantic correctness, based on human judgements, showed
that the system outperformed, by a small margin, both Kim and Mooney’s and
Angeli et al.’s on both measures in all domains with the exception of weathergov, where Angeli et al.’s system did marginally better.
In a related vein, Elliott and De Vries compare their image captioning system, based on visual dependency relations, to the Bidirectional rnn
developed by Karpathy and Fei-Fei , on two diﬀerent datasets. The two
systems were close to each other on the vlt2k dataset, but not on Pascal1k, a
result that the authors claim is due to vlt2k containing more pictures involving
actions. As for the relationship between metrics and human judgements, Elliott
and Keller concluded that meteor correlates better than bleu , a ﬁnding also conﬁrmed in their later work ,
as well as in the ms-coco Evaluation Challenge, which found that meteor
was more robust. However, work by Kuznetsova et al. showed variable
results; their highest-scoring method as judged by humans, involving tree composition, was ranked higher by bleu than by meteor. In the ms-coco Evaluation Challenge, some systems outperformed a human-human upper bound when
compared to reference texts using automatic metrics, but no system reached this
level in an evaluation based on human judgements .
Some studies have explicitly addressed the relationship between methods as
a research question in its own right. An important contribution in this direction is the study by Reiter and Belz , which addressed the validity of
corpus-based metrics in relation to human judgements, within the domain of
weather forecast generation . In a ﬁrst experiment, focussing
on linguistic quality, the authors found a high correlation between expert and
non-expert readers’ judgements, but the correlation between human judgements
and the automatic metrics varied considerably (from 0.3 to 0.87), depending on
the version of the metric used and whether the reference texts were included in
the comparison by human judges. The second experiment evaluated both linguistic quality, by asking human judges to rate clarity/readability; and content
determination, by eliciting judgements of accuracy/appropriateness (by comparing texts to the raw data). The automatic metrics correlated signiﬁcantly
with judgements of clarity, but far less with accuracy, suggesting that they were
better at predicting the linguistic quality than correctness.
Other studies have yielded similarly inconsistent results. In a study on paraphrase generation, Stent et al. found that automatic metrics correlated
highly with judgements of adequacy (roughly akin to accuracy), but not ﬂuency.
By contrast, Espinosa et al. found that automatic metrics such as nist,
meteor and gtm correlate moderately well with human ﬂuency and adequacy
judgements of English surface realisation quality, while Cahill reported
only a weak correlation for German surface realisation. Wubben et al. ,
comparing text simpliﬁcation strategies, found low, but signiﬁcant correlations
between bleu and ﬂuency judgements, and a very low, negative correlation
between bleu and adequacy. These contrasting ﬁndings suggest that the relationship between metrics may depend on purpose and genre of the text under
consideration; for example, Reiter and Belz used weather reports, while
Wubben et al. used Wikipedia articles.
Various factors can be adduced to explain the inconsistency of these metaevaluation studies:
1. Metrics such as bleu are sensitive to the length of the texts under comparison. With shorter texts, n-gram based metrics are likely to result in
lower scores.
2. The type of overlap matters: for example, many evaluations in image
captioning rely on bleu-1 , but longer n-grams are harder to
match, though they capture more syntactic information and are arguably
better indicators of ﬂuency.
3. Semantic variability is an important issue. Generated texts may be similar
to reference texts, but diﬀer on some near-synonyms, or subtle word order
variations. As shown in Table 1, some metrics are designed to partially
address these issues.
4. Many intrinsic corpus-based metrics are designed to compare against multiple reference texts, but this is not always possible in nlg. For example,
while image captioning datasets typically contain multiple captions per
image (typically, around 5), this is not the case in other domains, like
weather reporting or restaurant recommendations.
The upshot is that nlg evaluations increasingly rely on multiple methods, a
trend that is equally visible in other areas of nlp , such as mt .
Using Controlled Experiments
A few studies have validated evaluation measures against experimental data.
For example, Siddharthan and Katsos compared the outcomes of their
magnitude estimation judgement study (see Section 7.1 above) to the results
from a sentence recall task, ﬁnding that the results from the latter are largely
consistent with judgements and concluding that they can substitute for taskbased evaluations to shed light on breakdowns in comprehension at sentence
level. A handful of studies have also used behavioral experiments and compared
‘online’ processing measures, such as reading time of referring expressions, to
corpus-based metrics . Correlations with automatic metrics are usually poor. A somewhat diﬀerent use of reading times was made by
Lapata , who used them as an objective measure against which to validate
Kendall’s τ as a metric for assessing information ordering in text (an aspect of
text stucturing). In a recent study, Zarrießet al. compared generated
texts to human-authored and ‘ﬁller’ texts (which were manually manipulated
to compromise their coherence). They found that reading-time measures were
more useful to distinguish these classes of texts than oﬄine measures based on
elicited judgements of ﬂuency and clarity.
Evaluation: Concluding Remarks
Against the background of this section, three main conclusions can be drawn:
1. There is a widespread acceptance of the necessity of using multiple evaluation methods in nlg. While these are not always consistent among themselves, they are useful in shedding light on diﬀerent aspects of quality,
from ﬂuency and clarity of output, to adequacy of semantic content and
eﬀectiveness in achieving communicative intentions. The choice of method
has a direct impact on the way in which results can be interpreted.
2. Meta-evaluation studies have yielded conﬂicting results on the relationship between human judgements, behavioural measures and automatically
computed metrics. The correlation among them varies depending on task
and application domain. This is a subject of ongoing research, with plenty
of studies focussing on the reliabilty of metrics and their relationship to
other measures, especially human judgements.
3. A question that remains under-explored concerns the dimensions of quality
that are themselves the object of inquiry. . For example, what are people judging when they judge
ﬂuency or adequacy and how consistently do they do so? It is far from
obvious whether these judgements should really be expected to correlate
with other measures, given that the latter are producer-oriented, focussing
on output, while judgements are themselves often receiver-oriented, focussing on how the output is read or processed . Furthermore, while meta-linguistic judgements can
be expected to reﬂect the impact of a text on its readers, there is nevertheless the possibility that behavioural, online methods designed to directly
investigate aspects of processing would yield a diﬀerent picture, a result
that has been obtained in some psycholinguistic studies .
In conclusion, our principal recommendation to nlg practitioners, where
evaluation is concerned, is to err in favour of diversity, by using multiple methods, as far as possible, and reporting not only their results, but also the correlation between them. Weak correlations need not imply that the results of a
particular method are invalid. Rather, they may indicate that measures focus
on diﬀerent aspects of a system or its output.
Discussion and Future Directions
Over the past two decades, the ﬁeld of nlg has advanced considerably, and
many of these recent advances have not been covered in a comprehensive survey
yet. This paper has sought to address this gap, with the following goals:
1. to give an update of the core tasks and architectures in the ﬁeld, with an
emphasis on recent data-driven techniques;
2. to brieﬂy highlight recent developments in relatively new areas, incuding
vision-to-text generation and the generation of stylistically varied, engaging or creative texts; and
3. to extensively discuss the problems and prospects of evaluating nlg applications.
Throughout this survey, various general, related themes have emerged. Probably the central theme has been the gradual shift away from traditional, rulebased approaches to statistical, data-driven ones, which, of course, has been
taking place in ai in general. In nlg, this has had substantial impact on how
individual tasks are approached (e.g., moving away from domain-dependent to
more general, domain-independent approaches, relying on available data instead) as well as on how tasks are combined in diﬀerent architectures (e.g.,
moving away from modular towards more integrated approaches). The trade-oﬀ
between output quality of the generated text and the eﬃciency and robustness
of an approach is becoming a central issue: data-driven approaches are arguably
more eﬃcient than rule-based approaches, but the output quality may be compromised, for reasons we have discussed. Another important theme has been
the increased interplay between core nlg research and other disciplines, such
as computer vision (in the case of vision-to-text) and computational creativity
research (in the case of creative language use).
At the conclusion of this comprehensive survey of the state of the art in
nlg, and given the fast pace at which developments occur both in industry and
academia, we feel it is useful to point to some potential future directions, as
well as to raise a number of questions which recent research has brought to the
Why (and How) Should NLG be Used?
Towards the beginning of their inﬂuential survey on nlg, Reiter and Dale 
recommended to the developer that she pose this question before embarking
on the design and implementation of a system.
Can nlg really help in the
target domain?
Does a cheaper, more standard solution exist and would it
work just as well? From the perspective of an engineer or a company, these
are obviously relevant questions. As recent industry-based applications of nlg
show, this technology is typically valuable whenever information that needs to
be presented to users is relatively voluminous, and comes in a form which is not
easily consumed and does not aﬀord a straightforward mapping to a more userfriendly modality without considerable transformation. This is arguably where
nlg comes into its own, oﬀering a battery of techniques to select, structure and
present the information.
However, the question whether nlg is worth using in a speciﬁc setting should
also be accompanied by the question of how it should be used.
Our survey
has focussed on techniques for the generation of text, but text is not always
presented in isolation. Other important dimensions include document structure
and layout, an under-studied problem . They also
include the role of graphics in text, an area where there is the potential for
further interaction between the nlg and visualisation communities, addressing
such questions as which information should be rendered textually and which
can be made more accessible in a graphical modality .
These questions are of great relevance in some domains, especially those where
accurate information delivery is a precursor to decision-making in fault-critical
situations .
Does NLG Include Text-to-Text?
In our introductory section, we distinguished text-to-text generation from datato-text generation; this survey has focussed primarily on the latter. The two
areas have distinguishing characteristics, not least the fact that nlg inputs
tend to vary widely, as do the goals of nlg systems as a function of the domain
under consideration. In contrast, the input in text-to-text generation, especially
Automatic Summarisation, is comparatively homogeneous, and while its goals
can vary widely, the ﬁeld has also been successful at deﬁning tasks and datasets
(for instance, through the duc shared tasks), which have set the standard for
subsequent research.
Yet, a closer look at the two types of generation will show more scope for
convergence than the above characterisation suggests. To begin with, if nlg
is concerned with going from data to text, then surely textual input should be
considered as one out of broad variety of forms in which input data might be
presented.
Some recent work, such as that of Kondadadi et al. (discussed in Section 3.3) and McIntyre and Lapata (discussed in Section 6)
has explicitly focussed on leveraging such data to generate coherent text. Other
approaches to nlg, including some systems that conform to a standard, modular, data-to-text architecture , have had to deal with
text as one out of a variety of input types, albeit using very simple techniques.
Generation from heterogeneous inputs which include text as one type of data
is a promising research direction, especially in view of the large quantities of
textual data available, often accompanied by numbers or images.
Theories and Models in Search of Applications?
In their overview of the status of evaluation in nlg in the late 1990s, Mellish
and Dale discussed, among the possible ways of evaluating a system,
its theoretical underpinnings and in particular whether the theoretical model
underlying an nlg system or one of its components is adequate to the task
and can generalise to new domains. Rather than evaluating an nlg system as
such, this question targets the theory itself, and suggests that we view nlg as
a potential testbed for such theories or models. But what are the theories that
underlie nlg?
The prominence of theoretical models in nlg tends to depend on the task
under consideration. For instance, many approaches to realisation discussed in
Section 2.6 are based on a speciﬁc theory of syntactic structure; research on reg
has often been based on insights from pragmatic theory, especially the Gricean
maxims ; and much research on text structuring has been inspired
by Rhetorical Structure Theory . Relatively novel
takes on various sentence planning tasks – especially those concerned with style,
aﬀect and personality – tend to have a theoretical inspiration, in the form of a
model of personality or a theory of politenes , for example.
More often than not, such theories are leveraged in the process of formalising
a particular problem to achieve a tractable solution. Treating their implementation in an nlg system as an explicit test of the theory, as Mellish and Dale
 seem to suggest, happens far less often. This is perhaps a reﬂection of a
division between ‘engineering-oriented’ and ‘theoretically-oriented’ perspectives
in the ﬁeld: the former perspective emphasises workable solutions, robustness
and output quality; the latter emphasises theoretical soundness, cognitive plau-
sibility and so forth. However, the theory/engineering dichotomy is arguably a
false one. While the goal of nlg research is often diﬀerent from, say, that of cognitive modelling (for example, few nlg systems seek to model production errors
explicitly), it is also true that theory-driven implementations are themselves
worthy contributions to theoretical work.
Recently, some authors have argued that nlg practitioners should pay closer
attention to theoretical and cognitive models. The reasons marshalled in favour
of this argument are twofold.
First, psycholinguistic results and theoretical
models can actually help to improve implemented systems, as Rajkumar and
White show for the case of realisation. Second, as argued for example
by van Deemter et al. , theoretical models can beneﬁt from the formal
precision that is the bread-and-butter of computational linguistic research; a
concrete case in point in nlp is provided by Poesio et al. , whose implementation of Centering Theory shed light on a number of
underspeciﬁed parameters in the original model and subsequent modiﬁcations of
it. Our argument here is that nlg has provided a wealth of theoretical insights
which should not be lost to the broader research community; similarly, nlg researchers would undoubtedly beneﬁt from an awareness of recent developments
in theoretical and experimental work.
Where do We Go from Here?
Finally, we conclude with some speculations on some further directions for future
research for which the time seems ripe.
Within the ﬁeld of Natural Language Processing as a whole, a remarkable
recent developments is the explosion of interest in social media, including online
blogs, micro-blogs such as Twitter feeds, and social platforms such as Facebook.
In one respect, interest in social media could be seen as a natural extension of
long-standing topics in nlp, including the desire to deal with language ‘in the
wild’. However, social media data has given more impetus to the exploration of
non-canonical language ; the impact of social and demographic factors on language use ; the prevalence of paralinguistic features such as aﬀect, irony and humour
 ; and other variables such as personality . Social media feeds are also important data streams for the identiﬁcation
of topical and trending events .
There is as yet little work on generating textual or multimedia summaries of
such data or generating text in social media contexts .
Since much of social media text is subjective and opinionated, an increased interest in social media on the part of nlg researchers may also give new impetus
to research on the impact of style, personality and aﬀect on textual variation
(discussed in Section 5), and on non-literal language (including some of the
phenomena discussed in Section 6).
A second potential growth area for nlg is situated language generation.
The term situated is usually taken to refer to language use in physical or virtual
environments where production choices explicitly take into account perceptual
and physical properties. Research on situated language processing has advanced
signiﬁcantly in the past several years, with frameworks for language production
and understanding in virtual contexts , as well as a
number of contributions within nlg, especially for the generation of language
in interactive environments . The popular give Challenge added further impetus to this research . Clearly,
this work is also linked to the enterprise of grounding generated language in the
perceptual world, of which the research discussed in Section 4 constitutes one
of the current trends. However, there are many ﬁelds where situatedness is key,
in which nlg can still make novel contributions. One of these is gaming. With
the exception of a few endeavours to enhance the variety of linguistic expressions used in virtual environments , nlg technology
is relatively unrepresented in research on games, despite signiﬁcant progress on
dynamic content generation in game environments .
This may be due to the perception that linguistic interaction in games is predictable and can rely on ‘canned’ text. However, with the growing inﬂuence of
gamiﬁcation as a strategy for enhancing a variety of activities beyond entertainment, such as pedagogy, as well as the development of sophisticated planning
techniques for varying the way in which game worlds unfold on the ﬂy, the assumption of predictability where language use is concerned may well be up for
Third, there is a growing interest in applying nlg techniques to generation
from structured knowledge bases and ontologies . The availability
of knowledge bases such as dbpedia, or folksonomies such as Freebase, not only
constitute input sources in their own right, but also open up the possibility of
exploring alignments between structured inputs and text in a broader variety of
domains than has hitherto been the case.
Finally, while there has been a signiﬁcant shift in the past few years towards data-driven techniques in nlg, many of these have not been tested in
commercial or real-world applications, despite the growth in commercialisation
of text generation services noted in the introductory section. Typically, the arguments for rule-based systems in commercial scenarios, or in cases where input
is high-volume and heterogeneous, are that (1) their output is easier to control
for target systems; or (2) that data is in any case unavailable in a given domain,
rendering the use of statistical techniques moot; or (3) data-driven systems have
not been shown to be able to scale up beyond experimental scenarios . A response to the
ﬁrst point depends on the availability of techniques which enable the developer
to ‘look under the hood’ and understand the statistical relationships learned
by a model. Such techniques are, for example, being developed to investigate
or visualise the representations learned by deep neural networks. The second
point calls for more investment in research on data acquisition and data-text
alignment. Techniques for generation which rely on less precise alignments between data and text are also a promising future direction. Finally, scalability
remains an open challenge. Many of the systems we have discussed have been
developed within research environments, where the aim is of course to push the
frontiers of nlg and demonstrate feasibility or correctness of novel approaches.
While in some cases, research on data-to-text has addressed large-scale problems
– notably in some of the systems that summarise numerical data – a greater
concern with scalability would also focus researchers’ attention on issues such
as the time and resources required to collect data and train a system and the
eﬃciency of the algorithms being deployed. Clearly, developments in hardware
will alleviate these problems, as has happened with some statistical methods
that have recently become more feasible.
Conclusion
Recent years have seen a marked increase in interest in automatic text generation. Companies now oﬀer nlg technology for a range of applications in domains such as journalism, weather, and ﬁnance. The huge increase in available
data and computing power, as well as rapid developments in machine-learning,
have created many new possibilities and motivated nlg researchers to explore a
number of new applications, related to, for instance, image-to-text generation,
while applications related to social media seem to be just around the corner,
as witness, for instance, the emergence of nlg-related techniques for automatic
content-creation as well as nlg for twitter and chatbots . With
developments occurring at a steady pace, and the technology also ﬁnding its way
into industrial applications, the future of the ﬁeld seems bright. In our view,
research in nlg should be further strengthened by more collaboration with kindred disciplines. It is our hope that this survey will serve to highlight some of
the potential avenues for such multi-disciplinary work.
Acknowledgements
We thank the four reviewers for their detailed and constructive comments. In
addition, we have greatly beneﬁtted from discussions with and comments from
Grzegorz Chrupala, Robert Dale, Raquel Herv´as, Thiago Castro Ferreira, Ehud
Reiter, Marc Tanti, Mari¨et Theune, Kees van Deemter, Michael White and
Sander Wubben. EK received support from RAAK-PRO SIA 
and The Netherlands Organization for Scientiﬁc Research (NWO 360-89-050),
which is gratefully acknowledged.