ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 09 October 2020
doi: 10.3389/fnbot.2020.568359
Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org
October 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 568359
Edited by:
Subramanian Ramamoorthy,
University of Edinburgh,
United Kingdom
Reviewed by:
Jeffrey L. Krichmar,
University of California, Irvine,
United States
Yulia Sandamirskaya,
Intel, Germany
*Correspondence:
Travis DeWolf
travis.dewolf@
appliedbrainresearch.com
Received: 01 June 2020
Accepted: 01 September 2020
Published: 09 October 2020
DeWolf T, Jaworski P and Eliasmith C
 Nengo and Low-Power AI
Hardware for Robust, Embedded
Neurorobotics.
Front. Neurorobot. 14:568359.
doi: 10.3389/fnbot.2020.568359
Nengo and Low-Power AI Hardware
for Robust, Embedded Neurorobotics
Travis DeWolf 1*, Pawel Jaworski 1 and Chris Eliasmith 1,2
1 Applied Brain Research, Waterloo, ON, Canada, 2 Centre for Theoretical Neuroscience, University of Waterloo, Waterloo,
ON, Canada
In this paper we demonstrate how the Nengo neural modeling and simulation libraries
enable users to quickly develop robotic perception and action neural networks for
simulation on neuromorphic hardware using tools they are already familiar with, such
as Keras and Python. We identify four primary challenges in building robust, embedded
neurorobotic systems, including: (1) developing infrastructure for interfacing with the
environment and sensors; (2) processing task speciﬁc sensory signals; (3) generating
robust, explainable control signals; and (4) compiling neural networks to run on target
hardware. Nengo helps to address these challenges by: (1) providing the NengoInterfaces
library, which deﬁnes a simple but powerful API for users to interact with simulations
and hardware; (2) providing the NengoDL library, which lets users use the Keras and
TensorFlow API to develop Nengo models; (3) implementing the Neural Engineering
Framework, which provides white-box methods for implementing known functions and
circuits; and (4) providing multiple backend libraries, such as NengoLoihi, that enable
users to compile the same model to different hardware. We present two examples
using Nengo to develop neural networks that run on CPUs and GPUs as well as
Intel’s neuromorphic chip, Loihi, to demonstrate two variations on this workﬂow. The
ﬁrst example is an implementation of an end-to-end spiking neural network in Nengo
that controls a rover simulated in Mujoco. The network integrates a deep convolutional
network that processes visual input from cameras mounted on the rover to track a target,
and a control system implementing steering and drive functions in connection weights to
guide the rover to the target. The second example uses Nengo as a smaller component
in a system that has addressed some but not all of those challenges. Speciﬁcally it is
used to augment a force-based operational space controller with neural adaptive control
to improve performance during a reaching task using a real-world Kinova Jaco2 robotic
arm. The code and implementation details are provided1, with the intent of enabling other
researchers to build and run their own neurorobotic systems.
Keywords: Nengo, neuromorphic, neurorobotic, spiking neural networks, robotic control, adaptive control,
embedded robotics
1. INTRODUCTION
Specialized AI hardware oﬀers exciting potential for the development of low-power, highly
responsive robotic systems with embedded control. Edge devices for accelerating neural networks
are starting to become commercially available from companies, such as NVIDIA, BrainChip, GrAI
Matter Labs, Google, Intel, and IBM. While the promise of low-power and low-latency embedded
1 
DeWolf et al.
Nengo for Neurorobotics
processing and control is highly desirable, the process of
implementing algorithms on the hardware generally remains a
signiﬁcant hurdle. Developing neural networks for processing
sensory data and generating control signals is a diﬃcult problem,
and adding further constraints speciﬁc to a particular piece of
hardware only increases the challenge. In this paper we focus
on the development of spiking neural networks (SNNs) for the
subset of devices known as neuromorphic hardware . Eﬀectively using such hardware often requires additional
expert knowledge outside of traditional machine learning and
neural network methods to program eﬀectively. In short, it is
diﬃcult to quickly and easily build robust, integrated neural
models for controlling robots using neuromorphic hardware.
Building neurorobotic systems can be characterized as
consisting of four tasks:
1. Developing
infrastructure
from the environment. There are a multitude of diﬀerent
interface protocols for sensors, hardware, and simulators.
To minimize development time, simple interfaces should be
available and interchangeable with minimal changes to the
model description.
2. Processing task speciﬁc sensory signals. Deep neural networks
(DNNs) are the principle machine learning tool used for
sensory processing, and it is important to take advantage of
the extensive literature and solutions in this ﬁeld. To that end,
users need to be able to take DNNs, convert them to networks
that can run on neuromorphic hardware, and integrate
them into a neurorobotics control system. For systems using
perception methods not rooted in neural networks, it is also
important to be able to easily integrate their output with
downstream networks.
3. Generating robust control signals with explainable neural
networks. When generating control signals, having guarantees
on performance is important, and often necessary. To
accomplish this users needs to know exactly what operations
are being implemented to guarantee stability. The Neural
Engineering Framework . As part of this
workﬂow, we take advantage of the NengoInterface package to
streamline interfacing with the physics simulators, the NengoDL
package for integrating Keras and TensorFlow models that
process incoming sensory data, and the NengoLoihi package for
compiling the model to run on Intel’s Loihi neuromorphic chip
 .
We illustrate two variations on this workﬂow by describing
two example neurorobotics applications in detail. The ﬁrst
example implements an end-to-end perception and action system
in Nengo for tracking a target with a rover simulated in
Mujoco . The rover has four mounted
cameras whose input is fed into a DNN built using Keras. The
DNN estimates the distance to the target, and this estimate is
sent to a control network which generates torques to apply to
the steering wheel and drive wheels to move the rover to the
target. This full system is then compiled onto Loihi. In the
second example, we demonstrate how Nengo can be integrated
with an existing system by augmenting a standard robotic arm
force controller using a neural adaptive controller that learns
online. We implement the adaptive component both on standard
hardware and Loihi, where we take advantage of its on-chip
learning. We compare implementations of the adaptive control
system as it drives a physical Jaco2 robot arm from Kinova
to perform a reaching task while adapting to the unmodeled
force of holding a two pound weight. We discuss the workﬂow
bottlenecks and challenges that are encountered, addressed,
and remaining.
2. BACKGROUND
2.1. Nengo and Supporting Development
Nengo is a neural modeling development and simulation
platform. Users specify the architecture of models using a
Python-based API, referred to as the “front-end,” and then
compile their model for simulation on hardware using a “backend.” The API is designed such that the same model can be run
on diﬀerent hardware with few to no changes in the front-end
script. Supported hardware includes CPUs, GPUs, FPGAs, and
specialized neuromorphic hardware (such as Intel’s Loihi chip).
Nengo users are able to quickly design and simulate neural
networks, and use the NengoGUI package to visualize and
interface with them during run-time. The NengoDL package
extends Nengo’s API to interface with and integrate deep and
machine learning networks built in Keras or TensorFlow, as
well as take advantage of TensorFlow’s resource distribution
manager for eﬃcient simulation across multiple processors.
The NengoInterfaces package provides easy interface access
with the Mujoco simulator, abstracting out the setup and
overhead involved in connecting, running, communicating,
and restarting Mujoco simulations. The NengoLoihi package
allows us to compile our models to run on the Loihi, and also
handles communication to and from the chip. Additionally,
the NengoLoihi package provides a Loihi emulator that
allows users to run their models while simulating Loihi
computations
computers,
development.
supporting
packages, but in the interest of space we limit our review
Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org
October 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 568359
DeWolf et al.
Nengo for Neurorobotics
to the above packages relevant to the work presented in
this paper.
2.2. The Loihi Chip
We use Intel’s Loihi chip for demonstration
in the examples below. The Loihi chip is a many-core mesh
with 128 neuromorphic cores, 3 embedded × 86 processing
cores, and oﬀ-chip communication interfaces. An asynchronous
network-on-chip communicates packetized messages between
cores, allowing write, read request and response, spike messages,
and barrier messages for time synchronization to be sent between
cores. Each neuromorphic core has 1,024 neural “compartments,”
where a compartment can be allocated to simulate a neuron
or dendrite.
The NengoLoihi package allows users to compile their
front-end script to the Loihi chip, handling all of the lowlevel mapping and communication. Some front-end scripts will
require modiﬁcation specifying low-level details, such as how
to allocate neural populations across Loihi cores, but largely
the details of this low-level mapping are abstracted out and
handled automatically.
2.3. Other Neurorobotic Workﬂows and
Most commonly, building neurorobotic applications involves
hand-crafting and tuning SNNs for the task of interest. In
Gutierrez-Galan et al. the authors build an SNN inspired
by biology to implement a central-pattern generator that runs
on the SpiNNaker neuromorphic board 
and drives a hexapod robot to walk, trot, or run. In Kreiser
et al. , the authors hand craft an SNN to run on the
Loihi to steer a small rover. In Stagsted et al. , a PID
controller is implemented in an SNN running on Loihi to steer
an unmanned aerial vehicle. The authors accomplish this using
one-hot encoding, such that only one neuron in a population is
able to spike at a time, and each neuron represents a diﬀerent
possible variable value, to build up networks implementing
addition and subtraction, at which point a PID controller can
be built. Implementation of non-linear functions is listed as
future work. We note that these models can be built using
the Nengo API, and the NEF API makes non-linear function
implementation straight-forward.
The authors of Taunyazov et al. implement an SNN
visual tactile system that runs on Loihi and performs container
classiﬁcation and rotational slip detection. The network is a deep
net trained with the SLAYER 
method, which uses stochastic spiking neurons to overcome
the undeﬁned derivative in spiking neurons that prevents
backpropagation from working. In Hwu et al. , the authors
train an Energy-Eﬃcient Deep Neural Network (EEDN), a
deep network designed speciﬁcally to run on IBM’s TrueNorth
neuromorphic chip , on trail photos to train
up a network that attaches to a real-world rover and guides it
along a path. The authors mention that the trained weights work
well in a standard convolutional neural network or in the EEDN,
which can transfer its weights directly to the TrueNorth. As we
detail in our examples below, the NengoDL package allows users
to take advantage of similar deep learning methods for training
SNNs to run on neuromorphic hardware.
Another way to program neuromorphic hardware is using
the Python Neural Networks (PyNN) interface . PyNN is a front-end API that shares Nengo’s goal of
creating a high-level front-end API that speciﬁes neural network
architecture without being tied to the low-level implementations
speciﬁcs. PyNN was developed to standardize scripting neural
networks across several diﬀerent low-level neural simulators,
including Brian , NEURON , and Nest .
Since its development, others have extended PyNN to include
backends for other simulators and neuromorphic hardware.
While Nengo allows the same low-level speciﬁcity of PyNN,
Nengo also allows many of these details to be easily abstracted,
and has more focus on high-level objects that speed the
development of large or complex neural systems. For example, to
implement a communication channel between two populations
of neurons takes ∼12 lines in Nengo, and over 80 lines
in PyNN . Importantly, Nengo also supports
methods for generating connection weight matrices, including
the NEF as well as Keras/TensorFlow techniques, which PyNN
The Neurorobotics Platform is a
web-based simulation environment for running SNNs hooked
up to virtual robots. Developed as part of the Human Brain
Project , the goal of the NRP is to streamline the
process of running experiments with SNNs and robots. The NRP
lets users quickly select a virtual environment, robot, and SNNs
to run an experiment. The NRP has a broad scope, oﬀering tools,
such as the web-based robot designer, experimental workﬂow
editor, and Gazebo simulation environment editor. In contrast,
Nengo focuses primarily on the development, integration, and
simulation of neural networks (both spiking and non-spiking),
support of diﬀerent neural network programming paradigms
like the NEF and Keras/TensorFlow, compiling to diﬀerent
hardware backends, and systems interfacing through Python.
There is potential for collaboration between Nengo and the
NRP, expanding the neural network development and simulator
interfacing of the NRP, and the experiment design and web
interface of Nengo.
3. NEUROROBOTIC ROVER SYSTEM
In this example we develop an end-to-end perception and action
system for tracking a target with a rover in Mujoco . The simulated rover we use is a four wheeled vehicle,
built using Mujoco’s XML modeling language, with Ackerman
steering and rear diﬀerential drive in a boundless environment
with no obstacles. The rover has 4 RGB cameras mounted on its
back, each with a 90◦ﬁeld-of-vision, that provide a full 360◦view
of the environment, and a sensor on the front wheels that provide
steering angle information. The rover accepts two torque input
signals, one to control the acceleration of the rear wheels, and
one to turn the front wheels right or left. The target is a red sphere
that ﬂoats in the air and warps to a new location A diagram of the neural network implementing the rover’s perception and action system. The components inside the gray
rounded rectangle are run on the Loihi hardware. Arrows indicate the ﬂow of information. The “conv” preﬁx denotes convolutional layers, the “dense” preﬁx denotes
fully connected layers, and the “ens” preﬁx denotes NEF layers. (2) Top: The control network’s approximation of the steering (top) and acceleration (bottom) signals are
plotted in blue. The ideal function output is plotted as a dashed red line. Bottom: The vision network’s estimate of the target x (top) and y (bottom) location relative to
the rover is plotted in blue. Ground truth is plotted as a dashed red line. (3) The trajectory followed by the rover is plotted in orange as it approaches different targets,
as seen from above. The rover starts in the center at the green X and drives to the different targets, plotted as blue Xs. (4) Left: An image of the rover and the target in
the Mujoco environment. Right: The images from the four mounted cameras attached to the rover, which generate the input to the vision network. (5) The ﬁring rate
curve of standard and Loihi neurons, to show the effects of discretization on the on-chip activity proﬁles neurons. (Left) Spiking rectiﬁed linear neurons; (right) Leaky
integrate-and-ﬁre neurons.
a random distribution within 3 m of the origin) when the centerof-mass of the rover is within 50 cm of the center of the target.
Figure 1–4 shows the rover in the world on the left, and the view
from each of the 4 cameras on the right.
To begin developing our perception and action systems, we
ﬁrst build out the controller without using neural networks. We
use the exact ground-truth information provided by Mujoco to
identify the target location relative to the rover, and calculate
Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org
October 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 568359
DeWolf et al.
Nengo for Neurorobotics
the torques for acceleration and steering in Python. Next, we
address sensory perception by building a DNN that can identify
target (x, y) location relative to the rover based on input from the
four mounted cameras. This requires building a dataset using the
simulator to train the DNN. We initially train the system using
standard artiﬁcial rate neurons, to conﬁrm that the desired level
of performance can be achieved with our network architecture.
We then us NengoDL to convert the network to spiking neurons
and tune the parameters to optimize performance. Next, we
replace each function in the control system with spiking analogs,
testing each in isolation before ﬁnally integrating the entire
spiking network. Once performance is achieved in a fully spiking
neural network, we move the network simulation from Nengo
into the NengoLoihi emulator, and tune the parameters again to
optimize under the constraints of the Loihi. Finally we compile
the network to the Loihi hardware, again using NengoLoihi. In
the next sections we describe each of these steps in more detail.
3.1. Interfacing With Mujoco
Interfacing to Mujoco is done through NengoInterfaces, which
uses the mujoco-py library for Python
bindings to the Mujoco C API. The interface accepts force
signals from the neural network, applies them inside Mujoco
and moves the simulation forward one time step, and then
returns feedback from the rover. Environment information
can be accessed directly from the NengoInterfaces API, and
less common functions are available through the mujoco-py
simulation and environment model parameters.
3.2. Processing Visual Input Using a Keras
DNN Converted to a Nengo SNN
The network used for tracking the target location consists of
two convolutional layers and three dense layers, and is shown
in the bottom block of Figure 1–1. The ﬁrst convolutional layer
uses 1 × 1 kernels with a stride of 1, and a ﬁlter size of 3; its
purpose is to convert the image signal into spikes to be sent to
the layers running on Loihi2. To generate the input image, we
take a 32 × 32 pixels resolution snapshot from each camera,
and concatenate them horizontally to create a 32 × 128 pixels
input to the network. This resolution was chosen as the smallest
network size that could still identify targets at a distance of 3 m.
To retrieve the signal from the last layer running on-chip we use
neural probes, which monitor spiking activity.
The dataset used for training the model was generated by
recording both input from the mounted cameras and the relative
distance to the target. The data was collected while our nonspiking control system drove the rover to the targets, recording
every 10th frame. The ﬁnal dataset used consists of roughly
40,000 images and target (x, y) locations (the height of the target
is constant and is not relevant to control so we ignore it).
Training the network with non-spiking ReLU activation
functions using standard DNN tools (i.e., Keras) was the ﬁrst
step. This allows us to validate the network architecture. For all
of our training we use the RMSprop optimizer from TensorFlow
2It is also possible to send information to Loihi by setting the bias and current for
neurons, but we have found this method to be slower for a dynamic input signal.
and the mean squared error loss function on network output
to learn to output the target (x, y) locations associated with
an image. When converting the network into spiking neurons
take into account both the desired ﬁring rates and the activation
function of neurons running on the Loihi. We have found that
if the average ﬁring rates are <50 Hz, spiking neurons are
not driven strongly enough to generate any activity. We target
the 175 Hz range for ﬁring rates, because it is large enough
to ensure spiking, but still inside the range where the Loihi
neurons approximate standard neurons well (discussed below).
To achieve this, we initialize the weights of our network by setting
the scale_firing_rates parameter of the NengoDL builtin Keras converter to 400. This parameter encourages the
optimizer to converge to ﬁring rates that are higher or lower,
based on the scaling. An alternative, and more ﬁne-grained and
reliable method, is to add a ﬁring rate regularization term to
the cost function that penalizes neurons ﬁring outside of the
desired range.
The second factor we need to account for is the activation
function of neurons on the target neuromorphic hardware.
Neurons on the Loihi have a unique activation proﬁle because
of discretization that occurs on-chip, as shown in Figure 1–5.
We use NengoLoihi’s model of the Loihi rectiﬁed linear neuron
during training to ensure that the network is trained on the same
kind of activation functions used during inference.
Finally, we set network synapses throughout the network as
required to smooth out the signal and ﬁlter noise. In Nengo, you
can set synapses to 0 to implement no ﬁltering, or to None to
collapse the computations of two connected layers into a single
layer. We set each of the synapses on the connections between
layers to None. This speeds up the propagation of spikes through
the network, but also has the potential to decrease performance
due increased noise in the signal. We found empirically, however,
that applying a 0.05 s time constant low-pass ﬁlter on the
vision network output smoothed the target location estimate and
improved the control signal generated downstream.
3.3. Generating Robust, Explainable
Control Signals Using the NEF
We described the NEF as a “white-box” approach to building
neural networks because of its mechanistic approach. Brieﬂy,
the NEF uses populations of neurons to represent vectors,
feed-forward connections between populations to implement
functions on those vectors, and recurrent connections to
implement diﬀerential equations. Rather than specifying a tasklevel cost function, as in standard machine learning methods, the
user must ﬁrst design a circuit that solves the problem, including
specifying a state space representation, set of computations,
and ﬂow of information. The user then uses Nengo’s NEF API
to implement this circuit in neurons. These added top-down
constraints give clear network structure that allows users to
identify points of error and apply speciﬁc changes to debug and
improve network performance. This is in contrast to “blackbox” deep learning methods, which use training algorithms to
ﬁnd a network conﬁguration that solves the problem, without
knowledge of the function implemented. In situations, such
Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org
October 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 568359
DeWolf et al.
Nengo for Neurorobotics
as complex visual analysis where the algorithmic solution is
unknown this is very desirable, but in cases where proven
solutions are available and we would like performance guarantees
the methods of the NEF are preferable.
The motor system for the rover is implemented using the
NEF. The ﬁrst step in this implementation is deriving the
functions for vehicle acceleration and steering wheel control. We
calculate acceleration as distance to target multiplied by a gain
term, clipped to a maximum magnitude empirically chosen to
prevent the rover from ﬂipping when traveling at top speed and
turning sharply. Formally,
uacceleration = kamin(∥(x∗, y∗)∥, 1)
where u is the control signal sent to the rover, ka is the
acceleration gain term, x∗and y∗are the target location relative
to the rover, and ∥· ∥denotes the 2-norm.
The torque applied to the steering wheel is calculated with a
simple proportional controller using the diﬀerence between the
current and desired angle of the wheels multiplied by a gain term.
The desired angle is calculated as the angle to the target using
arctan2(−x∗, y∗), where order of the arguments and the negative
sign in front of the x term account for the orientation of the rover
relative to the environment. Formally,
usteer = kp(arctan2(−x∗, y∗) −q)
where kp is the proportional gain term, and q is the current angle
of the steering wheel.
The neural circuit implementation of this controller is done
in two parallel ensembles, with the connections weights on
the outbound connections calculated to approximate the above
equations, as shown in the top portion of Figure 1–1. In Nengo,
we project the relevant variables into each population and specify
the functions to be computed on their outbound connections
using Python code. Nengo then solves for connection weights
using the principles of the NEF. In this particular case,
we compute these functions using separate ensembles, rather
than having a single ensemble with two separate outbound
connections, because the functions they are calculating depend
on diﬀerent sets of variables. The acceleration function only
requires the estimated target (x, y) values for calculation, while
the steering function requires the estimated target (x, y) and the
current angle of the steering wheel. While the variables required
by the acceleration function are a subset of the variables used in
the steering function, we can achieve greater precision by using
an ensemble that only encodes the target (x, y).
In the hardware implementation, each ensemble consists of
4,096 Loihi leaky integrate-and-ﬁre neurons, spread across four
cores. This speciﬁc number of neurons is chosen to satisfy
hardware constraints on the number of inbound connections a
population of neurons can receive. The neurons in the ensemble
are set up to have maximum ﬁring rates between 175 and 220 Hz,
chosen because in general higher ﬁring rates provide for more
accurate function approximation.
3.4. Integration and Compiling to Hardware
Putting the vision and control networks together is a simple
matter of connecting the output of one to the input of the other
in Nengo. As both networks were built using Loihi-type neurons,
they are also prepared to be mapped to neuromorphic hardware.
During the initial building and debugging process running on
a CPU backend, which is the Nengo default, greatly expedited
development. The NengoLoihi backend can then be used to
compile the network to run on the Loihi (we could also use
NengoOCL or NengoDL to compile to GPU and run directly in
Nengo). We used a workstation with and Intel Core i7-6700K
CPU @ 4.00 GHz × 8 with 32 GB RAM and GeForce GTX
1070/PCIe/SSE2 running Ubuntu 18.04, and the Intel Nahuku
board with 32 Loihi chips running NxSDK
0.9. In this example, we are only using one of the Loihi chips
on the board. When the system is running, Nengo provides
the interface between the simulator and the hardware, but all
computations are run on the Loihi chip.
3.5. Performance
Figure 1–3 shows the (x, y) trajectory of the rover moving
throughout the environment to six diﬀerent targets in the
environment, starting from the green “x.” Figure 1–2 shows
the perception and action signals from the network, with the
target (x, y) estimated in the top ﬁgures in blue and the ground
truth shown in red. The lower ﬁgure shows the steering and
acceleration control signals generated by the network in blue
with the ideal values in orange. As can be seen, the rover
drives accurately (to within 50 cm) over the course of the
trial. We have not performed extensive testing of the accuracy,
and do not provide quantitative results as our purpose here
is to focus on the methods used to develop the system. There
is clearly signiﬁcant room for improvement and extension to
this work. Nevertheless, this simple example demonstrates the
implementation of an end-to-end perception and action spiking
neural network running on neuromorphic hardware. All code
is available online at 
We have provided full code to serve as a starting point for those
interested in exploring neurorobotic solutions that can leverage
embedded neuromorphic hardware for next generation systems.
4. NEUROROBOTIC ADAPTIVE ARM
In this second example we augment an existing force controller
with an adaptive neural network implemented on Loihi, using
on-chip learning to control a Kinova Jaco2 physical robot in
a reaching task while it holds an unexpected weight. The
existing control system generates joint torques using a standard
proportional derivative (PD) operational space controller , designed to move the hand along a target
path. The adaptive controller adds an adaptive signal trained
online to account for any unexpected forces aﬀecting movement,
which is tuned online. We compare performance of the adaptive
control system to a non-adaptive PD OSC, and an industry
standard proportional integrated-error derivative (PID) OSC.
Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org
October 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 568359
DeWolf et al.
Nengo for Neurorobotics
We also compare the neuromorphic implementation with CPU
and GPU implementations of the adaptive control system. We
compare all systems in terms of accuracy, power use, and control
loop update latency.
Operational space control relies on an accurate model of
the arm dynamics to generate torques that will move the arm
as desired. If the arm picks up an object, is subjected to
external forces or perturbances, or wears down over time, the
dynamics have changed and OSC performance will degrade
unless the changes can be accurately modeled. In general, these
perturbations can not be predicted in advance, so updating
the controller on-the-ﬂy is desirable. This is the purpose of
the adaptive controller we use here, implemented as a neural
network. Intuitively, the adaptive controller acts as a context
sensitive integrated error term. Where standard integrated error
terms (such as the I in PID control) apply the same learned error
regardless of the current joint angles or velocities, the adaptive
controller learns to account for errors speciﬁc to diﬀerent arm
states. The diﬀerence becomes signiﬁcant in the control of highly
non-linear systems, where the error that needs to be compensated
for changes signiﬁcantly with system state.
4.1. Interfacing With the Jaco2 Robotic Arm
In this example Nengo is called as a sub-function of the PD
OSC. The PD OSC itself is implemented in Python and runs
on a workstation that interfaces with a physical Kinova Jaco2
6 degrees-of-freedom (DOF) arm. The interface implemented
is through the ABR Jaco2 repository, and includes no neural
network infrastructure. To integrate neural computation with
this standard Python code, at each time step in the control
model, Nengo is called to run the neural network for a single
step. The control code sends feedback from the arm to Nengo
and receives back an adaptive control signal to add into the
outbound set of joint torques sent to the Jaco2. Nengo takes care
of running the neural network on a CPU, GPU, or the Loihi
neuromorphic hardware.
4.2. Processing Sensory Feedback Using
In this application we are augmenting an existing control system
with an adaptive control signal generated by a neural ensemble.
The ensemble requires sensory feedback related to joint positions
and velocities as input in order to compute the necessary
correction to the control signal. Because the sensory feedback
is a relatively low-dimensional signal (e.g., compared to image
input), it does not need to be processed by a deep neural network
before we can use it to generate a corrective control signal. The
adaptive controller requires that the eﬀects of the unexpected
force are predictable given the input provided to the ensemble
to be able to learn to compensate for unexpected forces aﬀecting
the arm. If, for example, the force aﬀecting the arm was a function
of joint angle, and the ensemble only had inputs related to joint
velocity, then the network would not be able to adapt to the force.
Given that we have appropriate inputs, we further need to
make sure that the neurons are suﬃciently sensitive to diﬀerent
states of the arm relevant for compensating for the unexpected
force. In the NEF, the neural tuning properties are determined by
a combination of the neuron encoders (or “preferred” direction
vectors), gains, and biases. This tuning determines which parts
of the input state space are represented by the neural ensemble.
In this section, we present considerations that determine how to
appropriately pick these tuning curves for adaptive control in a
highly non-linear state space.
In particular, we need to ensure that neurons are not
active over a large part of state space. If this is the case, the
compensatory signal they learn in one part of state space may
incorrectly generalize to other parts. In contrast, if neurons are
active over a small part of state space, then the compensatory
signal they learn in one area will not aﬀect what learning
occurs in other parts of state space. Unsurprisingly, there is a
trade-oﬀbetween the speciﬁcity of neural responses and their
generalization abilities. In arm control, because the dynamics
are highly non-linear, we generally want to ensure that neurons
in our ensemble are sensitive to localized parts of state space.
We also do not want to waste neural resources. Consequently,
neurons should only be sensitive to parts of state space that are
actually explored by the arm. In other words, we do not want our
population to include neurons that never become active.
To handle both of these issues, we need to carefully choose
neural tuning curves, and hence NEF encoders. To optimize
neurons for the relevant parts of the state space, we begin by
subtracting the mean and then normalizing the input signals for
each dimension given their joint limits. Next, we project into the
D + 1 unit hypersphere, where D is the number of dimensions
represented by the ensemble. By doing this it becomes possible to
carefully control the range of values that cause neurons in the
ensemble to respond. Because we have 6 joints and two input
signals from each (i.e., position and velocity), we project the
normalized signals onto the 13-dimensional (i.e., 12 + 1) unit
hypersphere and use that as input to the ensemble.
Figure 2 illustrates how this allows us to control neural
responses by considering the simpler case of projecting 2D into
3D. Assuming we have inputs in the −1 to 1 range along each
dimension, the inputs are going to lie somewhere in the unit
square. In the NEF, by default, each of our neurons will initially
have an encoder that is a vector pointing from the origin to
somewhere inside unit circle. Neurons with encoding vectors
that point in the same direction will have similar ﬁring rates
responses to the same input, as shown in the top half of Figure 2.
By projecting our encoding vectors and input signal into the 2 +
1 dimensional unit hypersphere, our neurons are still sensitive to
all parts of the original 2D input signal, but co-linear encoding
vectors can also generate distinct activity, as shown in the bottom
half of Figure 2. For example, we can have neurons sensitive to
an input signal of (0, 0.5) but not (0, 1), which was not possible
with our 2D preferred direction vectors. Essentially, this method
allows us to have neurons sensitive to more speciﬁc parts of
state space.
4.3. Online Learning for Adaptive Control
The neural adaptive controller presented here is a neuromorphic
implementation of the control system presented in DeWolf et al.
 , where it is proven that this adaptive controller performs
as well or better than a PID controller. The neural adaptive
Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org
October 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 568359
DeWolf et al.
Nengo for Neurorobotics
FIGURE 2 | An example of how increasing encoder dimensionality can create neurons that are more selectively responsive. On the right side of all ﬁgures the spike
raster (top) and ﬁltered output (bottom) is plotted, showing the ﬁring rates of these neurons for the same 2D input signal that moves from [0, −1] to , projected
into 3D for (3,4). In the top row we show two neurons with 2D encoding vectors (0, 0.5) [shown in (1) on the left] and (0, 1.0) [shown in (2) on the left]. The arrows in
the ﬁgures represent the neuron’s encoding vectors. The z-axis and color reﬂect the ﬁring rates of these neurons given different (x, y) input. As can be seen, the activity
of these neurons with co-linear encoding vectors is indistinguishable. In the bottom row, we project these same 2D encoders, (0, 0.5) [shown in (3) on the left] and (0,
1.0) [shown in (4) on the left], into 3D. The arrows in the ﬁgures represent the neuron’s encoding vectors projected into 3D. The ﬁring rates of the neurons given
different (x, y, z) input is represented by color, showing that the neurons are responsive to different parts of 3D state space.
controller uses the Prescribed Error Sensitivity learning rule, which is a local, spiking or
non-spiking, error-driven Hebbian rule. The Loihi chip supports
several diﬀerent kinds of online learning, providing the ability
to use microcode to deﬁne diﬀerent kinds of rules. NengoLoihi
implements the PES learning rule using this feature of the chip,
which allows weight updates to be calculated on-chip. For the
other hardware, core Nengo includes a deﬁnition of the PES rule.
The adaptive control signal is calculated via
uadapt = a d,
where a is the vector of neural activities (i.e., ﬁltered neural spike
trains) and d denotes a vector of “decoders” which are the output
weights from the ensemble. The resulting uadapt is a vector of the
same dimensionality as the OSC control signal. We initialize d to
a vector of zeros, and use the learning rule
1d = −κ a ⊗u,
to update the decoder weights, where κ is a learning rate, u is
the OSC’s outbound control signal (acting as the error in the
PES rule), and ⊗denotes the outer product. This training signal,
u, was chosen based on Lyapunov stability analysis. Details,
derivation, and proof of stability of this adaptive neural controller
are provided in DeWolf et al. .
In the system diagram shown in Figure 3–1, the hollow
triangle denotes the connection providing the training signal, u,
for the learning rule.
4.4. Compiling to Neuromorphic Hardware
The NengoLoihi backend is used to instantiate the neural
ensemble on the Loihi with the parameters discussed above, and
implement the PES learning rule on-chip. Core Nengo is used for
the CPU implementation and the NengoOCL backend package
is used for the GPU implementation. In this example we used a
workstation with and Intel Core i7-6700K CPU @ 4.00 GHz ×
8 with 32 GB RAM and GeForce GTX 1070/PCIe/SSE2 running
Ubuntu 18.04 and the Intel Kapoho Bay board with 8 Loihi chips
running NxSDK 0.9 In this example, we are only using one of the
Loihi chips on the board.
4.5. Performance
Figure 3–2 shows the arm performing a reaching task while
holding an unexpected two pound mass. In this task the arm
repeatedly starts from the same position and reaches to the same
target 50 times, with continuous learning between reaches. We
perform the 50 reaches with each controller ﬁve times, using
diﬀerent randomly generated neuron ensemble parameters (such
as bias and maximum ﬁring rates), and calculate the mean error
and 95% conﬁdence intervals. The adaptive controller is run
while simulating the neurons on the Loihi, and the CPU and
GPU of our workstation (speciﬁcations are in section 4.4), and
compared against a standard PID controller running on the same
workstation. We normalize our performance results using the
performance of a PD operational space controller. We consider
that controller reaching under normal conditions with nothing in
the hand as 0% error, and the results of that controller reaching
while holding the unaccounted-for two pound weight as 100%
Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org
October 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 568359
DeWolf et al.
Nengo for Neurorobotics
FIGURE 3 | A neurorobotic adaptive arm controller. (1) The system diagram of the neurorobotic adaptive control system. The hollow triangle denotes the connection
providing the training signal to the learning rule. Note that Nengo is only used to run the neural part of the system. The “ens” preﬁx denotes NEF layers. (2)
Performance error while reaching to a target while holding an unexpected two pound mass. Black: PD controller with no extra mass, used as a 0% reference error.
Gray: PD controller reaching while holding the two pound mass, used as 100% reference error. Brown: PID controller reduces error to 65.3%. Green: Adaptive
controller CPU implementation with 1,000 neurons reduces error to 37.6%. Red: Adaptive controller GPU implementation with 1,000 neurons reduces error to 36.2%.
The initially high error is due to the increased latency of the GPU implementation. Blue: Adaptive controller Loihi implementation with 1,000 neurons reduces error to
26.7%. Results are averaged over ﬁve sets of 50 trials with 95% conﬁdence intervals shown. The adaptive controller demonstrates a 2.45 times improvement in
accuracy over PID, and 1.49 and 1.57 times improvement over the CPU and GPU adaptive controller implementations, respectively. (3) Top: A power comparison
between adaptive controller implementations. Running adaptation on the CPU and GPU requires 4.6× and 43.2× more power than Loihi. Bottom: Latency
measurements of the controllers. PD: 2.91 ms, PID: 2.95 ms, Adaptive Loihi: 3.08 ms, Adaptive CPU: 3.13 ms, Adaptive GPU: 4.38 ms.
error. As can be seen, the Loihi system outperforms all other
controllers after 50 trials of training. Unsurprisingly, the CPU
and GPU perform similarly, and better than the PID controller.
Figure 3–3 shows the power and latency measurements
of the controllers during the task, where the neuromorphic
implementation consumes the least energy of the adaptive
controllers, with a minimal increase in latency compared to the
non-adaptive controllers. Speciﬁcally, the CPU uses 4.6× more
power, and the GPU 43.2× more. As well, the CPU is a similar
latency (i.e., 2% slower), while the GPU is 42% slower than
the Loihi.
To measure the power use of the CPU, we used the software
package s-tui, available online at 
s-tui. To measure the power use of the GPU, we used the
nvidia-smi software. To measure the Loihi power use,
we used the Linear Tech DC1613A dongle and LTpowerPlay
software, which provides current and voltage measurements for
the chip’s two power supplies, from which we calculated the total
power use.
5. DISCUSSION
We have demonstrated how to take advantage of neuromorphic
technology to fully implement or augment existing robotic
control systems. In particular, we showed how a set of tools in the
Nengo ecosystem allows eﬃcient execution of four central tasks
for building neurorobotic systems.
1. The NengoInterfaces library provides an easy API for
interfacing with the Mujoco simulation, used in the ﬁrst
example, both for sending in control signals and receiving
feedback. While the second example is not directly providing
simple API access, it illustrates the ﬂexibility of Nengo to
be incorporated into already developed Python programs
and interfaces.
2. In the rover example, we show how NengoDL provides
a natural way to integrate Keras and TensorFlow models.
For non-neural perception algorithms, Python code can be
directly executed from Nengo or the code can be run outside
Nengo and sent into a Nengo model, as is done in the adaptive
arm example.
3. We illustrated how a circuit design that solves the problem
of interest can be implemented in a neural network using
Nengo, providing white-box neural network systems. In the
ﬁrst example this was shown with the rover control network
that steered and drove the rover to the target, and the second
example showed the use of a vector-space training signal with
stability guarantees to implement non-linear adaptive control.
4. The Nengo development toolkit allows users to compile
their model to run on multiple diﬀerent hardware platforms,
including CPU , GPU ,
FPGA , Intel’s Loihi ,
and SpiNNaker .
We have made all of the code used in these examples publicly
available, to provide practical, reproducible examples for the
community. We believe this set of tools and examples helps
address the core challenge of making neurorobotic systems easier
to build, and a wide variety of architectures easier to explore.
In the ﬁrst example, while we did not benchmark or
quantitatively characterize the result, it provides a demonstration
of how our chosen tools allow the development of complete
perception-action systems for neurorobotics. In particular,
Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org
October 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 568359
DeWolf et al.
Nengo for Neurorobotics
it demonstrated how to couple white box (i.e., NEF) and
techniques
underlying
neuromorphic
platform (i.e., Loihi).
Nengo is unique in its ability to make such integration easily
accessible. Nengo has several advantages in this context: (a) it is
not vendor speciﬁc, and supports hardware from several sources;
(b) it allows a high-level model speciﬁcation for easy portability,
while also allowing hardware speciﬁc details to be incorporated
(e.g., via its conﬁguration system); and (c) Nengo removes the
need to have detailed knowledge about SNNs, neuromorphic
hardware, simulator interfaces, embedded programming, and so
on, while allowing those with such knowledge to leverage it (e.g.,
by easily deﬁning new neuron models, using the conﬁguration
system, building new hardware speciﬁc backends, and so on).
quantitative
characterization of the advantages of neurorobotics. From
a tools perspective, it demonstrated how Nengo can be integrated
into existing systems and run the same neural model across
multiple kinds of hardware. But, more importantly, this
example demonstrates the kinds of advantages we expect from
neuromorphics: an increase in speed and accuracy, and severalfold decrease in power compared to traditional hardware. As is
well-established, low latency and energy eﬃciency are critical for
many mobile robotics applications.
Possible extensions to the examples provided here are many
and varied. Perhaps one of the more obvious ones is to implement
the entire adaptive controller on neuromorphic hardware. To
the best of our knowledge this has only been done with a 3-link
planar arm . Since the adaptive controller
has performance guarantees, and the white box methods of the
NEF allow us to implement it on neuromorphic hardware while
preserving those guarantees, a full implementation would be a
rare example of an adaptive, fully neurorobotic controller with
clear performance guarantees.
While we believe the Nengo ecosystem is useful for the
development of neurorobotic systems, there remain a variety
of challenges and directions for future development that
stand to improve it. For instance, Nengo backends that
target non-spiking AI acceleration hardware, such as Google’s
Coral chip, would expand the community able to use the
methods we have discussed because spiking neuromorphic
hardware, such as Intel’s Loihi chip, is not commercially or
otherwise widely available. Extending the interfaces oﬀered by
the NengoInterfaces package to improve accessibility, as well
as oﬀering the same automatic conversion from DNNs to
SNNs for PyTorch users also remains important future work.
Perhaps most importantly, continuing to increase the number
of available tutorials, ready-to-use models, and online examples
is critical to reducing the startup overhead for new users and
better supporting the neurorobotics, neural networks, and edge
AI communities.
In conclusion, the Nengo ecosystem makes it possible for users
to quickly develop applications for neuromorphic hardware,
while taking advantage of already developed neural or nonneural machine learning solutions. We have shown two examples
that demonstrate how the ecosystem can be used to address
four core stages of the development workﬂow. We encourage
interested researchers to use the code and tools that we have
made available, and look forward to exploring the vast space
of robust, embedded neurorobotics systems with the emerging
research community.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The datasets presented in this study can be found in online
repositories.
repository/repositories
supplementary material.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
TD directed the project. TD, PJ, and CE implemented the
examples. PJ and CE collected the data for the arm example.
TD wrote the manuscript. CE provided research guidance and
edited the manuscript. All authors contributed to the article and
approved the submitted version.
The NengoLoihi interface development was funded by Intel. All
other funding was provided by Applied Brain Research, Inc.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Daniel Rasmussen, Eric
Hunsberger, and Xuan Choo for their help in the development
of this project. We would also like to thank Intel for access to the
Nahuku board and Kapoho Bay used in the examples, and Mike
Davies for reviewing an early draft of the paper.