Weak gravitational lensing
Matthias Bartelmann
Matteo Maturi
Universit¨at Heidelberg, Zentrum f¨ur Astronomie, Institut f¨ur Theoretische Astrophysik
Invited and refereed contribution to Scholarpedia
According to the theory of general relativity, masses deﬂect
light in a way similar to convex glass lenses. This gravitational
lensing eﬀect is astigmatic, giving rise to image distortions.
These distortions allow to quantify cosmic structures statistically on a broad range of scales, and to map the spatial distribution of dark and visible matter. We summarise the theory of
weak gravitational lensing and review applications to galaxies,
galaxy clusters and larger-scale structures in the Universe.
Brief historical outline of gravitational lensing
Newton and Soldner
As early as in 1704, Sir Isaac Newton had surmised that light
might be deﬂected by gravity. In his book “Opticks: or, a
treatise of the reﬂections, refractions, inﬂections and colours of
light”, he collected a whole list of questions in an appendix, the
ﬁrst of which was: “Do not Bodies act upon Light at a distance,
and by their action bend its Rays; and is not this action (caeteris
paribus) strongest at the least distance?” 
In Newtonian physics, however, this question cannot even
be conﬁdently addressed. Light can be considered as a stream
of particles, the photons, which however have no rest mass. In
the view of special relativity, photons acquire inertia by their
motion, and this inertia contributes to their mass. However, if
they could be at rest, no inertia and thus no mass would remain.
But gravity should not be able to act on something without
mass, or should it?
On the other hand, in Newtonian physics, the trajectory of
a small test body around a large mass does not at all depend
on the mass of the test body. As Galileo had noticed already,
all bodies fall equally rapidly, provided that no forces besides
gravity act upon them. If one imagines a light particle with
even a tiny mass, its motion e.g. around the Sun would be
calculable without problems. If this mass would be halved,
the trajectory would remain the same. And what happened if
its mass was progressively reduced until it ﬁnally completely
disappeared?
The astronomer Johann Georg von Soldner was fully aware
of this diﬃculty when he wrote his article “On the deﬂection
of a light ray from its straight motion by the attraction of a
heavenly body which it passes closely” for the Astronomical
Almanac for the year 1804. Assuming that a mass could (and
should) be assigned to the (then hypothetical) particles of light,
he calculated by what amount such light rays would be de-
ﬂected that, as seen from the Earth, would just graze the Solar
rim. Almost apologetically, he wrote: “Hopefully nobody will
ﬁnd it questionable that I treat a light ray perfectly as a heavy
body. For that light rays have all the absolute properties of matter is seen by the phenomenon of aberration, which is possible
only by light rays being indeed material. – And besides, nothing can be conceived that exists and acts on our senses without
having the properties of matter.” [2, originally in German, our
translation]
Einstein’s two deﬂection angles
In Einstein’s perception of the essence of gravity, however,
this problem does not even exist. Einstein’s theory of general
relativity no longer interprets gravity as a force in the Newtonian sense, but explains the eﬀects of gravity on the motion of
bodies by the curvature of space-time caused by the presence
of matter or energy.
In the framework of an unﬁnished version of the theory of
general relativity, Einstein calculated the deﬂection of light at
the rim of the Sun for the ﬁrst time in 1911. He found: “A light
ray passing the Sun would accordingly suﬀer a deﬂection of the
magnitude 4 · 10−6 = 0.83 arc seconds.” This was exactly
the same value that Johann Georg von Soldner had found by
his calculation within Newtonian physics. The second time, in
1916, Einstein arrived at the conclusion: “A light ray passing
the Sun thus experiences a deﬂection of 1.7 arc seconds.” [4,
originally in German, our translation] His value had plainly
doubled, and for a good reason: Only within the ﬁnal theory of
general relativity did Einstein ﬁnd that he needed to account for
temporal as well as spatial curvature of space-time by gravity,
and this caused precisely twice the amount of light deﬂection
This value of 1.7 arc seconds, twice as large as expected from
the Newtonian calculation, was conﬁrmed shortly thereafter by
observations. During a total Solar eclipse on May 29, 1919, two
British expeditions succeeded in measuring the angle by which
such stars appeared pushed away from the Sun which happened
to be close to the Sun at the moment of the eclipse and became
momentarily visible while the Sun was obscured. In November
1919, the authors Dyson, Eddington and Davidson reported:
“Thus the results of the expeditions to Sobral and Principe can
leave little doubt that a deﬂection of light takes place in the
neighbourhood of the Sun and that it is of the amount demanded
by Einstein’s general theory of relativity, as attributable to the
sun’s gravitational ﬁeld.” 
On October 9, 1919, Einstein himself had reported in a brief
note: “According to a telegram addressed to the signatory by
Prof. Lorentz, the English expedition under Eddington, sent
out to observe the Solar eclipse of May 29, has observed the
 
deﬂection of light at the rim of the Sun required by the general
theory of relativity. The value provisionally deduced so far
falls between 0.9 and 1.8 arc seconds. The theory demands 1.7
arc seconds.” [6, originally in German, our translation]
Mandl and Zwicky
Even though, for Einstein himself, the deﬂection of light at
the rim of the Sun marked a conﬁrmation of his theory of
general relativity, he was sure that this eﬀect would hardly
ever gain astrophysical relevance, not to speak of an even more
practical importance. When the Czech engineer Rudi W. Mandl
visited Einstein in Princeton in 1936 and asked him to calculate
the gravitational lensing eﬀect of a star on a more distant star,
Einstein ﬁnally consented to publish a note on this phenomenon
 , which he however believed to be unobservable. Indirectly
also stimulated by Mandl, the Swiss-American astronomer
Fritz Zwicky, however, voiced the idea in 1937 that entire
clusters of galaxies could act as gravitational lenses . Only
four years earlier, Zwicky had found the ﬁrst indication of
dark matter by observations of the Coma galaxy cluster .
Nonetheless, it took until 1979 for the ﬁrst gravitational lens
to be found . This lens is a galaxy embedded into a group
of galaxies whose gravitational-lensing eﬀect turns a bright,
approximately point-like, very distant object, a so-called quasistellar object or QSO, into two images.
Deﬂection angle and lensing potential
Index of refraction and Fermat’s principle
There are multiple ways at gravitational lensing which agree in
the limit which is commonly applied. In by far the most astrophysical applications, the Newtonian gravitational potential Φ
is small, |Φ|/c2 ≪1, and the lensing mass distribution moves
slowly with respect to the cosmological rest frame. In a galaxy
cluster, for example, |Φ|/c2 ≲10−5, and cosmic structures have
typical peculiar velocities v ≲600 km s−1 ≪c. The standard
approach to gravitational lensing has been laid out in several reviews, lecture notes and a text book .
Under such conditions, gravitational lensing can be described by a small perturbation of the locally Minkowskian
space-time of an observer co-moving with the gravitational
lens. The Minkowski metric of special relativity, expressed by
its line element
ds2 = −c2dt2 + d⃗x 2 ,
is perturbed by the dimension-less Newtonian gravitational
potential Φ/c2 as
With the propagation condition for light, ds = 0, this expression
can be rearranged to ﬁnd the eﬀective light speed in a weak
gravitational ﬁeld,
where Φ/c2 ≪1 was used in a ﬁrst-order Taylor expansion.
Introducing the index of refraction n by the conventional deﬁnition c′ = c/n, we see that a weak gravitational ﬁeld has the
eﬀective index of refraction
c′ = 1 −2Φ
Since the gravitational potential is negative if conventionally
normalised such as to vanish at inﬁnity, this index of refraction
is larger than unity.
We can now apply Fermat’s principle, which asserts that a
light ray follows that path between two ﬁxed points A and B
along which its optical path τ is extremal,
n dt = 0 .
The variation of τ with respect to the light path leads directly
to the deﬂection angle
which is the gradient of the dimension-less Newtonian potential
perpendicular to the light ray, integrated along the light ray and
multiplied by two. This factor of two comes from the fact that
the perturbed Minkowski metric has equal perturbations in both
its temporal and spatial components, as mentioned above in the
context of Einstein’s two calculations.
The Born approximation
The integral over the actual light path is complicated to carry
out. However, since typical deﬂection angles are on the order
of arc seconds or smaller, the integration path can be approximated by a straight line, just as in the Born approximation
familiar from quantum mechanics. Then, assuming a point
mass M at the origin of a coordinate system and a light ray
propagating parallel to the z axis and passing the point mass at
an impact parameter b, the deﬂection angle according to (6) is
b2 + z2 = 4GM
where RS = 2GM/c2 is the Schwarzschild radius of the lensing
point mass. For the Sun, with its mass of M = 2 · 1033 g, the
Schwarzschild radius is RS⊙≈3 km, hence the deﬂection angle
at the Solar radius R⊙= 7 · 105 km is
7 · 105 ≈8.6 · 10−6 ≈1.7′′ .
This is Einstein’s famous result, tested and veriﬁed by Dyson,
Eddington and Davidson in 1919.
The lensing potential
If the lensing mass distribution is thin compared to the overall
extent of the lens system, the light path from the observer to the
source can be approximated by straight lines from the observer
to the lens and from there on to the source which enclose the
deﬂection angle. This is called the thin-lens approximation.
It is appropriate for the description of isolated lenses such as
galaxy clusters, but inadequate for extended lenses such as the
large-scale structures of the Universe. We shall proceed with
the thin-lens approximation for now and later generalise the
results to extended mass distributions.
Figure 1: Sketch of a gravitational-lens system (adapted from
 ): The optical axis runs from the observer O through the
centre of the lens. The angle between the source S and the optical axis is β, the angle between the image I and the optical axis
is θ. The light ray towards the image is bent by the deﬂection
angle ˆα, measured at the lens. The reduced deﬂection angle α
is measured at the observer.
Tracing a light ray back from the observer to the source, the
lens or ray-tracing equation can then simply be found from the
intercepts of the light ray relative to the (arbitrary) optical axis
at the distances of the lens and the source from the observer,
DL and DS, respectively. Let the angles between the optical
axis and the image, and between the optical axis and the source
on the observer’s sky be ⃗θ and ⃗β, respectively. These angles are
vectors because they have a direction as well as a magnitude.
DS⃗β = DS⃗θ −DLS ˆ⃗α ,
with DLS being the distance between the lens and the source
(cf. Fig. 1). This equation may look trivial, but it is not. It only
holds because even in the curved space-time of the Universe,
distances can be introduced in such a way that the intercept
theorem familiar from Euclidean geometry continues to hold.
These are the angular-diameter distances. Dividing by DS and
introducing the reduced deﬂection angle
leads to the lens or ray-tracing equation in its simplest form,
⃗β = ⃗θ −⃗α .
With Eq. (6), the reduced deﬂection angle can be written as a
It is convenient to introduce the quantities describing gravitational lensing, such as the reduced deﬂection angle or the
lensing potential, as functions on the sky, i.e. as functions of the
angular position ⃗θ on the celestial sphere. Then, gradients need
to be taken with respect to angles rather than perpendicular
distances. The perpendicular gradient ⃗∇⊥occurring in (6) and
(12) is then replaced by the gradient ⃗∇θ with respect to the
angle ⃗θ according to
The distance DL from the observer to the lens appears here
because, in the small-angle approximation, the perpendicular
separation from the line-of-sight is DL⃗θ. Thus, (12) turns into
The quantity ψ deﬁned here is called the lensing potential. In
by far the most situations of astrophysical interest, the lensing
potential incorporates all imaging properties of a gravitational
For a point-mass lens, we have seen in (7) that the deﬂection
angle ˆα is proportional to the inverse impact parameter, b−1.
Converting b to the angle θ by b = DLθ and the deﬂection angle
ˆα to the reduced deﬂection angle α, we ﬁnd
showing that the lensing potential of a point-mass lens at the
coordinate origin is proportional to the logarithm of the angular
Magniﬁcation and distortion
The convergence
Taking the divergence of ⃗α leads to the Laplacian of ψ,
⃗∇θ · ⃗α = ⃗∇2
where we have replaced the Laplacian ⃗∇2
θ with respect to the
angle ⃗θ by the perpendicular Laplacian ⃗∇2
⊥with respect to
physical coordinates. If we could replace the perpendicular by
the complete Laplacian,
we could insert Poisson’s equation
⃗∇2Φ = 4πGρ
into (16). We can indeed do so if the gradient of the potential
Φ along the line-of-sight, taken at the beginning and at the end
of the line-of-sight, can be neglected,
∂z2 dz = ∂Φ
end points
This is indeed excellently satisﬁed in all situations where the
extent of the lensing mass distribution is small compared to
the cosmological distances DL, DLS and DS characterising the
geometry of the lens system.
We thus substitute the complete, three-dimensional Laplacian for the two-dimensional, perpendicular Laplacian in (16)
and use Poisson’s equation to write
where the surface mass density
is deﬁned as the line-of-sight projection of the threedimensional mass density ρ. The prefactor
has the dimension of an inverse surface-mass density, cm2 g−1.
The quantity Σcr is called critical surface mass density. With
these deﬁnitions,
where we introduced the dimension-less surface-mass density
or convergence κ. From here on, we shall drop the subscript θ
on the gradient, understanding that ⃗∇is the gradient ⃗∇θ with
respect to ⃗θ.
Geometrical
sensitivity
gravitational
The Poisson equation (23) shows that the source of the lensing potential ψ is twice the dimension-less convergence or
surface-mass density κ, i.e. the surface-mass density Σ of the
lens divided by its critical surface mass density Σcr. A mass
distribution with a ﬁxed surface-mass density Σ can thus be
a more or less eﬃcient gravitational lens, depending on the
overall extent of the lens system composed of observer, source,
and lens, and depending on where the lens is located along
the line-of-sight. Lensing is most eﬃcient where the critical
surface-mass density Σcr is minimal, or where the expression
in (22) is maximal. In Euclidean space, this would be half-way
between the observer and the source. In the curved space-time
of our Universe, the location of maximal lensing sensitivity is
somewhat closer in redshift to the observer. The geometrical
sensitivity of gravitational lensing is one of the main characteristics turning lensing into a powerful tool for cosmology.
Linearised lens mapping and Jacobi matrix
In terms of the lensing potential ψ, the lens equation (11) is
⃗β = ⃗θ −⃗∇ψ .
Imagine now a source substantially smaller than any typical
scale of variation in the deﬂection angle. Let δ⃗β the angular
separation of a point on an outer source contour from the centre
of the source. Then, the corresponding angular distance of
the image point can be approximated by a ﬁrst-order Taylor
expansion of the lens equation (24),
δ⃗β ≈A δ⃗θ ,
where A is the Jacobian matrix of the lens mapping. It has the
components
= δij −ψij ,
where the potential derivatives are to be taken at the centre
of the lensed image. Here, we have introduced the common
short-hand notation
for the second partial derivatives of ψ.
Equations (25) and (26) are interesting expressions. First,
(25) states that the Jacobi matrix A maps small distances δ⃗θ in
an image back to small distances δ⃗β in the source. This is the
foundation of by far the most applications of weak gravitational
lensing in astrophysics and cosmology. Equation (26) shows
that, in the absence of the lensing potential, the lens mapping
is simply the identity. In the presence of a lens, the local
properties of the lens mapping are determined by the curvature
of the lensing potential ψ, expressed by the matrix of second
derivatives of ψ, or the Hessian matrix of the potential. Second
derivatives of gravitational potentials are tidal forces. Locally,
deformations by the lens mapping are thus determined by the
gravitational tidal forces caused by the lens.
Shear and magniﬁcation
For the physical interpretation of the Jacobi matrix A, it is
convenient and instructive to split A into an isotropic and an
anisotropic, trace-free part by taking the trace,
trA = 2 −⃗∇2ψ = 2(1 −κ) ,
and subtracting it from A by means of the unit matrix I to
obtain the shear matrix
which has the components
Γ11 =: γ1 = 1
2 (ψ11 −ψ22) ,
Γ22 = −γ1 ,
Γ12 = Γ21 =: γ2 = ψ12 .
These manipulations leave the Jacobi matrix in the form
A = (1 −κ)I −Γ =
The linearised lens equation (25) tells us the inverse of what
we typically want to know from weak gravitational lensing.
Since we observe images but cannot access the sources, we
need to infer the separation δ⃗θ of image points from the image
centre. If the Jacobi matrix A has a non-vanishing determinant,
it can be inverted, allowing us to write
δ⃗θ = A−1δ⃗β .
The inverse Jacobi matrix determines how sources are mapped
on images. In weak gravitational lensing, the Jacobi determinant
det A = (1 −κ)2 −γ2
is near unity because the absolute values of the convergence κ
and the shear γ are both small compared to unity. Points in the
lens where det A = 0 are called critical points. They play no
role in weak gravitational lensing but are centrally important
for strong lensing.
Thus, we can always assume in weak gravitational lensing
that the linear lens mapping is invertible. The inverse of the
Jacobi matrix is
The prefactor in this expression indicates that the solid angle
spanned by the image is changed compared to the solid angle
covered by the source by the magniﬁcation factor
(1 −κ)2 −γ2 ≈1 + 2κ ,
where the ﬁnal approximation is a ﬁrst-order Taylor expansion.
Thus, in weak lensing, the magniﬁcation of an image is essentially (i.e. to ﬁrst Taylor order) determined by the convergence
κ, not by the shear.
Image distortion
Figure 2: Illustration of gravitational-lensing eﬀects on small
sources: The left column shows the eﬀects of both components
of the shear on a circular source. The middle and right columns
illustrate eﬀects of higher order, quantiﬁed by the so-called
ﬂexion components F and G, which are linear combinations of
third potential derivatives. F ﬂexion leads to a centroid shift
while G ﬂexion causes a triangular deformation.
The eigenvalues of the inverse Jacobi matrix A−1 are
λ± = 1 −κ ± γ
A hypothetical circular source is deformed by weak gravitational lensing to become an ellipse whose semi-major and
semi-minor axes, called a and b, respectively, are proportional
to the eigenvalues λ±. By its common deﬁnition, the ellipticity
ε of such an image is
a + b = λ+ −λ−
Since the source size prior to lensing is typically inaccessible
to observation, the magniﬁcation of an image relative to the
source cannot directly be measured. The ellipticity ε and the
orientation of elliptically distorted images are thus the only
information supplied by weak lensing in the vast majority of
cases. Equation (38) shows that the ellipticity is determined by
the so-called reduced shear
rather than by the shear itself. If κ ≪1 which can most often
be assumed in cases of weak lensing, ε = g ≈γ. The eﬀects of
both shear components on a circular source are illustrated in
Fig. 2 together with higher-order distortions.
Ellipticity measurement
Local averages and angular resolution
The sources typically used in observations of weak gravitational
lensing are of course not circular, but intrinsically elliptical. In
lowest-order approximation, the intrinsic source ellipticity εS
and the ellipticity caused by lensing add. Then,
ε ≈g + εS .
One of the most essential assumptions in the interpretation
of weak gravitational lensing is that the intrinsic ellipticities
approach zero when averaged over suﬃciently large samples,
Fortunately, the sky is studded with so many faint, distant
galaxies that averages over many of them can be taken on
angular scales small compared to the typical scales which the
shear and the convergence of the lens vary on. On deep images
taken with ground-based telescopes (at an r-band magnitude
of ∼25), n ≈10 galaxies are found per square arc minute, and
n ≈30 −50 is reached on images taken in space. The standard
deviation of the intrinsic ellipticity is measured to be σε ≈0.2
per source. Averaging over N faint galaxy images, the scatter
of the intrinsic ellipticity is reduced to
and the angular resolution ∆θ of this measurement is limited
For N = 10, we ﬁnd ∆⟨εS⟩≈0.06 and ∆θ ≈1′, assuming
n ≈10 source galaxies per square arc minute. It is of paramount
importance for weak gravitational lensing to verify that intrinsic
source ellipticities do indeed average to zero, or otherwise to
quantify the degree to which they do not.
Measurement process
There are essentially two general approaches to the measurement of image ellipticities. Both of them build upon the measured surface brightness I(⃗θ ) of an image. In the forward
modelling approach, models for the surface brightness of elliptical sources are ﬁt to the image, allowing to read oﬀthe
model ellipticity once the best ﬁt has been found. In the other,
model-free approach, the quadrupole moments Qi j of the surface brightness are measured,
d2θ I(⃗θ )θiθj ,
i, j = 1, 2 .
From them, the two components of the ellipticity are
ε1 = Q11 −Q22
Both methods have their advantages and disadvantages.
The forward-modelling approach needs to assume a surfacebrightness distribution which may or may not reﬂect the image
properties well. Biases in the inferred ellipticities are possible
and likely if the model is not well adapted to the image. The
measurement of the surface-brightness moments is hampered
by the fact that the formally inﬁnite integral in (43) will pick
up intensity ﬂuctuations surrounding the typically faint and
small image. To control this noise contribution, a weight function needs to be introduced in (43), eﬀectively limiting the
domain of the integral. The inevitable eﬀects of the weight
function on the ellipticity measurement need to be corrected
afterwards. Alternatively, denoising procedures can be applied
to the images.
On the whole, measuring the ellipticities of distant source
galaxies accurately is very diﬃcult. Distortions caused by
weak lensing are on the order of up to ∼10 per cent, i.e. the
diﬀerence of the semi-axes of typical images is only a few per
cent of their sum. Ellipticities thus have to be measured either
by model ﬁtting or by measuring the quadrupole moments of
the surface-brightness distribution from faint, small, pixellised
images distorted by weak lensing at the per cent level.
Substantial complications arise because these faint galaxy
images are irregular and distorted prior to lensing. Moreover,
they are being observed through optical systems with their own
small, but numerous and subtle imperfections and physical limitations. Even if small, these imperfections typically imprint
noise and systematics on the measured ellipticities which also
have to be carefully corrected. In particular, the point-spread
function of the telescope optics needs to be carefully determined in order to quantify any distortions caused by the optical
system itself. Usually, the point-spread function is estimated
from the images of stars in the observed ﬁeld.
In the course of these developments, algorithms were described and implemented for measuring the weak shear signal
from large data ﬁelds. The Shear Testing Programme (STEP)
was launched to test and improve the accuracy of shear measurements from weakly distorted images of distant galaxies in
the presence of several perturbing eﬀects .
On the whole, ellipticity measurements must still be considered an art which is under ongoing development . For the purposes of this review, we
cannot go into any detail of this complicated and demanding
measurement process. Suﬃce it to say that it belongs to the
most fascinating developments in extragalactic astrophysics
and cosmology since the turn of the century that highly reliable
and signiﬁcant measurements of weak gravitational lensing by
galaxies, galaxy clusters as well as by large-scale structures
have routinely become possible.
Extended lenses
Generalisation of the lensing potential
So far, we have assumed that the lens is geometrically small
compared to the overall scale of the lens system. Since this is
clearly not appropriate for gravitational lensing by the largescale structures in our Universe, we need to generalise the
results derived so far to the case of extended lenses. To achieve
this, it suﬃces to pull the distance factors in the deﬁnition of
the lensing potential in (14) under the line-of-sight integral.
Before we can meaningfully do so, however, we need to clarify
the concept of a distance in cosmology.
In the curved and expanding space-time of our Universe,
distances are no longer uniquely deﬁned. Depending on the
measurement procedure intended, distances typically turn out
to be vastly diﬀerent. For gravitational lensing, the appropriate
distance measure is deﬁned such that the ratio between the
physical size of a small object and its angular extent equals its
distance, which is the relation familiar from static Euclidean
space. The distance deﬁned this way is called angular-diameter
Since our Universe is expanding, spatial separations between
any two points grow in time in a way quantiﬁed by the so-called
scale factor a. Commonly, the scale factor is normalised to
unity at the present cosmic epoch. It is then convenient to
introduce so-called comoving distances, which are distances
deﬁned on a spatial hypersurface constructed at the present time.
Measurements have shown that, even though our Universe has
a ﬁnite space-time curvature, its spatial curvature cannot be
distinguished from zero within the measurement uncertainty.
In other words, our Universe turns out to be well described as
spatially ﬂat.
Let now χ be the comoving angular-diameter distance in
a spatially ﬂat space-time, then the lensing potential of an
extended lens acting on a source at distance χS is
ψ(⃗θ ) = 2
Φ(χ⃗θ, χ) .
Note the similarity to the expression for the lensing potential of
a thin lens in (14): the distance prefactor is replaced according
and pulled under the integral, the line-of-sight integration is
being performed over dχ, and the Newtonian potential is taken
at the position χ⃗θ perpendicular and χ parallel to the line-ofsight.
Deﬂection angle, convergence and shear
The remaining quantities, in particular the reduced deﬂection
angle ⃗α, the convergence κ and the shear γ, can now be derived
from ψ in the usual manner,
⃗α = ⃗∇ψ ,
2 (ψ11 −ψ22) ,
γ2 = ψ12 ,
where all derivatives are to be taken with respect to the angular
position ⃗θ, as introduced before. In particular, the convergence
to be assigned to an extended lens is
dχ χ(χS −χ)
where Poisson’s equation was used again after replacing the
Laplacian with respect to perpendicular coordinates by the full
Laplacian. The squared scale factor a2 takes into account that
we are using comoving angular-diameter distances. Expression
(48) shows that the convergence is a geometrically weighted
line-of-sight integral over the mass density ρ. It is important
to note, however, that ρ is the ﬂuctuation of the mass density
about its cosmological mean value ¯ρ and not the entire mass
density. This is because the bending of light by the mean mass
density is already incorporated into the distance measure χ.
The convergence κ from (48) thus describes the lensing eﬀects
of matter inhomogeneities in an otherwise homogeneous mean
Introducing the dimension-less density contrast δ as the density ﬂuctuation about the mean relative to the mean, the density
ρ to be inserted into (48) is ρ = ¯ρδ. In terms of conventional
cosmological parameters, the mean matter density is
8πGΩm0a−3 = ¯ρ0 a−3 ,
where H0 is the Hubble constant quantifying the present expansion rate of the universe, and Ωm0 is the dimension-less
matter-density parameter. Inserting (49) into (48) gives the
expression
dχ χ(χS −χ)
for the convergence κ of an extended lens. It is called eﬀective
convergence because it corresponds to the convergence of a
thin lens whose eﬀects are equivalent to those caused by the
actual extended matter distribution.
Cosmological
gravitational
Limber’s approximation
The lensing eﬀects by the cosmic large-scale structures along
one particular line-of-sight cannot be predicted because the
actual matter distribution in any direction is unknown. What
can be predicted, however, is the degree to which lensing quantities such as the lensing potential, the deﬂection angle, the
convergence and the shear are correlated with each other. To
give just one example, this means that, if some image distortion
by lensing is measured in one particular direction, the image
distortion measured in a nearby direction should be similar.
The smaller the angle is chosen between the two directions, the
more similar the distortions are expected to be, and if the angle
becomes large, the distortions should become independent.
This expected behaviour is quantiﬁed by an angular correlation function. Let x(⃗θ ) be a quantity measured on the sky, its
angular correlation functions is
x(⃗θ )x(⃗θ + ⃗ϕ )
The average indicated by the angular brackets is quite involved:
It combines an average over all positions ⃗θ with an average
over all orientations of the separation vector ⃗ϕ on the sky. The
concept behind assuming that the angular correlation function
depends only on the absolute value of ϕ but not on its orientation is the statistical isotropy of the cosmic large-scale
structures: On average, these structures should not identify an
orientation on the sky.
In many applications, it is convenient to Fourier-transform
the correlation function ξ(ϕ) to obtain the so-called angular
power spectrum,
d2ϕ ξ(ϕ) e−i⃗l·⃗ϕ .
Here, ⃗l is the two-dimensional wave vector conjugate to the
angular separation ⃗ϕ.
Quite often, the weak-lensing power spectra are calculated
by means of Limber’s approximation. It asserts that, if the
quantity x(⃗θ ) deﬁned in two dimensions is a projection
dχ w(χ) y(χ⃗θ, χ)
of a quantity y(⃗r) deﬁned in three dimensions with a weight
function w(χ), then the angular power spectrum of x is given
where Py(k) is the power spectrum of y, taken at the threedimensional wave number k = l/χ. The condition for Limber’s
approximation to be applicable is that y must vary on length
scales much smaller than the typical length scale of the weight
function w.
Convergence power spectrum
Equation (50) shows that the eﬀective convergence is a projection of the density contrast δ with the weight function
The power spectrum of the convergence Cκ(l) is thus determined by a weighted line-of-sight integral over the power spectrum Pδ(k) of the density contrast.
To further clarify the physical interpretation of cosmological
weak gravitational lensing, we write the power spectrum Pδ in
a diﬀerent way, motivated as follows. As long as the density
contrast is small, δ ≪1, it can be shown to increase with time
in proportion to a time-dependent linear growth factor D+(a).
Being quadratic in the density contrast, the power spectrum
thus grows like Pδ ∝D2
+ on suﬃciently large scales whose
wave number k is suﬃciently small. On such scales, the power
spectrum Pδ keeps its initial shape. On small scales, this shape
is changed by non-linear eﬀects on the evolution of the density
contrast. Notwithstanding this non-linear complication, we
write the power spectrum Pδ as a slowly varying shape function
P times an amplitude. Conventionally, this amplitude is called
8 and set at the present epoch. In terms of the power spectrum
linearly extrapolated to the present time, σ8 is deﬁned by
2π2 Pδ(k)W2
where W8(k) is a ﬁlter function suppressing all modes smaller
than 8 h−1 Mpc. Setting the linear growth factor D+ to unity
at present, the density-ﬂuctuation power spectrum can then be
written as
Pδ(k) = σ2
+(a) P(k) .
With this expression for Pδ(k), the convergence power spectrum
is given by
This equation is cosmologically very important. First, the
convergence power spectrum Cκ(l) can be measured in a way
to be described shortly. Second, the shape of the convergence
power spectrum depends on the shape P of the power spectrum
Pδ for the density contrast, which can thus be inferred from
measurements as well. Third, the amplitude of the convergence power spectrum is directly proportional to the squared
matter-density parameter times the amplitude of the power
spectrum, Ω2
8. Fourth, the weight function appearing in
square brackets under the integral in (58) contains the linear
Figure 3: The angular correlation function of the eﬀective
convergence is shown for three source redshifts, as a function
of the angular separation.
growth factor D+(a) of the density contrast, which opens a way
towards probing the evolution of cosmic structures with time.
The prefactor Ω2
8 is characteristic and has an intuitive
meaning as well. The density parameter Ωm0 quantiﬁes the
mean matter density in the universe, while the parameter σ8
quantiﬁes how strongly this matter is clumped. Gravitational
lensing alone cannot distinguish between a low density of
strongly clumped matter and a high density of weakly clumped
Measurement principle
The convergence κ alone can only be accessed through the
magniﬁcation, as (36) shows. Measuring the magniﬁcation is
possible, but diﬃcult. Routinely, cosmological weak lensing is
quantiﬁed by the shear γ. A simple consideration shows however that shear and convergence have identical power spectra.
To see this, we transform the deﬁning equations for κ and γ
into Fourier space, where they read
2ˆκ = −l2 ˆψ ,
ˆγ2 = −l1l2 ˆψ ,
with the hats denoting the Fourier transform. Now,
2 = 4 |ˆκ|2 ,
showing that the shear power spectrum is also given by (58),
Thus, the power spectrum or, equivalently, the correlation
function of the weak distortions of distant galaxy images imprinted by cosmological weak lensing needs to be measured.
This can be achieved as described in the subsection “Measurement process” above.
Gravitational lensing of the Cosmic Microwave Background
The most distant source of electromagnetic radiation we can
observe in our Universe is the so-called Cosmic Microwave
Background (CMB). It was emitted when the cosmic radiation temperature fell to approximately 3000 K and allowed
the cosmic plasma to recombine for the ﬁrst time in cosmic
history, approximately 400, 000 years after the Big Bang. As
neutral atoms were formed, the free charges disappeared, and
the cosmic matter became essentially transparent. From then
on, the electromagnetic heat radiation left over from the Big
Bang could propagate freely through the Universe.
The CMB is cosmologically highly important because, prior
to its emission, energy-density ﬂuctuations were imprinted on
it by the cosmic structures that had already begun forming. We
can observe these primordial energy-density ﬂuctuations as
tiny ﬂuctuations of the CMB temperature around its mean. The
mean CMB temperature today was measured by the COBE
satellite to be 2.726 K, and the relative temperature ﬂuctuations
are of order 10−5. Precise measurements of these ﬂuctuations
by the COBE, WMAP and Planck satellites as well as by several balloon-borne and ground-based experiments have turned
into the major information source on the physical state of the
early Universe.
However, with the CMB photons having been released about
400, 000 years after the Big Bang, they had to travel through
the Universe for almost 14 billion years before they reached
our detectors. Doing so, they passed the growing network
of cosmic structures and experienced their weak gravitational
lensing eﬀects. The photons of the CMB could not propagate
along straight lines (or unperturbed null geodesics), but along
weakly perturbed paths. What we observe is thus not the CMB
itself, but an image of it slightly distorted by gravitational
lensing .
Gravitational lensing of the CMB is weak and conﬁned to
angular scales of approximately 10 arc minutes and less. It can
be thought of as a diﬀusion process slightly blurring the CMB
on such angular scales. Fortunately, however, the eﬀects of
gravitational lensing on the CMB can be statistically quantiﬁed
from the data itself, and thus be removed.
The essential reason for this correction to be possible is
best seen thinking of a Fourier decomposition of the temperature ﬂuctuation on the CMB. From the origin of these
temperature ﬂuctuations, their Fourier modes are independent, i.e. there is intrinsically no correlation between any two
CMB temperature-ﬂuctuation Fourier modes with diﬀerent
wave vectors. Through its focusing eﬀect, however, gravitational lensing slightly changes the wave numbers of lensed
Fourier modes. Gravitational lensing thus mixes temperature-
ﬂuctuation Fourier modes of diﬀerent wave vectors and thus
causes them to be correlated. In the data of the Planck satellite,
the weak cosmological lensing eﬀects on the CMB could be
measured directly for the ﬁrst time . The amplitude and
the shape of the lensing correlation function inferred from the
CMB provide additional strong conﬁrmation for the cosmological standard model.
Weak gravitational lensing by galaxies and galaxy clusters
Weak lensing of galaxies by galaxies
Less distant galaxies can act as weak gravitational lenses on
more distant galaxies. Through their gravitational shear, the
lensing galaxies imprint a weak tangential distortion pattern on
the images of the lensed galaxies in their close neighbourhood
 . This weak shear signal is superposed on the intrinsic ellipticities and irregularities of the background-galaxy images and
thus requires statistical techniques for its identiﬁcation and extraction. (See for a review on strong lensing by galaxies.)
Foreground and background galaxies can tentatively be separated according to their apparent brightness. Galaxy-galaxy
lensing, as the eﬀect is called, can constrain the potential depth
and size of the dark-matter haloes inhabited by the lensing
galaxies. First measurements in 1996 found potential depths
and halo radii typical for massive galaxies .
The statistical signal extraction can be improved by a thorough maximum-likelihood analysis, taking the distance distributions of lensing foreground and lensed background galaxies
into account . The galaxy-galaxy lensing signal of galaxies
embedded in galaxy clusters could also be detected; it revealed
that cluster galaxies are smaller than galaxies outside clusters,
with their radius shrinking with the density of the environment
 . Galaxy-galaxy lensing also reveals that the
dark-matter haloes around the lensing galaxies are ﬂattened
Combinations of weak gravitational lensing of galaxies by
galaxies with measurements of optical brightness and stellar
velocities in galaxies have been used to infer that the darkmatter distribution surrounding galaxies falls oﬀrather steeply
towards the outskirts of the dark galaxy haloes. Measurements
of galaxy-galaxy lensing in wide-ﬁeld surveys such as the Sloan
Digital Sky Survey, the Las Campanas Redshift Survey or
the Canada-France-Hawaii Legacy Survey conﬁrm that bright
galaxies have projected density proﬁles falling with radius
r approximately like r−1, are characterised by stellar orbital
velocities of approximately vc = (150 −240) km s−1, are hosted
by dark-matter haloes of typically (2.7 −11) × 1011 h−1 M⊙and
have mass-to-light ratios between M/L ≃120 h M⊙/L⊙in blue
and ≃170 h M⊙/L⊙in red light .
The overall dark-matter halo masses range between (5 −
10) × 1011 h−1 M⊙, the mass-to-light ratio increases gently with
luminosity and the mass-to-light ratios of bright spiral galaxies
are approximately half those of elliptical galaxies . The
masses quoted in this context are typically the total (virial)
masses of haloes with parameterised density proﬁles adapted
to the measured lensing signal.
Weak gravitational lensing by galaxies has also been used
to study how dark matter and galaxies are correlated on large
scales. The correlation function could be measured to separations reaching 10 h−1 Mpc. It shows a typical correlation
length of r0 ≃(5.4 ± 0.7) h−1 Mpc and falls of with distance
with a approximate power law with exponent 1.79 ± 0.05. The
density contrast in the galaxy distribution may either follow
the density contrast in the dark matter, or increase slightly
with scale. These results are generally in good agreement
with theoretical expectations, except that the mass-to-light ratio
found in simulations is typically somewhat too high. Satellite galaxies orbiting the lensing galaxies could be physically
aligned with their hosts by the gravitational tidal ﬁeld and thus
mimic a weak galaxy-galaxy lensing signal. On the relevant
scales, this possible contamination is probably less than 15 %
 .
The availability of huge surveys with suﬃcient depth and
image quality for weak-lensing studies has opened new applications also for galaxy-galaxy lensing. Exciting examples of
more detailed studies enabled this way are the measurement
of mean masses of dark-matter haloes hosting active galactic
nuclei (AGN), which found that radio-loud AGN reside in host
haloes which are typically ≈20 times more massive than for
radio-quiet AGN. Moreover, the combination of galaxy-galaxy
lensing with galaxy correlations has been used to specify the
mean mass-to-light ratio of the galaxies and to break degeneracies between cosmological parameters .
Cluster masses and mass-to-light ratios
As described above, galaxy clusters imprint a coherent weak
distortion pattern onto the many faint and distant galaxies in
their background. Since those distant galaxies reach number
densities of ≃40 per square arc minute in typical images taken
with large ground-based telescopes, typical galaxy clusters thus
cover of order 103 background galaxies.
As shown above, shear and convergence are both related
through the scalar lensing potential. Knowing the shear thus
allows the scaled surface-mass density to be reconstructed.
Cluster convergence maps can be obtained by convolving the
measured shear signal with a simple kernel, opening the way
to systematic, parameter-free, two-dimensional cluster studies. An immediate application of this technique to the cluster MS 1224 revealed a surprisingly high mass-to-light ratio
of ≃800 h M⊙/L⊙, about four times the typical cluster value
Weaknesses in this convolution algorithm mainly due to
the non-locality of the convolution were identiﬁed and could
be removed . Another, purely local cluster reconstruction method has been proposed based on an entropyregularised maximum-likelihood approach. This method allows the straightforward extension of the reconstruction algorithm to include all observable quantities provided by galaxy
clusters .
These inversion techniques for the matter distribution in
galaxy-cluster lenses have by now been applied to numerous
objects . For most of them, the mass-to-light ratios
turned out to be M/L ≃(250−300) h M⊙/L⊙in blue and M/L ≃
(150 −200) h M⊙/L⊙in red light, respectively [see 71, 72, 73,
for some examples]. Similar to weak lensing by galaxies, the
masses quoted here are typically derived from parameterised
density proﬁles adapted to the measured lensing signal and
integrated to a ﬁxed radius of order 1 h−1 Mpc. Statistically
combining the weak-lensing signal of galaxy groups, the mass
range in which mass-to-light ratios can be probed could be
extended towards lower masses. For galaxy groups with masses
around (1013 −1014) M⊙, values of M/L ≃180 h M⊙/L⊙in
blue and M/L ≃250 h M⊙/L⊙in red spectral ranges have been
obtained .
By a similar statistical analysis of gravitational lensing together with the optical light distribution, the mass-to-light ratio
of the central brightest galaxies in galaxy clusters was found to
be M/L ≃360 h M⊙/L⊙ . Mass and light generally appear well correlated in weakly lensing clusters. Contradicting
claims from individual objects could not be conﬁrmed .
A very peculiar case is the galaxy cluster Abell 2744, whose
galaxies and dark matter are displaced from the X-ray emission
 , see Fig. 4.
Figure 4: Mass map of the galaxy cluster Abell 2744 (sometimes called “Pandora’s box”), reconstructed from the weaklensing signal [reprinted with permission from 80, Fig. 3]. At
least two, maybe three galaxy clusters have collided here. The
colour encodes the convergence κ.
Lensing and X-ray emission
Comparing the surface-brightness distribution of the X-rays
emitted by the hot intracluster medium with the surface-density
contours obtained from weak lensing, interesting phenomena
are uncovered. While the X-ray surface brightness follows
the matter density in many clusters (see for
examples), instructive deviations have been discovered.
Generally, deviations between the morphologies of the
surface-mass density and the X-ray surface brightness are attributed to dynamical processes going on in galaxy clusters
which are merging with other clusters or are otherwise out of
equilibrium. In merging clusters, the X-ray gas is typically
found lagging behind the dark matter, as expected for hot gas
embedded into collision-less dark-matter halos .
A particularly interesting case is the cluster 1E 0657−558,
called the bullet cluster, whose X-ray emission appears in between two galaxy concentrations and dark-matter distributions
recovered from weak lensing . The morphology of
the bullet cluster suggests that two clusters have lost their gas
by friction while passing each other in the course of a merger.
Other clusters showing similar morphology have since been
found .
If the hypothetical dark-matter particles interacted with
each other, such a separation between gas and dark matter
would be suppressed. Thus, from gas lagging behind the dark
matter in merging clusters, and from small dark-matter core
radii, limits could be obtained for the self-interaction cross
section of the dark-matter particles, typically ﬁnding values
≲(0.1 −1) cm2 g−1, comparable to values derived from strong
gravitational lensing by clusters .
Apart from gravitational lensing, masses of galaxy clusters
can be estimated from the X-ray emission and the kinematics
of the cluster galaxies. Although diﬀerent mass estimates agree
well in some clusters (e.g. ), substantial discrepancies are often found and interpreted
as signalling dynamical processes in unrelaxed cluster cores
or systematics in the data interpretation . Signs of dynamical activity are often seen
in massive galaxy clusters, while less massive, cooler clusters
seem to be closer to equilibrium .
Even though galaxy clusters are the population of cosmic
objects forming last in cosmic history, spectacular examples of
massive, distant clusters have been found. The weak-lensing
signals of many distant clusters have been measured, typically
conﬁrming the presence of well-developed, massive and compact clusters at that epoch , but also
frequently indicating violent dynamical activity in cluster cores
 .
Cluster density proﬁles
Figure 5: Radial mass proﬁles of the galaxy cluster Abell 2261,
obtained from gravitational lensing and from diﬀerent types of
data [reprinted with permission from 120, Fig. 13].
The radial matter-density proﬁle in galaxy clusters is fundamentally important for cosmology because numerical simulations routinely show that a near-universal density proﬁle is
x(1 + x)2 ,
It is called NFW proﬁle after Navarro, Frenk and White who
ﬁrst described it . While ﬁrst studies found that
cluster mass-density proﬁles could be well ﬁt by an isothermal
proﬁle (falling oﬀin projection with radius r as r−1) or equally
well by NFW and isothermal proﬁles , the
NFW proﬁle became preferred as the data quality improved
 .
In addition to its density parameter ρs, the NFW proﬁle is
characterised by a scale radius rs. Simulations ﬁnd that the
ratio between the overall (virial) radius and the scale radius,
called concentration, is gently decreasing with mass. While
cluster proﬁles derived from weak gravitational lensing alone
tend to have somewhat larger scale radii than expected, possibly
reﬂecting deviations from spherical symmetry , scale radii well in the expected range are typically derived
from data of high quality analysed with sophisticated methods
 . An exciting step beyond determining density
proﬁles is the measurement of the subhalo mass function in the
Coma galaxy cluster .
The large-scale matter distribution in front of and behind
galaxy clusters is projected onto them and can aﬀect weaklensing mass determinations. Estimates based on simulations
and analytic calculations indicate that cluster mass estimates
from weak gravitational lensing can be changed at the level
of up to 40 per cent, and that uncertainties of the total mass
estimates can be approximately doubled by projection. Cluster
density proﬁles, however, should only be weakly aﬀected .
Cluster detection
Several detections of clusters with very high mass-to-light ratios have been claimed and raised the question whether clustersized dark-matter halos may exist which are so ineﬃcient in
producing stellar or X-ray emission that they are invisible to
anything but gravitational lensing .
The most prominent cases discussed of potentially dark clusters
so far, however, did not outlast later re-analyses of the data or
analyses of new data .
Weak gravitational lensing also provides a powerful way
to detect galaxy clusters regardless of their directly observable signatures.
Methods developed for this purpose use
weighted integrals over circular apertures of the gravitational
shear signal tangentially oriented with respect to the aperture
centre. Numerical simulations show that these methods are
highly eﬃcient in ﬁnding suitably massive matter concentrations if parameters and weight functions are optimally chosen
to carefully balance the completeness against the frequency
of spurious detections . Substantial samples of galaxy clusters have been routinely detected
and conﬁrmed by this technique. Their statistical analysis
is likely to provide important information on the origin and
evolution of non-linear cosmic structures in the near future
 . Suﬃciently numerous and welldeﬁned cluster samples may well be the most sensitive probe
into a possible time dependence of the enigmatic dark energy
supposed to drive our Universe apart in an accelerated fashion
 .
Galaxy clusters are embedded into a network of ﬁlamentary
structures which may be traced by direct
mapping or with linear ﬁltering techniques similar to those
developed for halo detection, albeit with generally low signalto-noise ratio .
Weak gravitational lensing by largescale structures
Expectations and measurements
Weak gravitational lensing by large-scale structures, or cosmological weak lensing, is a rich and rapidly developing
ﬁeld which is covered in detail by several dedicated reviews
 . We summarise the most important aspects here and refer the interested reader to those
reviews for further detail.
Early studies used analytic calculations to show that the
standard deviation of image ellipticities induced by cosmological weak lensing were of order a few per cent on arc-minute
angular scales. A ﬁrst attempt at measuring this tiny signal
placed an upper limit in agreement with theoretical expectations
 . Since weak cosmological lensing depends sensitively on the non-linear evolution of the large-scale
structures, numerical simulations are required for precisely estimating the expected amplitude of the signal and the shape of the
ellipticity correlation function .
The cosmological potential of large weak-lensing surveys was
quickly pointed out , emphasising the possibility of measuring in particular the matter density parameter Ωm0
and the amplitude σ8 of the dark-matter power spectrum.
The ﬁrst detections of cosmological weak lensing were announced around the turn of the century . Given the enormous diﬃculty of the measurement and
the diﬀerent telescopes, cameras, and analysis techniques used,
the agreement between these results and their compatibility
with theoretical expectations was surprising and encouraging
at the same time.
Assuming a spatially ﬂat cosmological model, the cosmological parameters Ωm0 and σ8 were derived from measurements of
the cosmic-shear correlation function. Since these parameters
are degenerate, higher than two-point statistics are needed for
constraining them separately . Enormous
eﬀort was subsequently devoted to calibrating weak-lensing
measurements, to designing optimal cosmic-shear estimators
and studying their noise properties, and to shaping theoretical
expectations .
Numerous weak-lensing surveys have meanwhile been conducted, and cosmological parameters derived from them. Values obtained for the matter-ﬂuctuation amplitude σ8 at ﬁxed
Ωm0 = 0.3 tend to agree within the error bars, but the scatter
is still substantial: They fall into the range 0.65 −1.06, with
much of the uncertainty due to remaining systematics in the
data analysis .
Dedicated weak-lensing surveys of increasing portions of
the sky have been concluded with remarkable success, are ongoing or being planned, with the solid angles covered by the
surveys increasing in steps of a factor of ten. The Canada-
France-Hawaii Telescope Lensing Survey (CFHTLens) has
covered 154 square degrees ; see Figs. 6 and 7 for
selected results. The Kilo-Degree Survey and the Dark-
Energy Survey are overing 1500 and 5000 square degrees,
respectively. The Large Synoptic Survey Telescope and the Euclid satellite are planned to cover approximately 15000 square
degrees . Besides mapping dark matter and determining cosmological parameters, a primary goal of these surveys is
to constrain the growth of cosmological structures and thereby
the nature of the dark energy. Future wide-ﬁeld radio surveys
will also oﬀer exciting possibilities for cosmological applications of weak gravitational lensing .
Systematics
Numerical simulations show that the Born approximation is
valid to a very high degree . As shown above,
the gravitational lensing eﬀects even by widely extended lenses
can be summarised by a scalar potential. Thus, weak lensing can only cause such distortion patterns which can be described by derivatives of a scalar potential. This motivates
the decomposition of distortion patterns in gradient and curl
contributions, termed E and B modes in analogy to electrodynamics. Signiﬁcant B modes in the data are interpreted as
Figure 6: Constraints on two cosmological parameters, the normalisation parameter σ8 and the matter-density parameter Ωm0,
obtained from cosmic-shear correlation functions measured from ∼450 square degrees of the KiDS survey [reprinted with
permission from 233, Fig. 6]. The green area in the panel shows constraints from the KiDS survey, the grey area those from the
CFHTLens survey . In the right panel, the vertical axis shows the combined parameter σ8(Ωm0/0.3)0.5 that weak cosmological
lensing is sensitive to. Blue and red areas show the independent constraints from CMB measurements prior to Planck and by
Planck, respectively.
Figure 7: Map of matter distribution in one of the CFHTLens
ﬁelds, reconstructed from weak gravitational lensing [225,
Fig. 8]. The white dots mark positions of local galaxy concentrations.
remainders of undetected or incompletely removed systematics.
More or less signiﬁcant B modes have been found in almost
all weak-lensing surveys. Meticulous studies revealed that they
originated from various eﬀects, among them incomplete correction of astigmatism in the telescope optics, source clustering
or ﬁnite-ﬁeld eﬀects. Once these reasons had been identiﬁed,
methods were developed for removing the B modes they caused
 .
At least ﬁve important sources of systematic error plague
weak-lensing measurements: astigmatism of the telescope
optics, miscalibrated distortion measurements, insuﬃcient
knowledge of the non-linear density-ﬂuctuation power spectrum, insuﬃcient information on the distance distribution of
the lensed galaxies, and intrinsic alignments of background
All these eﬀects have been addressed in detail,
and sophisticated techniques have been developed for removing them from the data or at least for quantifying them
 . By now, the
largest sources of systematic error are probably the distances
of the background sources, the non-linear evolution of the
power spectrum and the inﬂuence of baryonic matter on the
dark-matter distribution.
The potentially harmful eﬀect of intrinsic rather than lensinginduced galaxy alignments depends obviously on the depth
of the survey.
Deep surveys project galaxy images along
light paths which are substantially longer than any large-scale
structure correlation scale and thus suppress any spurious
signal due to intrinsinc alignments of physically neighbouring galaxies. In shallow surveys, however, intrinsic source
alignments may substantially contaminate any weak-shear signal. The degree to which intrinsic alignments aﬀect weaklensing measurements is still a matter of lively debate in
both theory and observation, and between both disciplines
 .
Likewise, possibilities for removing the signal contamination due to intrinsic alignments are being discussed extensively.
They advocate using approximate photometric distance information to remove physically close pairs of source galaxies
from the analysis. Applications of this technique suggest that
the eﬀects of intrinsic alignments should be near the lower
end of the theoretical predictions. Foreground galaxies are
additionally aligned with the large-scale structures lensing the
background galaxies, thus giving rise to an indirect alignment
between galaxies at diﬀerent redshifts. This further eﬀect can
substantially reduce the measured shear signal, leading to a
likely underestimate of the σ8 parameter by several per cent
 .
Perspectives
Approximately since the turn of the century, cosmology has
a standard model, most of whose parameters are now known
at the per-cent level or better. To a large degree, this was
enabled by the precise measurements of the temperature and
polarisation ﬂuctuations in the CMB, combined with surveys
of the large-scale galaxy distribution and measurements of the
cosmic expansion rate by means of type-Ia supernovae. What
is the role of weak gravitational lensing in this context?
Cosmological parameter constraints from the CMB alone
suﬀer from degeneracies which can only be broken using additional information. By measuring the dark-matter density and
the normalisation of its ﬂuctuation amplitude directly, gravitational lensing adds constraints which substantially narrow the
parameter ranges allowed by the CMB alone .
Also, the exploitation of higher than two-point statistics helps
in breaking degeneracies in the weak-lensing parameter estimates and in analysing deviations from the primordial Gaussian statistics that develop from non-linear structure growth
 .
Perhaps the most exciting promise of weak gravitational lensing by large-scale structures derives from its potential to study
the three-dimensional distribution of dark structures, originating from the distance dependence of the lensing observables.
Although these observables measure the tidal ﬁeld of the twodimensional, projected matter distribution, selecting sources
at multiple distances allows structures along the line-of-sight
to be resolved. The distances to the source galaxies can be
estimated with suﬃcient accuracy by photometric (rather than
spectroscopic) methods. Such estimates can be used to group
the source-galaxy population by distance shells and thus to
extract three-dimensional information on the lensing matter
distribution .
Even poorly resolved three-dimensional information from
weak gravitational lensing constrains the growth of cosmic
structures along the line-of-sight from the distant and past universe until the present. Suﬃciently precise measurements of
weak lensing in wide ﬁelds on the sky should thus enable accurate constraints on the dynamics of the accelerated expansion
of the Universe. This constitutes the strongest motivation for
weak-lensing surveys on increasing areas and from space, and
for getting remaining systematics under ever better control
 . A further exciting perspective for gravitational-lensing
research is the possibility to test the theory of gravity itself
 .
Cosmic magniﬁcation
Gravitational lensing not only distorts the images of distant
galaxies, but also magniﬁes them. As shown above to linear
order, the power spectrum of the magniﬁcation is just four
times the power spectrum of the gravitational shear, hence both
magniﬁcation and shear contain the same amount of information. The gravitational shear, however, can much more easily
be measured than the magniﬁcation because the ellipticities of
distant galaxies average to zero while the intrinsic ﬂux of any
given source is generally unknown.
Currently the most promising method for detecting gravitational magniﬁcation rests on the so-called magniﬁcation bias.
If a population of distant sources is observed within a certain
solid angle δΩon the sky where the magniﬁcation is µ, fainter
sources become visible there. At the same time, their number density is reduced because the solid angle is enlarged by
the magniﬁcation. The net eﬀect depends on how many more
sources the magniﬁcation lifts above the sensitivity threshold
of the observation. If the number of visible sources increases
more than linearly with the magniﬁcation, the dilution by the
enlarged solid angle is outweighed and the magniﬁcation causes
more sources to become visible.
There is a class of intrinsically bright sources in the distant
universe, the so-called quasi-stellar objects or QSOs, which appear more numerous on magniﬁed areas of the sky. At the same
time, the large-scale structures responsible for gravitational
lensing contain more galaxies where the matter is more concentrated. This correlation of galaxies with the magnifying lenses,
together with the increase of QSO number counts due to the
lensing magniﬁcation, creates a measurable, apparent correlation between distant QSOs and foreground galaxies. Due to the
non-linearity of the magniﬁcation in the convergence and the
shear, accurate theoretical predictions for cosmic magniﬁcation
are more diﬃcult than for cosmic shear. Typical magniﬁcations
are of order 10 per cent for moderately distant sources. In addition to QSOs, certain populations of distant galaxies can also be
used as sources .
The existence of correlations between distant QSOs and
foreground galaxies could quickly be established . It was considerably more diﬃcult to
determine accurate expected amplitudes and angular scales of
these correlations and ﬁnally converge on results that could be
understood theoretically, including systematic eﬀects due to
extinction by intervening dust and ﬂuctuations in the correlation
between the foreground galaxies and the gravitationally-lensing
large-scale structures .
The weakness of the signal and the interference of a variety
of confusing eﬀects required large surveys taken in several
photometric bands to unambiguously detect cosmic magniﬁcation and to extract cosmological information from it, but the
information gain is expected to be substantial .
Gravitational lensing of the CMB
The eﬀects of gravitational lensing on the CMB are rich in detail . Pioneering studies showed that the CMB is expected
to be measurably lensed by cosmic structures in a way which
resembles a diﬀusion process and builds up small-scale structure at the same time . As mentioned above, gravitational lensing of the
CMB can be identiﬁed by the coupling lensing creates between
diﬀerent Fourier modes of the temperature-ﬂuctuation pattern
in the CMB .
Accurate constraints of cosmological parameters from wellresolved CMB temperature ﬂuctuations are possible only if
the weak gravitational lensing eﬀects can be quantiﬁed and
corrected. At the same time, the gravitational lensing signal
contained in the CMB itself can be used to break parameter
degeneracies in the purely primordial CMB data . After indirect evidence had been found for
gravitational lensing of the CMB , the direct and
unambiguous detection of cosmological weak lensing in the
CMB data was among the most fascinating results of the Planck
Figure 8: Sky map of the gravitational-lensing potential reconstructed from the CMB temperature ﬂuctuations as measured
by the Planck satellite [reprinted with permission from 29,
satellite mission .
Gravitational lensing has two major advantages that turn it into
one of the most versatile, contemporary cosmological tools: its
foundation in the theory of gravity is reasonably straightforward, and it is sensitive to matter (and energy) inhomogeneities
regardless of their internal physical state. Under the assumptions that gravitational lenses are weak, move slowly with respect to the cosmological rest frame, and are much smaller than
cosmological length scales, the eﬀects of gravitational lensing
are entirely captured by a two-dimensional eﬀective lensing
potential. The Hessian matrix of this potential deﬁnes the local
imaging properties of gravitational lenses. The Poisson equation, relating the Laplacian of the potential to the surface-mass
density, allows one to infer the lensing matter distribution from
observable image distortions.
Weak gravitational lensing has been applied on a broad range
of scales. Weak lensing of galaxies by galaxies was used to
infer mass-to-light ratios of galaxies, their sizes, and constraints
on their radial density proﬁles. Besides constraining the density
proﬁle and the mass-to-light ratio, weak lensing by galaxy
clusters has allowed us to map the spatial distribution of dark
and luminous matter in clusters as well as to constrain the
amount of substructure in them. In spectacular examples, it was
possible to show that dark and luminous matter must have been
separated in cluster collisions, yielding tight upper limits on the
self-interaction cross section of the hypothetical dark-matter
particles. On yet larger scales, cosmological weak lensing
is now routinely being used to constrain the amount of dark
matter and the amplitude of its ﬂuctuations, and also to map
the matter distribution in wide ﬁelds on the sky. Finally, it has
recently become possible to measure the cosmological weak
lensing eﬀect on temperature ﬂuctuations in the CMB and to
create sky maps of what could be called the index of refraction
of the entire visible universe.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by the Transregional Collaborative Research Centre TR 33 “The Dark Universe” of the
German Science Foundation (DFG). We are grateful to Olivier
Minazzoli for inviting us to write this contribution to Scholarpedia and for his patience with our very slow return. We
also wish to thank the many colleagues who helped us shape
our views on weak lensing with enlightening and enjoyable
discussions, way too many to name them all individually – they
form a good fraction of the authors cited below! (Unfortunately
not including Sir Isaac Newton.)