PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE
Research Article
VOL. 14, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2003
Copyright © 2003 American Psychological Society
GLOBAL TRANSSACCADIC CHANGE BLINDNESS DURING
SCENE PERCEPTION
John M. Henderson1 and Andrew Hollingworth2
1Department of Psychology and Cognitive Science Program, Michigan State University, and
2Department of Psychology, Yale University
Abstract—Each time the eyes are spatially reoriented via a saccadic
eye movement, the image falling on the retina changes. How visually
speciﬁc are the representations that are functional across saccades
during active scene perception? This question was investigated with a
saccade-contingent display-change paradigm in which pictures of
complex real-world scenes were globally changed in real time during
eye movements. The global changes were effected by presenting each
scene as an alternating set of scene strips and occluding gray bars,
and by reversing the strips and bars during speciﬁc saccades. The
results from two experiments demonstrated a global transsaccadic
change-blindness effect, suggesting that point-by-point visual representations are not functional across saccades during complex scene
perception.
Human vision is dynamic and active: On average, observers move
their eyes three times each second in very fast saccadic eye movements. Between the saccades are ﬁxations, each lasting about 300 ms
on average, during which visual information is acquired from the environment . Recent
research has shown that a change to a speciﬁc region of a scene often
goes unnoticed when that change takes place during a saccade
 . Similar effects are observed if a scene element changes during
a visually blank period of time that simulates a saccade or is otherwise masked or hidden from view
at the time of the change . This changeblindness effect is striking because it seemingly undermines a longstanding assumption in vision science that the visual system constructs a
complete and integrated representation of the visual world across
glimpses. Furthermore, the effect has been taken to call into question
the intuition that perceptual experience directly reﬂects the nature of
the underlying visual representation; instead, change blindness appears to indicate that observers’ experience of a complete and detailed
visual world is based on what is in fact a sparse and incomplete visual
representation .
Recent theoretical treatments of scene perception based on the
change-blindness effect have converged on two assumptions concerning visual representation. First, all forms of visual representation of a
scene element are assumed to be lost once attention is withdrawn from
that element . This assumption
explains change blindness: Changes are missed because visual representations of scene elements are not retained and accumulated during
viewing. Instead, a scene representation is taken to consist only of a
transient visual representation of the currently attended element, the semantic gist of the scene, gross spatial layout of scene elements, and an
inventory of object concepts and identities . Second, it is assumed that a highly detailed, pointby-point representation is created for the currently attended scene element (e.g., object), and that this veridical point-by-point representation
can survive a transient disruption (e.g., a saccade) as long as attention
remains directed toward that element . This
assumption is taken to explain the fact that once a change has been
detected, it is thereafter very apparent .
Contrary to the ﬁrst of these assumptions, recent evidence has
demonstrated that relatively detailed visual representations of objects
in scenes can in fact be retained after attention has been withdrawn.
These representations are visual in the sense that they encode visual
properties of objects, such as viewpoint-speciﬁc orientation and the
visual detail necessary to identify speciﬁc members of a general object
class . The conclusion that these visual representations are
retained after the withdrawal of attention is based on three main ﬁndings. First, change blindness for object orientation and token replacement is reduced or even eliminated when care is taken to ensure that a
changing object is attended both before and after the change, even if
attention has been withdrawn in the meantime . Second, in those cases in which change blindness
persists when the changing object is attended both before and after the
change, more subtle measures of change detection, such as ﬁxation
duration, reveal that the change has been noted by the visual system at
some level . Third, when memory is directly probed following
scene viewing, evidence for the retention of visual representations can
be found over retention spans of several minutes .
The present study was designed to test the second assumption: that
point-by-point sensory representations of a scene element can be retained across a saccade as long as attention is continuously allocated
to that scene element during the saccade . Prior studies have demonstrated that simple visual patterns
cannot be visually integrated across saccades . Similarly, the contours of single objects cannot be integrated
across saccades . However, the degree to which
point-by-point representations are functional across saccades during
natural scene perception has not yet been investigated.
In the present study, we examined this issue using a saccadecontingent global display-change paradigm. Viewers studied pictures
of complex real-world scenes while their eye movements were recorded. Each scene was presented as an alternating series of scene
Address correspondence to John M. Henderson, Psychology Research
Building, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824-1117; e-mail:
 .
PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE
Global Change Blindness
VOL. 14, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2003
strips and occluding gray bars (Fig. 1). Eye movements were monitored with a fast and accurate eyetracker, and each time a viewer’s direction of gaze crossed an invisible software-deﬁned boundary, the
display changed such that the occluding gray bars revealed the previously occluded scene image, and the scene image previously visible
became occluded by gray bars. These display changes took place during the saccade, when vision is suppressed , and were
completed before the onset of the next ﬁxation so that the changes
could not be detected from visual transients. The occlusion manipulation ensured that every pixel and every visual feature in the image was
replaced each time a change took place, but that higher-level visual
properties of the scene, such as depicted surface color, viewpoint, direction of lighting and shadow, object shapes, and spatial relationships
among scene elements, remained the same across the change. Viewers
were instructed to memorize the scenes for a later memory test, and to
indicate immediately via button press each time the image changed.
The exact nature of the change that might occur was described. Subjects were told that on some trials more than one change would occur,
and that they should respond as quickly as possible to each change
while withholding response when no change occurred. In Experiment
1, the region boundaries divided each of the scenes into three equally
sized regions. In Experiment 2, the boundaries were placed around
three speciﬁc objects in each scene so that both overt (button press)
and covert (ﬁxation duration) measures of change detection could be
During a ﬁxation-saccade-ﬁxation sequence generated as gaze
shifts from one object to another, attention-saccade dynamics ensure
that a single location is attended immediately prior to and immediately
following the saccade. That is, prior to a saccade, attention mandatorily and exclusively precedes the eyes to the target of that impending
saccade; the eyes then move to the attended location, and attention and
ﬁxation are recoupled . Therefore,
attention is oriented to and maintained at a single location before and
after each saccade (the saccade target prior to the saccade and that
same location once it is foveally acquired following the saccade). If a
point-by-point representation is functional across saccades for attended scene elements, then the scene changes used in this study
should be highly salient and easily detected. If instead only a higherlevel visual representation of the scene, abstracted away from the
point-by-point image, is functional across saccades even for attended
scene elements, then these scene changes should not be detectable.
GENERAL METHOD
Eighteen Michigan State University undergraduate students, naive
with respect to the hypotheses under investigation, participated for
course credit (10 in Experiment 1, 8 in Experiment 2).
The right eye was tracked using a Generation 5.5 SRI Dual
Purkinje Image Eyetracker interfaced with a 90-MHz computer (sampling rate 
1000 Hz) driving a Hercules Dynamite 128/Video graphics card and
NEC Multisync P750 monitor (refresh rate  143 Hz, saccade-contingent change completed in 7–14 ms). Viewing was binocular, and the
head was restrained with a bite bar and forehead rest. A shutter test
 demonstrated that display changes could not be detected
on the basis of phosphor persistence (Henderson & Hollingworth,
Pictures of real-world scenes (35 in Experiment 1, 36 in Experiment 2) subtending 15.8°
11.9° at a viewing distance of 1.13 m
were rendered from three-dimensional wire-frame models. Rendered
images were divided into 40 vertical strips, each subtending 0.395°. In
one version of each scene, alternating bars were replaced with uniform
gray in a square-wave pattern; the other version of each scene reversed
the positions of the gray bars and the displayed scene.
Procedure and Design
Once the subject ﬁxated a central box on a ﬁxation screen, the experimenter started the trial. The initial version of a scene (A) was displayed until the subject’s direction of gaze crossed one of two
invisible boundaries (Experiment 1) or into one of three invisible object regions (Experiment 2). The scene then changed to the alternate
version (A). Viewing continued for a total of 10 s per scene, with images alternating between A and A each time direction of gaze crossed
a region boundary (Experiment 1) or the ﬁrst time direction of gaze
entered each object region (Experiment 2). No-change control trials
were included (7 in Experiment 1, 18 in Experiment 2), with scenes
assigned to change and no-change conditions via Latin square across
subjects. Order of scenes and conditions was determined randomly for
each subject. Subjects were instructed to view each scene in preparation for a memory test, and to press a response button immediately
upon detecting a change; the nature of the change that might occur
was described in detail. Subjects were told that more than one change
would occur on some trials, and that no change would occur on others.
They were to respond as quickly as possible for each change and to
withhold response when no change occurred.
EXPERIMENT 1
In Experiment 1, the display changed each time the subject’s direction of gaze crossed either of two invisible change-generating boundaries that divided each scene into three equally sized regions. The
subject was instructed to press the response button immediately whenever a change was detected.
Each subject executed multiple saccades across the boundaries in
each trial (Fig. 1a). Trials were eliminated when the change could not
be completed before the eyes came to rest in ﬁxation following the
saccade that initiated the display change. Summing over the 10 subjects in the experiment, 1,691 useable scene changes took place
(range  106–234 across viewers), for an average of 6.48 changes per
trial, or an average of 1 change every 1.54 s of viewing. Subjects detected only 45 out of these 1,691 changes, for an overall detection rate
of 2.66%, with a range of 0% to 5.26% across subjects (0.0%, 0.74%,
1.0%, 1.89%, 2.56%, 3.14%, 3.47%, 4.0%, 4.48%, 5.26%). Thus, the
results demonstrate nearly complete global change blindness.
PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE
Global Change Blindness
VOL. 14, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2003
EXPERIMENT 2
Although overt responses to image changes have sometimes been
taken to reﬂect completely the degree to which viewers notice
changes, more recent evidence has demonstrated that overt responses
underestimate change sensitivity . Therefore, it is possible that although the point-bypoint changes were not overtly reported in the ﬁrst experiment, they
may still have been detected. Fixation duration has been shown to be a
sensitive measure of covert (i.e., unreported) change detection , but this measure could
not be examined in Experiment 1 because there were very few nochange baseline trials, and because the use of large boundary regions
did not allow for control of the position of ﬁxations following boundary crossings, an important factor in determining ﬁxation durations
 .
In Experiment 2, a modiﬁed version of the boundary paradigm was
employed. In the change condition, the display change used in Experiment 1 took place whenever the viewer’s direction of gaze entered any
of three predeﬁned object regions in each scene , as shown in Figure 1b. In addition, we equated the
number of change and no-change trials to increase the power of the
ﬁxation-duration comparison. Only data from the ﬁrst entry into each
region were analyzed, as an additional control over ﬁxation durations.
Changes were eliminated from analysis when either (a) the change
could not be completed before the eyes came to rest in ﬁxation following the saccade that initiated the display change or (b) the saccade
crossed the region boundary but the following ﬁxation was not within
the object region (i.e., the saccade passed through the region). The ﬁrst
criterion was more difﬁcult to meet in this experiment than in Experiment 1 because of the restriction on the following landing position.
Summing across the 8 viewers and 36 scenes, there were 318 useable
change-inducing ﬁrst region entries in the change trials (2.2 changes/
trial on average), and 337 equivalent region entries in the no-change
control trials (2.3 entries/trial on average). Five of the 8 viewers had
detection rates that were similar to those observed in Experiment 1
(0%, 4.17%, 4.47%, 6.67%, 7.15%), 1 viewer had an elevated detection rate (13.65%), and 2 viewers detected even more of the changes
(22.8% and 29.6%). Prior research using the occlusion manipulation
with single objects had shown that viewers occasionally adopt a detection strategy based on abstract verbal coding (e.g., “the briefcase handle was present, and now it is not”) that allows them to perform at
higher-than-usual levels . Debrieﬁng suggested that
the latter 3 viewers performed better than the others because they used
such a strategy. It is clear that the remaining 5 viewers detected very
few, if any, of the changes.
Covert detection was assessed by comparing ﬁxation duration on the
object within the change-inducing region in the no-change control trials
and in the change trials in which the change was not overtly reported via
button press. Only those trials in which the eyes came to rest inside the
region were scored. The average duration of the ﬁrst ﬁxation in each of
the critical regions was no different in the (undetected) change and nochange conditions (319 ms vs. 318 ms, respectively, F  1). Similarly,
gaze durations (the sum of the durations of all ﬁxations the ﬁrst time
each of the critical regions was entered) did not differ across these conditions (750 ms vs. 730 ms, respectively, F  1); the 20-ms difference
was an order of magnitude smaller than the gaze-duration effects that
have been observed in experiments demonstrating covert change detection with these same scenes .
GENERAL DISCUSSION
A prevalent theoretical assumption in the current change-blindness literature is that attended scene elements can be retained across
saccades in a veridical point-by-point format. Contrary to this view,
the present study demonstrated that even when every pixel and every
point-by-point visual feature in a scene changed, these changes were
extremely difﬁcult to detect across saccades. In two experiments,
change detection rates, as indexed by overt detection responses,
were very low, approaching zero in the ﬁrst experiment for all viewers, and approaching zero in the second experiment for the majority
of viewers. Furthermore, in Experiment 2, which equated the change
and no-change conditions both in number of trials and in ﬁxation positions following each change, there was no evidence from ﬁxation
durations indicating that viewers covertly detected the changes. Because in this paradigm a change took place across the entire scene
image, changes necessarily occurred wherever attention (and the
saccade) happened to be directed, so the failure to detect change
could not have been due to a failure to attend to the changing region.
Together, these results constitute the ﬁrst demonstration of a global
transsaccadic change-blindness effect, and indicate that point-bypoint representations are not functional across saccades during complex real-world scene perception.
The global change-blindness effect reported here is particularly
striking because viewers were informed about the nature of the changes
beforehand and were presented with multiple changes on each trial. This
global change-blindness effect is also observed for highly knowledgeable viewers. For example, despite our own familiarity with the images
and complete understanding of when the changes take place, we regularly experience the phenomenon, and can successfully detect the global
change only by adopting a verbal coding strategy explicitly describing
some feature of the scene.
The results of the present study contrast with recent evidence
demonstrating that relatively detailed representations of the visual
properties of objects in scenes can be retained across saccades and
stored in memory. For example, we reported a study in which a speciﬁc token of an object class
was replaced with another token from that same class during a saccade . Three results from this previous study strongly suggested
that relatively detailed visual object representations were retained in
memory. First, the overt detection rate for these token substitutions
was 28%. Second, when the token substitutions were not overtly detected, there was evidence for covert detection: Gaze durations were
elevated by an average of 145 ms compared with trials on which the
same objects were unchanged. Third, a forced-choice memory test
showed that participants could discriminate the object token that had
appeared in a scene from another token of the same type with an average accuracy rate of 87%. These ﬁndings are even more striking
PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE
John M. Henderson and Andrew Hollingworth
VOL. 14, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2003
when one considers that the objects used in the token-substitution
experiments occupied only about 3% of the area of each scene on average . In contrast, the global image changes used in the
present study took place across the entire scene image, yet were almost impossible to detect.
The global change-blindness phenomenon reported here, together
with recent demonstrations of good detection across saccades of token
substitutions and other visual changes to attended objects, can be accommodated by a theory of dynamic scene perception in which information is integrated across saccades by visual representations that are
abstracted away from the point-by-point image . These representations
are visual in the sense that they are orientation-speciﬁc and capable of coding the information needed to
discriminate between different tokens of the same object class . However, as demonstrated in the present study, these representations are not
point-by-point sensory images of the kind that might be formed in primary visual cortex . Instead, the abstract visual representations that operate across saccades are
consistent with functional accounts of more anterior brain areas, such as
medial and inferior temporal cortex, where abstract visual categories
seem to be represented and stored .
In summary, point-by-point visual representations are not functional across saccades, even for attended scene regions. More abstract
visual representations, however, are functional across saccades as well
as over longer periods of time, and contribute to an integrated scene
representation that can support visual memory and dynamic visually
guided activity.