Paper—Online Learning Communities in the COVID-19 Pandemic
Online Learning Communities in the COVID-19
Social Learning Network Analysis of Twitter During the Shutdown
 
David John Lemay
McGill University, Montreal, QC
Tenzin Doleck ()
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA
 
Abstract—This paper presents a social learning network analysis of Twitter
during the 2020 global shutdown due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Research
concerning online learning environments is focused on the reproduction of
conventional teaching arrangements, whereas social media technologies afford
new channels for the dissemination of information and sharing of knowledge and
expertise. We examine Twitter feed around the hashtags online learning and
online teaching during the global shutdown to examine the spontaneous
development of online learning communities. We find relatively small and
ephemeral communities on the two topics. Most users make spontaneous
contributions to the discussion but do not maintain a presence in the Twitter
discourse. Optimizing the social learning network, we find many potential
efficiencies to be gained through more proactive efforts to connect knowledge
seekers and knowledge disseminators. Considerations and prospects for
supporting online informal social learning networks are discussed.
Keywords—Social learning network analysis, Twitter, online learning, online
teaching, COVID-19, online discourse communities, discussion forums
Teaching and Learning During The 2020 Global Pandemic
The current pandemic has altered social behaviors on a massive scale. With the
global COVID-19 pandemic sparked by the emergence of a novel coronavirus in late
2019 , large portions of the global population have seen their livelihoods drastically
shifted online. At one point, nearly a third of the world population was under lockdown
 and nearly all students found educational institutions suddenly closed for the
indefinite future . Parents scrambled online to find educational activities as they
suddenly found schools and the public realm closed indefinitely and had to find ways
to occupy their children during the pandemic.
iJAI – Vol. 2, No. 1, 2020
Paper—Online Learning Communities in the COVID-19 Pandemic
The present context offers an opportunity to explore the formation of online
communities over the course of the global shutdown which saw many states enforce
public measures such as social distancing to reduce the spread of the virus.
With everyone suddenly housebound, many school-based activities shifted online,
facilitated by such open access platforms such as Google Classroom, Zoom, and
countless educational tutoring software providers. For budding homeschoolers, search
and discovery of new educational activities operates through social media channels.
Twitter is one of the predominant means of joining social conversations with an
audience of potential global reach. On Twitter, conversations are discovered through a
tagging system using the commonplace hashtag (#) to enable keyword filtering of
conversational threads. Thus, to search out threads about online teaching and learning,
you might simply search for #onlinelearning or #onlineteaching.
In the present study, we mined Twitter posts to explore how the Twitter
conversational communities around online teaching and learning evolved over the
course of the global shutdown. We compiled Twitter post data for the hashtags
#onlinelearning and #onlineteaching from mid-March to end of April 2020 to answer
the following question.
Research question
How did the online conversational communities evolve on Twitter during the global
shutdown due to the COVID-2019 pandemic?
Below, we review literature on online learning environments research before
describing our analytical approach and presenting and discussing the results of our
temporal analysis of the evolution of social learning networks on Twitter during the
2020 global shutdown.
Literature Review
Whereas there have not been many studies of informal discourse communities in the
educational technology literature, Twitter post data has been mined to study the
evolution of Twitter discourse concurrent to large scale events such as political rallies
and academic conferences. Twitter, which is now closing in on 330 million users ,
has become an important backchannel for conversations at academic conferences .
A conference specific hashtag is usually used to aggregate real-time conversations
around a conference .
To understand the potential value of interacting and communicating via conferencespecific hashtags, it is important to systematically analyze the structure and content of
such conversation spaces. Indeed, analysis of conference specific tweets can reveal
salient topics during the conference and can provide a posteriori overview of a
conference . Moreover, Xie and Luo highlight two key benefits of using Twitter
as a backchannel for conferences: (1) broadening immediate participation and (2)
diversity in user types and discourse.
 
Paper—Online Learning Communities in the COVID-19 Pandemic
In recent years, concomitant with the increasing use of Twitter conference
backchannels, there are been a growing interest in studying various aspects of Twitter
use in academic conferences in varying disciplines . Our current work builds
on this stream of research by examining how social learning networks develop in new
communication spaces, such as Twitter conference backchannels.
Most online learning environments research has focused on the reproduction of
conventional teaching arrangements, whereas social media technologies afford
new channels for the dissemination of information and sharing of knowledge and
expertise. Research concerning informal online learning environments is benefiting
from the development of statistical tools for the study of social networks and the
proliferation of online usage data , as a result of a long-term trend and recent
massive online migration of public life due to social distancing efforts to mitigate the
effects of the pandemic.
Little research has examined informal online learning networks as manifested in
discussion forums and social media . However, an increasing amount of
information is being communicated through these channels , influencing
opinion and shaping conversations. Indeed, increasing fractions of individuals get their
news from social media rather than traditional media. In the context of massive open
online courses (MOOC), researchers have examined the relationship between
discursive interactions on MOOC platforms and academic performance . However,
few have studied how social learning networks develop in informal settings such as in
conversational threads on Twitter.
Merely because there are no objective measures of performance should not limit the
study of informal or social learning as other measures of performance can be devised
 . For instance, Brinton et al. derived a measure of social learning network
efficiency as the average benefit derived from the connections between knowledge
seeker and knowledge disseminators on inductively derived topics. Their social
learning network optimization algorithm helps connect participants to increase the
overall learning benefit. As a variant of the shortest path algorithm it also raises the
overall efficiency (or informativeness) of the network graph .
Theoretical framework
This work is grounded in the communities of practice framework, particularly the
notion of boundary crossing , as it applies to the site of informal learning networks
and exchanges where ideas and artifacts are exchanged between a constellation of
communities with their own members and practices. These boundary interactions can
be short lived and focused as they can be longer lasting in some formalized structure,
but they do not proceed from identification and participation.
Concretely, in a public forum like Twitter, we do not assume any long-lasting
connections in the data. In fact, in this study, we examine follow-up and repeated
iJAI – Vol. 2, No. 1, 2020
Paper—Online Learning Communities in the COVID-19 Pandemic
interactions to study the nature of the interactions that occur in Twitter conversation on
online teaching and learning.
Research design
This retrospective study uses an exploratory case study methodology employing
multiple measures to describe the phenomena of interest in sufficient detail to enable
reproduction of our work in other contexts.
Twitter posts with the hashtags #onlinelearning and #onlineteaching were collected
from mid-March to end of April 2020 using: R programming language , RStudio
 , and the R tweet package . The R tweet package retrieves tweets from the last
6–9 days. For this study, we created five datasets using tweets at approximately 9-day
intervals.
Analytical procedure
Social network analysis was conducted using the Python programming ecosystem,
including Pandas for data manipulation and NetworkX for social network analysis. We
employed Python 3.7.6 and NetworkX 2.4 in our analyses. Undirected network graphs
were constructed from the Twitter post and response data using the NetworkX package
 . Several metrics were calculated based on the adjacency matrix of the undirected
network graph, including descriptive statistics such as nodes and edges, as well as
average neighbor degree, number of connected components, density, global efficiency,
and community distribution. Global efficiency is a small-world metric that assesses the
overall informativeness, or how efficiently information is communicated, of a network
calculated as the multiplicative inverse of the shortest path between successive nodes
 . The average degree refers to the average number of connections for each node.
The number of connected components tells us the number of connected groups within
the data. The density is the ratio of connections to the overall graph of possible
connections. All these measures are implemented in the NetworkX social networking
analysis package. We inspected the circular graphs of the networks over the six-week
The edges represent post-reply connections. We take the liberal assumption that
these edges form an undirected graph. Whereas such connections can reasonably be
interpreted as uni-directional, we believe it is justified on the basis of our study’s
objectives. Our goal is to map out the community interactions and these are defined as
bi-directional as members are posting on the same topic and are assumed to be engaging
on the topic of discussion, that is, whether or not they reply to specific posts, it is
reasonable to assume that they are engaging with the discussion threads around online
teaching and learning. Hence, post-replies represent instances of interactions among
community members. From a pragmatic perspective, the relaxing of this assumption
 
Paper—Online Learning Communities in the COVID-19 Pandemic
also allows us to include metrics that have only been implemented for undirected graphs
such as the calculation of connected components and local and global efficiency.
We employ Brinton et al.’s social learning network optimizer as implemented
in to identify potential gains from connecting users based on the information they
are likely to interact on. Briefly, the algorithm casts the problem as a convex
optimization problem that seeks to connect knowledge seekers and knowledge
disseminators based on the weighted average of the questioning and answering
tendencies per topic. Topics are inductively derived using latent Dirichlet allocation
 . The solution is computed using alternating direction method of multipliers, which
uses Lagrange multipliers to find minima subject to some linear constraints. Brinton et
al. demonstrate that their approach has convergence guarantees and is performant
for networks with millions of parameters.
For analyzing the tweets, the following packages were used: tidytext; dplyr; syuzhet;
stringr; tm; and ggplot2. Before conducting sentiment analysis, to the extracted tweets,
we applied the following preprocessing steps: removed stopwords, removed urls,
converted text to lowercase, and removed punctuation.
The results are presented in the following order: social network analysis followed by
sentiment analysis.
Social network analysis
We observed an early peak in interest in online teaching and learning coinciding with
the beginning of the global social distancing measures. As can be observed in Table 1,
we see a maximum number of nodes and edges and the highest average degree at T1,
declining at T2 and further at T3. This is reflected in the number of conversational
groups (see Table 2) which drop from 623 to 409 (for online learning) and 183 to 59
(for online teaching).
Whereas the average neighbor degree and global efficiency remain stable (see Table
2). This is interpreted as a result of the limited interactions on the Twitter threads
relative to the untapped potential interactions. In fact, the great majority of communities
are distributed between communities of degree two and communities of degree four for
both #onlinelearning and #onlineteaching (see Table 3).
In Figures 1-10, we find the circular graphs representing the user interactions over
at five time points (approximately nine-day intervals) over the duration of the study. In
the case of the discussion threads on online teaching and learning, most communities
contain between two and four members only (See Table 3). Indeed, we do not see large
clusters or connections in the circular graphs but a uniform distribution of connections
since each node only has few connections. Moreover, we notice an initial burst of
interaction steadily declining across subsequent time points.
Finally, we combined the post data for both #onlinelearning and #onlineteaching to
generate the full adjacency graph for the six-week period and passed it to the social
iJAI – Vol. 2, No. 1, 2020
Paper—Online Learning Communities in the COVID-19 Pandemic
learning network optimizer. We set the threshold, or the gain from each iteration, to
0.1, the seeking constraint to 1.25 and the disseminating constraint to 0.75 following
Brinton et al. . The constraints capture the diminishing benefits received from
specific interactions. The optimization converged after three iterations. The observed
learning benefit (before optimization) was 0.65, or essentially zero. The optimized
network found a potential learning benefit of 24.78, which could be derived from a
more efficient distribution of connections. The observed network is manifestly
inefficient, with 0.65/24.78x100=2.63% efficiency.
Figures 1 to 10 present the circular graphs for the two conversational communities
(#onlinelearning and #onlineteaching) over the six weeks of the study. Visual
inspection of the graphs reveals a steadily increasing sparsity from the initial peak of
Table 1. Descriptive Statistics
Online Learning
Average Degree
Online Teaching
Average Degree
Table 2. Network Connectivity
Online Learning
Components
Average Neighbor
Global Efficiency
Online Teaching
Components
Average Neighbor
Global Efficiency
 
Paper—Online Learning Communities in the COVID-19 Pandemic
Table 3. Degree Distribution
Fig. 1. Online Learning T1
iJAI – Vol. 2, No. 1, 2020
Paper—Online Learning Communities in the COVID-19 Pandemic
Fig. 2. Online Learning T2
Fig. 3. Online Learning T3
 
Paper—Online Learning Communities in the COVID-19 Pandemic
Fig. 4. Online Learning T4
Fig. 5. Online Learning T5
iJAI – Vol. 2, No. 1, 2020
Paper—Online Learning Communities in the COVID-19 Pandemic
Fig. 6. Online Teaching T1
Fig. 7. Online Teaching T2
 
Paper—Online Learning Communities in the COVID-19 Pandemic
Fig. 8. Online Teaching T3
Fig. 9. Online Teaching T4
iJAI – Vol. 2, No. 1, 2020
Paper—Online Learning Communities in the COVID-19 Pandemic
Fig. 10. Online Teaching T5
Sentiment analysis
The Syuzhet R package was used to analyze the sentiment about the content of
the tweets. Syuzhet provides the following sentiment measures using the NRC emotion
lexicon : eight emotions (anger, fear, anticipation, trust, surprise, sadness, joy, and
disgust) and two sentiments (positive and negative). Overall, the positive sentiment was
the most prevalent sentiment for both #onlinelearning (see Figure 11) and
#onlineteaching (see Figure 12).
Fig. 11. Online Learning-Overall Sentiments
 
Paper—Online Learning Communities in the COVID-19 Pandemic
Fig. 12. Online Teaching-Overall Sentiments
Discussion
Our study finds, for both both #onlinelearning and #onlineteaching, sparse networks
and limited, generally positive, exchanges where the great majority of conversational
groups contain between two and four members. That is, in the Twitter conversations,
many posts are restricted to atomic exchanges of one post and one reply. Only
very few posts lead to follow-up exchanges. The size is relatively stable, though we
identify a spike of interest in online learning and teaching that gradually tapers off over
the course of the period considered in the present study.
These results highlight the limited efficiency of the Twitter conversations as a
medium for informative communicative exchanges . Such findings support the
view that informative or instructive conversational exchanges need to be supported as
they do not spontaneously form . In more conventional online learning
environments, many tools are at the disposal of educational platform providers and
distance learning instructors to support interaction and learning and facilitate discursive
exchanges from optimizing social learning network algorithmically to embedding
discursive exchanges in online activities and artefacts .
It appears evident that supporting informative (and instructive) conversations could
benefit from outside support or some scaffolding to improve the quality of online
conversational interactions. Indeed, when applying Brinton et al.’s social learning
network optimizer, we found large potential learning benefits from connecting
knowledge seekers and knowledge disseminators. This suggests potential gains from
algorithmically connecting users to sustain conversational interactions and increase
knowledge discovery. Indeed, many social media platforms employ such tools to
iJAI – Vol. 2, No. 1, 2020
Paper—Online Learning Communities in the COVID-19 Pandemic
enhance the quality of social interactions. However, it appears clear that there is room
for improving communication on Twitter, especially for creating instructive exchanges.
Limitations
Given the retrospective nature of the study, it is not possible to infer any causal
relationships. We are limited to describing overall trends in the Twitter data. Our
analysis is limited to two conversational threads (#onlinelearning and #onlineteaching)
and six weeks is a short period to study trends. Although, we believe that our study is
warranted given the exceptional circumstances. Our social learning network analysis
could be extended by extending the number of threads, platforms, and the duration of
the sampling period.
Future directions
As an exploratory study of social learning networks on the Twitter platform, we
believe the present study serves instrumentally to demonstrate the value of social
network analysis methodologies to study the social graph of knowledge creation and
dissemination in online social media platforms. Given the democratizing effects of
online access to information , we call on researchers to extend the study of online
learning environments to informal learning networks emergent on social media, and
other non-conventional learning environments afforded by new information and
communication technologies . Study of social learning networks can describe
the social processes underpinning shared knowledge construction.