Fully Automated Deep Learning System for Bone Age Assessment
Hyunkwang Lee1 & Shahein Tajmir1 & Jenny Lee1 & Maurice Zissen1 &
Bethel Ayele Yeshiwas1 & Tarik K. Alkasab1 & Garry Choy1 & Synho Do1
Published online: 8 March 2017
# The Author(s) 2017. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Abstract Skeletal maturity progresses through discrete phases,
a fact that is used routinely in pediatrics where bone age assessments (BAAs) are compared to chronological age in the evaluation of endocrine and metabolic disorders. While central to
many disease evaluations, little has changed to improve the
tedious process since its introduction in 1950. In this study, we
propose a fully automated deep learning pipeline to segment a
region of interest, standardize and preprocess input radiographs,
and perform BAA. Our models use an ImageNet pretrained,
fine-tuned convolutional neural network (CNN) to achieve
57.32 and 61.40% accuracies for the female and male cohorts
on our held-out test images. Female test radiographs were
assigned a BAA within 1 year 90.39% and within 2 years
98.11% of the time. Male test radiographs were assigned
94.18% within 1 year and 99.00% within 2 years. Using the
input occlusion method, attention maps were created which reveal what features the trained model uses to perform BAA.
These correspond to what human experts look at when manually
performing BAA. Finally, the fully automated BAA system was
deployed in the clinical environment as a decision supporting
system for more accurate and efficient BAAs at much faster
interpretation time (<2 s) than the conventional method.
Keywords Bone-age . Structured reporting . Artificial neural
networks (ANNs) . Automated measurement . Automated
object detection . Clinical workflow . Computer-aided
diagnosis (CAD) . Computer vision . Data collection .
Decisionsupport .DigitalX-rayradiogrammetry .Efficiency .
Classification . Machine learning . Artificial intelligence
Introduction
Skeletal maturity progresses through a series of discrete phases,
particularly in the wrist and hands. As such, pediatric medicine
has used this regular progression of growth to assign a bone age
and correlate it with a child’s chronological age. If discrepancies
are present, these help direct further diagnostic evaluation of
possible endocrine or metabolic disorders. Alternatively, these
examinations may be used to optimally time interventions for
limb-length discrepancies. While the process of bone age assessment (BAA) is central to the evaluation of many disease states,
the actual process of BAA has not changed significantly since the
publication of the groundbreaking atlas in 1950 by Greulich and
Pyle , which was developed from studying children in Ohio
from 1931 to 1942.
BAA can be performed either using the Greulich and Pyle
(GP) or Tanner-Whitehouse (TW2) methods. The GP
* Synho Do
 
Hyunkwang Lee
 
Shahein Tajmir
 
 
Maurice Zissen
 
Bethel Ayele Yeshiwas
 
Tarik K. Alkasab
 
Garry Choy
 
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
Radiology, 25 New Chardon Street, Suite 400B, Boston, MA 02114,
J Digit Imaging 30:427–441
DOI 10.1007/s10278-017-9955-8
method compares the patient’s radiograph with an atlas of representative ages and determines the bone age. The TW2 system is
based on a scoring system that examines 20 specific bones. In
both cases, BAA requires a considerable time and contains significant interrater variability, leading to clinical challenges when
therapy decisions are made based on changes in a patient’s BAA.
Attempts have been made to shorten the evaluation process by
defining shorthand methods to perform BAA more efficiently;
however, these still rely on human interpretation and reference to
an atlas .
BAA is the ideal target for automated image evaluation as
there are few images in a single study (one image of the left
hand and wrist) and relatively standardized reported findings
(all reports contain chronological and skeletal ages with relatively standardized keywords, like Bbone age^ or Byear old^).
This combination is an appealing target for machine learning,
as it sidesteps many labor-intensive preprocessing steps such
as using Natural Language Processing (NLP) to process radiology reports for relevant findings.
Deep learning has proven itself a powerful method for a
wide range of computer vision image tasks , leading to
growing interest in using the technique to replace conventional algorithms using manually crafted features. From using
deep CNNs to detect patterns of interstitial lung disease on
2D patches of chest CTs to segmenting the vascular network of the human eye on fundus photos , deep CNNs have
proven enormously successful since they enable learning
highly representative, layered, hierarchical abstractions from
image data . In addition to segmentation and detection
tasks, many deep learning-based methods are well suited for
recognition and classification tasks in medical imaging .
However, to the best of our knowledge, a large-scale, fullyautomated, data-driven, deep learning approach has not been
introduced to reduce human expert interobserver variability
and improve workflow efficiency of BAA in any published
works. We propose a fully automated deep learning platform
to perform BAA using deep CNNs for detection and classification with the deployed system able to automatically generate structured radiology reports as in Fig. 1.
Data Preparation
Data Collection
IRB approval was obtained for this retrospective study. Using
an internal report search engine (Render), all radiographs and
radiology reports using the exam code BXRBAGE^ were queried from 2005 to 2015. Accession numbers, ages, genders,
and radiology reports were collected into a database. Using
the open source software OsiriX, DICOM images
corresponding to the accession numbers were exported. Our
hospital’s radiology reports include the patient’s chronological
age and the bone age with reference to the standards of
Greulich and Pyle, second edition .
Data Categorization
Radiographs from patients with chronological age of 5–18 years
and skeletally mature (18 years and up) were included in the
dataset. In this study, ages 0–4 years were excluded for two
reasons. First, there were only a limited amount of radiographs
for patients in the 0–4 year-old bracket (298 cases for females
and 292 cases for males), which significantly reduced the volume of images usable for training. Second, the overwhelming
indication for bone age assessment at our institution is for questions of delayed puberty, short stature, or precocious puberty.
These examinations are infrequently performed for patients less
than 5 years of age. The reported bone ages were extracted from
the radiologist report by determining bone age-related keywords
such as Bbone age^ and Bskeletal.^ The extracted bone ages
were calculated in the form of years, floored, and categorized
by year ranging from 5 to 18 years. Skeletally mature cases were
considered 18 years . For cases where the reported bone
ages were given in a range, we assigned the arithmetic mean
of the range as the actual bone age. The total number of studies
originally retrieved was 5208 for the female cohort and 5317 for
the male cohort. After excluding ages 0–4 years and aberrant
cases—right hands, deformed images, and uninterpretable reports—4278 radiographs for females and 4047 radiographs for
males were labeled by skeletal age as in Fig. 2.
We randomly selected 15% of the total data for use as a
validation dataset and 15% for use as a test dataset. The remainder (70%) was used as training datasets for the female and male
cohorts. The validation datasets were utilized to tune
hyperparameters to find the best model out of several trained
models during each epoch. The best network was evaluated
using the test datasets to determine whether the top 1 prediction
matched the ground truth, was within 1 year or 2 years. In order
to make a fair comparison, we used the same split datasets for
each test as new random datasets might prevent fair comparisons.
Preprocessing Engine
Input DICOM images vary considerably in intensity, contrast,
and grayscale base (white background and black bones or
black background and white bones) as shown in Fig. 3. This
variance of the training radiographs prevents algorithms from
learning salient features. As such, a preprocessing pipeline
that standardizes images is essential for the model’s accuracy
by eliminating as much unnecessary noise as possible. For this
application, bones are the most important features to be preserved and enhanced as they are central to BAAs. Therefore,
we propose a novel preprocessing engine that consists of a
J Digit Imaging 30:427–441
detection CNN to identify/segment the hand/wrist and create a
corresponding mask followed by a vision pipeline to standardize and maximize the invariant features of images.
Normalization
The first step of the preprocessing engine is to normalize radiographs for a grayscale-base and image size before feeding
them to the detection CNN. Some images have black bones
with white backgrounds and others have white bones with
black backgrounds (Fig. 3). Image size varies considerably from
a few thousand to a few hundred pixels. To normalize the different grayscale bases, we calculated the pixel-means of 10 × 10
image patches in the four corners of each image and compared
them with the half value of the maximum value for a given image
resolution (e.g., 128 for 8-bit resolution). This effectively determines whether an image has a white or black background,
allowing us to normalize them all to black backgrounds. The
next step normalizes sizes of input images. Almost all hand radiographs are height-wise rectangles. Accordingly, we resized
Fig. 1 Overview of a the conventional GP-BAA methodology and b our proposed fully automated BAA deep learning system
Fig. 2 Bone age distribution for radiographs of female and male left hands
J Digit Imaging 30:427–441
the heights of all images to 512 pixels, then through a combination of preserving their aspect ratios and using zero-padding; the
widths were all made 512 pixels, ultimately creating standardized
512 × 512 images. We chose this size for two reasons: it needed
to be larger than the required input size (224 × 224) for the neural
network, and this size is the optimal balance for the performance
of the detection CNN and the speed of preprocessing. Larger
squares improve the detection CNN performance at the cost of
slower deployment time, while smaller squares accelerate the
testing time, but they result in worse image preprocessing.
Detection CNN
There are five different types of objects on hand radiographs:
bone, tissue, background, collimation, and annotation markers
(Fig. 3). In order to segment the hand and wrist from
radiographs, we utilized a CNN to detect bones and tissues,
construct a hand/wrist mask, and apply a vision pipeline to
standardize images. As shown in Fig. 4, image patches for the
five classes were sampled in the normalized images through
the use of ROIs. The sampled patches are a balanced dataset
with 1 M samples from each class. We used 1000 unique
radiographs, which randomly selected from the training
dataset, to generate diverse object patches. We used LeNet-5
 as the network topology for the detection CNN because
the network is an efficient model for coarse-grained recognition of obviously distinctive datasets and used in applications
such as MNIST digit recognition . In addition, the network requires small amount of computations and trivial memory space for trainable parameters at deployment time. We
trained the model with the set of the sampled patches for
100 epochs using a stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
Fig. 3 Examples of input radiographs utilized in this work. All images have varying sizes, but they were resized for the purposes of this figure
J Digit Imaging 30:427–441
algorithm with 0.01 of the base learning rate decreased as a
factor of ten by three steps based on convergence to loss of
function. The 25% of training images per class were held out
as a validation dataset to select the best model out of epochs.
Reconstruction
The next step is to construct a label map which contains hand
and non-hand regions. For each input radiograph, the detection system slides across the entire image, sampling patches,
and records all class scores per pixel using the trained detection CNN. Based on the score records, the highest-score class
is labeled to each pixel. After that, a label map is constructed
by assigning pixels labeled as bone and tissue classes to a
hand label and other pixels to a non-hand label.
Mask Generation
Most label maps have clearly split regions of hand and non-hand
classes, but like an example in Fig. 4, false-positive regions were
sometimes assigned to the hand class. As a result, we extracted
the largest contiguous contour, filled it, and then created a clean
mask for the hand and wrist shown in Fig. 4.
Vision Pipeline
After creating the mask, the system passes it to the vision pipeline. The first stage uses the mask to remove extraneous artifacts
from the image. Next, the segmented region is centered in the
new image to eliminate translational variance. Subsequently,
histogram equalization for contrast enhancement, denoising,
and sharpening filters are applied to enhance the bones. A final
preprocessed image is shown in Fig. 4.
Image Sample Patch Size and Stride Selection
Preprocessing performance depends on the size of an image
sample patch and the stride by which the detection system
moves. We conducted a regressive test to find the optimal
image patch size and stride by comparing varying strides (2,
4, 8, 16) and image patch sizes (16 × 16, 24 × 24, 32 × 32,
40 × 40, 48 × 48, 56 × 56, 64 × 64) as shown in Fig. 5a. For
this experiment, 280 images representing 10 images per class
for females and males were randomly selected from the test
dataset to evaluate the preprocessing engine’s performance by
calculating the arithmetic mean of Intersection over Union
values (mIoU) between the predicted and ground truth binary
maps. Based on the results in Fig. 5, a 32 × 32 image patch
size and a stride of 4 are the optimal configuration with a
mIoU of 0.92.
Classification CNN
Deep CNNs consist of alternating convolution and pooling
layers to learn layered hierarchical and representative abstractions from input images, followed by fully connected classification layers which are then trainable with the feature vectors
extracted from the earlier layers. They have achieved considerable success in many computer vision tasks including object
classification, detection, and semantic segmentation. Many innovative deep neural networks and novel training methods have
demonstrated impressive performance for image classification
Fig. 4 Overview of a deep CNN-based preprocessing engine to automatically detect a hand, generate a hand mask, and feed that into the vision pipeline
to standardize images, making the trained automated BAA model invariant to differences in input images
J Digit Imaging 30:427–441
tasks, most notably in the ImageNet competition . The
rapid advance in classification of natural images is due to the
availability of large-scale and comprehensively annotated
datasets such as ImageNet . However, obtaining medical
datasets on such scale and with equal quality annotation as
ImageNet remains a challenge. Medical data cannot be easily
accessed due to patient privacy regulations, and image annotation requires an onerous and time-consuming effort of highly
trained human experts. Most classification problems in the
medical imaging domain are fine-grained recognition tasks
which classify highly similar appearing objects in the same
class using local discriminative features. For example, skeletal
ages are evaluated by the progression in epiphyseal width relative to the metaphyses at different phalanges, carpal bone appearance, and radial or ulnar epiphyseal fusion, but not by the
shape of the hand and wrist. Subcategory recognition tasks are
known to be more challenging compared to basic level recognition as less data and fewer discriminative features are available . One approach to fine-grained recognition is transfer
learning. It uses well-trained, low-level knowledge from a
large-scale dataset and then fine-tunes the weights to make
the network specific for a target application. This approach
has been applied to datasets that are similar to the large-scale
ImageNet such as Oxford flowers , Caltech bird species
 , and dog breeds . Although medical images are considerably different from natural images, transfer learning can be
a possible solution by using generic filter banks trained on the
large dataset and adjusting parameters to render high-level features specific for medical applications. Recent works 
have demonstrated the effectiveness of transfer learning from
general pictures to the medical imaging domain by fine-tuning
several (or all) network layers using the new dataset.
Optimal Network Selection for Transfer Learning
We considered three high-performing CNNs, including AlexNet
 , GoogLeNet , and VGG-16 , as candidates for our
system as they were validated in ImageNet Large Scale Visual
Recognition Competition (ILSVRC) . Fortunately, Canziani
et al. performed a comparative study between the candidate networks. A summary of their differences is presented in Table 1
 . If accuracy is the sole determiner, VGG-16 is the best
performer and AlexNet is the worst. However, GoogLeNet utilizes ∼25 times fewer trainable parameters to achieve comparable
performance to VGG-16 with a faster inference time. In addition,
GoogLeNet is the most efficient neural network , particularly
Fig. 5 Finding the optimal combination of image patch sizes and strides
for optimal mask generation in the preprocessing engine. a mean
Intersection over (mIoU) results were shown for all combinations of
strides (2, 4, 8, 16) and image patch sizes (16 × 16, 24 × 24, 32 × 32,
40 × 40, 48 × 48, 56 × 56, 64 × 64). b Representative predicted and
ground truth binary maps with the equation for Intersection over Union
(IoU) for a single case. mIoU was calculated by taking the arithmetic
mean of IoU values for all 280 test cases
Table 1 Comparisons of the
three candidate networks for
transfer learning in terms of
trainable parameter number,
computational requirements for a
single inference, and single-crop
top 1 accuracy on the ImageNet
validation dataset
No. of trainable
parameters
No. of operations needed
for a single inference
Single-crop top
1 validation accuracy
GoogleNet 
˜̃3 G-ops (1×)
AlexNet 
˜̃60M (12×)
˜̃2.5 G-ops (0.83×)
VGG-16 
˜̃140M (28×)
˜̃32 G-ops (10.6×)
Numbers from a comparative study conducted by Canziani et al. 
J Digit Imaging 30:427–441
because the inception modules described in Figs. 5 and 6, enable
the network to have a greater capability to learn hierarchical
representative features without many trainable parameters by
minimizing the number of fully connected layers.
Training Details
We retrieved a pretrained model of GoogLeNet from Caffe Zoo
 and set about fine-tuning the network to medical images.
ImageNet consists of color images, and the first layer filters of
GoogLeNet correspondingly comprise three RGB channels.
Hand radiographs are grayscale, however, and only need a single
channel. As such, we converted the filters into a single channel
by taking arithmetic means of the preexisting RGB values. We
confirmed that the converted grayscale filters matched the same
general patterns of filters, mostly consisting of edge, corner, and
blob extractors. After initializing the network with the pretrained
model, our networks were further trained using an SGD for 100
epochs with a mini-batch size of 96 using 9 different combinations of hyperparameters, including base learning rates (0.001,
0.005, 0.01) and gamma values (0.1, 0.5, 0.75), in conjunction
with a momentum term of 0.9 and a weight decay of 0.005.
Learning rate, a hyperparameter that controls the rate of weights
and bias change during training a neural network, is decreased
by the gamma value by three steps to ensure a stable convergence to loss function. It is challenging to determine the best
learning rate because it varies with intrinsic factors of the
dataset and neural network topology. To resolve this, we use
an extensive grid search for optimal combinations of
hyperparameters using the NVIDIA Devbox to find the
optimal learning rate schedule.
Preventing Overfitting (Data Augmentation)
Deep neural networks require a large amount of labeled training
data for stable convergence and high classification accuracy. If
there is limited training data, deep neural networks will overfit
and fail to generalize for target application. This is a particular
challenge in medical imaging, as compilation of high quality and
well-annotated images is a laborious and expensive process. As a
result, several methods are used to decrease the risk of overfitting.
Data augmentation is one technique where we synthetically increase the size of the training dataset with geometric transformations, photometric transformations, noise injections, and color
jittering , while preserving the same image label. Table 2
details the geometric, contrast, and brightness transformations
used for real-time data augmentation and the number of possible
synthetic images for each. Affine transformations, including rotation, scaling, shearing, and photometric variation were utilized
to improve resiliency of the network to geometric variants and
variations in contrast or intensity. Rotations ranged from −30 to
+30 in 5° increments. Scaling operations were performed by
multiplying the width by 0.85–1.0 in 0.01 increments and the
height by 0.9–1.0 in 0.01 increments. Shearing was performed
Fig. 6 a GoogLeNet network topology that we used for this study. b The inception module, utilized in GoogLeNet, contains six convolutional layers
with different kernel sizes and a pooling layer. All resultant outputs are concatenated into a single output vector
J Digit Imaging 30:427–441
by applying an x and y angle ranging from −5 to +5 with an
increment of 1°. Brightness was adjusted by multiplying all
pixels by a factor ranging from 0.9 to 1.0 with increment of
0.01 and adding an integer ranging from 0 to 10. These transformations were augmented with random switches for each transformation. By using real-time data augmentation, a single image
can be transformed into one of 1,107,150,000 images (= 61 *
150 * 121 * 100), preventing image repetition during each epoch.
This method does not increase computing time or storage as
images for the next iteration are augmented on the CPU while
the previous iteration is being trained via the GPU. We excluded
random horizontal inversion, frequently utilized for natural images, because BAA only uses left-sided radiographs by convention. We also did not perform random translation as all were
centered at the image preprocessing stage.
Preprocessing Engine
Figure 7 demonstrates the effectiveness of the preprocessing
engine at performing image standardization. There is extensive variability among the input images with half the images
having white bones on black backgrounds, variable collimation configurations, and presence or absence of side markers.
Normalizing the grayscale base and image size produces the
images in the second row. The third row presents the constructed label maps used for automatic hand/wrist segmentation used by a second trained CNN. However, the label map
cannot be used as a segmentation mask because there are
frequently false-positive pixels, such as in the second image
Table 2 Summary of real-time
data augmentation methods used
in the study
No. of synthetic
−30° ≤rotation angle ≤30°
0.85 ≤width < 1.0, 0.9 ≤height < 1.0
−5° ≤x angle ≤5°, −5° ≤y angle ≤5°
pixel transform
α* pixel +_β, (0.9 ≤α ≤1.0, 0 < β ≤10)
Geometric (rotation, resizing, and shearing) and photometric transformations (contrast and brightness) were
applied to input images prior to training the network to prevent overfitting
Fig. 7 Ten examples at each stage of preprocessing as described in the
BPreprocessing engine^ section a Input radiographs. The images have
been transformed to a square shape for consistent layout. b Normalized
images with consistent grayscale base and image size. c Label maps of
hand (white) and non-hand (black) classes. d Generated masks for
segmentation. e Final preprocessed images.
J Digit Imaging 30:427–441
of the third row. These pixels can be removed by extracting the
largest contour and filling the resulting polygon to create a uniform mask shown in the fourth row. The vision pipeline can then
segment the hand and wrist using the generated mask, enhance
the bone edges, and denoise the image. The pipeline takes
DICOM objects from various vendors with huge differences in
appearance then automatically segments, centers, and enhances
the images prior to training and deployment.
Classification CNN
Optimal Depth of Fine Tuning
Tajbakhsh et al. found that a layer-wise fine-tuning schema
can find the best performance for a given application with a
limited amount of training data in the medical imaging domain.
The early layers learn low-level image features, like edges and
corners, while the later layers learn higher-level features applicable for the target application . Transfer learning typically
requires fine-tuning the later layers to the specific dataset, but it
might require fine-tuning early layers, depending on how different the source and target applications are . To find the optimal
number of layers requiring adjustment for BAA, we conducted a
regressive test by incrementally fine-tuning pretrained CNNs
from the last layer to the first. In addition, the CNN was trained
from scratch with a random weight initialization to determine
whether the fine-tuning method was better than training from
scratch. In order to enable a stable convergence of loss function,
it is essential to anneal the learning rate over time. Similar to the
BClassification CNN^ section, a grid search for finding the
optimal combination of hyperparameters was conducted to ensure the optimal training parameters. Figure 8 presents test accuracy for the Bcorrect^ case, with the real-time data augmentation,
for the pretrained CNNs that were fine-tuned for layers ranging
from fully connected (fc) to all layers. A base learning rate of
0.005 was determined for the best performing models at
fine-tuning tests, and 0.01 was employed for training from
scratch. If large learning rates are used for training the pretrained
model, well-trained generic features will be overwritten, causing
overfitting of the model. We found out that fine-tuning weights
of all layers is the best scheme for BAA. Since medical images
are markedly different from natural images, all layers must be
fine-tuned to generate low-level and high-level features for BAA.
When training the network from scratch, there were many cases
where the loss function failed to converge, implying that random
weight initialization is not a stable training method given the
small amount of data.
Test Accuracy
Test accuracy of the four different methods for female and
male BAAs is detailed in Fig. 9. The first model (M1) was
the trained CNN with original hand radiographs resized to
224 × 224. Test accuracy was 39.06% for the female cohort
and 40.60% for the male cohort. Skeletal ages for the female
and male radiographs were assigned an age within 1 year of
ground truth 75.59 and 75.54% of the time and within 2 years
90.08 and 92.35% of the time, respectively. The second model
(M2) was conducted with preprocessed images, and the third
model (M3) was performed by turning on real-time data
Fig. 8 CNN test accuracy with the real-time data augmentation using
different styles of training. The Btrained from scratch^ method trains a
CNN with a random weight initialization. Other methods fine-tune the
ImageNet pretrained CNNs by incrementally updating weights of each
fully connected (fc) layer from inception5 to conv1, detailed in Fig. 6
J Digit Imaging 30:427–441
augmentation while training the network from scratch.
Neural network generalization improved with the use of
preprocessed and augmented data, with test accuracy increasing by 33.85% for the female cohort and 34.83% for
the male cohort. The last model (M4) was the fine-tuned
CNN with preprocessed images by turning on real-time
augmentation. Test accuracy was 57.32% for the female
cohort and 61.40% for the male cohort. BAAs for female
radiographs were assigned an age within 1 year of ground
truth 90.39% of the time and 98.11% within 2 years. BAAs
for male radiographs were assigned an age within 1 year of
ground truth (94.18%) of the time and 99.00% of the time
within 2 years. Root mean squared error (RMSE) was
0.93 years for females and 0.82 years for males, improved
by 62% for the female and 57% for the male cohorts compared to RMSE for M1. Furthermore, mean average precision (mAP) was 53.3% for the female cohort and 55.8% for
the male cohort, improved by 57.69% for females and
72.22% for males compared to mAP for M1.
Visualization
Attention Map
Despite their impressive performance at natural image
classification, deep neural networks are not well understood. Several approaches for investigating what neural
networks use to perform classification have been proposed . We utilized the occlusion method to
generate attention maps to find which part of an image is
locally significant for fine-grained classification. The occlusion method iteratively slides a small patch across the
image, passing occluded input images to the forward network and generating two-dimensional attention maps
based on the change in classification probability as a
function of occluder position. Only correctly classified
input images were selected to determine the important
regions of the input images. In Fig. 10, representative
attention maps were generated for four major skeletal development stages—prepuberty, early-and-mid puberty,
late puberty, and postpuberty —highlighting the important portions of the image which allowed the neural
network to perform fine-grained classification. Infant
and toddler categories were excluded. Intriguingly, the
significant regions for each classification are partially in
accordance with the targeted features of each category
described in . The prepubertal attention maps (a) focus on carpal bones and mid-distal phalanges. The
early-mid and late-pubertal attention maps (b and c) focus
less importance on the carpal bones and more on the phalanges, implying that these are more important predictors
of BAA than the carpal bones. For postpubertal attention
maps (d), importance returns to the wrist, where the radial
and ulnar physes are the last to close.
Fig. 9 Performance of four different methods (M1–M4) of training for
female (a) and male (b) bone age assessments. M1 trains a CNN from
scratch with a random weight initialization on original images down
sampled to 224 × 224 pixels. M2 contains images from the automated
preprocessing engine. M3 contains synthetically generated images for
improving network generalization in addition to M2. M4 fine-tunes an
ImageNet pretrained CNN on the preprocessed images with data
augmentation turned on. BCorrect^ corresponds to the case where the
prediction of the model is the same as the ground truth. BWithin 1 year^
and Bwithin 2 years^ include the cases where the network’s prediction is
within 1 and 2 years, respectively. In addition, root mean squared error
(RMSE) and mean average precision (mAP) were reported for the four
different models to figure out how robust and well-performing each
J Digit Imaging 30:427–441
Discussion
Comparison with Previous Works
Fully automated BAA has been a goal of computer vision and
radiology research for many years. Most prior approaches
have included classification or regression using hand-crafted
features extracted from regions of interest (ROIs) for specific
bones segmented by computer algorithms. Table 3 summarizes four prior attempts at BAA in comparison with our method. Seok et al. utilized a scale invariant feature transform
(SIFT) to extract image descriptors and singular value decomposition (SVD) to create fixed-size feature vectors, feeding
them into a fully connected neural network. Since they used
only a small number of images, their model was not robust to
images totally different from their internal dataset. They also
did not provide any quantifiable performance metrics.
Somkantha et al. selected the carpal bone region using
projections in both the horizontal and vertical axes, extracting
boundaries of the carpal bones. They extracted five morphological features from the segmented carpal bones, using them
for regression with a support vector machine (SVM). This
approach is similar to Zhang et al.’s approach in that
hand-engineered features were extracted from carpal bones,
and the features were used as input for a fuzzy logic classifier.
However, this approach is not applicable for children older
Fig. 10 Selected examples of attention maps for female (upper rows) and
male (lower rows) in the four major skeletal maturity stages: prepuberty,
early-and-mid puberty, late puberty, and postpuberty stages . Infant
and toddler categories were excluded. Six representative attention maps
were carefully chosen to represent the general trend for each category. a
Prepuberty: BAAs from 2 to 7 years for females and 3–9 years for males.
b Early-and-mid puberty: 7–13 years for females and 9–14 years for
males. c Late-puberty: 13–15 years for females and 14–16 years for
males. d Postpuberty: 15 and up for females and 17 years and up for
Summary and comparison of prior attempts at automated BAA: dataset, method, salient features, and their limitations
Limitations
24 GP female images
SIFT; SVD Fully
connected NN
Fixed-sized features vectors
from SIFT description with
Training and validation with
limited data; deficiency of
robustness to actual images
180 images from 
Canny edge detection
Fuzzy classification
Morphological features
regarding carpal bones
Not applicable for children
above 7 years
205 images from 
Canny edge detection
Fuzzy classification
Morphological features
regarding carpal bones
(Capitate Hamate)
Not applicable for children
above 5 years for females
and 7 years for males
1559 images from multiple sources
Features regarding shapes,
intensity, texture of RUS
Vulnerable to excessive noise
in images chronological age
used as input
8325 images at MGH
Deep CNN transfer
Data driven, automatically
extracted features
SIFTscale invariant feature transform, AAM active appearance model, PCA principle component analysis, SVD singular value decomposition, NN neural
network, SVM support vector machine, RUS radius ulna short
J Digit Imaging 30:427–441
than 5 to 7 years as the carpal bones are typically fully mature
by that age and no longer allow meaningful discrimination
beyond that point .
The most successful attempt to date is BoneXpert , a
software only medical device approved for use in Europe and
the first commercial implementation of automated BAA.
BoneXpert utilizes a generative model, the active appearance
model (AAM), to automatically segment 15 bones in the hand
and wrist and then determine either the GP or TW2 bone age
based on shape, intensity, and textural features. Even though
BoneXpert reports considerable accuracy for automated
BAA, it has several critical limitations. BoneXpert does not
identify bone age directly, because the prediction depends on a
relationship between chronological and bone ages . The
system is brittle and will reject radiographs when there is
excessive noise. Prior studies report that BoneXpert rejected
around 235 individual bones out of 5161 (4.5%) . Finally,
BoneXpert does not utilize the carpal bones, despite their containing discriminative features for young children.
In summary, all prior attempts at automated BAA are based
on hand-crafted features, reducing the capability of the algorithms from generalizing to the target application. Our approach exploits transfer learning with a pretrained deep
CNN to automatically extract important features from all
bones on an ROI that was automatically segmented by a detection CNN. Unfortunately, all prior approaches used varying
datasets and provide limited details of their implementations
and parameter selection that it is impossible to make a fair
comparison with prior conventional approaches.
How to Improve the System?
Classification Accuracy
The trained model in this study achieved impressive classification accuracy within 2 years (>98%) and within 1 year (>90%)
for the female and male cohorts. Areas for future improvement
abound. We plan to use insights from attention maps and iterative
radiologist feedback to direct further learning and improve prediction accuracy. The attention maps reveal key regions similar to
what domain experts use to perform conventional BAA; however, it is not certain whether the algorithm uses the exact same
features as domain experts. Rather, this method of visualization
only reveals that the important regions of the images are similar.
The CNN could be using as yet unknown features to perform
accurate fine-grained classification which happen to be in the
same regions. Further investigation is needed to determine if
bone morphology is what the CNN is using for BAA.
However, the algorithm still has room for improvement to
provide even more accurate BAA at a faster interpretation
time. We down sampled native DICOM images to 8-bit resolution jpegs (224 × 224) to provide a smaller matrix size and
use GPU-based parallel computing. In the future, using the
native 14-bit or 16-bit resolution images with larger matrix
sizes will likely improve the performance of algorithm.
Another approach could be to develop a new neural network
architecture optimized for BAA. Recent advanced networks, like
GoogLeNet , VGGNet , and ResNet , contain many
layers—16 to 152—and run the risk of overfitting given our
relatively small amount of training images. Creating a new network topology might be a better approach for BAAwhich could
be more effective than using transfer learning. This would require
future systematic study to determine the best algorithm for BAA,
beyond the scope of this work.
Lastly, we need to reconsider that bone ages obtained from
reports may not necessarily reflect ground truth as BAA is inherently based on subjective analysis of human experts. In some
radiology reports, bone ages were recorded as single numbers,
a numerical range, or even a time point not in the original GP
atlas. In addition, Greulich and Pyle’s original atlas provides
standard deviations that range from 8 to 11 months for a given
chronological age, reflecting the inherent variation in the study
population. As such, not all the ground truths can be assumed as
correct. To counter this, the algorithm could be enhanced with an
iterative training by applying varying weights to training images
based on confidence levels in reports.
Deployment Time
The proposed deep learning system for BAA will be used in
the clinical environment to both more efficiently and more
accurately perform BAA. It takes approximately 10 ms to
perform a single BAA with a preprocessed image. However,
it requires averagely 1.71 s to crop, segment, and preprocess
an image prior to classification. Most of the time is consumed
by the construction of the label map prior to segmentation.
The time could be decreased by exploiting a selective search
to process only plausible regions of interest . Additionally,
instead of preserving aspect ratios and creating a 512 × 512
pixels image, image warping to a smaller matrix size could
reduce the computational time required for segmentation at
the cost of eventual output image quality. The optimal balance
requires a systematic study, beyond the scope of this work.
Although all stages of preprocessing and BAA cannot be performed in real time (<30 ms), net interpretation time (<2 s) is
still accelerated compared to conventional BAA, which
ranges from 1.4 to 7.9 min .
Clinical Application
Figure 1 details the process of conventional BAA by radiologists and the proposed fully automated BAA system with
automated report generation. Radiologists conventionally
compare the patient’s radiograph to reference images in the
G&P atlas, a repetitive and time-consuming task. Since bone
age is evaluated based on a subjective comparison, interrater
J Digit Imaging 30:427–441
variability can be considerable. As a result, our system has
another major advantage: it reduces interobserver variability
for a given examination. Repeated presentations of the same
radiograph to the CNN will always result in the same BAA.
Our workflow shows the radiologist a relevant range of
images from the G&P atlas with probability estimate of which
the algorithm considers the best match. The radiologist then
chooses which image he or she thinks is the most accurate
BAA, triggering the system to create a standardized report.
This system can be seamlessly embedded into the reporting
environment, where it provides structured data, improving the
quality of health data reported to the EMR.
Limitations
While our system has much potential to improve workflow, increase quality, and speed interpretation, there are important limitations. Exclusion of 0–4 year olds slightly limits the broad
applicability of the system to all ages. Given that 10 years of
accessions only included 590 patients of ages 0–4 years (5.6%
of the total query), this limitation was felt to be acceptable given
the relative rarity of patients in this age range. Eventually, by
adding more radiographs to the dataset, we hope to expand our
system to include all ages.
Another limitation is our usage of integer-based BAA, rather
than providing time-points every 6 months. This is unfortunately inherent to the GP method. The original atlas did not provide
consistent time points for assignment of age, rather than during
periods of rapid growth, there are additional time points. This
also makes training and clinical assessment difficult, given the
constant variability in age ranges. This has been a problem that
multiple others have tried to correct, such as Gilsanz and Ratib’s
work in this area with the Digital Atlas of Skeletal Maturity,
which uses idealized images from Caucasian children to provide 29 age groups from 8 months to 18 years of age .
While their atlas is more consistent than the GP atlas, it has
the serious limitation of not seeing wide clinical adoption,
therefore limiting the available training data that we can then
use for machine learning.
Because our cohort was underpowered for determinations
below annual age determinations, we elected to floor ages in
the cases where the age was reported as BX years, 6 months^
to maintain a consistent approach to handling all intermediate
time points and the fact that chronological ages are naturally
counted with flooring. However, this could be introducing error.
Retraining the models to account for this by using selectively
rounded cases, a higher volume of cases, higher resolution images, or higher powered computer systems to find the optimal
combination of settings is beyond the scope of this work but an
important future direction.
Lastly, an important consideration is the extent of interobserver variability. Limited directly comparable data is available
in the literature regarding interobserver variability in BAA.
These estimates range from 0.96 years for British registrars
evaluating 50 images using Greulich and Pyle to Tanner’s own
publications which suggested manual interpretation using the
TW2 system resulted in differences greater than 1 stage ranging
from 17 to 33% of the time . The most comprehensive
open dataset available of hand radiographs with assessment by
two raters is the Digital Hand Atlas , compiled by the Image
Processing and Informatics Lab at the University of Southern
California in the late 1990s. All radiographs in that series were
rated by two raters, with an overall RMSE of 0.59 years—
0.54 years for females, 0.57 years for males, and 0.66 years
for all children ranging from 5 to 18 years of age. More recent
publication from Korea reported interobserver variation of
0.51 ± 0.44 years by the GP method . These values provide
a baseline for the human interobserver variability; however, they
may underestimate the true degree of interobserver variability.
Our values of 0.93 years for females and 0.82 years for males are
comparable to the upper limits of these reported values, keeping
in mind that our system does not reject malformed images.
While our dataset does provide a rich source from which to
perform a rigorous assessment of interobserver variability with
multiple raters and experience levels, performing such an analysis is beyond the scope of this work and will be performed as
part of future examinations to help guide assessments of system
performance.
Conclusion
We have created a fully automated, deep learning system to
automatically detect and segment the hand and wrist, standardize the images using a preprocessing engine, perform automated BAAwith a fine-tuned CNN, and generate structured
radiology reports with the final decision by a radiologist. This
system automatically standardizes all hand radiographs of different formats, vendors, and quality to be used as a training
dataset for future model enhancement and achieves excellent
average BAA accuracy of 98.56% within 2 years and 92.29%
within 1 year for the female and male cohorts. We determined
that the trained algorithm assesses similar regions of the hand
and wrist for BAA as what a human expert does via attention
maps. Lastly, our BAA system can be deployed in the clinical
environment by displaying three to five reference images from
the G&P atlas with an indication of our automated BAA for
radiologists to make the final age determination with oneclick, structured report generation.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the
Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
J Digit Imaging 30:427–441