HAL Id: hal-03553032
 
Submitted on 21 Feb 2022
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of scientific research documents, whether they are published or not.
The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
Using Natural Language Generation in Automatic Route
Description
Robert Dale, Sabine Geldof, Jean-Philippe Prost
To cite this version:
Robert Dale, Sabine Geldof, Jean-Philippe Prost. Using Natural Language Generation in Automatic
Route Description. Journal of Research and Practice in Information Technology, 2005, 37 (1), pp.89-
105. ￿hal-03553032￿
Journal of Research and Practice in Information Technology, Vol. 37, No. 1, February 2005
Using Natural Language Generation in Automatic Route
Description
Robert Dale, Sabine Geldof and Jean-Philippe Prost
Centre for Language Technology
Macquarie University
Sydney, Australia
Email: {rdale|sabine|jpprost}@ics.mq.edu.au
In this paper we tackle the problem of generating natural route descriptions on the basis of input
obtained from a commercially available way-finding system. Our framework and architecture
incorporates the use of general principles drawn from the domain of natural language generation.
Through examples we demonstrate that it is possible to bridge the gap between underlying data
representations and natural sounding linguistic descriptions. The work presented contributes both
to the area of natural language generation and to the improvement of way-finding system interfaces.
Keywords: Natural language generation, way-finding systems, micro-planning
ACM Classification: I.2.7 (Artificial Intelligence – Natural Language Processing)
Manuscript received: 4 July, 2003
Communicating Editor: Robyn Owens
Copyright© 2005, Australian Computer Society Inc. General permission to republish, but not for profit, all or part of this
material is granted, provided that the JRPIT copyright notice is given and that reference is made to the publication, to its
date of issue, and to the fact that reprinting privileges were granted by permission of the Australian Computer Society Inc.
1. INTRODUCTION
Natural language generation (NLG) is concerned with the production of natural language output,
whether written or spoken, from some underlying non-linguistic data source. The technology has
been used in a wide variety of systems and contexts; see Reiter and Dale for an overview. In
this paper, we describe our current work in using NLG to provide fluent and natural navigational
assistance in the context of driving directions.
There are now many web-based services which offer the automatic generation of driving
directions. MapBlast, MapPoint and MapQuest are three major US providers of this functionality;
in Australia, WhereIs provides the same kind of information.1 Although there are interesting
differences of detail in the user interfaces provided by each, all these systems are similar in concept
and content: the user specifies a start address and a target address, and the system plans a route
between these two points, possibly taking into account specific constraints such as a desire to use
freeways or to avoid toll bridges. The output of each of these systems is in the form of ‘turn by turn’
instructions; an example from WhereIs is shown in Figure 1.
There may be some advantage to displaying this kind of information in a tabulated form like
this: for example, the consistent row-by-row format may make it easier to quickly determine what
is involved in the route. Nonetheless, when compared to a human-authored description for the same
route, as in Figure 2, several differences become apparent:2
1 See www.mapblast.com, www.mappoint.com, www.mapquest.com and www.whereis.com.au respectively.
2 All our human-authored examples are drawn from a corpus of real route descriptions, described later.
Our examples of publicly available, web-delivered directions are obtained from www.whereis.com.au.
Using Natural Language Generation in Automatic Route Description
Journal of Research and Practice in Information Technology, Vol. 37, No. 1, February 2005
Humans often omit steps that the automated systems include, typically because they are considered unimportant or obvious; automated systems are not capable of making these assessments.
Humans typically use landmarks and visible features of the environment to identify turning
points, whereas the automated systems generally describe these points by distances or times of
travel from previous decision points.
Humans typically produce complex clause structures, gathering together related information
into single sentences, whereas the automated systems produce what are in effect one-sentenceper-step mappings.
In this paper, we explore how natural language generation techniques can be exploited to imbue
automatically generated route descriptions with some of these properties.
Of course, there is no prima facie reason why we should want an automated system to emulate
what people do. There is no guarantee that a human-produced description is necessarily a good one,
and it is clearly possible that the tabulated form of instructions that is common to existing
applications is actually an improvement on what people do. There is some evidence, however, that
route descriptions closer to those produced by humans are preferable. Work on the graphical display
of routes, for example by Agrawala and Stolte , has suggested that users prefer modes of
delivery which do not give equal status to all parts of the route description; and experiments have
demonstrated that describing points by means of salient features of the environment results in route
descriptions that are much easier to follow than those couched in terms of distances and travel
Figure 1: An automatically generated route description
Leave the house and drive towards the Midway shops, at the end of the street turn right and then
left at the roundabout. Drive along North road and take the third right turn, just after the first hump
in the road. Go to the end of that road and then go straight ahead at the roundabout, there’s a church
on your left. Now go straight along Herring road for quite a way until you hit the main road (Epping
Rd), go straight across at the lights and continue on until you get to the next set of lights. Turn right
here into the university.
Figure 2: A human generated route description for the route in Figure 1
Using Natural Language Generation in Automatic Route Description
Journal of Research and Practice in Information Technology, Vol. 37, No. 1, February 2005
times, which humans find difficult to estimate and keep track of .
Our current work is concerned with the development of a route description system that uses the
same underlying Geographical Information Systems (GIS) datasets as the commercially available
web-based systems, but which incorporates techniques from natural language generation (NLG)
research to produce more natural-sounding descriptions. In this paper, we focus on three aspects of
our generation process:
the use of discourse structure to facilitate understanding of the structure of a route;
the use of aggregation techniques to combine information into fluent and coherent multiclausal
sentences; and
the use of referring expression generation techniques to produce user-oriented descriptions of
key elements in routes.
The techniques we use are an attempt to balance generalisability and domain dependence, in
order to provide a practical solution.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 sketches some background to the
work described here. Section 3 describes the architecture of our system and outlines the approach
we take to the problem in general; and Section 4 explores our use of discourse structuring and NLG
techniques for referring expression generation and aggregation, along with example outputs that
demonstrate the current capabilities of our system. Section 5 reports on evaluation, draws some
conclusions and points to ways forward.
2. BACKGROUND
There already exists a considerable body of work in the automatic generation of route descriptions.
Pattabhiraman and Cercone pointed to the importance of salience and relevance in content
selection, the first sub-process in NLG. The domain of route descriptions illustrates their point
clearly because of the inherent coupling of domain and linguistic knowledge. The notion of
salience is further specified as a gradual value by Fraczak, Lapalme and Zock ; their system
produces variants of subway route directions by mapping the relative importance of information
entities onto syntactico-semantic features. While these approaches are all concerned with
establishing a link between GIS knowledge on the one hand and linguistic realization principles
on the other, Moulin and Kettani take a radically different approach. They advocate the
encoding of geographical information centred around those elements that are believed to be crucial
in the description of routes, thus conceiving the generation task as a straightforward mapping from
the underlying data. Like Fraczak et al and Höök also aimed at generating different
route descriptions for one particular route, but from a human-computer interaction (HCI)
perspective; her focus was the matching of observed differences in navigation style. Finally, the
route descriptions generated by Maaß et al are based on the integration of cognitive and
perceptual information processing. From our perspective, this earlier work suffers from two
drawbacks:
For the most part, earlier systems have not made use of real GIS data, but have relied on handcrafted knowledge sources to support the generation process. While this strategy allows
exploration of desirable outputs in a way that might inform subsequent GIS data development
exercises, it does not provide a solution to the limitations of existing GIS-based systems.
The techniques used in these systems have tended to be somewhat ad hoc, in that they have not
attempted to capitalize on more general techniques and approaches developed in the field of
Using Natural Language Generation in Automatic Route Description
Journal of Research and Practice in Information Technology, Vol. 37, No. 1, February 2005
Our own system, Coral, has evolved over the last few years through a range of quite different
instantiations. Our earlier work addressed the provision of route descriptions within a university
department , providing multi-modal (text, graphics and speech)
descriptions via the web; more recently, we have explored how higher-level segmentation of a route
description may contribute to its ease of use, especially when delivered via a mobile device .
Our current work represents an attempt to address both of the problems identified above. We use
as input precisely the same GIS data that is available to existing commercial web-based systems; and
at the same time, we attempt to apply more general principles of natural language generation to the production of the resulting output texts. To support this
work, we have carried out an analysis of several especially collected corpora of human-produced
route descriptions. Our corpora differ with respect to mode of navigation, means of communication,
and type of environment: our first corpus consists of 49 spoken route descriptions (7 subjects × 7
routes) within our university department; another corpus consists of 30 written route descriptions (10
subjects × 3 routes) within the university campus. Of particular relevance to the work described here,
we also collected a corpus of 20 written directions within the urban road network: 9 subjects were
asked to describe the route from their homes to the university to a visitor and to a neighbour, as well
as a route from the university to a fixed, known destination. Whereas the architecture of our system
is applicable to the domains explored in each of these corpora, the strategies described in this paper
are based on the last corpus; given the variety of parameters that influence the formulation of route
descriptions, it was important to reduce our scope to a single mode of transportation and environment
type. The familiarity with the environment and the fixed destinations in this corpus allowed us to
constrain and control the variations in expression used by our subjects. Our approach to corpus
analysis and its application to other corpora are the subject of a later paper.
3. THE CORAL ARCHITECTURE
3.1 The Input Representation
The GIS datasets used in existing commercial systems represent the world in terms of nodes (points
in space), arcs (directed links that connect two nodes), and polygons (sequences of arcs that form
bounded spaces). Nodes typically represent junctions or decision points in a road network; arcs are
the travelable paths between points in that network; and polygons are used to represent areas such
as parks or railway stations. A GIS system typically also provides, in additional data sources,
information about these entities: street names, the lengths of paths, categories of points of interest,
and so on.
The construction of a route plan thus consists in determining a path between two specified
nodes; the result of route planning is a sequence of arcs that form a path between these nodes. A
number of constraints may be taken into account in planning this path: for example, some systems
offer the user a choice of the fastest or the shortest route (not necessarily the same), or of routes that
avoid toll bridges. Local constraints such as whether a segment of road is one-way must also, of
course, be taken into account.
Before such a plan can be used to produce an output description, it typically undergoes a process
of arc aggregation. This is our term for the process of merging together those contiguous arcs that
are all part of the same road: since an arc joins two junctions, the path between each two
intersections along a road constitutes a separate arc, and so an instruction like Follow Epping Road
for 10km may in fact correspond to a sequence of arcs in the underlying representation. Arc
aggregation thus turns a raw arc-based plan into what we call a path-based plan. From here, it is a
Using Natural Language Generation in Automatic Route Description
Journal of Research and Practice in Information Technology, Vol. 37, No. 1, February 2005
fairly simple process to map the route into a sequence of turn-by-turn instructions as in Figure 1.
Our interest, however, is in further manipulating the data to produce more fluent and natural output.
3.2 Levels of Representation
In line with current thinking in NLG research, we view the generation process as consisting of three
distinct stages: text planning, micro-planning, and linguistic realisation. For our current purposes,
text planning consists in taking a path-based route plan, and deriving from this a set of messages
that are to be conveyed to the user. These can be thought of as the separate chunks of meaning that
have to be conveyed. The micro-planning stage then uses these messages to build a sequence of
sentence plans that determine the content to be realised in each sentence; this may involve
combining clauses to build complex sentences, and also working out what information should be
used to describe locations that are mentioned. Finally, the realisation stage maps these sentence
plans, which are still in the form of semantic specifications, into the appropriate lexico-syntactic
material of the target natural language. This architecture is shown in Figure 3.
A message is, effectively, a piece of semantic content that can be realised linguistically. As
argued in Reiter and Dale , the appropriate inventory of message types and
their optimal granularity depends on specific characteristics of the application: the general idea is
to view messages as data objects corresponding to the largest distinct linguistic fragments we need
in order to generate the variety of texts we are interested in.
Our analysis of human-produced route descriptions leads us to favour a message level that
distinguishes three message types that may be combined in a variety of ways:
Figure 3: Coral’s architecture
Using Natural Language Generation in Automatic Route Description
Journal of Research and Practice in Information Technology, Vol. 37, No. 1, February 2005
Points: Although descriptions of points rarely appear in the route descriptions produced by
commercial systems, they are common in human-produced descriptions, where they often serve
as a means of checking the user’s position. References to points can either appear as parts of
instructions, or in separate sentences whose sole function is to state position, as in the following
Follow the road until the traffic lights next to ‘The Ranch’ restaurant.
Take a right turn, just after the Macquarie Centre.
Turn right at the first roundabout.
There’s a church on your left.
You’ll go over two bridges.
Directions: These correspond to turns that are made at decision points in a route plan.
Paths: These correspond to continuous movements along parts of the road network.
In these terms, the instructions in commercial systems typically consist of a combination of a
PATH message and a DIRECTION message; as noted, POINT messages typically do not occur at all.
Given a path-based route plan as introduced in Section 3.1, we build from this a text plan that
consists of an alternating sequence of POINT, DIRECTION and PATH messages, terminating in a
POINT message that corresponds to the target location. Each message contains information that can
be used in describing that message; Figure 4 shows the content of typical POINT and PATH
messages. A POINT message includes a list of the identifiers of points of interest (POIs) that are
associated with that point and which can therefore be used in describing the point; a PATH message
contains its level in the road status hierarchy (here, a ‘3’ means that this is a main road), the distance
to be travelled along this path, and the constituent arcs and nodes that make up the path (these are
the elements combined in arc aggregation).
This text plan then serves as the input to our micro-planning process, which is faced with two
it must decide how to cluster together the points, directions and paths into clause-sized units;
it must decide how to refer to each of these elements.
Figure 4: Example point and path messages
Using Natural Language Generation in Automatic Route Description
Journal of Research and Practice in Information Technology, Vol. 37, No. 1, February 2005
The first of these is a linguistic aggregation task , while the second is an application of referring expression generation . We describe our
approach to each of these tasks in Sections 4.4 and 4.5 below, but first turn to the higher-level
generation task concerned with determining the structure of the route description and its correlation
to ease of task execution.
4. APPLYING NLG TECHNIQUES
4.1 Discourse Structure
Höppner formulated requirements for route descriptions in general: a route description needs
to be both recognizable and rememberable. Our view is that these cognitive requirements can be at
least partially met by introducing segmentation and structuring into the flat sequences of instructions provided by existing systems. Given a flat sequence of instructions of the kind delivered by a
typical navigational assistance system, our approach is to segment this sequence of instructions in
a meaningful way, and to generate a summary for each resulting segment. This hierarchical
approach reduces the cognitive load on the user and enhances the rememberability of the route
description.
Our solution is based on two elements. First, the route to be described needs to be segmented
and summarized in a meaningful way. In an ideal world this might correspond to the top-down
structure developed in a hierarchical planner; however, existing systems do not make use of or
provide such structures, and so we have explored the use of bottom-up heuristics for the
identification of appropriate segmentations.
Then, we need techniques that support flexible interaction with the segmented route in
conjunction with task execution. For example, we exploit the hierarchical structure resulting from
Figure 5: Example of a segmented route presentation via the Web
Using Natural Language Generation in Automatic Route Description
Journal of Research and Practice in Information Technology, Vol. 37, No. 1, February 2005
segmentation to present route descriptions on a small device (in particular, a Palm hand-held
computer). This presentation mode allows step-by-step exploration of the description as the user
performs the navigation task (see Figure 6).
The following subsections further explain each of these elements.
4.2 Segmentation
As noted above, existing route planning systems provide flat sequences of instructions, consisting
of alternating paths and turns, rather than hierarchical structures. The process of segmentation
therefore consists in grouping these path and turn instructions into higher level entities that we call
segments. The notion of segmentation we are working with here bears some relation to the notion
of a discourse segment as discussed by Grosz and Sidner : elements that are more related are
seen as aggregating together to form segments within a larger structure, and in theory this analysis
applies recursively to the resulting segments to produce a hierarchy.3
The concept of hierarchy in way-finding is not, of course, new. The process of human spatial
knowledge acquisition is often assumed to result in a hierarchical structure, referred to as the
cognitive map by Kuipers ; and Pailhous’s observation of way-finding behaviour by experts
(i.e. taxi drivers in Paris) confirms the hypothesis of the existence of a hierarchical strategy, where
first a route between regions is constructed at a higher level before being refined into concrete path
components . As so far described, segmentation can be viewed as a way of
coherently organising and structuring information. However, it can also be seen as addressing a key
question in the provision of information in dialogic contexts: how do we convey information in
installments so that the course of information exchange approximates the way humans interact? The
Figure 6: An example of a segmented route presentation via the Palm
3 In practice, we have so far only found need for one level of hierarchy in our structures.
Using Natural Language Generation in Automatic Route Description
Journal of Research and Practice in Information Technology, Vol. 37, No. 1, February 2005
segmentation of information in human dialogue responds to the need for decreasing the cognitive
effort required from the interlocutor .
Of course, only a subset of all (mathematically) possible segmentations of a stream of
information is meaningful. Thus a key task is to determine which segmentations are valuable. We
have explored two alternative strategies: one determines optimal break points in the sequence of
paths that make up the route, and the other aggregates several paths into a higher level structure on
the basis of properties of the constituent elements. These strategies have been applied to the output
of existing route description systems.
4.2.1 Landmark-based segmentation
Our first strategy relies on the experimentally verified idea that landmarks at decision points
constitute useful cognitive entities whose inclusion improves the effectiveness of route descriptions
 . Although what
constitutes a landmark remains vague and ill-defined, attempts have been made to distinguish
different categories of landmarks. Sorrows and Hirtle , for example, identify visual
landmarks (objects such as churches and towers which are clearly distinguishable from their
environment by virtue of salient visual features), cognitive landmarks (for example, the desk of a
receptionist, which may be significant because it has a particular function for a user), and structural
landmarks (entities such as Trafalgar Square in London, which assists in structuring a spatial
environment). Raubal and Winter developed measures to formally specify the saliency of
various features in view of landmark selection. However, these require the availability of rich
datasets, typically not available in GIS data.
We explored the hypothesis that the global saliency of landmarks can be exploited to structure
route descriptions. A landmark at a decision point delimits a part of the route to be followed, so the
navigator will be aware whether she has reached that point in the route and will thus know how far
she has progressed in the navigation task at hand.
We have applied this idea to an earlier version of Coral which provided indoor route descriptions
for our department . The knowledge representation used in that system includes
landmarks as domain objects, and these are included in the intermediate representation from which
the textual route description is generated. The route plan representation consists of a sequence of
alternating path and turn specifications as shown in the following example, which underlies part of
the route presented in Figure 6:
〈start(r333), via(〈〉), end(p333)〉,
turn(lhs),
〈start(p2), via(〈c1, pass(lhs:[4,room]), pass(rhs:[1,room]), final(rhs:lift1)〉),
end(lift1)〉
turn(lhs),
〈start(p362), via(〈〉), end(r362)〉
Our segmentation strategy makes use of a separate knowledge source that indicates which
domain objects are plausible landmarks; in the present case, the lift is one such object. Since this
appears at a decision point (just before the final left-hand turn in the fragment above), it is selected
as a segment border and included in the summary for this segment. Consequently, the route is
Using Natural Language Generation in Automatic Route Description
Journal of Research and Practice in Information Technology, Vol. 37, No. 1, February 2005
decomposed into one segment leading to the lift and a second segment from this landmark to the
destination, a shown in Figure 6.
The intuition behind this approach to segmentation is quite straightforward: if the user is
familiar with the environment, she will recognize the landmark that terminates the segment and
realise that she does not need the detailed instructions for that segment. It is also easy for the user
to keep this landmark in mind as an intermediary target and to remember that, once she has reached
it, she should revert back to the instructions.
There are, however, limitations to this strategy, since it depends on the presence of landmarks at
appropriate locations along the route. Applied blindly, it can lead to segments of significantly
varying lengths, which can be confusing. Overall, then, whereas a landmark-based segmentation
might be feasible for route descriptions on a small dataset (such as an indoor area), where it is
relatively easy to determine which objects of the domain constitute landmarks, it becomes more
difficult to apply on a larger scale, and this is particularly the case with currently available GIS data.
4.2.2 Path-based segmentation
Another approach to segmentation is to investigate characteristics of the constituent paths of the route
to determine whether they belong to a meaningful higher-level entity. Other work has
explored the hypothesis that recurring higher-level patterns can be found in route descriptions. A
frequently occurring pattern consists of three segments corresponding to the beginning, middle and
end of a route; typically these involve, respectively, getting onto a main thoroughfare or higher-level
road, travelling along that road, and then leaving that road to reach the destination via a number of
lower-level roads. We refer to this route pattern as ‘BME’. For example:
How do I get from Macquarie University to the Queen Victoria Building, in the City?
[Well, first you get onto Epping Road B],
[then you continue ahead via the freeway, following signs to the City M].
[Exit at Druitt Street, then the QVB is not far from there E].
Given a flat sequence of paths and turns, we need to determine how these constituents are
allocated to segments within such a structure. Our analysis of a small corpus of human-generated
routes led us to formulate the hypothesis that three features of paths and turns play a role in this
segmentation:
Road status hierarchy: Routes often involve travelling on roads of different status within the road
network, from freeways down through main roads to side roads. Our analysis demonstrated that
a series of consecutive paths of the same or similar road status is likely to be perceived as
constituting a higher-level entity.
Path length: For some routes, segmentation on the basis of road status alone can result in a large
number of segments. In such cases, the total length of a segment can help to decide which one
of the segments is the stable middle segment.
Turn typology: A turn that is very salient (for example, a T-junction) or that requires careful
navigation (for example, a right turn in a drive-on-the-left road context) is a likely segment
border candidate.
These principles are very prominent in the prototypical BME route, as demonstrated in the
example above: the middle segment consists of a long stretch of one or more steps on higher level
roads, and the absence of explicit or difficult turns along this middle segment reinforces the
Using Natural Language Generation in Automatic Route Description
Journal of Research and Practice in Information Technology, Vol. 37, No. 1, February 2005
perception of a stable section in the route. However, when examining a larger number of routes, it
becomes clear that many variants on this pattern exist, and that these three features interact in a
complex manner.
To allow for a systematic exploration of the space, we implemented a segmentation module that
takes as input a route obtained from a route planning system available on the web, augmented with
road status information derived from a widely used street directory. We used 23 routes of different
lengths and in various suburbs of Sydney in our initial exploration.4 Our main criterion for
segmentation quality was approximation to the prototypical BME pattern. We experimented with
various combinations of road status-based and length-based heuristics for segmentation; our
conclusions from this study were that road status is a good indicator for segmentation (in 43% of
the cases); in most other cases (another 34%), segmentation can be improved by augmenting this
with heuristics that combine segments on the basis of path length.
4.3 A Route Planning Markup Language
Our goal is to produce route descriptions that can be rendered via a variety of devices; in the first
instance we have been exploring rendering via both standard desktop web browsers and via handheld computers (specifically, the Palm), and we are also considering applying this to voice delivery
via VoiceXML.
<route-plan context=”Sydney”>
<from>BAY RD ARCADIA</from>
<to>UNIVERSITY AV MACQUARIE PARK</to>
<distance>35.0 km</distance>
</summary>
<map url=” >
<segment sid=”1”>
<string>First go from BAY RD to PACIFIC HWY. </string>
</summary>
<detail> <utterance uid=”1”>
<string>Start at BAY RD.</string>
</utterance>
Figure 7: A fragment of RPML
To support this variety of outputs, we have defined an intermediate, device-independent
representation called rpml (for Route Planning Markup Language). Two principle features of this
representation are that (a) it allows for the annotation of a route description with segmentation
information that can be used for presentation by the rendering device; and (b) it allows for multimodal content, such as links to graphical representations of the described route and to voice output.
Using this representation, we use XSLT to produce web pages for pre-trip planning like those found
at and the same input is used by a specially
4 These routes can be inspected online. See for an
Using Natural Language Generation in Automatic Route Description
Journal of Research and Practice in Information Technology, Vol. 37, No. 1, February 2005
written renderer on the Palm that formats the output for interactive display to support incremental
exploration of the route description while travelling. Figure 7 shows a fragment of RPML; this
demonstrates how individual instructions can be provided both as canned output (strings like First
go from BAY RD to PACIFIC HWY) and as more abstracted specifications (as in the contents of the
top level <summary> element) which the renderer can decide how to realise.
4.4 Aggregation
Aggregation is the process of building sentences which communicate several pieces of information
at once. Although the messages in our text plan could be realised one-per-sentence, the result would
be less than fluent, as exemplified by the route description in Figure 8.
Start at Liverpool Street.
Follow Liverpool Street for 86 metres.
You are at George Street.
Turn right.
Follow George Street for 230 metres.
You are at Bathurst Street.
Turn left.
Follow Bathurst Street for 8 metres.
You have arrived at your destination.
Figure 8: One message per sentence
Of course, there are many situations where one sentence will indeed be used to convey a single
message. However, our examination of human-produced route descriptions has identified two
specific aggregation strategies that people frequently pursue:
Path+Point: A common strategy is to fold a description of a point into the description of a path, in
order to provide a more effective way of identifying the end of that path:
Now go straight ahead along Herring Road for quite a way until you hit the main road
(Epping Road).
Continue on until you get to the next set of lights.
Point+Direction: Very often, a turn direction is combined with a specification of the location where
this instruction is to be executed:
… and take the third right turn, just after the first hump in the road.
… and then go straight ahead at the roundabout.
… at the end of the street turn right.
Note here that the point description can be realized either before or after the turn or follow
instruction; we view this variation as a choice made in the realisation stage, so both variants involve
the same aggregation strategy.
We also find sentences that combine all three of path, point and direction, as in Go to the end of
that street and then go straight ahead at the roundabout. However, from our perspective this is the
result of a clause combining process that takes effect once aggregation at the message level has been
applied: in effect, aggregation determines the content of major clauses, which may then be realised
as single-clause sentences, or combined to form conjoined sentences.
Using Natural Language Generation in Automatic Route Description
Journal of Research and Practice in Information Technology, Vol. 37, No. 1, February 2005
Start at Liverpool Street.
Follow Liverpool Street for 86 metres.
Turn to the right at George Street.
Follow George Street for 230 metres until you reach Bathurst Street.
Turn left.
Follow Bathurst Street for 8 metres.
You have arrived at your destination.
Start at Liverpool Street.
Follow Liverpool Street for 86 metres until you reach George Street.
Turn right.
Follow George Street for 230 metres.
Turn to the left at Bathurst Street.
Follow Bathurst Street for 8 metres until you reach your destination.
Figure 9: Different aggregations
Clearly, applying different combinations of strategies to the same route plan will result in
different ways of describing that plan. Currently, our Prolog implementation uses backtracking to
produce all possible combinations of the applications of these strategies to a given text plan; Figure
9 shows some of the various realisations possible for the route shown in Figure 8. In future work,
we aim to explore a scoring regime that ranks the various renderings.
4.5 Referring Expression Generation
Referring expression generation is the process of determining what semantic content should be used
in describing an intended referent; the goal is to distinguish the intended referent from other entities
with which it might be confused. So, for example, describing the location of a turn by referring to
an object at the relevant intersection is only effective if that description does not also apply to other
intermediate intersections on the way: an instruction like Turn left at the traffic lights may be a true
description of the location of a turn, but it is not helpful if there are intermediate intersections that
also have traffic lights.
In Dale , the task of referring expression generation is characterised as being driven by
three principles: sensitivity (the speaker must pay heed to what the hearer can be presumed to
know), adequacy (the referring expression should identify the intended referent unambiguously),
and efficiency (the referring expression should not contain more information than is required for the
task at hand). Following Dale and Reiter , we take the view that the best way to meet these
requirements is to use a general purpose algorithm that is fed by a ‘preference ranking’ of domain
properties and relations that can be used in building referring expressions; properties and relations
from a predetermined list of types are added to the content of a description until enough information
to identify the referent has been collected.
In the context of our current work, a number of distinct reference strategies are applied by the
algorithm in turn. Again, on the basis of a corpus analysis and the readily available GIS information,
we have identified the following strategies for referring to junction points:
1. Use a landmark that is at, or close to, the junction.
2. Use the type of intersection (for example, roundabout, T-junction, or fork).
Using Natural Language Generation in Automatic Route Description
Journal of Research and Practice in Information Technology, Vol. 37, No. 1, February 2005
3. Use the name of the immediately preceding intersection.
4. Use the name of the intersecting street.
Thus, we use whatever information the underlying dataset makes available, and only fall back
on the ‘intersecting street name’ strategy as a last resort. Examples of the third and the first strategy
respectively are shown in Figure 10.
Start at Liverpool Street.
Follow Liverpool Street for 86 metres until you reach George Street.
Turn right.
Follow George Street for 230 metres.
After you pass Wilmot Street turn to the left at Bathurst Street.
Follow Bathurst Street until you reach St. Andrew’s Cathedral.
Figure 10: Applying referring expression generation
A similar range of reference strategies is used to provide appropriate descriptions of paths:
1. Mention street name and any landmarks that are passed on the path.
2. Mention street name and the distance to be travelled along the path.
The effectiveness of these strategies is determined by the richness of the underlying data set. For
example, in the data we are currently using, there are no details of whether junctions have traffic
lights, so a type of landmark that is commonly used by humans is not available to us. However,
there are a sufficient number of other kinds of landmarks encoded in the data to be able to provide
useful descriptions.
4.6 An Example
Combined with the aggregation strategies described in the previous section, the application of these
techniques allows us to generate route descriptions which are considerably more fluent than those
in commercial systems. Figure 11 shows a route description provided by WhereIs, and the same
route described by our system, making use of the aggregation and referring expression strategies
described above.
5. EVALUATION AND CONCLUSIONS
Following the recommendations of Ross and Burnett , for the evaluation of navigational
systems, we have performed a small-scale expert evaluation in a task-based context, described in
more detail in Geldof and Dale . The aim of the experiment was to obtain feedback on the
use of segmented route descriptions and their incremental presentation on a mobile device. The
experiment was well-defined and carefully designed to minimize the many factors which influence
the performance of a navigation task. Three teams, each consisting of a navigator and a driver, were
asked to drive two routes each, one using a segmented and one using a non-segmented route
description delivered via a Palm hand-held computer. An observer accompanied each team and
feedback was collected via a form to be filled out during and just after the navigation task. A striking
difference in navigation style was observed, between a navigator who relied heavily on distance
information provided in the descriptions, whereas the two others used more general orientation and
higher level information such as that provided through the summary of segments. While no
Using Natural Language Generation in Automatic Route Description
Journal of Research and Practice in Information Technology, Vol. 37, No. 1, February 2005
noticeable problems occurred with respect to task performance, the first navigator expressed a
preference for the non-segmented presentation mode, whereas the other navigators indicated that
they found the segmented presentation on the mobile devices more useful. Thus, although a larger
scale experiment would need to be set up to further confirm this result, this pilot evaluation is
indicative of the utility of this aspect of our approach.
The observed differences in navigation style point to an important aspect which has an impact
on any evaluation task in this domain. At the same time they highlight the potential benefits of
natural language generation technology for tuning route descriptions to personal preferences. On the
one hand, individual judgements of the quality of route descriptions will to a large extent depend on
personal preferences. This increases the complexity of an evaluation set-up (as one needs to ensure
that the results are not biased towards a particular subject and as there is no clearly specified gold
standard), but also creates a situation in which no objective measure is available. On the other hand,
once elicited, the principles underlying these preferences may be embedded in a generation system
that outputs route directions better adapted to individual needs.
In this paper, we have presented a framework and architecture for generating route descriptions
that approximate the naturalness of human generated route descriptions. Unlike other attempts
towards this goal, our approach allows us to take as input GIS data like that currently used by
commercial systems, and uses generic natural language generation techniques in constructing the
resulting textual output.
Our findings so far consist in a better understanding of the multiple aspects that give rise to
variation in human route descriptions. We have unravelled the basic descriptive components of
route directions and identified the mechanisms that impact on their combination and refinement
towards full-fledged semantic input structures. Further experimentation within this framework will
allow us to focus on the interaction between the techniques we use for aggregation and referring
expression generation: some route descriptions we produce can contain redundant information
Figure 11: Whereis compared to Coral generated route description
Start at Parbury Lane.
Follow Parbury Lane until you reach the end.
Take a right.
Follow Lower Fort Street for 30 metres.
Turn to the left at George Street.
Follow George Street until you reach your destination.
Using Natural Language Generation in Automatic Route Description
Journal of Research and Practice in Information Technology, Vol. 37, No. 1, February 2005
because these two processes work in a pipeline. Insights about this interaction should lead towards
more general heuristics at the level of micro-planning in natural language generation.
A principled approach to route directions generation may also be valuable to two important
issues in the domain of route guidance: customization to different navigation styles and inclusion
of landmarks. The former consists in applying different strategies for generating referring
expressions. The latter also relates to this topic, since the very notion of a landmark and the
conditions that govern the choice of one over another can be viewed in terms of generating a
referring expression for a decision point or path.