METHODS ARTICLE
published: 09 April 2013
doi: 10.3389/fphar.2013.00038
lazar: a modular predictive toxicology framework
Andreas Maunz1, Martin Gütlein1, Micha Rautenberg 2, David Vorgrimmler 2, Denis Gebele2
and Christoph Helma2*
1 Institute for Physics, Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany
2 in silico toxicology gmbh, Basel, Switzerland
Edited by:
Sebastian Hoffmann, seh consulting +
services, Germany
Reviewed by:
Marina Evans, United States
Environmental Protection Agency,
Kim Z. Travis, Syngenta, UK
*Correspondence:
Christoph Helma, in silico toxicology
gmbh, Altkircher Strasse 4, CH-4052
Basel, Switzerland.
e-mail: 
lazar (lazy structure–activity relationships) is a modular framework for predictive toxicology.
Similar to the read across procedure in toxicological risk assessment, lazar creates
local QSAR (quantitative structure–activity relationship) models for each compound to
be predicted. Model developers can choose between a large variety of algorithms for
descriptor calculation and selection, chemical similarity indices, and model building.
This paper presents a high level description of the lazar framework and discusses the
performance of example classiﬁcation and regression models.
Keywords: predictive toxicology, QSAR, in silico, semantic web, read across
INTRODUCTION
Computer-based (in silico) predictions are gaining acceptance in
toxicological risk assessment, but there is still a lot of reservation toward in silico methods, especially from toxicologists with
a biological or medical background. Apart from obvious barriers
between the involved disciplines, we attribute this reservation to a
variety of scientiﬁc, technical, and social factors:
SCIENTIFIC LIMITATIONS
• Limited capability of some quantitative structure–activity relationship (QSAR) algorithms (e.g., linear regression) to handle
complex relationships
• Missing, improper, ambiguous, or poorly reproducible deﬁnitions of applicability domains
• Improper application of validation procedures, ignorance of
applicability domains1
• Poor validation of applicability domain concepts
• Poor consideration of biological mechanisms
• Irreproducible results, because proprietary algorithms are not
TECHNICAL LIMITATIONS
• Hard to use and unintuitive software
• Standalone solutions with poor integration of
databases, ontologies etc.
SOCIAL LIMITATIONS
• Insufﬁcient translation of statistics/data mining/QSAR concepts into toxicological terminology
• Poor understanding of the signiﬁcance of validation results1
• Poor and/or too technical documentation of algorithms, which
is hard to understand for non-computer scientists
1We have submitted a separate paper on this subject on this topic, for this reason we
will cover validation only superﬁcially in this manuscript.
We have developed lazar (shortcut for lazy structure–activity
relationships) approximately 5 years ago in order to address some
of these shortcomings and to fulﬁll the requirements of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
principles for QSAR validation . In the meantime
it has undergone several revisions and rewrites and ended up as
a completely modular framework for predictive toxicology, based
on the OpenTox framework. This paper documents the main modiﬁcations of lazar, implementation details,
new algorithms, and experiments performed since the original
lazar publications . It is
intended as a high level overview for readers without a background
in computer science or data mining. Readers interested in algorithmic details should consult the original literature cited in the
references, and the source code documentation at Github2.
The main objective of lazar is to provide a generic tool for the prediction of complex toxicological endpoints, like carcinogenicity,
long-term, and reproductive toxicity. As these endpoints involve
a huge number of complex (and probably unknown) biological
mechanisms, lazar does not intend to model all involved biological processes (as in molecular modeling or various systems biology
approaches), but follows a data driven approach.
lazar uses data mining algorithms to derive predictions for
untested compounds from experimental training data. Any dataset
with chemical structures and biological activities can be used as
training data. This makes lazar a generic prediction algorithm for
any biological endpoint with sufﬁcient experimental data.
At present, lazar does not consider chemical, biological, or
toxicological expert knowledge, but derives computational models from statistical criteria. Such an approach has the distinct
2 
www.frontiersin.org
April 2013 | Volume 4 | Article 38 | 1
Maunz et al.
lazar framework
advantagethatincomplete,wrong,orincorrectlyformulatedbackground knowledge cannot affect predictions, because they are
based on objective, traceable, and reproducible statistical criteria3.
Although lazar does not use explicit background knowledge for
predictions, it was created with an intent to support mechanisticbased risk assessment. For this purpose, rationales for predictions
are presented together with a hypothesis about possible biological mechanisms that is based on statistically signiﬁcant properties
of the underlying data4. As both, predictions and mechanisms,
3Expert knowledge, encoded in software is frequently used in predictive toxicology. Such expert systems build QSAR generalizations from individual chemicals to
chemical classes based on prior knowledge, heuristics, expert judgment, and chemical and biological mechanism considerations. A prominent example is DEREK, sold
by Lhasa Ltd. In systematic assessments of predictive power, such as the Predictive
Toxicology Evaluation, however, expert systems have been performing rather badly,
comparedtostatisticalmodels . Areasonfortheirremarkable
spread despite this crucial deﬁciency may be that their logic closely mimics the line
of argumentation of chemical experts, which may provide an intuitive familiarity
and seeming plausibility.
4This is more or less the reverse procedure as in traditional hypothesis driven experimental science, where a scientist starts with a hypothesis, designs and conducts
experiments and uses statistics to (in)validate hypothesis.
are statistically derived (not causally or mechanistically), the toxicological expert is a key part of the process. He should review
and interpret the output in order to identify, e.g., training data
errors, chance correlations, systematic problems, or ﬁndings
that contradict with current knowledge and discard results if
necessary5.
In contrast to most machine learning and QSAR methods,
which create a global prediction model from all training data,
lazar uses local QSAR models, similar to the read across procedure
(Figure 1). To obtain a prediction for a given query compound
• identiﬁes similar compounds in the training data (neighbors)
• creates a local prediction model (based on experimental activities of neighbors)
• uses the local model to predict properties of the query compound
5We plan a tighter integration of ontologies without compromising the statistical
foundation of lazar in the near future.
FIGURE 1 |The workﬂow of the lazar framework, with regard to the conﬁgurable algorithms for descriptor calculation, chemical similarity calculation,
and local QSAR models.
Frontiers in Pharmacology | Predictive Toxicity
April 2013 | Volume 4 | Article 38 | 2
Maunz et al.
lazar framework
We have shown experimentally that this procedure gives superior results compared
to global models, which is also in consensus with the commonly
accepted notion in the QSAR community that local QSAR models provide results superior to global QSAR models . For this reason, the core prediction scheme remains unaltered in lazar, but considerable ﬂexibility arises from the selection
of algorithms for
• descriptor calculation
• chemical similarity calculation
• local QSAR models
lazar is able to utilize OpenTox compatible algorithm implementations. Within the scope of the collaborative EU project
OpenTox, a uniﬁed interface for an interoperable predictive toxicology framework was deﬁned, and several applications and
services have been created. The available OpenTox implementations give us access to many chemoinformatics and data mining
algorithms implemented in open source projects like Chemistry Development Kit , OpenBabel
 , R , and WEKA . In addition we have implemented novel algorithms
for substructure mining and similarity calculations, which are
described below.
lazar ﬁlls a niche between specialized toxicity prediction tools6,
which rely mostly on pre-built models and general purpose statistical and data mining tools (like R or WEKA) which lack chemoinformatics algorithms for the predictive toxicology domain and are
frequently hart to use for non-experts. lazar streamlines the model
building and validation process and creates standalone prediction
models that can be used without prior processing of input data
(e.g., external descriptor calculation).
ALGORITHMS
Several types of algorithms ensure the ﬂexibility of the lazar system. Figure 1 shows the integration of these algorithms into the
Similarity
Although the concept of chemical similarity is very intuitive at
a ﬁrst glance, there is no global similarity property intrinsic to
chemical structures . Instead, there
are many ways to deﬁne chemical similarity, and each of them may
serve different purposes.
Structural similarity.
The similarity between structures is the
most frequently used chemical similarity concept. Although visually obvious for the trained eye of a chemist, it is far from
straightforward to deﬁne structural similarity formally. A few
methods can work with structure graphs directly, but they are too
computationally expensive for practical purposes (e.g., database
searches). Most practical methods require the decomposition of
structures into a set of distinct substructures (ﬁngerprints). While
standard chemoinformatics libraries provide methods based on
(Patlewicz
the OECD toolbox (available at 
theoecdqsartoolbox.htm).
predeﬁned ﬁngerprints , we have
developed methods that allow us to mine efﬁciently for relevant substructures (see Substructure Mining) and use them to
determine activity speciﬁc similarities. Technically, most structural
similarity indices work with either with binary (i.e., true/false)
classiﬁcations, indicating the presence of a given substructure in a
compound, or consist of substructure frequency counts.
Property similarity.
It can be argued that the biological activity
of a compound is not determined by its structure per se, but by its
physico-chemical properties. However, these are in turn determined by chemical structure. Physico-chemical properties can
be determined either experimentally, or calculated from chemical structure. Although many similarity indices from the literature
combine physico-chemical properties and substructures in a single index, we prefer to keep both concepts separated. Technically,
we have to work with numerical values instead of nominal class
Biological similarity.
The similarity of compounds can be also
determined by their biological behavior. Although it is frequently
(silently) assumed that similar structures exhibit similar biological
behavior, every pharmacology and toxicology textbook provides
examples where a small modiﬁcation of the chemical structure
causes a big difference in biological effects. It is therefore useful to
deﬁne biological similarities in addition to structural and property
similarities. Descriptors for biological similarity can originate, for
example, from high throughput assays [as in the ToxCast exercise] and may consist of quantitative assay results,
affected targets, or pathways, among others. Technically, they will
have to work with numerical values as well as binary classiﬁcations.
It is also essential that the similarity index handles missing values
gracefully.
Activity speciﬁc similarities.
The calculation of similarity
indices may require large lists of descriptors, most of them unrelated to the endpoint under investigation. In the case of structural
similarity our intention is to compare only biologically active parts
of the molecule, and ignore the inert parts. For this purpose we
have deﬁned activity speciﬁc similarities, which weight the contribution of each descriptor by its correlation with a given endpoint.
Weights are determined by simple statistical tests (e.g., Chi-square
test), and descriptors below a predeﬁned threshold are discarded.
We were able to show that prediction accuracies can be
improved signiﬁcantly 
with activity speciﬁc similarities. This procedure yields also lists
of relevant descriptors as an important byproduct, which can
be useful to indicate possible biological mechanisms, or provide
directions for designing safer compounds.
Similarity indices.
Two implementations exist, depending on
descriptor type.
• Substructures: Employs a weighted Tanimoto index to determine neighbors to the query structure and derive a prediction
from them. The Tanimoto index is essentially a set kernel . The related Tanimoto index is one of the most useful
chemical similarity indices, as shown by Willet and colleagues
www.frontiersin.org
April 2013 | Volume 4 | Article 38 | 3
Maunz et al.
lazar framework
 . It encodes presence or absence of substructures in molecules, or the number of times substructures
occur in molecules.
• Physico-chemical properties: The features are preprocessed
using a singular value decomposition (SVD). This has many
desirable effects, e.g., normalization of the feature value range,
selection of the most expressive features, and redundancy reduction. Subsequently, the distance between two compounds is
computed using cosine similarity, by measuring the angle
between the feature value vectors. In natural language processing, this approach is known as Latent Semantic Indexing
 . The algorithm uses the Golub–Reinsch SVD
algorithm .
lazar provides a conﬁdence value with every prediction, ranging
between 0 and 1, based on the mean neighbor similarity.
Descriptor calculation
Substructure mining.
Substructure mining algorithms often
produce huge sets of redundant chemical fragments with the same
biochemical relevance (e.g., substructures that differ only by a few
carbon atoms). Since experts cannot draw any conclusions from a
vast amount of very similar substructures, it has been argued that
uncompressed results would require post-processing , in order to ﬁnd
meaningful patterns. Similarly, a high-dimensional pattern space
prevents machine learning methods from obtaining meaningful
models .
Backbone Reﬁnement Class Mining and
LAST-PM are two algorithmic approaches
to mining compact sets of descriptors in the search space of
chemical structure graphs, creating compressed and elaborate representations of chemical structure. Both methods combine feature
generation and feature selection into one step.
Backbone Reﬁnement Class Mining (BBRC) creates a sparse
selection from the search space of frequent and signiﬁcant subtrees, based on structural and statistical constraints. It has very
high compression potential, which has been shown theoretically
 . Empirical results conﬁrmed the compression results in practice, while retaining good database coverage.
Moreover, it has been shown that the structural constraints
produce structurally diverse features with low co-occurrence
rates. BBRC descriptors compare favorable to other compressed
representations in the context of classiﬁcation models.
Latent Structure Pattern Mining (LAST-PM) repeatedly combines related substructures into a weighted edge graph and mines
elaborate patterns from this graph. The elaborate patterns differ in
two aspects from basic substructures. First, the process superimposes the substructures, and substructures may differ in size. This
yields different weights for the constituent nodes and edges (i.e.,
atoms and bonds). Heavy components (in terms of the weights)
are extracted from the weighted edge graph by SVD, and the ambiguities are resolved by logical “OR” operations. It also generates
ambiguities (e.g., oxygen or nitrogen at a certain position), since
substructures may be conﬂicting, i.e., node and edge labels may
differatcertainpositions. Theprocedureyieldsatightlycondensed
representation of the dataset. The resulting chemical fragments
are expressed in a chemical fragment query language (SMARTS),
FIGURE 2 | A gray fragment with atom ambiguity, inducing polarity at
the marked positions.
preserving the ambiguities. They are interpretable for chemical
As an example, in Figure 2, LAST-PM, instead of returning a
set of similar fragments to the user, aligns the structure graphs and
extracts a common motif. It is the gray fragment with two polarity
inducing positions, marked red. The fragment is not identical
in both molecules, but has an ambiguous position that abstracts
from differences not inﬂuencing the toxicological behavior (the
arrow-marked atom, which may be oxygen or nitrogen).
In classiﬁcation tasks with either nearest-neighbor or support
vector machine (SVM) models, the accuracy of (models based
on) BBRC descriptors was on par with the complete set of frequent and signiﬁcant subtrees, but signiﬁcantly better than that
of other compressed representations. LAST-PM descriptors performed even signiﬁcantly better than the complete set from which
they were derived. They also outperformed BBRC descriptors and
highly optimized physico-chemical descriptor models from the
literature in the classiﬁcation of compounds for complex biological endpoints . Both algorithms perform
substructure selection with regard to the endpoint under investigation, and calculate substructure associations to the endpoint in
the form of p-values.
Physico-chemicalproperties.
lazarutilizesopensourcechemoinformatics libraries to calculate a range of physico-chemical
descriptors. Furthermore, other existing OpenTox compliant descriptor calculation services can be queried.
Categories were formed for the available chemical descriptors
(with a selection of descriptors):
Constitutional: largest chain, aromatic bonds count, longest aliphatic
chain, rule of ﬁve, atom count, XLogP,ALOGP,aromatic atoms count,
Mannhold LogP,bond count, rotatable bonds count, largest Pi system.
Frontiers in Pharmacology | Predictive Toxicity
April 2013 | Volume 4 | Article 38 | 4
Maunz et al.
lazar framework
Electronic: APol, BPol, H-bond acceptor count, H-bond donor count,
charged partial surface area descriptors (CPSA).
Geometrical: geometrical diameter, geometrical radius, gravitational
index, length over breadth, moments of inertia.
Topological: Chi Path, fragment complexity, Kier–Hall Smarts, Kappa
Shape Indices, Petitjean Number, autocorrelation mass, VAdjMa, Chi
Path Cluster,Wiener Numbers,Autocorrelation Polarizability, carbon
types, eccentric connectivity index, Chi Chain, MDE, Petitjean shape
index, TPSA, Chi cluster, Zagreb index, autocorrelation charge.
Hybrid: Burden–CAS–University of Texas (BCUT) descriptor, weighted
holistic invariant molecular (WHIM) descriptor.
In total, lazar can be used to generate more than 300 different, numerically unconstrained descriptors. In its current
implementation, it is able to calculate all of them on its own.
Measured properties.
In addition to calculated properties lazar
can utilize experimental measurements (e.g., of physico-chemical
properties or results from high-throughput assays) to characterize compounds. This allows us to encode biological similarities
(e.g., in respect to affected targets or pathways) and to apply the
lazar framework to compounds without well deﬁned chemical
structures like nano particles.
Learning algorithms
lazar uses a weighted majority voting scheme for classiﬁcation, or
SVM formulations for both classiﬁcation and regression problems
(numerical predictions). For the latter, either the Tanimoto kernel
or the Gaussian radial basis function kernel is available. In any
case, lazar builds a dedicated model for any single prediction from
the neighbors of the associated query compound. Multicore processing is used for SVM kernel parameter and hyper parameter
optimization, which keeps runtime efﬁciently under control even
for large sets of neighbors.
Applicability domains
Applicability domain estimation is a core module of the lazar algorithm, and is closely tied to the prediction algorithm, subject to
the same validation procedures as predictions. Conceptually, the
following factors affect the applicability domain of an individual
prediction:
• Number of neighbors
• Similarities of neighbors
• Coherence of experimental data within neighbors
Consequently, a prediction based on a large number of neighbors with high similarity and concordant experimental data will be
more reliable than a prediction based on a low number of neighbors with low similarity and contradictory experimental results.
Hence, the conﬁdence of the lazar algorithm is even more comprehensive than classical applicability domain approaches that only
consider the feature value space, but not the coherence of the
endpoint values.
More formally, the conﬁdence of a prediction is deﬁned by the
mean neighbor similarity (see similarity indices for the different
cases of neighbor similarity).
IMPLEMENTATION
lazar is based on the OpenTox framework and
consists of four main layers:
Clients Command line and graphical user interfaces using the ruby
Ruby library Ruby abstraction of the OpenTox REST API.
Webservices OpenTox compliant webservices for compounds, features,
datasets, algorithms, models, validation, tasks.
Backends Special purpose backends for data storage (4store), authentication and authorization (OpenSSO), statistical computing (Rserve).
The main implementation language is Ruby. Computationally
expensive parts are written in C/C++, while statistical computing
is delegated to R. Both backends are dynamically loaded into Ruby
viadynamiclibrariesandRuby’snativelanguageinterface. Services
communicate through the OpenTox REST API using Resource
Description Framework (RDF) as the primary data exchange format. In depth discussion of implementation details can be found
on the web at 
AVAILABILITY
A web interface for lazar is freely accessible from Public OpenTox compliant REST webservices exist at the
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Source code has been published at Github7 under the GPL3
license. Ruby Gems for client and server libraries, webservices,
and applications are hosted at Pre-installed
and conﬁgured virtual appliances with commercial support can
be obtained from in silico toxicology gmbh.
EXPERIMENTS
During lazar development we have performed a large number
of validation experiments to investigate various variants of the
overall algorithm. As it is beyond the scope of a single paper to
present all of them even in condensed form, we focus here on
a few results which could be interesting for a larger community
and justify the selection of lazar algorithms. For further reference,
very detailed and up-to-date validation reports for all lazar models
can be obtained from the lazar website at 
For the purpose, of this overview we have selected two example
datasets, one for classiﬁcation and one for regression (numerical
predictions). Experiments include 10-fold cross-validation, and
the creation of a validation report.
CLASSIFICATION
For substructure-based models, we have shown that substantial
improvements may be achieved by weighting each descriptor with
its association to the endpoint . For
example, in the case of the fathead minnow acute toxicity dataset,
the p-values were employed as weights in a kernel-based approach.
The effects were twofold:
• A substantially higher fraction of molecules could be predicted,
compared to the same setting without weighting.
• The predictive performance increased.
7 
www.frontiersin.org
April 2013 | Volume 4 | Article 38 | 5
Maunz et al.
lazar framework
This indicates the utility of p-values to identify relevant descriptors, in that they are able to extract some relevant descriptors, and
“mute” a large fraction of irrelevant descriptors, that would otherwise outweigh the former, simply because there are so many of
them. We refer the reader to our earlier work for details. In the present implementation of lazar, p-value
weighting is implemented by using a cutoff in the substructure
mining step (see Substructure Mining).
The lazar algorithm with BBRC descriptors was applied to the
Kazius/Bursi mutagenicity dataset using a 10fold cross-validation. For each training fold, substructures were
mined and a lazar model was built and subsequently applied to
the corresponding test fold. Any instance was represented in bit
vector form (ﬁngerprints), where each index represents presence
or absence of the corresponding descriptor. Weighted majority
voting was used for prediction. The validation results are shown
in Tables 1 and 2. Note that the given statistics neglect prediction
conﬁdences – higher accuracies can be achieved by setting a cutoff
for acceptable conﬁdences, albeit at the cost of obtaining fewer
predictions.
Figure 3 plots total accuracy (left) and the class speciﬁc
accuracies (right).
REGRESSION
The fathead minnow acute toxicity dataset 
was modeled using physico-chemical descriptors. As the computation of these descriptors is independent of the endpoint variable
(unsupervised), the features can be computed prior to crossvalidation. In contrast, supervised feature computation (like e.g.,
discriminative graph mining) has to be applied to each training
fold to avoid information leakage. Any instance was represented
in numeric vector form, where each index represented the corresponding descriptor value. Support vector regression was used,
Table 1 | Validation statistics for the Kazius/Bursi dataset.
Num instances
Num unpredicted
Area under roc
True positive rate
True negative rate
Positive predictive value
Negative predictive value
Table 2 | Confusion table for the Kazius/Bursi dataset.
where for each prediction a dedicated SVM model was built on
the neighbors. The parameters of the radial basis function kernel
have been optimized using a grid-search with different parameter
values. In more detail, the SVM was trained on a 8 x 8 grid for the
cost parameter C and hyper parameter μ.
Table 3 provides common regression performance statistics,
Figure 4 plots actual against predicted values (left) and R-squared
against conﬁdence (right).
FIGURE 3 | Kazius/Bursi Salmonella mutagenicity dataset: total
accuracy (left) and the class speciﬁc accuracies (right). The left
plot shows that model accuracy decreases with decreasing conﬁdence
(variability at the left hand side of the plot can be ignored, because
they are artifacts from small sample sizes). Note that prediction
conﬁdences are not probabilities or any statistical measure of model
performance. These values can be obtained from plots in the validation
reports, by identifying the conﬁdence value on the x-axis and looking
up the corresponding value (e.g., accuracy or R-Square) on the
Frontiers in Pharmacology | Predictive Toxicity
April 2013 | Volume 4 | Article 38 | 6
Maunz et al.
lazar framework
Table 3 | Validation statistics for the fathead minnow dataset.
Num instances
Num unpredicted
Root mean squared error
Mean absolute error
Sample correlation coefﬁcient
Concordance correlation coefﬁcient
Figures 3 and 4 are excerpts of detailed validation reports from
 that include the following information:
• Cross-validation statistics
• Confusion matrix (classiﬁcation only)
• Plots: pairs of conﬁdence vs. cross-validation statistics, ROC
(classiﬁcation), Scatterplot (Regression)
• Cross-validation statistics per fold
• All single predictions from all folds: 2D-structure image of
compound, actual value, predicted value, conﬁdence
DISCUSSION
It is beyond the scope of this manuscript to present detailed validation results of all currently implemented lazar models. Detailed
and up-to-date validation reports can be retrieved from the
lazar website and new regression models
will be discussed in greater detail in a forthcoming publication.
Instead, we will present a brief comparison of the lazar models from the Section “Experiments,” compare results from the
literature, and discuss the consequences of the modular lazar
MODEL PERFORMANCE
Comparisons with competing models from the literature are
always difﬁcult, because of different training sets, validation
schemes, and performance estimates. To enable unbiased comparisons, we provide detailed validation reports, including not
onlyallcommonlyusedstatisticalperformanceindicatorstogether
with graphs, but also results for all training/test set splits, as well
as tables of all validation instances with predicted and measured
values, and applicability domain estimates8.
For the Kazius/Bursi mutagenicity data set, lazar made predictions for 4057 of the total 4068 compounds, only 11 compounds
were outside of the applicability domain. Its AUC value of 0.83
ranks with the generic machine learning methods in the comparative study by Hansen et al. , with AUC values between 0.79
and 0.86. It shows that these methods are clearly superior to the
commercial systems DEREK and MultiCASE on this dataset. However, the authors point out the need for speciﬁc absorption rate
(SAR) information, i.e.,“interpretable structural information” on
mutagenicity prediction, which generic machine learning methods do not provide. It should be pointed out that lazar provides
both, predictive performance and detailed SAR information with
every single prediction, among others all the substructures (here:
BBRC descriptors) that were used to represent query compound
and neighbors, as well as the neighbors themselves.
For fathead minnow acute toxicity, lazar predicted 535 of the
total 611 compounds, which is comparable to the 555 in the study
by In et al. . In contrast to their approach, however, lazar
determined the domain of applicability domain autonomously.
Moreover, the lazar R-squared values, obtained by pooling the
results from 10-fold cross-validation, are also substantially higher
than their values (ranging between 0.553 and 0.632). They were
obtained by a single train/test split, which can be considered less
8 
FIGURE 4 | Fathead minnow acute toxicity dataset: actual against predicted values (left) and R-squared against conﬁdence (right). The left plot shows
the correlation of model prediction and actual values. The plot on the right shows that the model performance decreases with decreasing conﬁdence (see
description of Figure 3).
www.frontiersin.org
April 2013 | Volume 4 | Article 38 | 7
Maunz et al.
lazar framework
reliable. The R-squared values are also higher than the values in
the overview for which they gathered results from the literature.
APPLICABILITY DOMAINS
In contrast to generic machine learning methods, applicability
domains are tightly integrated with the lazar framework, in that
any prediction is associated with a conﬁdence value. Cumulative
plots of conﬁdence and accuracy for the experiments discussed
above are depicted in Figures 3 and 4. These ﬁgures document
that the conﬁdence value provides meaningful information, as the
model accuracy decreases with decreasing conﬁdence.
MECHANISTIC INTERPRETATION
lazar intends to present the rationales for each prediction in a form
that is understandable for toxicological experts without a background in machine learning and statistics. For this purpose, the
following information is displayed graphically in the web interface
(Figure 5):
• Neighbors that have been used for creating the local QSAR
model, together with a graphical display of their structures,
activity speciﬁc similarities, and experimental measurements
• Activating and deactivating fragments are highlighted in the
query compound
• Deﬁnitions for domain speciﬁc terms can be obtained by
following links in the web interface
By providing such detailed information we want to ensure that
predictions are critically examined by toxicologists. Information
about possible mechanisms can be obtained from neighbors
(which are assumed to act by similar mechanisms as the query
compound) and by the structural alerts used to determine activity
speciﬁc similarities. In the present version of the web interface
this information has to be retrieved manually, but we plan to add
further visualization and search components (e.g., for obtaining
and comparing pathway information of neighbors) in the future.
LIMITATIONS
It is important to remember that lazar predictions are based on
statistical criteria alone, without any explicit consideration of
chemical or biological knowledge. This implies that lazar capabilities depend – like any other data driven approach – on size,
composition, and quality of the training data. Large and reliable datasets with a good coverage of the chemical space will lead
to more accurate predictions and a broader applicability domain
than models based on small and unreliable datasets. Coherent
endpoint values of similar compounds in the training dataset also
increase the applicability domain of our approach. The quality of
an individual prediction will depend also on the proximity of the
query compound to the training data, which is represented by the
conﬁdence index.
One particular problem can arise when the query structure
contains biologically active substructures that are not represented
in sufﬁcient number in the training set. In this case they cannot be evaluated statistically and will be classiﬁed as “inert” by
the similarity calculation algorithm, which may lead to incorrect
predictions. As it is impossible to compute such constraints
FIGURE 5 | lazar prediction example for Salmonella mutagenicity (Kazius/Bursi datset).
Frontiers in Pharmacology | Predictive Toxicity
April 2013 | Volume 4 | Article 38 | 8
Maunz et al.
lazar framework
automatically, a toxicological interpretation of lazar results is
essential. For example, if a toxicologist discovers that a conﬁrmed
biologically active substructure is not present in the model, or that
neighbors act by different mechanisms, it is better to discard the
prediction than to trust it blindly.
MODULAR DESIGN AND INTERACTION WITH THE SEMANTIC WEB
The modular structure of the lazar framework and its integration
with the semantic web enables possibilities that go far beyond
the currently implemented lazar prediction models. With the
integration in the OpenTox framework, a researcher can freely
combine algorithms for
• descriptor calculation (or use measured properties, e.g., from
high throughput screening)
• descriptor selection
• similarity calculation
• model building
and validate the resulting model objectively with the OpenTox validation service. We are currently working on the development of
nanoQSAR models that incorporate the behavior of engineered
nanoparticles, as well as on predicting affected pathways within
the lazar framework.
Currently,
all major open source chemoinformatics and
machine learning algorithms are supported by wrappers for Open-
Babel, CDK, JoeLib, Weka, and R libraries, and the integration
of newly developed algorithms is straightforward through Open-
Tox algorithm web services. The OpenTox API also allows the
easy integration of lazar models into third party applications
and frameworks like Bioclipse, Taverna, or Knime. lazar can
also interact with external data sources and ontologies through the Open-
Tox API and data model. The integration of ontologies offers
interesting possibilities that go far beyond simple QSAR model
building, for example for the identiﬁcation of adverse outcome
pathways , supporting a more mechanistically
oriented risk assessment procedure.
CONCLUSION
lazar is a ﬂexible modular framework for developing predictive
toxicology models with a strong focus on the transparency and
interpretability of predictions. Currently implemented lazar models perform competitively with the best results reported in the
literature.
While the ﬁrst principle (a deﬁned endpoint) of the OECD
principles for QSAR validation cannotbesupported
directly by a computational framework, lazar clearly complies with
the remaining principles (an unambiguous algorithm, a deﬁned
domain of applicability, appropriate measures of goodness-of-ﬁt,
robustness and predictivity, a mechanistic interpretation, if possible).
For future developments, lazar provides well established and
tested algorithms, semantic web aware web services, and language
bindings, which can serve as building blocks for new algorithms
and applications. We hope that these facilities will speed up
the development cycle of future predictive toxicology applications, and will ultimately lead to improved and more relevant
applications in this area.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Financial support for the lazar version presented in this document was provided by the EU FP7 Projects OpenTox (Project
Reference: 200787), ToxBank (Project Reference: 267042), and
ModNanoTox (Project Reference: 266712), by the German Federal Ministry for Research project “Entwicklung einer Strategie
zurBildungvonKategorienundDeﬁnitionenneuerKategorienfür
die Endpunkte Subakute, Subchronische und Chronische Toxizität
zur Minimierung von Tierver-suchen unter REACH,Teilprojekt 2”
(No. 0315546B), and by Nestle AG.