InnoDB Database Forensics:
Reconstructing Data Manipulation Queries from Redo Logs
Peter Fr¨uhwirt, Peter Kieseberg, Sebastian Schrittwieser, Markus Huber, and Edgar Weippl
SBA-Research
Vienna, Austria
Email: pfruehwirt,pkieseberg,sschrittwieser,mhuber, 
Abstract—InnoDB is a powerful open-source storage engine
for MySQL that gained much popularity during the recent
years. This paper proposes methods for forensic analysis of
InnoDB databases by analyzing the redo logs, primarily used
for crash recovery within the storage engine. This new method
can be very useful in forensic investigations where the attacker
got admin privileges, or was the admin himself. While such a
powerful attacker could cover tracks by manipulating the log
ﬁles intended for fraud detection, data cannot be changed easily
in the redo logs. Based on a prototype implementation, we show
methods for recovering Insert, Delete and Update statements
issued against a database.
Keywords-InnoDB, digital forensics, databases, log ﬁles;
I. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
When executing a SQL statement, the InnoDB storage
engine keeps parts of the statements in several storage
locations . Thus, forensic analysis engaging with these
locations can reveal recent activities, can help creating
a (partial) timeline of past events and recover deleted
or modiﬁed data . While this fact is well known in
computer forensics research and several forensic tools 
as well as approaches , , , exist to analyze
data, the systematic analysis of database systems has only
recently begun , , , . Still, to this day,
none of these approaches incorporate the data stored in
InnoDB’s redo logs, which not only constitute a rich vault
of information regarding transactions, but even allow the
reconstruction of previous states of the database.
engine for MySQL databases. It is transaction-safe and
crash-recovery
 . Transaction-safe means that every change of data
implemented
mini-transaction
which is logged for redo purposes. Therefore, every data
manipulation leads to at least one call of the function
mtr_commit(), which writes the log records to the
InnoDB redo log. Since MySQL version 5.1, InnoDB
compresses the written data with a special algorithm 2.
 
2See Appendix A for a description of the algorithm
In our research, we disassembled the redo log ﬁles, which
are used internally for crash-recovery, in order to identify
and recover transactions for digital forensic purposes.
In Section II we describe the general structure of the log
ﬁles that are used in the course of our analysis, in Section III
we detail our approach for identifying recent operations, as
well as using the redo information for recovering overwritten
data. Section IV gives a detailed demonstration on the
capabilities of our forensic method by analyzing example
log entries. In Section V we conclude our work and give
an outlook to future plans regarding the development of
additional methods for recovering more complex statement
II. LOG FILE STRUCTURE
A. General Structure
ib_logfile0 and ib_logfile1 with the default size
of ﬁve megabytes each if MySQL is launched with the
innodb_file_ per_table option activated . Both
ﬁles have the same structure and InnoDB rotates between
them and eventually overwrites old data. Similar to the data
ﬁles , the log ﬁles are separated into several fragments
(see Figure 1):
1) One Header block containing general information on
the log ﬁle.
2) Two Checkpoints securing the log ﬁles against corruption.
3) Several Log Blocks containing the actual log data.
The header block combined with the two checkpoints and
padding is often referred to as ﬁle header and is exactly
2048 bytes long. Each log block contains a header, a trailer
and several log block entries. Since each log block is exactly
512 bytes long, log block entries can be split and stored in
two log blocks (see the description of the log block header
for further information).
B. Header Block
The ﬁrst part of the log ﬁle consists of the header block,
which contains general information about the ﬁle. This block
has a ﬁxed length of 48 bytes and starts at offset 0x00, i.e.
Structure of the log ﬁles
at the beginning of the ﬁle header. Table I gives an overview
on the contents of the header block.
Interpretation
Group Number of the log ﬁle
First log sequence number (lsn) of this log ﬁle
Archived log ﬁle number
This ﬁeld is used by InnoDB Hot Backup. It contains the ibbackup and the creation time in which
the backup was created. It is used for displaying
information to the user when mysqld is started for
the ﬁrst time on a restored database.
INTERPRETATION OF THE HEADER BLOCK
C. Checkpoints
InnoDB uses a checkpoint system in the log ﬁles. It
ﬂushes changes and modiﬁcations of database pages from
the doublewrite-buffer , , into small batches,
because processing everything in one single batch would
hinder the processing of SQL statements issued by users
during the checkpoint process.
Crash Recovery: The system of checkpoints is vitally
important for crash recovery: The two checkpoints in each
log ﬁle are written on a rotating basis. Because of this
method there always exists at least one valid checkpoint
in the case of recovery. During crash recovery , 
InnoDB loads the two checkpoints and compares their
contents. Each checkpoint contains an eight byte long log
sequence number (lsn). The lsn guarantees that the data
pages contain all previous changes to the database (i.e.
all entries with a smaller lsn). Therefore, each change
that is not written to the disk has to be stored in the
logs for crash recovery or rollbacks. InnoDB is forced to
create the checkpoints in order to ﬂush data to the disk .
Location in the log ﬁles: The two checkpoints are
located in the log ﬁles ib_logfile0 and ib_logfile1
at addresses 0x200 and 0x400 respectively. Every checkpoint
has the same structure with a ﬁxed length of 304 bytes.
A detailed explanation of the checkpoint structure can
be found in Table II. When ﬂushing the log data to the
disk, the current checkpoint information is written to
the currently unﬁnished log block header by the method
log_group_checkpoint() .
Interpretation
Log checkpoint number
Log sequence number of checkpoint
calculated
log_group_calc_lsn_offset() 
Size of the buffer (a ﬁxed value: 2 · 1024 · 1024)
UNIV_LOG_ARCHIVE is not activated, InnoDB
inserts FF FF FF FF FF FF FF FF here.
Spacing and padding
Checksum 1 (validating the contents from offset
0x00 to 0x19F)
Checksum 2 (validating the block without the log
sequence number, but including checksum 1, i.e.
values from 0x08 to0x124)
Current fsp free limit in tablespace 0, given in units
of one megabyte; used by ibbackup to decide if
unused ends of non-auto-extending data ﬁles in space
0 can be truncated 
Magic number that tells if the checkpoint contains
the ﬁeld above (added to InnoDB version 3.23.50
INTERPRETATION OF THE CHECKPOINTS
D. Structure of the Log Blocks
The log ﬁle entries are stored in the log blocks (the log
ﬁles are not organized in pages but in blocks). Every block
allocates 512 byte of data, thus matching the standard
disk sector size at the time of the implementation of
InnoDB . Each block is separated into three parts:
The log block header, data and the log block footer. This
structure is used by InnoDB in order to provide better
performance and to allows fast navigation in the logs.
In the following subchapters, we discuss the structures
of header and trailer records, in Section III we demonstrate
how to reconstruct previous queries from the actual content
of the log blocks.
1) Log Block Header: The ﬁrst 14 bytes of each block
are called the log block header. This header contains all the
information needed by the InnoDB Storage Engine in order
to manage and read the log data. After every 512 bytes
InnoDB automatically creates a new header, thus generating
a new log block. Since the log ﬁle header containing the
header block, the checkpoints and additional padding is
exactly 2048 bytes long, the absolute address of the ﬁrst
log block header in a log ﬁle is 0x800.
Interpretation
Log block header number. If the most signiﬁcant bit
is 1, the following block is the ﬁrst block in a log
ﬂush write segment. .
Number of bytes written to this block.
Offset to the ﬁrst start of a log record group of this
block (see II-D3 for further details).
Number of the currently active checkpoint (see II-C).
INTERPRETATION OF THE LOG BLOCK HEADER
As described in Section II-C, the currently active log
block always holds a reference to the currently active
checkpoint. This information is updated every time log
contents is ﬂushed to the disk.
2) Log Block Trailer: The log block trailer only contains
a checksum for veriﬁcation of the validity of the log block.
Interpretation
not contain the checksum but the same value as
LOG_BLOCK_HDR_NO .
INTERPRETATION OF THE LOG BLOCK TRAILER
3) Splitting log entries over log blocks: In case a log
entry is too big to ﬁt into the remaining space left in the
currently active 512-byte log block, it is split over two log
blocks. To this end, the currently active block is ﬁlled up
until the last four bytes that are needed for the log block
trailer. A new log block is then generated, holding a log
block header and the remaining contents of the split log
entry. The offset at position 0x04 and 0x05 in the log block
header is used to specify the beginning of the next log entry,
i.e. the byte after the end of the split entry (see Table 2).
This is needed in order to identify the beginning of the next
entry without having to refer to the log block before, thus
enhancing navigation in the log ﬁle drastically.
III. QUERY RECONSTRUCTION
In this section we demonstrate how to reconstruct
executed queries on the basis of information derived from
the log ﬁles described in the last chapter. As several parts
of the data are stored in a compressed form (see Appendix
A), it is not always possible to give an exact length
deﬁnition for each ﬁeld, since the length of these ﬁelds
is determined by the decompression routine. These values
are marked with a circle symbol (◦) in the ﬁeld “length”.
Length deﬁnitions containing an asterisk are deﬁned by
other ﬁelds in the log entry, whereas the number before the
asterisk refers to the ﬁeld where the length was deﬁned.
Splitting a log entry over two log blocks
In this paper, we focus on the analysis of InnoDB’s new
compact ﬁle format, which is recognized by the preﬁx
mlog comp in the log types. Older versions of InnoDB logs
need much more space and are not in the scope of this paper.
In our analysis, we focus on three different basic
statements, Insert, Delete and Update, since they form the
majority of all log entries. Furthermore they are of main
interest in most cases of forensic analysis.
Descriptions of the log entries: Since the lengths,
amounts and the positions of the relevant ﬁelds inside the
log entries are highly variable, we refrain from giving any
offsets for the data ﬁelds in question. In order to provide
a certain amount of clarity, the ﬁelds are numbered in
ascending order and ﬁelds being of the same type (e.g. a
variable number of ﬁelds containing length deﬁnitions) are
given the same value.
A. Statement Identiﬁcation
All log entries can be identiﬁed by their log entry type
which is provided by the ﬁrst byte of each entry. A complete
list of all existing log entry types can be found in the source
code 3. However, for our forensic analysis, all information
needed can be harvested from only a few, distinctive log
entries (see Table IX).
Description
mlog undo insert
Identiﬁes data manipulation statements.
mlog comp rec insert
Insertion of a new record.
DISTINCTIVE LOG ENTRIES
For every data manipulation statement, InnoDB creates at
least one new log entry of the type mlog_undo_insert.
3innobase/include/mtr0mtr.h
This log type stores the identiﬁcation number of the affected
table, an identiﬁer for the statement type (Insert, Update,
Delete . . .), as well as additional information that is largely
depending on the speciﬁc statements type.
Interpretation
Log entry type (always 0x14).
Tablespace id.
Length of the log entry.
Data manipulation type.
Rest of the log entry, depending on the data
manipulation type.
GENERAL STRUCTURE OF A MLOG UNDO INSERT LOG ENTRY
The most important ﬁeld for the identiﬁcation of the
statement is the ﬁeld holding the data manipulation type. In
our analysis, we focus on the values for this key parameter
shown in Table VII.
Data manipulation type
Description
Insert statement.
Update statement.
Mark for Delete.
ANALYZED VALUES FOR THE DATA MANIPULATION TYPE
The form of each mlog_undo_insert log entry is
very much depending on the content of the actual statement
it represents. Therefore, there is no general structure for
the log entries, but every type of entry is represented
differently, to allow an economical form of storing the log
entries without any padding. In the case of Update and
Delete statements, the remaining log_undo_insert log
entry speciﬁes the statement completely, whereas in the
case of Inserts, the mlog_comp_rec_insert log entry
following the log_undo_insert log entry provides
information on parameters of the statement.
B. Reconstructing Insert Statements
In the case of Update or Delete statements, most of the
information needed is stored in this mlog_undo_insert
log entry, which is not valid in the case of Insert statements.
In the course of inserting a new record into a table, InnoDB
creates nine log entries in the log ﬁles (see Table VIII for
an ordered list).
this paper,
mlog_comp_rec_insert-log entry (log entry code
0x26) contains a variety of detailed information that can
be used to reconstruct the logged Insert statement (the
Log entry type
Log entry type
multi rec end
undo hdr reuse
undo insert
comp rec insert
Table VIII
ALL LOG ENTRIES FOR AN INSERT STATEMENT
identiﬁcation of the Insert statement was done by checking
the data manipulation type in the mlog_undo_insert
entry right before).
Table IX gives a detailed description of the ﬁelds found
inside the mlog_comp_rec_insert log entry for Insert
statements.
Interpretation
Log entry type (ﬁxed value: 0x26)
Tablespace ID
Number of ﬁelds in this entry (n)
Number of unique ﬁelds (nunique)
Length of the 1st unique ﬁeld (primaryKey).
Length entries for unique ﬁelds.
Length of the last unique ﬁeld.
Length of the transaction ID )
Length of the data rollback pointer
Length of the 1st non-unique column.
deﬁnitions
non-unique
Length of the last non-unique column.
Length of the end segment.
Info and status bits.
Origin offset.
Mismatch index.
Length of the 1st dynamic ﬁeld like varchar.
Length entries for dynamic ﬁelds.
Length of the last dynamic ﬁeld.
Data for the ﬁrst unique column.
Data for unique columns.
Data for the last unique column.
Transaction ID
Data rollback pointer
Data for the last non-unique column.
Data for non-unique columns.
Data for the ﬁrst non-unique column.
MLOG COMP REC INSERT LOG ENTRY FOR INSERT STATEMENTS
comp_rec_insert is quite complex. After the ﬁrst
general log entry data ﬁelds (log entry type, tablespace ID
and page ID), which also deﬁne the database table used,
two data entries holding information on the columns of
the underlying table are provided: n and nunique. n deﬁnes
the number of data ﬁelds that can be expected in this
log record, whereas nunique speciﬁes the number of data
ﬁelds holding primary keys. The number n of data ﬁelds
is not equal to the number of columns in the table, since
deﬁnitions for system internal ﬁelds like the transaction
ID and the data rollback pointer are stored in data ﬁelds too.
Following the deﬁnition of nunique, the next 2·nunique bytes
are reserved for the deﬁnition of the lengths of these unique
columns, two bytes for each column. Furthermore, the
lengths of data ﬁelds holding the transaction ID and the data
rollback pointer are deﬁned. The following 2 · (n −nunique)
bytes hold the length deﬁnitions for the columns that do not
contain primary keys. It must be taken into account that the
length deﬁnitions given in the section refer to the lengths
deﬁned by the table deﬁnition, not the actual length of the
inserted data. In case of static data types like int, the actual
length is always the deﬁned length, however in the case of
dynamic data types like varchar (containing data of variable
length), the above mentioned length deﬁnitions only hold
the ﬁxed value 0x8000. The actual length of the data to be
inserted is deﬁned later in the log entry. Figure 3 shows
the context between the length deﬁnitions and the data ﬁelds.
The following bytes contain various information about
the record which is not needed for the reconstruction of the
Insert statement.
The following ﬁelds hold the length information of
all columns containing dynamic data types (the length
deﬁnitions of these columns are ﬁlled with the ﬁxed value
0x8000 as mentioned before), each one byte long and in
compressed form (see Figure 3). The next ﬁve bytes are
additional bytes and ﬂags, which are not needed for our
forensic approach.
Finally, the content of the inserted record is deﬁned
column by column: The ﬁrst nunique ﬁelds hold the data of
the primary key columns (lengths of the ﬁelds are deﬁned
before in the record), followed by one ﬁeld holding the
transaction ID and one ﬁeld holding the data rollback
pointer. These are followed by the n −nunique −2 ﬁelds
holding the non-primary key columns, lengths again with
respect to the deﬁnitions given before at the start of the
record. Still, for the correct interpretation of the data ﬁelds
(especially the data type), knowledge on the underlying
table deﬁnition is needed, which can be derived from an
analysis of the .frm ﬁles .
In case of Update statements, two log entries are
needed for the reconstruction: The mlog_undo_insert
log entry (which in case of Insert statements is only
used for determining the statements type) is needed for
Context between the data ﬁelds in a mlog comp rec insert log
recovering the data that was overwritten, the following
mlog_comp_rec_insert
reconstructing the data that was inserted in the course of
the Update. In this demonstration we focus on Update
statements which do not change the value of a primary key,
since these would result in more log entries and changes in
the overall index structure.
1) Reconstruction of the overwritten data: As InnoDB
internally stores overwritten data for recovery and rollbacks,
we focus on the mlog_undo_insert log entry for our
forensic purposes.
Interpretation
Log entry type (ﬁxed value: 0x94).
Tablespace ID
Length of the log entry
Data manipulation type (0x1C = update existing
Last transaction ID on updated ﬁeld
Last data rollback pointer
Length of the primary key
Affected primary key
Number of changed ﬁelds
Field id of ﬁrst changed ﬁeld
Length of ﬁrst changed ﬁeld
Overwritten data value of ﬁrst changed ﬁeld
MLOG UNDO INSERT LOG ENTRY FOR UPDATE STATEMENTS
For an interpretation of the ﬁrst ﬁve ﬁelds, please refer
to section III-A.
The next two bytes hold a table identiﬁer. This identiﬁer
can also be found in the table deﬁnition (it is stored
in the .frm ﬁles at address 0x26). In combination with
this information it is possible to derive the name of the table.
The next six bytes hold the transaction identiﬁcation
number and the following compressed ﬁeld holds the
data rollback pointer of the data ﬁeld. The transaction ID
identiﬁes the last executed transaction before the Update.
By using these references it is possible to reconstruct the
complete history holding all changes of a data set, even
spanning multiple Updates of the same records while
maintaining the correct order.
The following ﬁelds hold information on the updated
primary ﬁelds involved. For each primary key, there is a
ﬁeld holding the length of the new value (one byte) and
one containing the updated value itself. This is repeated
for every primary key of the underlying table, thus it is
important to know the number of primary keys for the
forensic analysis. The next byte deﬁnes the number of
non-primary columns affected by the Update, therefore the
following three ﬁelds exist for each updated non-primary
column: The id of the changed ﬁeld, length information on
the updated value and the new value for the ﬁeld.
2) Reconstruction of the executed query: InnoDB creates
a mlog comp rec insert log entry containing information
on the newly inserted data after the mlog undo insert entry,
i.e. the updating with new data is logged similar to an
statement.
mlog comp rec insert
entry described in Section III-B, thus the only way to
distinguish Update statements from Inserts lies in the
evaluation of the mlog undo insert entry preceding the
mlog comp rec insert entry.
The reconstruction of Delete statements is similar to
reconstructing Update queries. Basically, two forms of
Delete operations have to be discerned: Physical deletion of
a data row and execution of queries, which mark a record as
deleted. In the current analysis we only consider the second
form, since physical deletion can happen at an arbitrary time.
Log records of statements which mark records as
deleted are very short, they usually only generate four log
entries. For forensic reconstruction, only the data in the
mlog undo insert log entry is needed. Table XI shows
the log entry for an executed Delete statement which
is rather similar to the one generated in the course of
an Update statement without information on the values
of the deleted record, except the primary keys involved.
Still, these can be identiﬁed by using ﬁeld number 7, the
last transaction id on the deleted record. For an detailed
interpretation of the log record, please refer to Section III-C.
As a precondition for a correct analysis the number of
primary keys of the table needs to be known. Otherwise it
is not possible to calculate the number of affected primary
key ﬁelds (ﬁelds 9 and 10). Note that this log record only
gives information on the primary key of the record marked
Interpretation
Log entry type (ﬁxed value: 0x94).
Tablespace ID
Length of the log entry
Data manipulation type (0x0E = delete record)
Last transaction ID on deleted record
Last data rollback pointer
Length of the primary key
Affected primary key
Length of primaryKey ﬁeld
PrimaryKey of deleted ﬁeld
MLOG UNDO INSERT LOG ENTRY FOR DELETE STATEMENTS
as deleted.
IV. DEMONSTRATION
In this section we demonstrate the techniques outlined in
Section III by analyzing real-life log entries derived from a
demonstration database.
A. Demonstration database
All examples in this Section are presented with respect
to the following table model (listing in Table 1).
Listing 1.
Used table structure
CREATE TABLE ‘ f r u i t s ‘
‘ primaryKey ‘
i n t (10) NOT NULL,
‘ f i e l d 1 ‘
varchar (255) NOT NULL,
‘ f i e l d 2 ‘
varchar (255) NOT NULL,
‘ f i e l d 3 ‘
varchar (255) NOT NULL,
PRIMARY KEY ( ‘ primaryKey ‘ )
) ENGINE=InnoDB DEFAULT CHARSET= u t f 8 ;
varchar) in order to demonstrate the procedure of
reconstruction. InnoDB stores values of an integer ﬁeld
with a ﬁxed length of 4 bytes. The other ﬁelds of the
type varchar have variable lengths, most other data
types can be reconstructed in the same way except for the
interpretation of their content. For our forensic analysis,
knowledge on the exact table structure is required, which
can be reconstructed from the table description ﬁle (.frm
B. Reconstructing Inserts
In our example we use the excerpt shown in Table XII
containing a comp_rec_insert log entry. In order to
improve the clarity of our example, the blocks inside the
log entry are distinguished by colors.
EXAMPLE FOR A COMP REC INSERT LOG ENTRY
The ﬁrst entry (containing the value 0x26) marks the
entry as comp_rec_insert log entry. The two bytes
at offset 0x03 and 0x04 denote the number of data ﬁelds
in this Insert statement (0x0006, i.e. 6 data ﬁelds), the
two bytes at offset 0x05 and 0x06 the number of unique
columns (0x0001, i.e. one unique column). Since two of the
data ﬁelds are reserved for transaction ID and data rollback
pointer, we can derive that four columns were inserted,
with one being a column containing unique values. The
length of the unique column is given in the two bytes at
offset 0x07 and 0x08 (encoded as signed integers, thus
0x8004 represents 4) followed by the length deﬁnitions for
the transaction ID and data rollback pointer (0x8006 and
0x8007 respectively). The length deﬁnitions for the three
remaining data columns are set to the key value 0x8000,
thus denoting columns of dynamic length — the values
of the actual data inserted can be found at offsets 0x19,
0x1A and 0x1B respectively (containing the values 0x04,
0x05 and 0xA). Using the length deﬁnitions, the rest of
the log entry can be split into the data inserted into the
table: An unique column containing the value 0x80000004,
transaction
0x00000000332128)
and a data rollback pointer (value 0x00000000332128),
followed by the data in the non-unique columns number
3 (value 0x73747261776265727279), number 2 (value
0x6170706265) and number 1 (value 0x6B697769).
Together with knowledge on the table model extracted
from the corresponding .frm ﬁles, we can derive the correct
interpretation of the data ﬁelds: The primary key ﬁeld holds
an integer (4), the non-unique columns one to three ASCIIencoded strings (”kiwi”, ”apple” and ”strawberry”). Thus, it
is possible to reconstruct the Insert statement (see Listing
Listing 2.
Reconstructed Insert Statement
INSERT INTO f r u i t s
( primaryKey ,
f i e l d 1 ,
f i e l d 2 ,
f i e l d 3 )
VALUES (4 ,
’ s t r a w b e r r y ’ , ’ apple ’ , ’ kiwi ’ ) ;
C. Reconstructing updated data
In this demonstration, we reconstruct data that was overwritten by an Update statement. Since, from the logging
Table XIII
EXAMPLE OF A MLOG UNDO INSERT LOG ENTRY FOR AN UPDATE
EXAMPLE OF A MLOG UNDO INSERT LOG ENTRY FOR A DELETE
point of view, an Update can be considered as overwriting
a data ﬁeld together with an additional Insert statement,
we only demonstrate recovering the overwritten data, a
demonstration on recovery of the inserted data can be found
in Section IV-B.
In our example we use the record shown in Table XIII.
After interpreting the header identifying this log entry
as an Update, the table ID (0x0068) (which is the Table
“fruits” according to the .frm ﬁle), the last transaction id
on the updated ﬁeld (0x000000004001) and the last data
rollback pointer (0x0000332128) can be retrieved. The
byte at address 0x13 identiﬁes the length of the value for
the primary key ﬁeld (0x80000004), which is the signed
integer representation of 4, i.e. the primary key ﬁeld with
value 4 was updated. Furthermore, we conclude that one
(address 0x00018) data ﬁeld, the fourth (address 0x00019),
got changed and that the old value was 0x6170706C65, i.e.
D. Reconstructing Deletes
This example refers to the excerpt shown in Table XIV
containing a mlog_undo_insert log entry. Again, the
blocks inside the log entry are distinguished using colors.
Together with knowledge on the table structure, we
can reconstruct the query (see Listing 3): The row where
the primary key with id one (addresses 0x18-0x0x1B)
containing the original value 0x80000001 (addresses 0x20-
0x23) was deleted.
Listing 3.
Reconstructed Delete statement
DELETE FROM f r u i t s
WHERE primaryKey =1;
E. Prototype implementation
We validated our approach described in this paper with
a prototype implementation written in Java. Our tool ﬁrst
analyzes the structure of an InnoDB table based on the
its format stored in the table deﬁnition ﬁle (.frm). As
described in the paper, the table’s structure is ultimately
required for further analysis of the redo log ﬁles as it is used
for calculating offsets in the log ﬁles, which are parsed in
the second analysis step performed by our tool. We assume
a static table structure, thus, Alter table statements are
not supported in the current version of the tool. The result
of the analysis is a history of Insert, Delete and Update
statements. Additional types of SQL statements can be added
easily because of the modular architecture of the tool. It
allows deep insights into the history of a InnoDB table, thus
it’s main application area is the forensic investigation of a
MySQL database using InnoDB as storage engine.
V. CONCLUSION
reconstructing
statements
redo logs. Our techniques make it possible to gain deep
insights in the complete history of tables, including the
possibility of restoring deleted or updated values. Since
InnoDB stores log information for every single transaction,
these methods are to be considered powerful allies in
the task of reconstructing whole timelines and table
histories for forensic purposes. We veriﬁed our methods by
implementing a prototype for recovering Insert, Delete and
Update statements.
For future research we aim at raising the prototype version
of our forensic tool to a more enhanced state, which includes
the ability of recovering data in more complex scenarios with
DDL (Data Deﬁnition Language) statements such as Create
Table/Alter Table/Drop Table.
InnoDB uses a special compression method for writing
unsigned integers (smaller than 232), where the most significant bits (msbs) are used to store the length of the data.
Table XV gives an overview on the encoding-modes.
First byte
Compressed data
The ﬁrst byte is interpreted as number smaller than 128.
The ﬁrst byte is xored with 0x80, this and the second
byte are interpreted as number.
The ﬁrst byte is xored with 0xC0, this and the following
two bytes are interpreted as number.
1110[rest]
The ﬁrst byte is xored with 0xE0, this and the following
three bytes are interpreted as number.
1111[rest]
The ﬁrst byte is omitted, the following 4 bytes are
interpreted as number.
COMPRESSING UNSIGNED INTEGERS
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The research was funded by COMET K1 and grant
825747 by the FFG - Austrian Research Promotion Agency.