Lightweight Pyramid Networks for Image Deraining
Xueyang Fu, Borong Liang, Yue Huang, Xinghao Ding* and John Paisley
Abstract—Existing deep convolutional neural networks have
found major success in image deraining, but at the expense of
an enormous number of parameters. This limits their potential
application, for example in mobile devices. In this paper, we propose a lightweight pyramid of networks (LPNet) for single image
deraining. Instead of designing a complex network structures, we
use domain-speciﬁc knowledge to simplify the learning process.
Speciﬁcally, we ﬁnd that by introducing the mature Gaussian-
Laplacian image pyramid decomposition technology to the neural
network, the learning problem at each pyramid level is greatly
simpliﬁed and can be handled by a relatively shallow network
with few parameters. We adopt recursive and residual network
structures to build the proposed LPNet, which has less than 8K
parameters while still achieving state-of-the-art performance on
rain removal. We also discuss the potential value of LPNet for
other low- and high-level vision tasks.
Index Terms—Rain removal, deep convolutional neural network (CNN), image pyramid, residual learning, lightweight
I. INTRODUCTION
As a common weather condition, rain impacts not only
human visual perception but also computer vision systems,
such as self driving vehicles and surveillance systems. Due
to the effects of light refraction and scattering, objects in an
image are easily blurred and blocked by individual rain streaks.
When facing heavy rainy conditions, this problem becomes
more severe due to the increased density of rain streaks.
Since most existing computer vision algorithms are designed
based on the assumption of clear inputs, their performance
is easily degraded by rainy weather. Thus, designing effective
and efﬁcient algorithms for rain streak removal is a signiﬁcant
problem with many downstream uses. Figure 1 shows an
example of our lightweight pyramid network.
A. Related works
Depending on the input data, rain removal algorithms can
be categorized into video and single-image based methods.
1) Video based methods: We ﬁrst brieﬂy review the rain
removal methods in a video, which was the major focus in the
early stages of this problem. These methods use both spatial
and temporal information from video. The ﬁrst study on video
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China grants 61571382, 81671766, 61571005, 81671674, U1605252,
61671309 and 81301278, Guangdong Natural Science Foundation grant
2015A030313007, Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities
grants 20720160075 and 20720150169, the Natural Science Foundation of
Fujian Province of China grant 2017J01126, and the CCF-Tencent research
fund. (*Corresponding author: Xinghao Ding, .)
X. Fu, B. Liang, Y. Huang and X. Ding are with Fujian Key Laboratory of
Sensing and Computing for Smart City, School of Information Science and
Engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China.
J. Paisley is with the Department of Electrical Engineering & Data Science
Institute, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027 USA.
(a) Rainy image
(b) Our result
Fig. 1: An deraining example of our LPNet for single image deraining. The whole network only contains 7,548 parameters.
deraining removed rain from a static background using average
intensities from the neighboring frames . Other methods
focus on deraining in the Fourier domain , using Gaussian
mixture models , low rank approximations and via
matrix completions . In , the authors divide rain streaks
into sparse ones and dense ones, then a matrix decomposition
based algorithm is proposed for deraining. More recently,
 proposed a patch-based mixture of Gaussians for rain
removal in video. Though these methods work well, they
require temporal content of video. In this paper we instead
focus on the single image deraining problem.
2) Single-image methods: Since information is drastically
reduced in individual images, single image deraining is a much
more difﬁcult problem. Methods for addressing this problem
have employed kernels , low rank approximations , 
and dictionary learning , , , . In , rain
streaks are detected and removed by using kernel regression
and a non-local mean ﬁltering. In , the authors decompose
a rainy image into its low- and high- frequency components.
The high-frequency part is processed to extract and remove
rain streaks by using sparse-coding based dictionary learning.
In , a self learning method is proposed to automatically
distinguish rain streaks from the high-frequency part. A discriminative sparse coding method is proposed in . By
forcing the coefﬁcient vector of rain layer to be sparse, the
objective function is solved to separate background and rain
streaks. Other methods have used mixture models and
local gradients to model and then remove rain streaks.
In , by utilizing Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs), the
authors explore patch-based priors for both the clean and rain
layers. The GMM prior for background layers is learned from
natural images, while that for rain streaks layers is learned
from rainy images. In , three new priors are deﬁned
by exploring local image gradients. The priors are used to
modeling the objective function which is solved by using
alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM).
Deep learning has also been introduced for this problem.
 
Fig. 2: The proposed structure of our deep lightweight pyramid of networks (LPNet) based on Gaussian-Laplacian image pyramids. The
bottom level of the reconstructed Gaussian pyramid is the ﬁnal de-rained image.
Convolutional neural networks (CNN) have proven useful for
a variety of high-level vision tasks , , , , 
as well as various image processing problems , , ,
 , . In , a related work based on deep learning
was introduced to remove static raindrops and dirt spots from
pictures taken through windows. Our previous CNN-based
method for removing dynamic rain streaks was introduced
by . Here the authors build a relative shallow network
with 3 layers to extract features of rain streaks from the high
frequency content of a rainy image. Based on the introduction
of an effective strategy for training very deep networks ,
two deeper networks were proposed based on image residuals
 and multi-scale information . In , the authors
utilize the generative adversarial framework to further enhance
the textures and improve the visual quality of de-rained
results. Recently, in , a density aware multi-stream densely
connected CNN is proposed for joint rain density estimation
and de-raining. This method can automatically generate rain
density label, which is further utilized to guide rain streaks
B. Our contributions
Though very deep networks achieve excellent performance
on single image deraining, a main drawback that potentially
limits their application in mobile devices, automatic driving,
and other computer vision tasks is their huge number of
parameters. As a networks become deeper, more storage
space is required . To address this issue, we propose a
lightweight pyramid network (LPNet), which contains fewer
than 8K parameters, with the single image rain removal problem in mind. Instead of designing a complex network structure,
we use problem-speciﬁc knowledge to simplify the learning
process. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst adopt Laplacian pyramids to
decompose a degraded/rainy image into different levels. Then
we use recursive and residual networks to build a sub-network
for each level to reconstruct Gaussian pyramids of derained
images. A speciﬁc loss function is selected for training each
sub-network according to its own physical characteristics and
the whole training is performed in a multi-task supervision.
The ﬁnal recovered image is the bottom level of the reconstructed Gaussian pyramid.
The main feature of our LPNet approach is to use the
mature Gaussian-Laplacian image pyramid technique to
transform one hard problem into several easier sub-problems.
In other words, since the Laplacian pyramid contains different
levels that can differentiate large scale edges from small
scale details, one can design simple and lightweight subnetwork to handle each level in a divide-and-conquer way.
The contributions of our paper are summarized as follows:
1) We show how by combining the classical Gaussian-
Laplacian pyramid technique with CNN, a simple network structure with few parameters and relative shallow
depth is sufﬁcient for excellent performance. To our
knowledge the resulting network is far more lightweight
(in terms of parameters) among deep networks with
comparable performance.
2) Through multi-scale techniques and recursive and residual deep learning, our proposed network achieves stateof-the-art performances on single image deraining. Although LPNet is trained on synthetic data by necessity,
it still generalizes well to real-world images.
3) We discuss how LPNet can be applied to other fundamental low- and high-level vision tasks in image
processing. We also show how LPNet can improve
downstream applications such as object recognition.
II. LIGHTWEIGHT PYRAMID NETWORK FOR DERAINING
In Figure 2, we show our proposed LPNet for single image
deraining. To summarize at a high level, we ﬁrst decompose
a rainy image into a Laplacian pyramid and build a subnetwork for each pyramid level. Then each sub-network is
trained with its own loss function according to the speciﬁc
physical characteristics of the data at that level. The network
outputs a Gaussian pyramid of the derained image. The ﬁnal
derained result is the bottom level of the Gaussian pyramid .
A. Motivation
Since rain streaks are blended with object edges and the
background scene, it is hard to directly learn the deraining
function in the image domain . To simplify the problem, it
is natural to train a network on the high-frequency information
in images, which primarily contain rain streaks and edges
without background interference. Based on this motivation,
the authors in , use the guided ﬁlter to obtain
the high-frequency component of an image as the input to a
deep network, which is then derained and fused back with
the low-resolution information of the same image. However,
these two methods fail when very thick rain streaks cannot be
extracted by the guided ﬁlter. Inspired by this decomposition
idea, we instead build a lightweight pyramid of networks to
instead simplify the learning processing and reduce the number
of necessary parameters as a result.
B. Stage 1: The Laplacian pyramid
We ﬁrst decompose a rainy image X into its Laplacian
pyramid, which is a set of images L with N levels:
Ln(X) = Gn(X) −upsample(Gn+1(X)),
where Gn is the Gaussian pyramid, n = 1, ..., N−1. The function Gn(X) is computed by downsampling Gn−1(X) using a
Gaussian kernel, with G1(X) = X and LN(X) = GN(X).
The reasons we choose the classical Laplacian pyramid to
decompose the rainy image are fourfold: 1) The background
scene can be fully extracted at the top level of Ln while
the other levels contain rain streaks and details at different
spatial scales. Thus, the rain interference is removed and
each sub-network only needs to deal with high-frequency
components at a single scale. 2) This decomposition strategy
will allow the network to take advantage of the sparsity at
each level, which motivates many other deraining methods
 , , , to simplify the learning problem. However,
unlike previous deraining methods that use a single-scale
decomposition, LPNet performs a multi-scale decomposition
using Laplacian pyramids. 3) As shown in Figure 3, compared
with the image domain, deep learning at each pyramid level
is more like an identity mapping (e.g., the top row is more
similar to the middle row, as evident in the bottom row)
which is known to be the situation where residual learning
(ResNet) excels . 4) The Laplacian pyramid is a mature
algorithm with low computation cost. Most calculations are
based on convolutions (Gaussian ﬁltering) which can be easily
embedded into existing systems with GPU acceleration.
C. Stage 2: Sub-network structure
After decomposing X into different pyramid levels, we
build a set of sub-networks independently for each level
(a) Rainy image X
(e) Clean image Y
Pixel values
Number of pixel
(i) (a) - (e)
Pixel values
Number of pixel
(j) (b) - (f)
Pixel values
Number of pixel
(k) (c) - (g)
Pixel values
Number of pixel
(l) (d) - (h)
Fig. 3: An example of Laplacian pyramid. We show three levels here.
The 3rd and 5th level are increased in size for better visualization.
The bottom row shows the histogram of the residual to demonstrate
the increased sparsity over the image domain.
to predict a corresponding clean Gaussian pyramid G(Y).
All the sub-networks have the same network structure with
different numbers of kernels. We adopt residual learning 
for each network structure and recursive blocks to reduce
parameters. The sub-network structure can be expressed as
a) Feature extraction: The ﬁrst layer extracts features
from the nth input level,
Hn,0 = σ(W0
n ∗Ln(X) + b0
where H indexes the feature map, ∗is the convolution
operation, W are weights and b are biases. σ is an activation
function for non-linearity.
b) Recursive block: To reduce the number of parameters,
we build intermediate inference layers in a recursive fashion.
The basic idea is to share parameters among recursive blocks.
Motivated by our experiments, we adopt three convolutional
operations in each recursive block. Calculations in the tth
recursive block are
n,t = σ(W1
n ∗Hn,t−1 + b1
n,t = σ(W2
where F{1,2,3} are intermediate features in the recursive
block, W{1,2,3} and b{1,2,3} are shared parameters among
T recursive blocks and t = 1, ..., T.
To help propagate information and back-propagate gradients, the output feature map Hn,t of the tth recursive block is
calculated by adding Hn,0:
Hn,t = σ(F3
n,t + Hn,0).
c) Gaussian pyramid reconstruction: To obtain the output level of the pyramid, the reconstruction layer is expressed
Ln(Y) = (W4
n ∗Hn,T + b4
n) + Ln(X).
pixel values
probability
image domain
clean images
rainy images
(a) Image domain
pixel values
probability
5th Laplacian pyramid level
clean images
rainy images
(b) 5th level
pixel values
probability
0 4th Laplacian pyramid level (logarithmic)
clean images
rainy images
(c) 4th level
pixel values
probability
0 3rd Laplacian pyramid level (logarithmic)
clean images
rainy images
(d) 3rd level
pixel values
probability
0 2nd Laplacian pyramid level (logarithmic)
clean images
rainy images
(e) 2nd level
pixel values
probability
0 1st Laplacian pyramid level (logarithmic)
clean images
rainy images
(f) 1st level
Fig. 4: Statistical histogram distributions of 200 clean and rainy pairs from . To highlight the tail error, (c)-(f) are logarithmic transformed.
After obtaining the output of the Laplacian pyramid L(Y), the
corresponding Gaussian pyramid of the derained image can be
reconstructed by
GN(Y) = max(0, LN(Y)),
Gn(Y) = max(0, Ln(Y) + upsample(Gn+1(Y))),
where n = 1, ..., N−1. Since each level of a Gaussian pyramid
should equal or lager than 0, we use x = max(0, x), which
is actually the rectiﬁed linear units (ReLU) operation , to
simply correct the outputs. The ﬁnal derained image is the
bottom level of the Gaussian pyramid, i.e., G1(Y).
In methods , , , the authors build similar
networks based on the image pyramid, which are the most
related to our own work. However, these papers apply similar
structures to other tasks such a image generation or superresolution using different network approaches on the pyramid.
D. Loss Function
Given a training set {Xi, Yi
i=1, where M is the number
of training data and YGT is the ground truth, the most widely
used loss function for training a network is mean squared
error (MSE). However, MSE usually generates over-smoothed
results due to the squared penalty that works poorly at edges
in an image. Thus, for each sub-network we adopt different
loss functions and minimize their combination. Following
 , we choose ℓ1 and SSIM as our loss functions.
Speciﬁcally, as shown in Figure 3, since ﬁner details and
rain streaks exist in lower pyramid levels we use SSIM loss
to train the corresponding sub-networks for better preserving
high-frequency information. On the contrary, larger structures
and smooth background areas exist in higher pyramid levels.
Thus we use the ℓ1 loss to update the corresponding network
parameters there. The overall loss function is
Lℓ1(Gn(Yi), Gn(Yi
LSSIM(Gn(Yi), Gn(Yi
where LSSIM is the SSIM loss and Lℓ1 is the ℓ1 loss. In
this paper, we set the pyramid level N = 5 based on our
experiments. We use SSIM loss for levels {1, 2} and ℓ1 loss
for all levels.
E. Removing batch normalization
As one of the most effective way to alleviate the internal covariate shift, batch normalization (BN) is widely adopted
before the nonlinearity in each layer in existing deep learning
based methods. However, we argue that by introducing image
pyramid technology, BN can be removed to improve the
ﬂexibility of networks. This is because BN constrains the
feature maps to obey a Gaussian distribution. While during our
experiments, we found that distributions of lower Laplacian
pyramid levels of both clean and rainy images are sparse.
To demonstrate this viewpoint, in Figure 4, we show the
histogram distributions of each Laplacian pyramid level from
200 clean and light rainy training image pairs from . As
can be seen, compared to the image domain in Figure 4(a),
distributions of lower pyramid levels, i.e., Figures 4(c) to (f),
are more sparse and do not obey Gaussian distribution. This
implies that we do not need BN to further constrain the feature
maps since the mapping problem already becomes easy to
handle. Moreover, removing BN can sufﬁciently reduce GPU
memory usage since the BN layers consume the same amount
of memory as the preceding convolutional layers. Based on the
above observation and analysis, we remove BN layers from our
network to improve ﬂexibility and reduce parameter numbers
and computing resource.
F. Parameter settings
[0.0625, 0.25, 0.375, 0.25, 0.0625], which is also used to
reconstruct the Gaussian pyramid. In our network architecture,
each sub-network has the same structure with a different
numbers of kernels. The kernel sizes for W{0,1,3,4} are
3 × 3. For W{2}, the kernel size is 1 × 1 to further increase
non-linearity and reduce parameters. The number of recursive
blocks is T = 5 for each sub-network. For the activation
function σ, we use the leaky rectiﬁed linear units (LReLUs)
 with a negative slope of 0.2.
Moreover, as shown in the last row of Figure 3, higher
levels are closer to an identity mapping since rain streaks
only remain in lower levels. This means for higher levels,
fewer parameters are required for learning a good network.
Thus, from low to high levels, we set the kernel numbers to
16, 8, 4, 2 and 1, respectively. Since the top level is a tiny
and smoothed version of image and rain streaks remain in
high-frequency parts, the function of top level sub-network is
more like a simple global contrast adjustment. Thus we set
the kernel numbers to 1 kernel for the top level. As shown
in Figure 2, by connecting the up-sampled version of the
output from the higher level, the direct prediction of all subnetworks is actually the clean Laplacian pyramid. We show the
intermediate results predicted by each sub-network in Figure
5. It is clear that rain streaks remain in lower levels while
higher levels are almost the same. This demonstrates that our
diminishing parameter setting is reasonable. As a result, the
total number of trainable parameters is only 7, 548, far fewer
than the hundreds of thousands often encountered in deep
G. Training details
We use synthetic rainy images from as our training
data. This dataset contains 1800 images with heavy rain and
200 images with light rain. We randomly generate one million
80 × 80 clean/rainy patch pairs. We use TensorFlow to
train LPNet using the Adam solver with a mini-batch size
of 10. We set the learning rate as 0.001 and ﬁnish the training
after 3 epochs. The whole network is trained in a end-to-end
III. EXPERIMENTS
We compare our LPNet with four state-of-the-art deraining
methods: the Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) of , a CNN
baseline SRCNN , the deep detail network (DDN) of 
and joint rain detection and removal (JORDER) , which
is also a deep learning method. For fair comparison, all CNN
based methods are retrained on the same training dataset.
A. Synthetic data
Three synthetic datasets are chosen for comparison. Two of
them are from and each one contains 100 images. One
is synthesized with heavy rain called Rain100H and the other
one is with light rain called Rain100L. The third dataset called
Rain12 is from which contains 12 synthetic images. All
testing results shown are not included in the training data.
Following , for each CNN method we train two models,
one for heavy and for light rain datasets. The model trained
on the light rainy dataset is used to test Rain12.
Figures 6 to 8 shows visual results from each dataset. As can
be seen, GMM fails to remove rain streaks form heavy
rainy images. SRCNN and DDN are able to remove
the rain streaks while tend to generate obvious artifacts.
Our LPNet has comparable visual results with JORDER and
outperforms other methods.
We also adopt PSNR and SSIM to perform quantitative
evaluations in Table I. Our method has comparable SSIM
values with JORDER while outperforming other methods, in
agreement with the visual results. Though our result has a
lower PSNR value than JORDER method, the visual quality
is comparable. This is because PSNR is calculated based on
the mean squared error (MSE), which measures global pixel
errors without considering local image characters. Moreover,
as shown in Table I our LPNet contains far fewer parameters,
potentially making LPNet more suitable for storage, e.g., in
mobile devices.
B. Real-world data
In this section, we show that the LPNet learned on synthetic
training data still performs well on real-world data. Figure
9 shows ﬁve visual results on real-world images. The model
trained on the dataset with light rain is used for testing on realworld images. As can be seen, LPNet generates consistently
promising derained results on images with different kinds of
rain streaks.
Since no ground truth exists, we construct an independent
user study to provide realistic feedback and quantify the
subjective evaluation. We collect 50 real-world rainy images
from the Internet as a new dataset 1. We use the compared ﬁve
methods to generate de-rained results and randomly order the
outputs, as well as the original rainy image, and display them
on a screen. We then separately asked 20 participants to rank
each image from 1 to 5 subjectively according to quality, with
the instructions being that visible rain streaks should decrease
the quality and clarity should increase quality (1 represents
the worst quality and 5 represents the best quality). We show
the average scores in Table II from these 1,000 trials and our
LPNet has the best performance. In Figure 10, we show the
scatter plot of the rainy inputs vs de-rained user scores. This
small-scale experiment gives additional support that our LPnet
improves the de-raining on real-world images.
Moreover, when dealing with dense rain, LPNet trained on
images with heavy rain has a dehazing effect as shown in
Figure 11, which can further improve the visual quality. This
is because the highest level sub-network (low-pass component)
can adjust image contrast. Although dehazing is not the main
focus of this paper, we believe that LPNet can be easily
modiﬁed for joint deraining and dehazing.
1Our code and data will be released soon.
Fig. 5: One example of intermediate results predicted by our LPNet.
(a) Ground Truth
(b) Rainy images
(f) JORDER
(g) Our LPNet
Fig. 6: Two synthetic images from “Rain100H” with different rain orientations and magnitudes.
(a) Ground Truth
(b) Rainy images
(f) JORDER
(g) Our LPNet
Fig. 7: Two synthetic images from “Rain100L” with different rain orientations and magnitudes.
(a) Ground Truth
(b) Rainy images
(f) JORDER
(g) Our LPNet
Fig. 8: Two synthetic images from “Rain12” with different rain orientations and magnitudes.
TABLE I: Average SSIM and PSNR values on synthesized images.
Rainy images
SRCNN 
JORDER 
Parameters #
(a) Rainy images
(e) JORDER
(f) Our LPNet
Fig. 9: Three results on real-world rainy images with different rain orientations and magnitudes.
Rainy inputs
User study
Fig. 10: Scatter plot of user study.
TABLE II: Average scores of user study.
(a) Light rainy model
(b) Heavy rainy model
Fig. 11: An example of dehazing effect. Our LPNet trained on the
heavy rainy dataset can further improve image contrast.
C. Running time and convergence
To demonstrate the efﬁciency of LPNet, we show the average running time for a test image in Table III. Three different
image sizes are chosen and each one is tested over 100 images.
The GMM is implemented on CPUs according to the provided
Number of epoch
Loss value
Training loss
heavy rainy data
light rainy data
Fig. 12: Convergence on different training datasets.
(a) Rainy image
(b) Default numbers
(c) 16 feature maps
Fig. 13: One example by using different parameter numbers.
code, while other deep CNN-based methods are tested on both
CPU and GPU. All experiments are performed on a server with
Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU E5-2683, 64GB RAM and NVIDIA
GTX 1080. The GMM has the slowest running time since
complicated inference is required to process each new image.
Our method has a comparable and even faster computational
time on both CPU and GPU compared with other deep models.
This is because LPNet uses relatively shallow networks for
each level, so requires fewer convolutions.
We also show the average training loss as a function of
training epoch in Figure 12. We observe that LPNet converges
quickly on training with both light and heavy rainy datasets.
Since heavy rain streaks are harder to handle, as shown in the
1st row of Figure 6, the training error of heavy rain streaks
has a vibration.
D. Parameter settings
In this section, we discuss different parameters setting to
study their impact on performance.
1) Increasing parameter number: We have conducted an
experiment on the Rain100H dataset with increased parameters, i.e., 16 feature maps for all convolution layers at each
sub-network. The results are shown in Table IV. As can be
seen, the SSIM evaluation is better than JORDER and PSNR
value is also improved. We believe that the performance can be
further improved by using more parameters. However, increasing parameter number requires more storage and computing
resources. Figure 13 shows one example by using different
parameter numbers. As can be seen, the visual quality is almost
the same. Thus, we use our diminishing parameter setting to
achieve the balance between effectiveness and efﬁciency.
2) Skip connections: Though Laplacian pyramid images introduce sparsity in each level to simply the mapping problem,
it is still essential to add skip connection in each sub-network.
Number of iterations
Loss value
Training loss
w/o skip connection
w/ skip connection
Fig. 14: Training curves w/ and w/o skip connections.
We adopt skip connection for two reasons. First, image information may be lost during feed-forward convolutional operations, using skip connection helps to propagate information
ﬂow and improve the deraining performance. Second, using
skip connection helps to back-propagate gradient, which can
accelerate the training procedure, when updating parameters.
In Figure 14 we show the training curves on the heavy rainy
dataset with and without all skip connections. As can be seen,
using skip connection can bring a faster convergence rate and
lower training loss.
3) Loss function: We use SSIM as a part of loss function
(9) for two main reasons. First, SSIM is calculated based on
local image characteristics, e.g., local contrast, luminance and
details, which are also the characteristics of rain streaks. Thus,
using SSIM as the loss function is appropriate to guide the
network training. Second, the human visual system is also sensitive to local image characteristics. SSIM has been motivated
as generating more visually pleasing results, unlike PSNR. It
has therefore become a more prominent measure in the image
processing community. We also use ℓ1 loss because ℓ1 does not
over-penalize larger errors and thus can preserve structures and
edges. On the contrary, the widely used ℓ2 loss (which PSNR
is based on) often generates over-smoothed results because it
penalizes larger errors and tolerates small errors. Therefore,
ℓ2 struggles to preserve underlying structures in the image
compared with ℓ1. Figure 15 shows two results generated by
using our combined loss (9) and ℓ2 loss, respectively. As can
be seen, using our combined loss (9) can preserve more details.
E. Extensions
1) Generalization to other image processing tasks: Since
both Laplacian pyramids and CNNs are fundamental and
general image processing technologies, our network design
has potential value for other low-level vision tasks. Figure 16
shows the experimental result on image denoising and JPEG
artifacts reduction, which shares the property of rainy images
in that the desired image is corrupted by high frequency
content. This test demonstrates that LPNet can generalize to
similar image restoration problems.
2) Pre-processing for high-level vision tasks: Due to the
lightweight architecture, our LPNet can potentially be efﬁciently incorporated into other high-level vision systems. For
example, we study the problem of object detection in rainy
TABLE III: Comparison of running time (seconds).
SRCNN 
JORDER 
Image size
1024 × 1024
TABLE IV: SSIM and PSNR value comparison for different parameters.
JORDER 
Our LPNet (default)
Our LPNet (increasing)
Parameters #
(a) Rainy image
(b) ℓ2 loss
(c) SSIM + ℓ1 loss
Fig. 15: An deraining example by using different losses. Using SSIM + ℓ1 loss generates a more sharpen result.
(a) Noise (top) and JPEG (bottom)
(b) Our results
Fig. 16: Denoising and reducing JPEG artifact.
environments. Since rain steaks can blur and block objects,
the performance of object detection will degrade in rainy
weather. Figure 17 shows a visual result of object detection
by combining with the popular Faster R-CNN model . It
is obviously that rain streaks can degrade the performance of
Faster R-CNN, i.e., by missing detections and producing low
recognition conﬁdence. On the other hand, after deraining by
LPNet, the detection performance has a notable improvement
over the naive Faster-RCNN.
Additionally, due to the lightweight architecture, using
(a) Direct detection
(b) Deraining + detection
Fig. 17: An example of joint deraining and object detection on a
real-world image. We use the Faster R-CNN to perform object
detection with a conﬁdence threshold of 0.8.
LPNet with Faster R-CNN does not signiﬁcantly increase the
complexity. To process a color image with size of 1024×1024,
the running time is 3.7 seconds for Faster R-CNN, and 4.0
seconds for LPNet + Faster R-CNN.
IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have introduced a lightweight deep network that is based on the classical Gaussian-Laplacian pyramid for single image deraining. Our LPNet contains several
sub-networks and inputs the Laplacian pyramid to predict the
clean Gaussian pyramid. By using the pyramid to simplify
the learning problem and adopting recursive blocks to share
parameters, LPNet has fewer than 8K parameters while still
achieving good performance. Moreover, due to the generality
and lightweight architecture, our LPNet has potential values
for other low- and high-level vision tasks.