Anchors: High-Precision Model-Agnostic Explanations
Marco Tulio Ribeiro
University of Washington
 
Sameer Singh
University of California, Irvine
 
Carlos Guestrin
University of Washington
 
We introduce a novel model-agnostic system that explains the
behavior of complex models with high-precision rules called
anchors, representing local, “sufﬁcient” conditions for predictions. We propose an algorithm to efﬁciently compute these
explanations for any black-box model with high-probability
guarantees. We demonstrate the ﬂexibility of anchors by explaining a myriad of different models for different domains
and tasks. In a user study, we show that anchors enable users
to predict how a model would behave on unseen instances
with less effort and higher precision, as compared to existing
linear explanations or no explanations.
Introduction
Sophisticated machine learning models such as deep neural
networks have been shown to be highly accurate for many
applications, even though their complexity virtually makes
them black-boxes. As a consequence of the need for users
to understand the behavior of these models, interpretable
machine learning has seen a resurgence in recent years,
ranging from the design of novel globally-interpretable machine learning models to local explanations (for individual predictions) that can be computed
for any classiﬁer .
A question at the core of interpretability is whether humans
understand a model enough to make accurate predictions
about its behavior on unseen instances. For instances where
humans can conﬁdently predict the behavior of a model, let
(human) precision be the fraction in which they are correct
(note that this is human precision, not model precision). High
human precision is paramount for real interpretability - one
can hardly say they understand a model if they consistently
think they know what it will do, but are often mistaken.
Most local approaches provide explanations that describe
the local behavior of the model using a linearly weighted combination of the input features .
Linear functions can capture relative importance of features
in an easy-to-understand manner. However, since these linear
Copyright c⃝2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
(a) Instances
(b) LIME explanations
(c) Anchor explanations
Figure 1: Sentiment predictions, LSTM
explanations are in some way local, it is not clear whether
they apply to an unseen instance. In other words, their coverage (region where explanation applies) is unclear. Unclear
coverage can lead to low human precision, as users may think
an insight from an explanation applies to unseen instances
even when it does not. When combined with the arithmetic involved in computing the contribution of the features in linear
explanations, the human effort required can be quite high.
Take for example LIME explanations for two sentiment predictions made by
an LSTM in Figure 1. Although both explanations are computed to be locally accurate, if one took the explanation on
the left and tried to apply it to the sentence on the right, one
might be tempted to think that the word “not” would have a
positive inﬂuence, which it does not. While such explanations
provide insight into the model, their coverage is not clear, e.g.
when does “not” have a positive inﬂuence on sentiment?
In this paper, we introduce novel model-agnostic explanations based on if-then rules, which we call anchors. An
anchor explanation is a rule that sufﬁciently “anchors” the
prediction locally – such that changes to the rest of the feature
values of the instance do not matter. In other words, for instances on which the anchor holds, the prediction is (almost)
always the same. For example, the anchors in Figure 1c state
that the presence of the words “not bad” virtually guarantee a
prediction of positive sentiment (and “not good” of negative
The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)
(a) D and D(.|A)
(b) Two toy visualizations
Figure 2: Concrete example of D in (a) and intuition (b)
sentiment). Anchors are intuitive, easy to comprehend, and
have extremely clear coverage – they only apply when all the
conditions in the rule are met, and if they apply the precision
is high (by design).
We demonstrate the usefulness of anchors by applying
them to a variety of machine learning tasks (classiﬁcation,
structured prediction, text generation) on a diverse set of
domains (tabular, text, and images). We also run a user study,
where we observe that anchors enable users to predict how
a model would behave on unseen instances with much less
effort and higher precision as compared to existing techniques
for model-agnostic explanation, or no explanations.
Anchors as High-Precision Explanations
Given a black box model f : X →Y and an instance x ∈X,
the goal of local model-agnostic interpretability is to explain the behavior of f(x) to a user, where f(x)
is the individual prediction for instance x. The assumption is
that while the model is globally too complex to be explained
succinctly, “zooming in” on individual predictions makes
the explanation task feasible. Most model-agnostic methods
work by perturbing the instance x according to some “perturbation distribution” Dx (for simplicity, D from now on). In
Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin , we emphasize that the
perturbations D (and explanations) must use an interpretable
representation (i.e. one that makes sense to humans), even if
the model uses an alternative representation of the input.
Let A be a rule (set of predicates) acting on such an interpretable representation, such that A(x) returns 1 if all its
feature predicates are true for instance x. For example, in Figure 2a (top), x = “This movie is not bad.”, f(x) = Positive,
A(x) = 1 where A = {“not”, “bad”}. Let D(·|A) denote the
conditional distribution when the rule A applies (e.g. similar
texts where “not” and “bad” are present, Figure 2a bottom).
A is an anchor if A(x) = 1 and A is a sufﬁcient condition
for f(x) with high probability — in our running example, if
a sample z from D(z|A) is likely predicted as Positive (i.e.
f(x) = f(z)). Formally A is an anchor if,
ED(z|A)[1f(x)=f(z)] ≥τ, A(x) = 1.
Figure 2b shows two “zoomed in” regions of a complex
model, with particular instances (+ and -) being explained.
LIME explanations
work by learning the lines that best approximate the model
under D, with some local weighting. The resulting expla-
I want to play(V) ball.
previous word is
play is VERB.
I went to a play(N)
yesterday.
previous word is
DETERMINER
play is NOUN.
I play(V) ball on
previous word is
play is VERB.
Table 1: Anchors for Part-of-Speech tag for the word “play”
nations give no indication of how faithful they are (the explanation on the right is a much better local approximation
of the black box model than the one on the left), or what
their “local region” is. In contrast, even though they use the
same D, anchors are by construction faithful, adapting their
coverage to the model’s behavior (the anchor on the right of
Figure 2b is broader) and making their boundaries clear.
Leaving the discussion of how to compute anchors for
later, we now demonstrate their usefulness and ﬂexibility via
concrete examples in a variety of domains and models.
Text Classiﬁcation: We have already alluded to Figure 1,
where we trained an LSTM model with paraphrastic sentence
embeddings to predict the sentiment of
reviews. In this case, the features used by the model are uninterpretable. The interpretable representation we use is the
presence of individual tokens (words) in the instance. The perturbation distribution D replaces “absent” tokens by random
words with the same POS tag with probability proportional to
their similarity in an embedding space (i.e. the generated sentences are coherent,
and of the same length). We show samples from D for a sentence in Figure 2a. The anchor A = {“not”, “bad”} is easy
to apply: if the words “not” and “bad” are in the sentence,
the model will predict “positive” with probability at least τ
(set to 0.95 from here onwards). If either word (or both) are
not present, we know we do not have sufﬁcient information
to know what the model will do. Examples from D(z|A) are
shown in Figure 2a (bottom).
Structured prediction: When the output of the algorithm is
a structure, the anchor approach can be used to explain any
function of the output. Anchors are particularly suited for
structured prediction models: while the global behavior is too
complex to be captured by simple interpretable models, the
local behavior can usually be represented using short rules.
In Table 1, we explain the predictions of a state of the art
part-of-speech tagger for the word “play” in different contexts, where we include the tags for neighboring words as
part of the interpretable representation. The anchors demonstrate that the model is picking up on reasonable patterns of
the English language, e.g. if play is preceded by a determiner,
it is likely used as a noun.
In Table 2, we compute anchors for a multi-layer RNN
encoder/attention-based decoder translation system trained on English-Portuguese parallel corpora. In
this case, anchors explain the presence of a word (or certain
words) in the translation. The anchors (in bold) are computed
with respect to the presence of the words in pink in the Por-
Portuguese
This is the question we must
Esta ´e a quest˜ao que temos que
This is the problem we must
Este ´e o problema que temos
que enfrentar
This is what we must address
´E isso que temos de enfrentar
Table 2: Anchors (in bold) of a machine translation system
for the Portuguese word for “This” (in pink).
No capital gain or loss, never married
Country is US, married, work hours > 45
No priors, no prison violations and crime
not against property
Not rearrested
Male, black, 1 to 5 priors, not married,
and crime not against property
Re-arrested
FICO score ≤649
649 ≤FICO score ≤699 and $5, 400 ≤
loan amount ≤$10, 000
Table 3: Generated anchors for Tabular datasets
tuguese text. The ﬁrst row in Table 2 means that when the
words “This”, “is”, and “question” appear in English, the
translation will include the word “Esta”. In Portuguese, the
translation for the word “this” depends on the gender of the
word it refers to (“esta” for feminine, “este” for masculine),
or should be “isso” if its referent is not in the sentence. The
anchors show that the model is capturing this behavior as it
always includes “this is”, and the word that “this” refers to
(“question” is feminine, “problem” is masculine).
Tabular Classiﬁcation: Classiﬁcation of data in tabular form
(categorical and/or continuous features) is a popular application of machine learning. We use a validation dataset to
deﬁne D, and sample from D(z|A) by ﬁxing the predicates
in A and sampling the rest of the row as a whole. We show
anchors for a few predictions of 400 gradient boosted trees
trained on balanced versions of three datasets in Table 3. The
anchors provide valuable insight into these models. Marital status appears in many different anchors for predicting
whether a person makes > $50K annually (adult dataset).
The anchors for predicting recidivism for individuals released
from prison (rcdv dataset), show
that this model is unfair if used for bail decisions, as race and
gender feature prominently. For predicting whether a loan on
the Lending Club website will turn out bad, i.e. late payment
or default (lending dataset), the FICO score is sufﬁcient in
the extremes, but loan amount is taken into consideration
otherwise. We note that these are not exhaustive – the models
are complex, and these anchors explain their behavior on
part of the input space but not all of it. Anchors for “hard”
predictions (in particular boundary cases) may be longer.
Image Classiﬁcation: When explaining the label prediction
for an image we follow Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin ,
segmenting the image into superpixels and using the presence or absence of these superpixels as the interpretable representation. In contrast to Ribeiro,
Singh, and Guestrin , instead of hiding superpixels,
we deﬁne D(z|A) by ﬁxing the superpixels in A to the original image and superimposing another image over the rest
of the superpixels. We explain a prediction of the Inception-
V3 neural network in Figure 3b. Even
though D is quite unrealistic here, the anchor demonstrates
that the model focuses on various parts of the dog to determine its breed. An inspection of the (admittedly bizarre)
images from D(z|A) in Figure 3c for which the model predicts “beagle” with high conﬁdence illustrates that attributes
that humans would consider essential for a beagle prediction
(legs, not being underwater, not being in the sky, not having a
human body) are not quite as essential to the neural network.
Visual Question Answering (VQA): As a ﬁnal example,
we present anchors for the VQA task: answering a question
asked of a reference image. Here, we are interested in identifying which part of the question led to the predicted answer,
and thus use the same representation and distribution as in
Figure 2b. We explain predictions from the Visual7W openended VQA system using Figure 3a as the
reference image. In Figure 3d we show a question/prediction
pair and its anchor (in bold), as well as samples from D(z|A)
and their predictions. The short anchor (“What”) reveals that,
for this image, the model’s answer to many questions will be
“dog”, contrary to our expectations. In Figure 3e, we show
other question/answer pairs and their anchors, providing examples where the behavior of the classiﬁer is aligned with
our intuitions (ﬁrst three) and where it is not (last question).
Related Work
Even in the few cases where having some understanding of a
machine learning model’s behavior is not a requirement, it is
certainly an advantage. Relying only on validation accuracy
has many well studied problems, as practitioners consistently
overestimate their model’s accuracy , propagate feedback loops , or fail to notice
data leaks .
Compared to other interpretable options, rules fare well;
users prefer, trust and understand rules better than alternatives ,
in particular rules similar to anchors. Short, disjoint rules
are easier to interpret than hierarchies like decision lists
or trees . A number of approaches construct globally interpretable models,
many based on rules . With such models, the user should be able to guess
the model’s behavior on any example (i.e. perfect coverage).
However, these models are not appropriate for many domains,
e.g. almost no interpretable rule-based system is suitable for
text or image applications, due to the sheer size of the feature
space, or are just not accurate enough. Interpretability, in
these cases, comes at the cost of ﬂexibility, accuracy, or efﬁciency . An alternative
is learning a simple (interpretable) model to imitate the black
(a) Original image
(b) Anchor for “beagle”
(c) Images where Inception predicts P(beagle) > 90%
What animal is featured in this picture ?
What ﬂoor is featured in this picture?
What toenail is paired in this ﬂowchart ?
What animal is shown on this depiction ?
(d) VQA: Anchor (bold) and samples from D(z|A)
Where is the dog?
on the ﬂoor
What color is the wall?
When was this picture taken?
during the day
Why is he lifting his paw?
(e) VQA: More example anchors (in bold)
Figure 3: Anchor Explanations for Image Classiﬁcation and Visual Question Answering (VQA)
box model globally or a set of rules ), but this may
yield low human precision. Simple models are not able to
fully capture the behavior of the complex ones, and thus lead
users to wrong conclusions, especially since it is not clear
when the simple model is faithful.
To avoid this, local model-agnostic explanations explain
individual predictions (instead of the whole model at once).
These methods provide a trade-off: each explanation is easy
to understand even for complex models and tasks, but only
captures the behavior of the model on a local region of the input space. The anchor approach falls within this category (and
thus can explain complex models like translation and VQA),
together with many forms of linear explanations . As illustrated pictorially by Figure
2b and concretely in Figure 1b, even the local behavior of a
model may be extremely non-linear, leading to poor linear
approximations and users being potentially misled as to how
the model will behave (e.g. thinking that “not” will usually
be positive after seeing Figure 1b (left)). Linear explanations are also harder to parse and apply than simple rules, as
they involve mental calculations. Finally, even if the blackbox model is approximately linear locally, humans may not
be able to compute distance functions “correctly”, and may
think that a local explanation applies when it does not – the
“unclear coverage” problem.
Anchors, on the other hand, make their coverage very clear
— the user knows exactly when the explanation for an instance
“generalizes” to other instances. By construction, anchors are
not only faithful to the original model, but communicate its
behavior to the user in such a way that virtually guarantees
correct understanding, and thus high precision. Anchors are
also able to capture non-linear behavior, even locally. In
sum, the anchor approach combines the beneﬁts of local
model-agnostic explanations with the interpretability of rules,
constructed in a way to best support human understanding.
Efﬁciently Computing Anchors
We revisit the problem deﬁnition from Eq. (1): given a blackbox classiﬁer f, instance x, distribution D, and the desired
level of precision τ, an anchor A is a set of feature predicates
on x that achieves prec(A) ≥τ, where
prec(A) = ED(z|A)
1f(x)=f(z)
For an arbitrary D and black-box model f, it is intractable
to compute this precision directly. Instead, we introduce a
probabilistic deﬁnition: anchors satisfy the precision constraint with high probability.
P (prec(A) ≥τ) ≥1 −δ
If multiple anchors meet this criterion, those that describe
the behavior of a larger part of the input space are preferred,
i.e. ones with the largest coverage . Formally, we deﬁne the
coverage of an anchor as the probability that it applies to
samples from D, i.e. cov(A) = ED(z)[A(z)].
We thus deﬁne this search for an anchor as the following
combinatorial optimization problem:
A s.t. P (prec(A)≥τ)≥1−δ cov(A).
The number of all possible anchors is exponential, and it is
intractable to solve this problem exactly. While the search for
anchors is similar in spirit to Probabilistic Inductive Logic
Programming (ILP) and other
rule-ﬁnding methods, one crucial difference is that we do
not assume a dataset apriori - instead we have perturbation
distributions and a black box model, which we can call to
estimate precision and coverage bounds under D. While we
could in theory generate a very large dataset and then use
methods like ILP to ﬁnd anchors, the number of perturbed
samples and predictions from the black box model would be
prohibitive, especially in high-dimensional sparse domains
such as text. In order to efﬁciently explore the model’s behavior in the perturbation space, we turn to a multi-armed bandit
formulation.
Bottom-up Construction of Anchors
We ﬁrst introduce a bottom-up construction of anchors, which
we later extend to search over a space of potential anchors.
Here, we incrementally construct the anchor A, which is
initialized with an empty rule, i.e. one that applies to every
instance. In each iteration, we generate a number of candidate
rules that extend A by one additional feature predicate, {ai},
in its deﬁnition, i.e. the set of candidate rules in each iteration is A = {A ∧ai, A ∧ai+1, A ∧ai+2, . . .}. We identify
the candidate rule with the highest estimated precision (as
described next), replace A with the selected candidate, and
repeat. If the current candidate rule meets the anchor deﬁnition in Eq. (3), we have identiﬁed our desired anchor and
terminate. Although this approach does not directly compute
the coverage, and instead tries to ﬁnd the shortest anchor, we
note that short anchors are likely to have a higher coverage,
and require less effort from the users to understand.
In order to select the best candidate rule in each iteration,
we want to estimate the precision of these candidates efﬁciently. Since we cannot compute the true precision, we rely
on samples from D(·|A) to estimate the precision of A; however, a ﬁxed number of samples may be too many or too few
for an accurate estimation. Instead, we are interested in a
minimal set of calls to f (fewest samples from D) in order to
estimate which candidate rule has the highest true precision.
This problem can be formulated as an instance of pureexploration multi-armed bandit problem , i.e. each candidate A is an arm, the
true precision of A on D(·|A) is the latent reward, and each
pull of the arm A is an evaluation of 1f(x)=f(z) on a sample
from D(z|A). For such a setting, the KL-LUCB algorithm can be used to identify the rule with the highest precision. The algorithm works
by constructing conﬁdence regions based on KL divergence
 . In each step, the algorithm selects
two distinct rules: the best mean (A) and the highest upper
bound (A′), and updates their bounds by getting a sample
each from D(z|A) and D(z′|A′), and computing 1f(x)=f(z)
and 1f(x)=f(z′). This sampling process continues until the
lower bound on A is higher than A′’s upper bound with tolerance ϵ ∈ . If A∗is the arm with highest true precision,
the following (proved by Kaufmann and Kalyanakrishnan)
holds for the true precision of the chosen rule A:
P(prec(A) ≥prec(A∗) −ϵ) ≥1 −δ
Alg 1 presents an outline of this approach. When evaluating
if the rule chosen by KL-LUCB is an anchor, we need to
be conﬁdent it meets our precision criteria. Thus, if for an
identiﬁed rule A, preclb(A) < τ but precub(A) > τ, we
sample from D(·|A) until either we are conﬁdent A is an
anchor (preclb(A) > τ) or not (precub(A) < τ).
Algorithm 1 Identifying the Best Candidate for Greedy
function GenerateCands(A, c)
for all A ∈A; ai ∈x, ai /∈A do
if cov(A ∧ai) > c then
{Only high-coverage}
Ar ←Ar ∪(A ∧ai)
{Add as potential anchor}
{Candidate anchors for next round}
function BestCand(A, D, ϵ, δ)
initialize prec, precub, preclb estimates ∀A ∈A
A ←arg maxA prec(A)
A′ ←arg maxA′̸=A precub(A′, δ)
{δ implicit below}
while precub(A′) −preclb(A) > ϵ do
sample z ∼D(z|A), z′ ∼D(z′|A′)
{Sample more}
update prec, precub, preclb for A and A′
A ←arg maxA prec(A)
A′ ←arg maxA′̸=A precub(A′)
Algorithm 2 Outline of the Beam Search
function BeamSearch(f, x, D, τ)
hyperparameters B, ϵ, δ
A∗←null, A0 ←∅
{Set of candidate rules}
At ←GenerateCands(At−1, cov(A∗))
At ←B-BestCand(At, D, B, δ, ϵ)
if At = ∅then break loop
for all A ∈At s.t. preclb(A, δ) > τ do
if cov(A) > cov(A∗) then A∗←A
Beam-Search for Anchor Construction
Although the greedy approach we have described so far can
ﬁnd short anchors with the guarantee that, for each step, the
choice was near optimal with high probability, it has two
major shortcomings. First, due to the greedy nature of the
approach, it is only able to maintain a single rule at a time
(that it incrementally augments), and thus any suboptimal
choice is irreversible. Second, the greedy algorithm is not
directly concerned with the coverage of the anchors, and
instead returns the shortest anchor that it ﬁnds. In order to
address both these concerns, we extend the greedy approach
to perform a beam-search by maintaining a set of candidate
rules, while guiding the search to identify amongst many
possible anchors the one that has the highest coverage.
The algorithm is outlined in Algorithm 2. It is similar in
structure to the greedy approach, with a set of B current
candidates instead of a single one. After generating all the
possible candidates rules, we select the B-best candidates to
keep based on the KL-LUCB approach with multiple arms
(the Explore-m setting). For the tolerance ϵ ∈ , this
version of KL-LUCB algorithm returns a set A of size B that
is an ϵ-approximation of A∗, with high probability.
A∈A prec(A) ≥min
A′∈A∗prec(A′) −ϵ) ≥1 −δ
We omit the description of KL-LUCB for this setting, but the
intuition is similar to the one in the greedy approach. Further, amongst multiple anchors that we encounter, we output
the one with the highest coverage, thus directly optimizing
Eq. (4). This condition is also used for efﬁcient pruning of
the search space – we do not store any rule that has a lower
coverage than that of the best anchor found so far, since the
coverage of a rule can only reduce as more predicates are
added. The beam-search algorithm is therefore more likely to
return an anchor with a higher coverage than the one found
by the greedy approach, and thus we use this algorithm for
all examples and experiments.
Hyperparameters and Potential Issues
A rule that exactly matches x is always a valid anchor, albeit with very low coverage, and thus, is of little use. Our
algorithm can always recover this anchor, and thus is guaranteed to terminate in a bounded number of iterations. In
pathological cases, it is possible for KL-LUCB to require a
very large number of samples from D in order to separate
two candidate rules with a high conﬁdence; however, this can
be alleviated by increasing the tolerance ϵ, the width δ, or by
setting a maximum number of samples. In practice, all explanations present in this paper were generated in a few seconds
to few minutes. We set these parameters to reasonable values,
B = 10, ϵ = 0.1, δ = 0.05, and leave an analysis of the
sensitivity of our approach to these for future work.
So far, we focused on computing anchors for individual
predictions. In order to gain a more complete understanding
of how the model works, the user needs to examine multiple
explanations. Instead of randomly selecting which anchors to
show to the user, we would like to identify an optimal set of
anchors that represent this global behavior, thereby reducing
the user effort. By observing that such an objective is submodular, we propose an approach for submodular-pick (SP)
in Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin that we adapt to this
setting. In particular, the approach selects K anchors that
cover as many instances in the validation set as possible. We
use an iterative, greedy method that provides guarantees on
the quality of our solution, due to the submodular nature of
the optimization .
Experiments
We evaluate anchor explanations for complex models on a
number of tasks, primarily focusing on how they facilitate
accurate predictions by users (simulated and human) on the
behavior of the models on unseen instances. Code and the
data for all the experiments is available at 
marcotcr/anchor-experiments.
Simulated Users
For simulated users, we use the tabular datasets previously
mentioned (adult, rcdv and lending). Each dataset is split
such that models are trained with the training set, explanations are produced for instances in the validation set, and
evaluated on instances in the test set. For each dataset, we
train three different models: logistic regression (lr), 400 gradient boosted trees (gb) and a multilayer perceptron with
two layers of 50 units each (nn). We generate both linear
LIME and anchor explanations for them.
Table 4: Average precision and coverage with simulated
users on 3 tabular datasets and 3 classiﬁers. lime-n indicates
direct application of LIME to unseen instances, while lime-t
indicates a threshold was tuned using an oracle to achieve the
same precision as the anchor approach. The anchor approach
is able to maintain very high precision, while a naive use of
linear explanations leads to varying degrees of precision.
When simulating users, we compute coverage (what fraction of the instances they predict after seeing explanations)
and precision (what fraction of the predictions were correct)
on the complete test set. For each dataset, model, and explanation type, we compute these metrics for the explanation
of each instance in the validation data. Simulating when an
anchor applies is clear. It is not obvious, however, how real
users would use LIME explanations. Ideally, they should
only apply explanations to examples that are close, but it is
not clear what the distance function and the threshold for
“close” should be, or if users compute distances on demand.
Therefore, in this section, we simulate different behaviors,
and perform a study with real users in the following section.
In Table 4 (left), we show the average precision for anchor and LIME, assuming users always apply the LIME
explanation without any regard to distance (we call such a
user lime-n, for naive). It is clear that the anchor approach
is able to deliver on the promise of high average precision,
for all datasets and models. If users apply LIME naively, on
the other hand, they get widely differing levels of precision.
Since high precision is a prerequisite for interpretability, we
simulate a user that only makes a prediction with LIME if
the application of the linear explanation yields a probability
above a certain threshold (setting a threshold on the distance
produced strictly worse results), and call this user lime-t. We
tune the threshold values for each dataset/model pair in order
to obtain the same average precision as the anchor approach
on the test set, so that coverage is comparable. A real user
would not be able to perform this tuning, as (1) we are “cheating” by looking at the test set, and (2) the threshold values
found range from 67% to 91%, and often with huge variation
in the same dataset for different models. We show the average
test coverage of the validation set explanations for anchor and
lime-t in Table 4 (right). There is no clear winner in terms of
coverage, thus demonstrating that even with the impossibly
tuned thresholds, LIME is not able to outperform anchors.
Although the user is often interested in speciﬁc expla-
Coverage (perceived)
Time/pred (seconds)
Table 5: Results of the User Study. Underline: signiﬁcant w.r.t. anchors in the same dataset and same number of explanations.
Results show that users consistently achieve high precision with anchors, as opposed to baselines, with less effort (time).
(a) adult dataset
(b) rcdv dataset
Figure 4: Coverage on the test set as the simulated user sees
more explanations, at the same precision level. While there is
no clear winner for random explanations, anchors are better
when explanations are picked using submodular-pick.
nations, most users would prefer a set of explanations that
explain most of the model with as little effort on their part
as possible - explanations picked using the submodular procedure described before. In Figure 4, we show the coverage
(for the same precision level) for gb in two of the datasets
(we omit the other models/dataset due to space, but the results are similar) as the user sees more explanations, chosen
either via submodular pick (SP-LIME and SP-Anchor) or at
random (RP-LIME and RP-Anchor). The results indicate that
while the average coverage of random explanations is low
(e.g. 4.8% for rcdv), selecting the right set of explanations
with submodular pick can give users an understanding of the
model’s global behavior (e.g. ∼50% after only 10 explanations). The anchor approach also yields better coverage for
the same precision - even though it is unclear if real users can
achieve such high precision with LIME.
User study
We ran a user study with 26 users – students who had or
were taking a machine learning course – so we could rely on
familiarity with concepts such as “model”, “prediction”, and
“cross validation”. For this study, we used the adult and rcdv
datasets, followed by a multiple-choice VQA system on two images. While the VQA
model predicts one of 1000 labels, we restrict it to the 5 most
common answers predicted on questions in D, in order to
reduce visual overload.
For each dataset and explanation type, we want to evaluate if users are able to predict the behavior of the model on
unseen instances. Our set up for the adult and rcdv datasets
consists of the users ﬁrst browsing through 10 predictions
without any explanations, then with one, and two LIME or
anchor explanations. They are asked to predict the behavior
of the classiﬁer on 10 random test instances before and 10 instances after seeing each round of explanations. The user then
goes through the same procedure on the other dataset, with
the explanation type that was not the one used for the ﬁrst
one. We ask subjects to only make predictions if they are very
conﬁdent, and to select “I don’t know” otherwise. We measure coverage as the fraction of instances where users made
a prediction other than “I don’t know” (i.e. their perceived
coverage), and only measure precision in these instances.
This process is repeated for the two VQA images - half the
users see LIME for the ﬁrst and then anchor for the second,
and vice versa for the other half, and predict the model’s
answers on 20 questions before and after explanations. The
explanations are comparable in size: LIME explanations had
at most 5 terms in all datasets, while anchors varied from 1
to 5, depending on each individual prediction.
The results in Table 5, where LIME(1) refers to results
after one LIME explanation and so on, show that users with
anchors achieve high-precision - around 95% for all of the
combinations, except for Anchor(2) in adult. The coverage of
users with anchors grows with a second explanation on both
datasets. Precision with LIME, on the other hand, varies dramatically, and for VQA1, is worse than no explanations. The
subjects made mostly correct predictions when using anchors
(high precision), and knew to select “I don’t know” when an
instance was not covered by the explanation. In contrast, with
LIME or no explanations, users thought they could make
conﬁdent predictions more often, even though their precision
was considerably lower. Further, it took dramatically less
time to understand and use anchors as compared to linear
explanations, across all datasets and tasks. On a poll, 21/26
of users preferred anchors, and 24/26 said they would be
more precise with anchors; interestingly, the 2 users who said
they would be more precise with LIME were actually more
precise with anchors. Many commented that it was easier to
apply anchors than combining the weights of LIME explanations, especially with multiple explanations. They also felt
more conﬁdent in their predictions with anchors.
The user study conﬁrms our hypotheses: it is much easier
for users to understand the coverage of anchor explanations as
opposed to linear explanations, and to achieve high-precision
understanding of the model’s behavior (as measured by predicting it on new instances). Anchors are also easier to comprehend, and take less effort in applying, as reﬂected in their
times and qualitative feedback.
Limitations and Future Work
Having demonstrated the ﬂexibility and usefulness of the
anchor approach for a wide variety of domains, and having compared it to the state-of-the-art, we now turn to its
limitations and opportunities for future work.
Overly speciﬁc anchors: Predictions that are near a boundary of the black box model’s decision function, or predictions
of very rare classes may require very speciﬁc “sufﬁcient conditions”, and thus their anchors may be complex and provide
low coverage. We give an example in Figure 5 (adult dataset),
where a particular prediction is very near the boundary of the
decision function – almost any change to the instance results
in a change in prediction. While the very speciﬁc anchor
in Figure 5c communicates to the user that the conditions
necessary for the prediction are very speciﬁc, it does not
generalize well to other instances, due to its narrowness. It
also does not give much insight into the model’s behavior
besides the fact that the instance is near a decision boundary.
In cases like these, a linear LIME explanation (Figure 5b)
may be preferred due to the potential insights it gives, with
the caveat that users may still generalize incorrectly due to
unclear coverage.
Potentially conﬂicting anchors: When using the anchor approach “in the wild”, two or more anchors with different
predictions may apply to the same test instance. While possible, this situation is unlikely for two reasons: (1) the high
probability precision guarantee that anchors have by construction, and (2) the submodular objective in the pick procedure
encourages a set of anchors with low overlap. If this were to
happen in a real situation, we would want to alert the user,
suggest further investigation, and maybe suggest increasing
the precision threshold.
Complex output spaces: For certain problems where the
output is structured and complex, there is a variety of explanations that may be useful. In this work, we restrict ourselves
to explaining certain functions of the output, such as in Tables 1 and 2, leaving the task of explaining the full output
space to future work. We emphasize that this is a problem
that is not speciﬁc to the anchor approach, but still an open
problem in the explanation literature. Even for a “simpler”
output space such as the one present in the multi-label classi-
ﬁcation setting , it is not clear
if the best option would be to explain each label individually
or the set of predicted labels as a single label. The former
could overwhelm the user if the number of labels is too large,
while the latter may lead to non intuitive, or overly complex
explanations.
Realistic perturbation distributions: All perturbationbased explanation methods depend on a local perturbation
distribution that is expressive enough to reveal the model’s
behavior, while acting on components that are sufﬁciently
interpretable. Finding such distributions for some domains re-
28 < Age ≤37
Workclass = Private
Education = High School grad
Marital Status = Married
Occupation = Blue-Collar
Relationship = Husband
Race = White
Sex = Male
Capital Gain = None
Capital Loss = Low
Hours per week ≤40.00
Country = United-States
P (Salary > $50K) = 0.57
(a) Instance and prediction
(b) LIME explanation
IF Country = United-States AND Capital Loss = Low
AND Race = White AND Relationship = Husband
AND Married AND 28 < Age ≤37
AND Sex = Male AND High School grad
AND Occupation = Blue-Collar
THEN PREDICT Salary > $50K
(c) An anchor explanation
Figure 5: Explaining a prediction near the decision boundary
in the UCI adult dataset.
mains a challenge - for example, the perturbations for images
provided explanations that led to some insight, but cannot be
used for comparison of explanations across images. Designing such distributions is a line of research that would beneﬁt
multiple explanation methods.
Conclusions
We have argued that high precision and clear coverage are crucial for interpretable explanations of a model’s local behavior.
We introduced a novel family of rule-based, model-agnostic
explanations called anchors, designed to exhibit both these
properties. Anchors highlight the part of the input that is
sufﬁcient for the classiﬁer to make the prediction, making
them intuitive and easy to understand. We demonstrated the
ﬂexibility of the anchor approach by explaining predictions
from a variety of classiﬁers on multiple domains. In a user
study, we showed that anchors not only lead to higher human
precision than linear explanations, but also require less effort
to understand and apply.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the anonymous reviewers for their feedback. This work was supported in part by ONR award
#N00014-13-1-0023, and in part by FICO and Adobe Research. The views expressed are those of the authors and do
not reﬂect the policy or position of the funding agencies.