ADVANCES IN ALL-NEURAL SPEECH RECOGNITION
Geoffrey Zweig, Chengzhu Yu, Jasha Droppo and Andreas Stolcke
Microsoft Research
This paper advances the design of CTC-based all-neural (or end-toend) speech recognizers. We propose a novel symbol inventory, and
a novel iterated-CTC method in which a second system is used to
transform a noisy initial output into a cleaner version. We present
a number of stabilization and initialization methods we have found
useful in training these networks.
We evaluate our system on the commonly used NIST 2000 conversational telephony test set, and signiﬁcantly exceed the previously
published performance of similar systems, both with and without the
use of an external language model and decoding technology.
Index Terms— recurrent neural network, CTC, speech recognition, end-to-end training.
1. INTRODUCTION
In the recent renaissance of neural network speech recognition , as well as in pioneering earlier work , the networks
have been mainly used as a drop-in replacement for the acoustic
model in an HMM system. They have also been used for featureaugmentation in a “tandem” GMM-HMM system , which again
relied on a standard HMM backbone. The state-of-the-art today is a
hybrid HMM/neural-net system, which uses the classical decoding
w∗= arg max
P(w)P(a|w)
where the prior on words P(w) is estimated with a language model
trained on text only, and the probability of the acoustics P(a|w) is
estimated with a neural network acoustic model. The acoustic model
still uses a decision tree to further decompose the word sequence
into context-dependent triphone states, and a decoder to perform a
complex discrete search for the likeliest word sequence.
Recently, several research groups have begun to study whether a
neural network itself can subsume the functions of the decision tree,
and decoding search. We refer to these approaches as “all-neural,”
and they are also commonly referred to as “end-to-end.” Two main
approaches have been used, both of which attempt to leverage a recurrent neural network’s potential ability to “remember” information
for a long period of time1 and then act on it . The ﬁrst of
these approaches uses an RNN trained in the “connectionist temporal classiﬁcation” (CTC) framework to predict letter rather than
phonetic output . At its base, this approach has no
decoder at all, with all logic related to language modeling and decoding being implicitly done by the RNN. The output of a CTC system
can of course be consumed by a subsequent decoding process, but it
1The vanishing gradient problem has been sufﬁciently overcome by longshort-term memory (LSTM) and recurrent neural networks with rectiﬁed
linear units (ReLU-RNNs) that many problems in machine translation
and language processing can be handled regardless.
is not necessary. The second approach uses an RNN with an attention mechanism . The attention mechanism provides a
weighted sum of the hidden activations in a learned encoding of the
input frames as an additional input to the RNN at each time frame.
When the network learns an attention function that happens to be
unimodal with a peak that moves from left to right monotonically, it
is similar to a Viterbi alignment.
Attention-based models use a beam search to decode sequentially, symbol by symbol.
This paper is motivated by the desire to see to what extent the
decoding process of a standard system can be modeled by a neural
net itself, and to gauge the necessity of a pronunciation dictionary
and decision tree. We describe a CTC based system that advances
the state-of-the-art in all-neural modeling for conversational speech
recognition. We propose a two-stage CTC process, in which we ﬁrst
train a system that consumes speech features and hypothesizes letter sequences. Second, we re-use the CTC apparatus to train a system that consumes this noisy letter sequence and produces a cleaner
version. Additionally, we present a careful exploration of the unitvocabulary, and of the training process. We ﬁnd that a symbol inventory that uses special word-initial characters (capital letters) rather
than spaces performs well. Finally, we explore the addition of both
character and word language models. We advance the state of the art
at every level from pure all-neural ASR through to the addition of a
word-based decoding process.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
places our work in the context of previous efforts. Section 3 describe
the model we use, and 4 our standard decoding process, and extensions. Section 5 proposes the novel technique of iterated CTC. In
Section 6 we describe the details of training the models. Section 7
presents experimental results, followed by conclusions in Section 8.
2. RELATION TO PRIOR WORK
Letter-based or graphemic systems have been long studied , and are attractive because they alleviate the need to produce
a dictionary of word pronunciations. Past work was motivated by the
need to quickly build systems in new languages without a dictionary,
and kept the rest of a standard HMM system, in particular the use of
a decision tree.
In contrast to this, we follow recent work where
a neural network learns context-dependence implicitly.
Our approach is most similar to the CTC methods of . In contrast to , we use a ReLU-RNN rather than
an LSTM, and ﬁnd it to be effective and much faster. In contrast to
 , we use recurrent networks at every level as opposed to deep
neural nets (DNNs) in the lower levels, and an RNN at the top level
only. Also in contrast to , we study performance in the absence
of an external language model as well as with one.
We extend past CTC work by the use of what we term iterated CTC, ﬁrst operating on acoustic features, and then on letter sequences. This use of CTC on symbolic input is a novel alternative
to encoder-decoder models, and is described in Section 5. Interestingly, the attention-based approach of also introduces an extra
RNN layer with the motivation of modeling symbol/language level
phenomena.
3. THE MODEL
We adopt a multi-layer RNN trained with CTC . Central to the
CTC process is the use of a “don’t care” or blank symbol, which is
allowed to optionally occur between regular symbols.
The standard alpha-beta recursions are used to compute the posterior state occupancy probabilities.
Let the input consist of t acoustic frames along with a symbol sequence S. Denote an alignment of the t audio frames to the sequence
S by π, and the product of the state-level neural net probabilities for
the alignment as P(S|π). Let pt
q be the probability the neural net assigns to symbol q at time t, i.e., the output after the softmax function.
The CTC objective function is given by
P(S|π)P(π) =
P(π) is determined by the HMM transition probabilities. We use a
self-loop probability of 0.5 for all symbols. The probability of transitioning from a non-blank symbol to the blank symbol is 0.25, and
from a non-blank symbol to the next non-blank symbol it is 0.25. In
addition, the probability of transitioning out of the blank symbol to
the next non-blank symbol is 0.25. The key input to CTC is the probability, as determined by the neural network, of a particular symbol
St at time t.
Consistent with standard notation, denote the posterior probability of being in state/symbol q at time t by γt
q. Note that this is
derived from the alpha-beta computations, and is distinct from the
probability pt
q that the neural network assigns to symbol q at time
t. The derivative of the CTC objective function with respect to the
activation at
q for output q at time t before the softmax is
This is the error signal for backpropagation into the RNN.
4. INTERPRETING THE OUTPUT
4.1. Raw CTC Output
After training, the output of the RNN can be directly converted into
a readable character sequence. There are two problems to solve:
1. Where to put spaces between words.
2. How to distinguish instances of repeated characters, for example the ll in hello, from a sequence of frames each labeled
with the same letter, e.g., the l in help. Recall that the CTC
blank symbol is optional, so a sequence of frames labeled by
a single letter cannot be immediately distinguished from multiple occurrences of that letter.
When the symbol inventory includes a space symbol (distinct from
the blank symbol), the ﬁrst problem is easily solved. Past work, e.g.
 , solve the second problem with a search over alternatives, or
requiring a blank between letters. Instead, we propose a new symbol
inventory as described below.
4.2. Symbol Inventory
Past work has explicitly modeled the spaces between
words in the acoustic model, e.g., with a special space symbol “ ”
distinct from the CTC blank symbol. Since words are frequently run
together, we propose an alternative representation where word-initial
characters are considered distinct from non-initial characters. A convenient representation of this is to use capital letters in the wordinitial position. Since the forward-backward computation in CTC
requires that the input sequence be longer than the output sequence,
this also increases the set of utterances that can be aligned. This is
also consistent with speech recognition systems that use positiondependent phonetic variants. To identify repeated letters, we use
special double-letter units to represent repeated characters like ll.
Finally, to improve the readability of the output without any further
processing, we attach apostrophes to the following letters, creating
units like the “’d” in “we’d.” Altogether the unit inventory size is 79.
As an example of this, the sentence
“yes he has one”
would be rendered for training as
“YesHeHasOne”.
With this encoding, a readable decoding can then be produced very
1. Select the most likely symbol at each frame
2. Discard all occurrences of the “don’t care” symbol
3. Compress consecutive occurrences of the same letter into one
occurrence
4. Add a space in front of each capitalized letter and show the
4.3. Character Beam Search
Previous work has used a character-level language model
to improve the output of a neural system. This implements the classical decoding paradigm of Eqn. 1
at the character level, with the character language model providing P(w) or in this case P(c). The neural network provides P(c|a),
and beam search is used to ﬁnd the likeliest character sequence. We
present results for this approach in Section 7.4.
4.4. Word Beam Search
To provide a complete set of results comparable to , we have
also used a word-based decoder that uses a graphemic dictionary,
and uses the frame-level likelihoods in the standard way.
decoder is the dynamic decoder as described in .
the CUED-RNNLM toolkit to train two forward- and two
backward-running RNN language models. These are interpolated
with a standard 4-gram model and used to rescore N-best lists produced by the N-gram decoder. Details can be found in a companion
paper .
5. ITERATED CTC (CTC2)
The output described in the previous section is of course noisy. For
example, one of the Switchboard utterances is “no white collar
crime does not exactly fall into it”, but the raw network output is
Table 1. Word error rate (%) on NIST RT-02 Switchboard-1 test set
as a function of symbol inventory, for a 512-wide 5-deep network
Explicit spaces
Capital letters
Initial+Final letters
Table 2. Word error rate (%) on the RT-02 test set as a function of
hidden layer size, for 5-layer networks
Hidden Dimension
“and now whi coler crime doen exsitally fall into it”. The classical
approach to improving this is the incorporation of a lexicon of legal
word units and a language model, as described in Section 4.
To improve the output with a purely neural network based approach, we propose using iterated CTC. Speciﬁcally, the noisy character sequences from the initial raw CTC output is represented by
one-hot feature vectors analogous to the acoustic feature vectors, and
the RNN/CTC training process is repeated. The result is a model that
transforms a noisy symbol sequence into a less noisy sequence. We
have found that this process, while producing less dramatic improvements than the incorporation of a full ﬂedged decoder, consistently
improves the output, while staying in the all-neural paradigm. This
is the case even when the original network is optimally deep.
6. TRAINING PROCESS
Our models are trained using stochastic gradient descent with momentum and L2 regularization. For all but our largest networks,
minibatches of 32 utterances are processed at once, resulting in updates after several thousand speech frames. For networks of width
1024 and depth 7 or greater, we have found it necessary to process 64
utterances simultaneously to achieve accurate gradient estimates and
stable convergence. We use frame-skipping , where we stack
three consecutive frames into a single vector to produce an input
sequence one-third as long and three times as wide as the original
input. When we train on the 300-hour Switchboard set, we use a
per-frame learning rate of 0.5, and decrease it by a factor of 4 if 3
iterations over the data fail to produce an improvement on development data. We randomly held out about 10 hours of training data for
use as development data. When the Fisher data is added, resulting
in about 2000 hours of training data, the rate is reduced if a single
iteration passes without increasing dev set likelihood.
We implement the model with direct calls to the CUDNN v5.0
RNN library. Training with 40-dimensional input feature vectors
(prior to skipping), a 512-dimension bi-directional ReLU-RNN with
three hidden layers is about 0.0025 times real time, i.e., 400 times
faster than real time on a Razer laptop with a NVIDIA 970M GPU.
6.1. Stabilization Methods
In initial experiments, we found it useful to introduce several stabilization techniques. Most importantly, we use gradient clipping to
prevent “exploding gradients” during the RNN training. The magnitude of the gradients are clipped at 1 prior to the momentum update. Secondarily, we have noticed that when rare units are present
Table 3. Word error rate (%) as a function of the number of layers
and dimensions on the RT-02 test set
Number of layers
1024 width
(e.g., the “ii” in “Hawaii,” the training process tends to push their
probabilities close to 0 between occurrences, which leads to poor
performance and sometimes instability when the unit is eventually
seen. To avoid this, we interpolate the gradient with a small gradient tending towards the uniform distribution. This is implemented
by interpolating the γ values from the alpha-beta computation with
a uniform distribution. We reserve 1% of the total probability mass
for this uniform distribution. Finally, we have also found it important to compute the gradient over a large number of utterances (32 or
64) before doing a parameter update.
6.2. Model Initialization
Weight matrices are initialized with small random weights uniformly
distributed and inversely proportional to the square root of the fanin, with one exception. In the output layer, which maps from the
RNN hidden dimension (typically 1024) down to the size of the symbol inventory (79 in our case), we assign explicit responsibility for
each output symbol to a speciﬁc RNN activation. This is done by
using an identity matrix for the ﬁrst 79 dimensions, and zeros elsewhere. In the case of bidirectional networks, this is done symmetrically so both forward and backward portions of the network contribute equally. While we have not performed an exhaustive evaluation of this scheme, in initial experiments we observed consistent
small gains. Concurrent with this work, a similar scheme was very
recently proposed in for standard neural net systems.
6.3. Polishing with In-domain Data
Our training process begins and ends with a focus on the in-domain
300 hour switchboard-only dataset. We start by training on the 300
hour set mainly for convenience in showing results with both the
300 hour (Switchboard) and 2000 hour (Switchboard + Fisher) datasets. The 2000 hour models presented here were initialized with the
output of 300 hour training. While training from scratch with 2000
hours of data works about as well, we have found it consistently
useful to ﬁnish all training runs by executing a few more iterations of
training on the in-domain Switchboard-only data. We do this starting
from a very low learning rate (one-tenth the normal rate), and most
of the gain is observed in the ﬁrst iteration of training.
7. EXPERIMENTS
7.1. Corpus
For comparability with , we present results on the
NIST 2000 conversational telephone speech (CTS) evaluation set.
Table 4. Word error rate (%) as a function of post-processing for the
RT-02 test set, using a 9-layer 1024-wide network
Iterated CTC
Character-Beam
Table 5. Comparative performance: word error rates (%) on the
NIST 2000 Switchboard and CallHome test sets (models trained on
300 hours of Switchboard data only). All systems are use graphemic
Current+CTC2
Model selection uses the RT-02 CTS evaluation set for development.
The input features are 40-dimensional log-Mel-ﬁlterbank energies,
extracted every 10 milliseconds. The feature vectors are normalized
to zero mean on a per-utterance level. Since the logarithmic compression already limits the dynamic range to reasonable levels, we
do not perform variance normalization.
7.2. Network Architecture and Symbol Inventory
For computational efﬁciency, we restricted ourselves to the models directly supported by the CUDNN v5.0 library. This encompasses multi-layer uni- and bidirectional RNNs. Support is provided
for LSTMs, Gated Recurrent Units, standard sigmoid RNNs, and
ReLU-RNNs. In initial experiments, we found that ReLU-RNNs are
as good as LSTMs for this task, and many times faster. Therefore
we use them exclusively in the experiments. We further focus on
bi-directional networks for improved performance.
Table 1 shows the effect of our choice of symbol inventory. We
see that the use of special word-initial characters improves performance over the use of explicit blanks. Redundantly modeling word-
ﬁnal characters does not provide a further improvement. For ease of
interpretability, all models use explicit double-character symbols.
In Table 2, we show the effect of network width, keeping the
depth constant at 5. While the widest network is the best, for computational reasons we restrict our further experiments to networks of
width 1024 or less.
In Table 3, we present the effect of network depth, for hidden
layer sizes of 512 and 1024. Note that since we use a bidirectional
network, the total number of activations in a layer is double this.
We ﬁnd that relatively deep networks perform well. Based on these
results, the remainder of the experiments use a 1024 width 9 layer
bidirectional network. Including weight matrices and biases, the total number of parameters in the 9 layer 1024 wise network is about
53 million parameters.
Table 6. Comparative performance: word error rate (%) on the NIST
2000 Switchboard and CallHome test sets 
 (ensemble)
7.3. Iterated CTC and Beam Search
We evaluate the post-processing methods in Table 4. Clearly, the
RNN is not yet learning all the logic of a beam-search decoder, and
the effectiveness of a character-based beam search is midway between using the raw output, and a full word-based search. We see
that iterated CTC can produce a signiﬁcant improvement, though
not as much as a complete beam search, while remaining in the allneural framework. When character or word N-grams are used, the
utility decreases. An examination of the iterated CTC errors indicates that it mostly reduces the substitution rates, as the global shifts
created by insertions and deletions seem difﬁcult for the RNN to
compensate.
7.4. Comparison to Previously Published Results
We summarize our results on the NIST 2000 CTS test set and compare them with past work in Tables 5 and 6. The systems are categorized according to whether they use a lexicon to enforce the output of legal words, and in their use of a language model. We see
an improvement over previous results with our RNN based system.
In , a LSTM-CTC system using phonemic rather than graphemic
targets is presented, and achieves an error rate of 15% on the Switchboard portion of eval 2000; that system still uses a phonetic dictionary. Note that the authors in did not report an error rate
on Switchboard tasks with characters as target. The only reported
number for a CTC-based system with character output is from ,
where the error rate is 20.0%. This is much higher than the 15%
error rate we obtained in this work under the same evaluation conditions. Compared to a standard system, such as , which achieves
9.6% and 13% on Switchboard and CallHome respectively with conventional 300-hour training, we see that current neural-only systems cannot yet mimic all the logic in a conventional system. However, our ReLU-RNN system does set a new state of the art for an
all-neural system, and we see that performance of such systems is
rapidly improving.
8. CONCLUSIONS
We advance the state of the art with an all-neural speech recognizer,
principally by employing a novel symbol encoding, and optimized
training process. We further present an iterated CTC approach for
use without any decoding process. In this framework, a network
ﬁrst maps from audio to symbols, followed by a second symbol-tosymbol mapping network.
Both using raw network output and search-based post-processing,
we systematically improve on previously published results in the
end-to-end neural speech recognition paradigm.
9. REFERENCES
 G. E. Dahl, D. Yu, L. Deng, and A. Acero, “Large vocabulary continuous speech recognition with context-dependent DBN-HMMs”, in
ICASSP, pp. 4688–4691. IEEE, 2011.
 A.-r. Mohamed, G. Dahl, and G. Hinton, “Deep belief networks for
phone recognition”, in NIPS Workshop on Deep Learning for Speech
Recognition and Related Applications, p. 39, 2009.
 F. Seide, G. Li, and D. Yu, “Conversational speech transcription using
context-dependent deep neural networks”, in Interspeech, pp. 437–440,
 H. Sak, A. W. Senior, and F. Beaufays, “Long short-term memory recurrent neural network architectures for large scale acoustic modeling”,
in Interspeech, pp. 338–342, 2014.
 G. Hinton, L. Deng, D. Yu, G. E. Dahl, A.-r. Mohamed, N. Jaitly, A. Senior, V. Vanhoucke, P. Nguyen, T. N. Sainath, et al., “Deep neural networks for acoustic modeling in speech recognition: The shared views
of four research groups”, IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 29,
pp. 82–97, 2012.
 H. A. Bourlard and N. Morgan, Connectionist speech recognition: a
hybrid approach, Springer Science & Business Media, 1993.
 T. Robinson and F. Fallside, “A recurrent error propagation network
speech recognition system”, Computer Speech & Language, vol. 5, pp.
259–274, 1991.
 H. Hermansky, D. P. Ellis, and S. Sharma,
“Tandem connectionist
feature extraction for conventional HMM systems”, in ICASSP 2000,
vol. 3, pp. 1635–1638. IEEE, 2000.
 S. J. Young, J. J. Odell, and P. C. Woodland, “Tree-based state tying
for high accuracy acoustic modelling”,
in Proceedings of the workshop on Human Language Technology, pp. 307–312. Association for
Computational Linguistics, 1994.
 S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory”, Neural
computation, vol. 9, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
 Q. V. Le, N. Jaitly, and G. E. Hinton,
“A simple way to initialize recurrent networks of rectiﬁed linear units”,
arXiv preprint
 
 I. Sutskever, O. Vinyals, and Q. V. Le, “Sequence to sequence learning
with neural networks”, in Advances in neural information processing
systems, pp. 3104–3112, 2014.
 D. Bahdanau, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Neural machine translation by
jointly learning to align and translate”, arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.0473,
 O. Vinyals, Ł. Kaiser, T. Koo, S. Petrov, I. Sutskever, and G. Hinton,
“Grammar as a foreign language”, in Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, pp. 2773–2781, 2015.
 A. Graves, S. Fern´andez, F. Gomez, and J. Schmidhuber, “Connectionist temporal classiﬁcation: labelling unsegmented sequence data with
recurrent neural networks”, in Proc. of the 23rd Intl. Conf. on Machine
learning, pp. 369–376. ACM, 2006.
 A. Graves and N. Jaitly, “Towards end-to-end speech recognition with
recurrent neural networks”, in ICML, vol. 14, pp. 1764–1772, 2014.
 H. Sak, A. Senior, K. Rao, and F. Beaufays, “Fast and accurate recurrent neural network acoustic models for speech recognition”,
Interspeech, pp. 1468–1472, 2015.
 A. L. Maas, Z. Xie, D. Jurafsky, and A. Y. Ng, “Lexicon-free conversational speech recognition with neural networks”, in Proc. NAACL, pp.
345–354, 2015.
 A. Hannun, C. Case, J. Casper, B. Catanzaro, G. Diamos, E. Elsen,
R. Prenger, S. Satheesh, S. Sengupta, A. Coates, et al.,
speech: Scaling up end-to-end speech recognition”,
arXiv preprint
 
 Y. Miao, M. Gowayyed, and F. Metze,
“Eesen: End-to-end speech
recognition using deep rnn models and wfst-based decoding”, in IEEE
ASRU Workshop, pp. 167–174. IEEE, 2015.
 D. Bahdanau, J. Chorowski, D. Serdyuk, Y. Bengio, et al., “End-to-end
attention-based large vocabulary speech recognition”, in ICASSP, pp.
4945–4949. IEEE, 2016.
 L. Lu, X. Zhang, and S. Renals, “On training the recurrent neural network encoder-decoder for large vocabulary end-to-end speech recognition”, in ICASSP, pp. 5060–5064. IEEE, 2016.
 W. Chan, N. Jaitly, Q. Le, and O. Vinyals, “Listen, attend and spell:
A neural network for large vocabulary conversational speech recognition”, in ICASSP, pp. 4960–4964. IEEE, 2016.
 E. G. Schukat-Talamazzini, H. Niemann, W. Eckert, T. Kuhn, and
S. Rieck, “Automatic speech recognition without phonemes”, in Eurospeech, pp. 129–132, 1993.
 C. Schillo, G. A. Fink, and F. Kummert,
“Grapheme based speech
recognition for large vocabularies”, in Interspeech, pp. 584–587, 2000.
 S. Kanthak and H. Ney, “Context-dependent acoustic modeling using
graphemes for large vocabulary speech recognition”, in ICASSP, vol. 2,
pp. 845–848, 2002.
 M. Killer, S. St¨uker, and T. Schultz, “Grapheme based speech recognition”, in Interspeech, pp. 3141–3144, 2003.
 Y. Miao, M. Gowayyed, X. Na, T. Ko, F. Metze, and A. Waibel, “An
empirical exploration of ctc acoustic models”, in ICASSP, pp. 2623–
2627. IEEE, 2016.
 C. Mendis, J. Droppo, S. Maleki, M. Musuvathi, T. Mytkowicz, and
G. Zweig, “Parallelizing wfst speech decoders”, in ICASSP, pp. 5325–
5329. IEEE, 2016.
 X. Chen, X. Liu, Y. Qian, M. Gales, and P. Woodland,
RNNLM: An open-source toolkit for efﬁcient training and evaluation
of recurrent neural network language models”, in ICASSP, pp. 6000–
6004. IEEE, 2016.
 W. Xiong, J. Droppo, X. Huang, F. Seide, M. Seltzer, A. Stolcke, D. Yu,
and G. Zweig, “The Microsoft 2016 conversational speech recognition
system”, in ICASSP, 2017.
 G. Kurata and B. Kingsbury, “Improved neural network initialization
by grouping context-dependent targets for acoustic modeling”, in Interspeech, pp. 27–31, 2016.
 D. Povey, V. Peddinti, D. Galvez, P. Ghahrmani, V. Manohar, X. Na,
Y. Wang, and S. Khudanpur, “Purely sequence-trained neural networks
for ASR based on lattice-free MMI”, in Interspeech, pp. 2751–2755,