CBE—Life Sciences Education
Improvements from a Flipped Classroom May Simply
Be the Fruits of Active Learning
Jamie L. Jensen,* Tyler A. Kummer,* and Patricia D. d. M. Godoy†
*Department of Biology, Brigham Young University, Provo, UT 84602; †Health School, Universidade Potiguar,
Lagoa Nova–Natal, Rio Grande do Norte 59056-000, Brazil
Submitted August 20, 2014; Revised September 26, 2014; Accepted September 27, 2014
Monitoring Editor: Mary Pat Wenderoth
The “flipped classroom” is a learning model in which content attainment is shifted forward to out­
side of class, then followed by instructor-facilitated concept application activities in class. Current
studies on the flipped model are limited. Our goal was to provide quantitative and controlled data
about the effectiveness of this model. Using a quasi-experimental design, we compared an active
nonflipped classroom with an active flipped classroom, both using the 5-E learning cycle, in an ef­
fort to vary only the role of the instructor and control for as many of the other potentially influential
variables as possible. Results showed that both low-level and deep conceptual learning were equiv­
alent between the conditions. Attitudinal data revealed equal student satisfaction with the course.
Interestingly, both treatments ranked their contact time with the instructor as more influential to
their learning than what they did at home. We conclude that the flipped classroom does not result
in higher learning gains or better attitudes compared with the nonflipped classroom when both uti­
lize an active-learning, constructivist approach and propose that learning gains in either condition
are most likely a result of the active-learning style of instruction rather than the order in which the
instructor participated in the learning process.
wanting to implement a flipped strategy in their classrooms.
It is especially popular among K–12 educators, 40% of whom
reported a desire to try the flipped model this coming aca­
demic year in the Speak Up online survey . Even in higher education, the flipped classroom
is gaining significant ground, being implemented on college
campuses across the country.
Hamdan and others offer a definition: “In the Flipped
Learning model, teachers shift direct learning out of the
large group learning space and move it into the individual
learning space, with the help of one of several technologies”
 . Many researchers have put forth
variations on the definition of “flipped.” The main idea is
to shift the attainment of content before class in the form of
instructional videos, recorded lectures, and other remotely
accessed instructional items. Then, instructors spend inclass time applying the material through complex problem
solving, deeper conceptual coverage, and peer interaction
 .
Sarawagi suggests that it is defined by facilitating
low-level (terms, definitions, and basic content) learning
outside class and high-level (application-based) learning
within class.
According to the constructivist, inquiry-based, learning
cycle model ,
Vol. 14, 1–12, Spring 2015
Address correspondence to: Jamie L. Jensen ( ).
© 2015 J. L. Jensen et al. CBE—Life Sciences Education © 2015 The
American Society for Cell Biology. This article is distributed by The
American Society for Cell Biology under license from the author(s).
It is available to the public under an Attribution–Noncommer­
cial–Share Alike 3.0 Unported Creative Commons License (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0).
DOI:10.1187/10.1187/cbe.14-08-0129
“ASCB ®” and “The American Society for Cell Biology ®” are registered trademarks of The American Society for Cell Biology.
INTRODUCTION
Technological advances have impacted almost every facet of
modern culture; education is no different. As new technolo­
gies become available, they are often embraced in education­
al innovation in an attempt to enhance traditional instruc­
tion. The “flipped classroom” is one of the most recently
emerged and popular technology-infused learning models.
This is a learning model in which content attainment is shift­
ed forward to outside of class in an online format and then
followed by teacher-facilitated concept application activities
in class. This model has gained such popularity across the
country that there is now a Flipped Learning Network with
more than 12,000 member educators that supports educators
CBE Life Sci Educ March 2, 2015 14:ar5
J. L. Jensen et al.
14:ar5, 2
CBE—Life Sciences Education
teaching consists of two phases: a phase in which students
are gaining conceptual understanding (hereafter referred to
as the content attainment phase) and a phase in which students
learn to apply and/or evaluate those concepts in novel situa­
tions in order to broaden their conceptual understanding be­
yond the context in which they learned it (hereafter referred
to as the concept application phase). In a traditional teaching
model, the instructor facilitates content attainment through
various means in a classroom setting. Students are then
given the responsibility of applying the concepts, generally
in the form of homework assignments. In a flipped model,
the roles are reversed, with students being responsible for
attaining the content before coming to class, at which time
the instructor facilitates the application process. It appears
that the main difference between these models is the role
of the instructor: to facilitate content attainment or concept
application. Does it matter where you place instructor and
student responsibilities?
Owing to the relatively recent emergence of this model,
research has not been done to determine the differential ef­
fect of instructor facilitation in the two phases of learning.
Constructivist theory would suggest that instructor facilita­
tion is equally important in both phases. Vygotsky also put
forth the idea that an instructor (or a more capable peer) can
provide scaffolding by which students can perform above
their current level of development, thus facilitating their
learning . Research has also been done on
the complete presence or absence of an instructor, compar­
ing entirely online courses with face-to-face courses. Results
are mixed and confounded by the many different variables
involved, that is, active versus passive approaches, inclusion
of blended models, and differences in instructional material
and learning time; see Means et al., 2010, for a meta-analysis.
From this, it seems that an instructor can play an important
role; however, a theoretical rationale for the differential im­
portance of the instructor in each phase of learning is impos­
sible to establish.
Studies testing the effectiveness of the flipped model cur­
rently consist of either case studies, in which practitioners
describe the implementation of a flipped model in their
own classroom and report primarily affective data , or comparison studies, in which the flipped model is
compared directly with traditional didactic methods . Case studies
are informative but may offer limited value, in that they
are often not generalizable, they often do not target any
causal explanation, and they are seldom compared with
a control. Comparative studies can offer different insight
in a more generalizable manner; researchers are finding
positive trends in a flipped environment over a traditional
environment . However, current studies on the flipped
classroom are limited due to the fact that so many potential
causative mechanisms are being changed between treat­
ments (e.g., shifting to active learning, including additional
technology, using additional teaching materials, imple­
menting peer instruction) that it is difficult, if not impossi­
ble, to disaggregate them.
For example, Bergstrom compared a passive lec­
ture model with an approach that used online content de­
livery. However, many of the variables changed between
conditions, so it was impossible to parse out the effects and
pinpoint a specific causal factor. Bergstrom did, however,
find more positive opinions from students utilizing online
content, although exam scores showed no differences. In
2012, Strayer ran a statistics course in both lecture-based
and active flipped formats. Student attitudes and impres­
sions showed slight improvement in the flipped condition;
no quantitative learning gains were measured. Tucker 
suggests that, in high school settings, the flipped model leads
to better relationships between students and the instructor,
greater student engagement, and higher motivation; how­
ever, no quantifiable data were presented. Tune et al. 
gathered data on graduate students in a flipped physiology
course in which marked and quantified improvement in
conceptual understanding was seen. However, many vari­
ables differed between conditions (including active learning,
course materials, and instructional lessons) making it impos­
sible to attribute the success of the model to any one causal
factor. McLaughlin et  al. flipped an introductory
pharmaceutics course at a pharmacy school and found that
student attitudes and self-reported learning were greater in
the flipped model. However, no quantitative learning gains
were measured, and the flipped model was compared back
to a lecture-based model. In their report on flipped learning,
Hamdan et al. observed, “Quantitative and rigorous
qualitative research on Flipped Learning is limited” (p. 6).
The goal of this study was to take the first step into provid­
ing such quantitative and controlled data about the effective­
ness of the flipped model. Specifically, we aimed to compare
a flipped model with a nonflipped model while only varying
the role of the instructor, thus controlling for as many of the
other potentially influential variables as possible, especially
the influence of active learning. A 5-E learning cycle model
 was used in both treatments. In the nonflipped
model, the instructor’s responsibility lay within the content
attainment process, while the responsibility of concept ap­
plication was delegated to the student as homework assign­
ments, quizzes, and other assessments (albeit, often utiliz­
ing peer interactions). Alternatively, in the flipped model,
the student was given responsibility for content attainment
before class, and the instructor was then able to facilitate
concept application through complex problem-solving and
group work on items that would traditionally have been
homework assignments. It would seem logical that instruc­
tor and peer facilitation are equally important in both phases;
however, classroom time constraints necessitate the dele­
gation of one of the phases to students. If it matters where
instructor and peer facilitation takes place, we predicted
that we would see a clear difference in treatment conditions
between a nonflipped learning cycle and a flipped learning
cycle model. Currently this comparison has not been made;
it was therefore impossible to make a research-driven predic­
tion on which condition would be superior.
Ethics Statement
The institutional review board for human subjects at J.L.J.’s
institution approved this research and granted permission
for human subjects use in this study; written consent was
obtained from all participants.
Flipped Classroom Is Active Learning
Vol. 14, Spring 2015
This study was run at a large (approx. 35,000), private, doc­
torate-granting university in the western United States.
The university is highly selective, with an average incom­
ing freshman ACT score of 28 and grade point average of
3.82, which means that students are highly motivated. It is
a private religious institution with a highly homogeneous
population both religiously and culturally. Students in this
study were nonmajors enrolled in a general education biolo­
gy course. They ranged from freshmen to seniors and ranged
in majors across all non–life sciences disciplines. The classes
had ∼60 students each. The course met three times per week
for 50-min time periods.
Data were included in the analysis only for students who
completed the course with a passing grade to exclude stu­
dents who stopped attending the course midway through
the semester and returned only to take the final exam (60%
and above; both sections had an equal fail rate of ∼8%).
Thus, 53 students in the nonflipped condition and 55 stu­
dents in the flipped condition were included in the final
Study Design
A comparative quasi-experimental design was used. Two
sections of the course were used in a test-control situation.
Significant effort was put forth to ensure as much group
equivalence as possible, that is, the same instructor taught
both sections, the sections were taught back to back at the
same time of day in the same classroom, the same textbook
and course materials were used, and the same two teaching
assistants were present in both sections. Additionally, group
equivalence was tested using several pretests (see Measures
of Group Equivalence).
The nature of our hypothesis, that instructor facilitation is
the main causal factor of improvements in student learning
in the flipped model, necessitated that all other factors be
tightly controlled. Thus, the nonflipped and flipped sections
were exposed to the same active-learning instructional ma­
terials, just via different platforms, as described in Flipped
Condition Setup and Nonflipped Condition Setup below. Both
sections were taught using Bybee’s 5-E learning cycle
to accomplish both the content attainment and concept ap­
plication phases of learning. The 5-E learning cycle consists
of five instructional phases:
• Engage serves to interest the students in the material and
engage them in the process of learning; in this course, it
usually took the form of simply introducing students to a
puzzling phenomenon.
• Explore allows the students to explore the content and con­
struct their own understanding before introducing any
terminology; in this course, students actively engaged
with materials to discover patterns, make hypotheses, and
build conceptual understanding.
• Explain is the phase at which the instructor introduces ter­
minology that students can link to their own constructions
to facilitate concept building; in this course, this was ac­
complished through minilectures provided in person or
• Elaborate forces the students to apply their new conceptual
understanding to novel situations in order to broaden the
domain and strengthen the framework of these concepts;
in this course, students were asked to solve higher-order
problems using what they had learned in the previous
• Evaluate can take the form of both formative and/or sum­
mative assessments that test students’ understanding of
the concepts they have just learned; in this course, evalua­
tion took the form of clicker or online quizzes (formative)
and unit exams (summative).
The first three phases (engage, explore, and explain) are
used to facilitate content attainment. The elaborate phase
is the one in which students apply the concepts they have
constructed through the content attainment stage, that is, the
concept application phase.
The nonflipped condition was taught such that engage,
explore, and explain took place during the 50-min class
period, and elaborate and evaluate took place online as a
homework assignment. The flipped condition was taught
using the same materials, but with the variation being that
the engage, explore, and explain procedures were performed
by students online as preclass homework assignments, leav­
ing the elaborate and evaluate steps to be performed during
the 50-min class period (see Figure 1).
Nonflipped Condition Setup.  In this condition, students
were first introduced to the material during in-class instruc­
tion. A typical class period began with the exploration of a
novel biological phenomenon (engage and explore). Students
worked in groups of three or four using a prepared student
guide to discover patterns, put forth hypotheses, and ana­
lyze data. These group sessions were facilitated by both the
instructor and teaching assistants; thus, students had direct
access to individualized feedback. Brief whole-class discus­
sions were interspersed between the group work to clarify
Figure 1.  Study design. This represents the activities that would oc­
cur surrounding one class period.
J. L. Jensen et al.
14:ar5, 4
CBE—Life Sciences Education
out the class period. Again, the instructor acted mostly as a
guide to their learning, rather than as the authority figure in
the classroom.
For assessment of students’ understanding, the same quiz­
zes administered in the nonflipped condition were adminis­
tered in the flipped condition (evaluate). Quizzes followed
application either as a homework assignment on the CMS
or in class using iClicker. Quizzes administered in class in
the nonflipped condition were administered online in the
flipped condition and vice versa. Again, in-class quizzes
were taken collaboratively but answered individually. Feed­
back was given in the same manner.
Students learning under both conditions took identical
unit exams. Students learning under both conditions were
also administered a comprehensive final exam at the end
of the semester. Thus, neither section was exposed to more
content material, more application practice, or more assess­
ment than the other. A sample class activity, homework as­
signment, and quiz for each condition are included in the
Supplemental Material.
Additional Control.  As an additional control, scores from
this study were compared with scores from the previous se­
mester, when the course was taught using the 5-E learning
cycle but with less structure, that is, it was not always strictly
divided into engage, explore, and explain in class and elab­
orate and evaluate at home. This method was the original
method the instructor used to teach the course for several
years and is identified here as the original group, n = 94. It
closely resembled the nonflipped condition, but was less
time intensive for the student in that there were fewer home­
work assignments and less rigidity in when and where the
phases occurred. The explore and explain phases were still
conducted in class and were nearly identical to the activi­
ties in the current study. However, less elaborative exercises
were required of the student, with only 13 assignments giv­
en throughout the semester (in comparison with 39 assign­
ments in the nonflipped and flipped conditions of the cur­
rent study). These same 13 assignments, with minor editing,
were incorporated into the current study, but an addition­
al 26 assignments were created. In addition, students took
short vocabulary quizzes in the original method to ensure
that they were keeping up with the material. Unit exams
were nearly identical in the original method but included 25
additional questions. Sixty-three questions from the original
final exam were used in the current semester (22 low level,
17 high level, and 24 LCTSR). Table 1 highlights differences
between the original course, the nonflipped course, and the
flipped course. While several distinct changes were made
from the original method of teaching to accommodate the
current study, the goal of this comparison was simply to as­
sess whether the extra time and effort put in by the instruc­
tor to enhance the course and the extra effort put forth by
students on additional homework assignments and time on
task were beneficial to learning.
Measures of Group Equivalence
Both students’ prior knowledge of biology and students’
scientific reasoning skills were assessed at the start of the
semester to determine group equivalence (and to be used
as covariates if groups appeared to be nonequivalent).
Students’ prior biology knowledge was assessed using
concepts and introduce terms. Terms were usually written
on the board or included directly in the student guide. Stu­
dents were encouraged to ask questions and offer comments
throughout the class period. The instructor acted mostly as a
guide to their learning, rather than as the authority figure in
the classroom.
A homework assignment was assigned directly follow­
ing each in-class session (elaborate). The assignments were
posted on the university’s course-management system
(CMS). This system is formatted similar to Canvas (by In­
structure). The assignments encouraged students to apply
their newly acquired knowledge by presenting them with
novel situations and problems to solve. Students entered
their responses directly into the CMS, and teaching assis­
tants then graded them for accuracy. Students also received
feedback to most problems by preset text entered by the in­
structor. The instructor also answered questions and worked
through any particularly difficult problems that students re­
quested in the class period following the due date.
To assess students’ understanding of the material (evalu­
ate), we administered periodic quizzes either via the CMS di­
rectly following the homework assignment or by iClicker in
the class period directly following the assignment’s due date.
The quizzes consisted of four apply, analyze, or evaluate
questions with multiple-choice answers. If the quizzes were
taken in class, students were allowed to discuss answers as
groups, but they were required to answer individually. The
instructor would then review the questions and correct an­
swers with the class as a whole. If the quizzes were taken at
home, feedback appeared directly after the quiz via the CMS.
Flipped Condition Setup.  In this condition, students were
first introduced to the material online during the preclass
homework assignment. This assignment was identical to the
in-class activity administered in the nonflipped condition,
except that it was completed online and alone. However, it
still followed the format of the learning cycle, encouraging
students to explore the phenomenon and discover patterns,
offer explanations, and analyze data (engage and explore).
For explorations that required materials, students watched
short video clips that demonstrated what the other students
did as an activity in class. To progress through the assign­
ment (and to receive credit), students had to input responses
in the CMS to each of the questions posed before moving to
the next question. Feedback was immediately given to each
question through preset text embedded in the assignment.
Teaching assistants then graded responses, not for accura­
cy but for effort and completion. The assignments could be
resubmitted unlimited times. As a consequence, students
reported that they would often go back and revise their an­
swers based on feedback offered throughout the assignment.
Students were then asked to apply the concepts to novel
situations during the in-class instructional period (elaborate).
At the start of class, the instructor reviewed any questions
or particularly hard problems from the preclass assignment.
Then, the students worked in groups to solve novel prob­
lems and apply what they had learned. Group work was
facilitated by the instructor and teaching assistants; thus,
students had direct access to individualized feedback. Brief
whole-class discussions were interspersed among the group
work to clarify concepts and offer feedback. Students were
encouraged to ask questions and to offer comments through­
Flipped Classroom Is Active Learning
Vol. 14, Spring 2015
scores were analyzed. First, a homework accuracy score was
computed by averaging a student’s raw score on each of
the assignments and then taking an average for the section.
This served as a measure of students’ understanding of the
material and effort. Second, a homework attempt score was
computed by tallying the average percentage of homework
assignments that were attempted, regardless of their overall
accuracy. This served as a measure of students’ engagement
outside the course.
Final Exam Scores.  An identical comprehensive final exam
was administered to both the flipped and nonflipped con­
ditions in the university testing center (the original condi­
tion received some of the same final exam questions, see
Table 1). The exam consisted of 104 multiple-choice ques­
tions, including the 24-question LCTSR (to assess reasoning
gains), 40 low-level items (“remember” and “understand” of
Bloom’s taxonomy), and 40 high-level items (“apply” and
above of Bloom’s taxonomy). Again, all items were Bloomed
by four independent raters. An additional 20 questions were
included in the final that were not related to this study and
were excluded from the analyses. The final exam was worth
300 points, or ∼18% of the final grade. For each student, the
percent correct was calculated for the LCTSR, low-level, and
high-level items and for an overall average performance for
the full exam. A change in LCTSR was calculated by sub­
tracting pre-LCTSR scores from post-LCTSR scores.
All comparisons between sections were done using inde­
pendent-samples t tests or univariate analysis of variance
(ANOVA) in the SPSS statistical package .
Where appropriate, findings were confirmed using univari­
ate analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) using the LCTSR and
BKA scores as covariates.
Measures of Affect
Student attitudes toward the course were gathered at the
end of the semester. Students were given self-report surveys
on a 6-point Likert scale, 1 being strongly disagree to 6 be­
ing strongly agree, with no option for neutrality. The survey
asked seven questions regarding course purpose followed
by a free-response item asking them to elaborate on their
the Biology Knowledge Assessment (BKA), an instrument
designed by the researchers to assess basic biology under­
standing. Reliability of the instrument was low (Spear­
man-Brown coefficient = 0.51); it was therefore only used
to establish a baseline level to assess group equivalence.
It was not used in a pretest/posttest design to determine
student learning. Students’ scientific reasoning ability was
measured using Lawson’s Classroom Test of Scientific Rea­
soning . The LCTSR is
a content-independent test of basic formal reasoning skills,
including correlational, combinatorial, probabilistic, propor­
tional, and hypothetico-deductive reasoning as well as the
ability to identify and control variables. The LCTSR has been
shown to be highly correlated with performance in science
classes . Validity and reliability
have been well established . Thus, it
was used both to assess group equivalence and to determine
student gains in a pretest/posttest design.
Measures of Effect
Unit Exams.  To assess incremental learning throughout the
semester, we administered three identical unit exams in both
the flipped and nonflipped conditions (the original condi­
tion received an additional 25 questions on each unit exam).
Exams consisted of 75 multiple-choice questions written at
“apply” or above of Bloom’s taxonomy . Each question was worth
2 points, making exams worth 150 points. Together, the three
exams (450 points) made up approximately one-quarter of
a student’s grade in the course (out of 1624 points). Exams
were administered at the university testing center. Student
scores were calculated as total percent correct.
Homework Assignments.  Students in both conditions com­
pleted homework assignments corresponding to each day
of class. Each homework assignment was worth 10 points,
and 39 assignments were given throughout the semester.
Some of the assignments were given in two parts, each
worth 5 points. Homework assignments made up 390 points
of the total 1624 points in the course, comprising approxi­
mately one-quarter of a student’s grade. Two homework
Table 1.  Comparison of original, nonflipped, and flipped conditions
Course design
Nonflipped
Sample size (n)
5-E learning cycle
5-E learning cycle
5-E learning cycle
Portion in class
Engage, explore, and explain
Engage, explore, and explain
Elaborate and evaluate
Number of assignments that stu­
dents complete outside class
Final exam
Shared low-level items
Shared high-level items
Nonshared additional items
Unit exams
Length of unit exams
100 questions
75 questions
75 questions
Additional elements
Vocabulary quizzes, unit exam
study guides (no study guide
for the final)
J. L. Jensen et al.
14:ar5, 6
CBE—Life Sciences Education
reasons for the course being atypical of a college-level
biology course. Students were then asked to rank the im­
portance of the activities (in class versus at home) to their
learning. Table 2 outlines the questions asked. An addition­
al two free-response questions were included asking stu­
dents to comment on what they liked most about the class
and on what could be improved. Responses were digitized,
averaged, and compared between sections. The larger the
numbers, the more strongly students agreed with the state­
ment. Ranking of the activities were compared between
sections to look for trends in student perceived usefulness
of instructor facilitation. Free-response questions were
categorized into common responses and frequencies were
Group Equivalence
Scores on the BKA were compared using an indepen­
dent-samples t test to evaluate the equivalence of the sections
on prior biology knowledge upon entering the course (not all
students completed the pretests; nnonflipped = 44; nflipped = 46).
The BKA was scored as a raw percentage correct. The differ­
ence between sections did not reach significance, suggesting
that sections were equally matched in prior biology knowl­
edge (Mnonflipped = 41.4, Mflipped = 46.0, t(88) = 1.80, p = 0.08).
Scores on the LCTSR were compared using an indepen­
dent-samples t test to evaluate the equivalence of sections
on reasoning ability upon entering the course (not all stu­
dents completed the pretests; nnonflipped = 45; nflipped = 47).
The LCTSR is scored out of 24 points. The difference was not
significant, suggesting that sections were equally matched
in reasoning ability (Mnonflipped = 18.2, Mflipped = 19.5, t(90) =
1.58, p = 0.12).
Both tests confirm that the groups were statistically equiv­
alent in prior knowledge and scientific reasoning skills.
However, since both prior knowledge and scientific reason­
ing ability could potentially affect student performance on
high-level exams, analyses were run with these as covariates
to confirm the findings of the analyses without covariates
As an added control, a third group was included in the
analysis as the original teaching method condition. The
LCTSR was administered to this group at the beginning
and end of the semester as well. Pre-LCTSR scores were
compared between both treatment groups and this original
group using ANOVA. Results showed that all three groups
were equivalent (Moriginal = 17.7, Mnonflipped = 18.2, Mflipped =
19.5, F(2167) = 2.78, p = 0.07). The BKA was not administered
in this original condition.
Unit Exams
Unit exam scores were compiled for all students in each con­
dition. Unit exams were scored as a raw percentage correct.
An ANOVA was conducted, wherein each unit exam was
compare between the nonflipped and flipped conditions.
For all three unit exams, student scores were equivalent
(see Figure 2 and Table 3). An ANCOVA using students’
LCTSR and BKA scores as covariates confirmed these results
(p = 0.34, 0.09, and 0.58, respectively).
Homework Assignments
As a brief reminder, both the nonflipped and flipped sec­
tions completed homework assignments accompanying
each in-class session. In the nonflipped section, homework
assignments followed in-class sessions and encompassed the
elaborate portion of the learning cycle. In the flipped section,
homework assignments preceded in-class sessions and en­
compassed the engage, explore, and explain portions of the
learning cycle.
Accuracy.  Average homework accuracy scores for each con­
dition are shown in Table 4. Data did not meet the assump­
tion of equal variances, therefore, a nonparametric test was
warranted. A Mann-Whitney U-test was conducted compar­
ing the control and test sections. The results show that the
flipped condition achieved greater accuracy on the home­
work than the nonflipped condition. However, students in
Figure 2.  Unit exam scores. None of the differences is significant.
Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals.
Table 2.  Attitudes survey
1. The overall structure of this course was helpful to my learning.
2. The activities I did at home were helpful to my learning.
3. The activities we did in class were helpful to my learning.
4. The technology-facilitated activities (e.g., learning suite exams,
online videos, etc.) were helpful to my learning.
5. The course seemed well-organized with each activity having a
clear purpose.
6. This class was designed to make me think and discover princi­
ples on my own before being taught them by the instructor.
7. This class was typical of what I would have expected of a col­
lege-level biology course.
8. If not, why not? Please explain. (Free response)
9. If you were to rank the activities according their overall contribu­
tion to your learning, how would you rank them? (Place a 1 and
a 2 in the blanks below.)
_____Activities done in class with instructor and peer collaboration
_____Activities done at home on my own time
Flipped Classroom Is Active Learning
Vol. 14, Spring 2015
the flipped condition were generally graded on completion
of all the problems (engage, explore, and explain), rather
than accuracy; whereas, the nonflipped condition was grad­
ed on completion and accuracy (elaborate). Therefore, slight­
ly higher scores in the flipped condition are expected.
Attempts.  A Mann-Whitney U-test was conducted to com­
pare the percentage of homework assignments attempted
between conditions. Results show that there was no sig­
nificant difference between conditions (Mnonflipped = 92.7%,
Mflipped = 95.7%; see Table 4).
Final Exam
Total Score.  The overall total score on the final exam was
evaluated using ANOVA between the nonflipped and
flipped conditions. Results indicated that students learn­
ing under both conditions performed equally (Mnonflipped =
66.6%, Mflipped = 67.9%; see Figure 3 and Table 5). ANCOVA
using pre-LCTSR and BKA as covariates confirmed these re­
sults (p = 0.66).
LCTSR.  The average change in LCTSR scores from pretest
to posttest was compared between conditions. Results of
ANOVA show that the average change in reasoning was
equal between conditions (MΔnonflipped = 2.07, MΔflipped =
1.57, F(1, 90) = 0.86, p = 0.36). To assess whether this change
in reasoning was significant within each condition, we con­
ducted a paired-samples t test comparing pre-LCTSR scores
to post-LCTSR scores. The results indicated that the change
in LCTSR scores in both conditions was significant (MΔnon­
flipped = 2.07, t(44) = 5.60, p < 0.001; MΔflipped = 1.57, t(46) =
4.11, p < 0.001). As an added control, the average change in
LCTSR scores was compared between both conditions and
the original teaching method using ANOVA. The average
change in LCTSR in the original group was 2.8 and was sta­
tistically equivalent to both conditions in the present study
(F(2167) = 2.49, p = 0.09).
High-Level Items.  An ANOVA was conducted to evalu­
ate whether the condition affected student performance on
high-level Bloom’s items (i.e., “apply” and above). Results
indicated that students learning under both conditions
performed equally (Mnonflipped = 57.2%, Mflipped = 58.9%;
see ­Figure 3 and Table 5). ANCOVA using pre-LCTSR and
BKA as covariates confirmed these results (p = 0.86). As an
additional control, conditions in the current study were
compared with conditions in the original group. On the 17
high-level items that all three conditions shared, scores were
equivalent (Moriginal = 55.4%, Mnonflipped = 55.6%, Mflipped =
57.4%, F(2199) = 0.33, p = 0.72).
Low-Level Items.  An ANOVA was conducted to evalu­
ate whether the condition affected student performance
on low-level Bloom’s items (i.e., “remember” and “under­
stand”). Results indicated that students learning under both
conditions performed equally (Mnonflipped = 61.1%, Mflipped
= 60.9%; see Figure 3 and Table 5). ANCOVA using pre-
LCTSR and BKA as covariates confirmed these results (p
= 0.40). As an additional control, conditions in the current
study were compared with those of the original group. On
the 22 low-level items shared between all three conditions,
results of an ANOVA indicated a significant difference be­
tween them (F(2, 199) = 3.35, p = 0.04). Pairwise comparisons
show that scores were equivalent between the nonflipped
and flipped conditions (Mnonflipped = 61.7%, Mflipped = 63.0%,
p = 0.87); however, the flipped condition outperformed the
original condition (Moriginal = 57.8%, p = 0.05).
The attitudes survey was answered on a 6-point Likert scale.
Scores were analyzed using a Mann-Whitney U-test. Results
of the test are displayed in Table 6. Only two of the attitudes
differed significantly between conditions. Students in the
Table 3.  Unit exam scores between sections (nnonflipped = 53, nflipped
M nonflipped
(SD)nonflipped (%)
(SD)flipped (%)
81.7 (0.08)
82.4 (0.10)
78.3 (0.11)
78.5 (0.12)
75.9 (0.11)
76.3 (0.17)
Table 4.  Homework scores (nnonflipped = 53, nflipped = 55)
M nonflipped
(SD)nonflipped
(SD)flipped
z-score p Value
82.1 (0.10)
89.8 (0.07)
92.7 (0.09)
95.7 (0.07)
Figure 3.  Final exam scores. Flipped and nonflipped treatment con­
ditions are represented. None of the comparisons are significant.
Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals.
Table 5.  Final exam performance (nnonflipped = 53, nflipped = 55)
Final exam
M nonflipped
(SD)nonflipped (%)
(SD)flipped (%)
66.6 (11.3)
67.9 (11.8)
High-level
57.2 (12.0)
58.9 (14.0)
61.1 (13.8)
60.9 (12.5)
J. L. Jensen et al.
14:ar5, 8
CBE—Life Sciences Education
included that it was “more like high school,” implying that
the activities seemed juvenile (27.3%), and that lecturing was
noticeably absent (22.7%). A third, less-common response
was that the course was easier than expected (13.6%). In the
flipped condition, the most common response was that lec­
turing was noticeably absent (34.5%). No other response was
frequent enough to be classified.
Students were also asked to list what they most enjoyed
about the course; 95 students offered a response. In the
nonflipped condition, the most common response was that
they enjoyed the active-learning, hands-on activities for­
mat (43.5%). Other somewhat common responses included
group work (15.2%) and comments pertaining to a specific
lesson or content covered in the class (15.2%). In the flipped
condition, the overwhelming response was the active-learn­
ing, hands-on activities format (59.2%). The second most
common response was that they loved the group work
Finally, students were asked to offer an improvement for
the course; 93 students offered a response. In the nonflipped
condition, responses varied widely (34.8% fell into the
“other” category, meaning they were not repeated by oth­
ers), but two stood out as common responses: they wanted
more lecture (21.7%); and the homework assignments were
confusing, too long, or unclear (17.4%). In the flipped con­
dition, the two most frequent responses were that the tech­
nology system used (the CMS) was a hindrance to their en­
joyment of the class (27.7%) and that the assignments were
confusing, too long, or unclear (23.4%). Other less common
responses included the desire for more lecture (12.8%) and
that the exams were difficult (10.6%).
flipped condition had a more negative attitude toward the
technology-facilitated activities (i.e., online tutorials, videos,
and homework assignments), with an average rank of 43.03
compared with an average rank of 55.35 in the control condi­
tion (z = −2.25, p = 0.03; Table 2, item 4). However, students in
the flipped condition felt that the activities had a more clear
purpose for their learning, with an average rank of 55.32
in comparison with an average rank of 42.28 in the control
condition (z = −2.39, p = 0.02; Table 2, item 5). There was no
difference between conditions in student perceptions of the
overall structure of the course (item 1), usefulness of the athome and in-class activities (items 2 and 3), constructivist
quality of the course (item 6), or perception of it being typical
of a college course (item 7).
At the end of the survey (see Table 2, item 9), students in
both conditions were asked to rank the helpfulness of the
assignments and activities they did in class versus the ones
they did at home. Interestingly, of those who responded to
the survey (nnonflipped = 47; nflipped = 50), the in-class activi­
ties were ranked as more influential in student learning than
the assignments done at home in both conditions (66.0% in
the nonflipped condition, 76.0% in the flipped condition). A
cross-tabulation analysis indicated that these percentages are
equal (χ2 = 1.19, p = 0.28). Both groups perceived their time
with the instructor as more influential for learning, regard­
less of whether they were participating in content attainment
or concept application.
Students were asked three free-response questions. Fif­
ty-one students responded to the question concerning what
made the class atypical of college classes (Table 2, item 8).
In the nonflipped condition, the most common responses
Table 6.  Attitudinal data between the nonflipped and flipped conditionsa
The overall structure of this course was helpful to my learning.
Nonflipped
The activities I did at home were helpful to my learning.
Nonflipped
The activities we did in class were helpful to my learning.
Nonflipped
*The technology-facilitated activities were helpful to my learning.
Nonflipped
*The course seemed well-organized with each activity having a clear purpose.
Nonflipped
This class was designed to make me think and discover principles on my own before being taught them by the instructor.
Nonflipped
The class was typical of what I would have expected of a college-level biology course.
Nonflipped
aNumbers represent the percentage of students answering in each category of the Likert scale. The most frequent category is bolded.
*Significant difference between conditions at p < 0.05.
Flipped Classroom Is Active Learning
Vol. 14, Spring 2015
DISCUSSION
This study shows that the flipped classroom does not re­
sult in higher learning gains or better attitudes over the
nonflipped classroom when both utilize an active-learning,
constructivist approach. Students performed equally well
on unit exams and on both low-level and high-level items
on a comprehensive final exam. In addition, student atti­
tudes toward the class and gains in scientific reasoning abil­
ity were equal in both conditions. Finally, neither condition
outperformed the original condition (less structure and less
homework) on high-level conceptual understanding or rea­
soning gains. It should be mentioned that these data have
been gathered within a specific context and from a narrow
demographic. Thus, we recommend and encourage others to
implement this same research design with varying student
bodies in a variety of academic settings (e.g., small vs. large
class sizes, lower vs. upper division, majors vs. nonmajors,
different learning outcomes) to better define the degree and
extent of transferability of these results.
On the basis of these data, we propose that any learning
gains seen in either condition are more likely a result of the
active-learning style of instruction rather than the order in
which the instructor participated in the learning process,
that is, whether the instructor was facilitating initial content
attainment as seen in the nonflipped model or facilitating
concept application as seen in the flipped model. Active
learning is a more effective means of instruction over a tra­
ditional, didactic approach . In an influential study of more than 6000 phys­
ics students across multiple high schools and universities,
Hake found that students taught using active strate­
gies learned twice as much as students taught using a direct
instruction approach. This trend has been documented in a
variety of science disciplines .
Michael reviewed multiple active-learning techniques
and concluded that active learning is now a well-supported
pedagogical strategy to improve student learning. Most re­
cently, a meta-analysis was done on 225 studies comparing
active learning with traditional lecture .
Results confirm that active learning is superior to traditional
lecture-based teaching, increasing exam scores by 6% and
decreasing fail rates by more than 50%. These results hold
across all STEM disciplines. In fact, it is such a successful
strategy that it has been recommended in several seminal
publications, including How People Learn, published by the
National Research Council and Scientific Teaching,
endorsed by HHMI and the National Science Foundation’s
Summer Institutes .
Because both treatments in the current study were taught
using active-learning strategies, specifically the 5-E learning
cycle, if active learning is the most influential factor in student
learning, we would not expect to see substantial differences
in student learning. Results in the current study support this
prediction. Several researchers recently reported that the
flipped classroom facilitated learning more than the control
with which they compared it . It is difficult to determine the
causal factor in each of these successes, because the flipped
model is being compared with a passive lecture model of
instruction. Thus, it is possible that the flip is simply being
used to facilitate the shift from more passive, traditionalist
teaching to active-learning approaches. Our current results
support this idea. When using an active-learning approach
to instruction, flipping the classroom does not add any ben­
efit to student learning. Students learning under both con­
ditions performed equally well on unit exams, low-level
recall of facts on the final exam, and high-level application
problems on the final exam in addition to experiencing equal
gains in scientific reasoning.
It is interesting that adding additional structure and ap­
plication activities to the current active-learning model also
did not increase benefits. In semesters before this study,
an active-learning, 5-E learning cycle approach was used
wherein engage, explore, and explain were generally done
during in-class time, whereas elaborate and evaluate were
most often exclusive to homework assignments. However,
these homework assignments took place every third or
fourth class period rather than directly following each day
of instruction. In addition, parts of the concept application
activities were often done together as a class. Thus, a great
deal of flexibility was evident in the course structure and less
temporal demands were placed on students. When compar­
ing the final exam performances by students in this original
approach and in the highly structured approach used in the
current study, a significant difference was only found in the
students’ abilities to recall factual information. While the
flipped classroom approach did produce higher gains on
low-level recall items than the original format of the class,
the difference was small (57.8% vs. 63.0%). The flipped ap­
proach did not, however, produce higher gains than the non­
flipped approach in the current study. This could simply be
due to the more frequent review of content demanded by the
structured approach, as would be suggested by the spacing
effect (Ebbinghaus, 1885).
In the current study, attitudes toward the course did
differ somewhat between treatments. First, students in
the flipped classroom had a more negative opinion of the
use of technology. While some of this sentiment may arise
from the current platform used by the university, technol­
ogy acting as a barrier to student learning and/or satis­
faction is not new in the literature. Gender-specific diffi­
culty with technology has been documented . Those of differing socioeconomic status
may have varying levels of familiarity with technology
that can hinder their comfort level with a flipped classroom
 .
Many other factors may affect a student’s ability to suc­
ceed in a technology-enhanced environment. The cost to
the student caused by technological impediments should
certainly be weighed against the benefits of an approach
that may or may not increase student learning over current
active-learning approaches.
It does appear from student attitudinal responses that
students in the flipped classroom had a better impression of
assignments and activities being purposeful for their learn­
ing. This may indicate that the flipped model, which forces
students to complete homework assignments in preparation
for class instead of as a follow-up to class, gives students
more sense of purpose in their at-home activities. It did not,
however, increase the completion rate of these activities (see
J. L. Jensen et al.
14:ar5, 10
CBE—Life Sciences Education
materials on their own before coming to class. Certainly,
this is not a cost we would expect to be absent in a normal
classroom. However, due to the variation in student learning
abilities and styles, in a class in which students are required
to initially learn the information on their own, wide varia­
tion in how much time and effort this process takes would be
expected. In addition, a flipped classroom requires that stu­
dents have access to technology, whether this is provided by
the university (a substantial cost to the institution) or by the
student (a substantial cost to the student). In addition to
the actual cost of computers and Internet access, the cost of
the knowledge to effectively navigate the technology was an
issue encountered in the current study. Many of the student
issues with the technology involved a lack of knowledge on
the students’ part in using certain file types, Web browsers,
and the CMS.
Socioeconomic status plays a large role in accessibility and
prior exposure to technology both in the home and in the
educational setting . Termed the “digital
divide,” access to technology is largely influenced by so­
cioeconomic status . The Child Trends
survey indicated that only 57% of U.S. children ages
3–17 had access to the Internet in their homes (85% had ac­
cess to a computer). This indicates potentially 43% of our
incoming freshman did not have access to the Internet. In
homes with incomes less than $15,000, the number of chil­
dren with access to the Internet drops to 17%. Even among
the highest income bracket, only 63% of children regularly
used the Internet. Clearly, this digital divide may influence
students’ overall comfort level with and likely achievement
in a flipped learning environment.
If the benefits of the flipped classroom far outweigh the
effects seen in the current model of instruction, then these
benefits would certainly outweigh the costs of implementa­
tion. However, these data have not been sufficiently gener­
ated at this point. The current study has taken a step toward
providing the data necessary to conduct this cost-effective­
ness analysis. Results show that the benefits of the flipped
model over a nonflipped active-learning model are insignif­
icant (see Figures 2 and 3), when holding all other variables
constant. The hypothesis that the instructor’s role in content
attainment versus concept application makes a meaningful
difference in student learning has not been supported by the
current study.
This study certainly does not discount the value of the
flipped approach. If active learning is not currently being
used or is being used very rarely, the flipped classroom may
be a viable way to facilitate the use of such approaches, if the
costs of implementation are not too great. As the research
indicates, using active learning in the flipped approach can
increase student learning as well as satisfaction over tra­
ditional, non–active learning approaches .
The results of this study are a preliminary attempt to ad­
dress a major issue involved with the implementation of a
new and exciting educational innovation, that is, the causal
mechanisms involved in the flipped learning approach.
Specifically, this study aimed to address the role of the in­
structor controlling for the effects of active learning. Because
active learning is a well-documented improvement over the
traditional lecture approach , in order
to test the effectiveness of a flipped model that necessarily
It is interesting that students in both sections perceived
the homework assignments to be difficult and less beneficial
to their learning than the activities done in class, regardless
of whether the homework comprised content attainment or
concept application. The majority of students in both sec­
tions labeled the in-class activities as most beneficial to their
learning. Keep in mind that the activities done in class by
the nonflipped section are equivalent to the at-home activi­
ties completed by the flipped classroom, and vice versa. The
most valid conclusion from this is that the presence of the
instructor and/or peer interaction had greater influence on
students’ perceptions of learning than the activities them­
selves. This may in fact be due to the adjustable method of
feedback, that is, direct interaction with the instructor and/
or teaching assistants, available in a face-to-face format as
opposed to the preset feedback available through the CMS.
This finding refutes the hypothesis that instructor support
matters more in one phase of learning over the other. Rather,
it supports the idea that instructor support matters, regard­
less of whether it is in initially presenting the concepts or
in aiding students in applying them. The next step to con­
firm this hypothesis would be to compare either of the ap­
proaches in the current study with a strictly online course in
which no instructor interaction is ever experienced.
Finally, in confirmation of the highly active quality of
both the flipped and nonflipped conditions in the present
study, students overwhelmingly recognized this quality in
both courses and the distinct lack of lecture, as evidenced
by their comments in the attitudes survey. Students in
both conditions, but even more so in the flipped condi­
tion, listed the highly interactive nature of the course as
the characteristic they liked the most (nonflipped: 43.5%;
flipped: 59.2%). Disappointingly, however, a common im­
provement suggestion in both sections was to include more
lectures (nonflipped: 21.7%; flipped: 12.8%). This supports
a trend in resistance to inquiry-based learning documented
by other researchers .
What is the “cost” of flipping a classroom? For the current
study, the cost was in time and money. To produce a flipped
classroom required the digitization of active, exploratory
lessons for every class period. This required access to au­
diovisual equipment and many hours of recording and ed­
iting. In addition, the maintenance of the online system was
a labor-intensive process requiring the full cooperation of an
IT department that could provide student support around
the clock. It also required the instructor to design applica­
tion activities beyond what was currently being done in the
classroom, a process that all educators know is extremely
time intensive. Granted, some of these costs are large only
at the outset, after which they diminish or disappear once
curricular materials are created. However, maintenance and
technology support are ongoing costs.
The cost to students should also be considered. In a flipped
classroom, students are required to put in effort to learn the
Flipped Classroom Is Active Learning
Vol. 14, Spring 2015
14:ar5, 11
Gajjar NB . The role of technology in 21st century education.
Int J Res Educ 2, 23–25.
Hake R . Interactive-engagement versus traditional methods:
a six-thousand-student survey of mechanics test data for introduc­
tory physics courses. Am J Phys 16, 64–74.
Hamdan N, McKnight P, McKnight K, Arfstrom KM . A
Review of Flipped Learning: Flipped Learning Network, Pearson
Education, and George Mason University. www.flippedlearning
.org/cms/lib07/VA01923112/Centricity/Domain/41/LitReview
_FlippedLearning.pdf?utm_source=hootsuite&utm_campaign
=hootsuite .
Handelsman J, Miller S, Pfund C . Scientific Teaching, New
York: Freeman.
Heiss ED, Obourn ES, Hoffman CW . Modern Science Teaching,
New York: Macmillan.
Jensen MS, Finley FN . Changes in students’ understanding of
evolution resulting from different curricular and instructional strat­
egies. J Res Sci Teach 33, 879–900.
Johnson G . Students, please turn to YouTube for your assign­
ment. Educ Canada 52, 16.
Johnson MA, Lawson AE . What are the relative ef­
fects of reasoning ability and prior knowledge on biology
achievement in expository and inquiry classes? J Res Sci Educ 35,
Kassam A, Iding M, Hogenbirk P . Unraveling the
digital divide: time well spent or “wasted”? Educ Inf Technol 18,
Knight JK, Wood WB . Teaching more by lecturing less. Cell
Biol Educ 4, 298–310.
Kuriyan R . Innovations and Social Change for Girls and
Women: Bridging the Gender and Technology Divide, Intel White
Paper. www.fcc.gov/blog/innovation-and-social-change-girls-and
-women-bridging-gender-and-technology-divide . Inverting the classroom: a gate­
way to creating an inclusive learning environment. J Econ Educ 31,
Lawson AE . The development and validation of a classroom
test of formal reasoning. J Res Sci Teach 15, 11–24.
Lawson AE . Science Teaching and Development of Thinking,
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/Thompson Learning.
Lawson AE, Alkhoury S, Benford R, Clark BR, Falconer KA .
What kinds of scientific concepts exist? Concept construction
and intellectual development in college biology. J Res Sci Teach 37,
McLaughlin JE, Roth M, Glatt DM, Gharkholonarehe N, Davidson
CA, Griffin LM, Esserman DA, Mumper RJ . The flipped class­
room: a course redesign to foster learning and engagement in a
health professions school. Acad Med 89, 1–8.
Means B, Toyama Y, Murphy R, Bakia M, Jones K . Evaluation
of Evidence-Based Practices in Online Learning: A Meta-analysis
and Review of Online Learning Studies. Report prepared for the
US Department of Education, Office of Planning, Evaluation, and
Michael J . Where’s the evidence that active learning works?
Adv Physiol Educ 30, 159–167.
National Research Council . How People Learn: Brain, Mind,
Experience, and School, Washington, DC: National Academies
Prince M, Felder R . The many faces of inductive teaching and
learning. J Coll Sci Teach 36, 14–20.
Project Tomorrow . Speak Up Survey. www.tomorrow.org/
speakup .
involves active learning, it is imperative that it be compared
with a control model that uses active learning. In doing this
comparison, the current study suggests that the flipped ap­
proach offers no additional benefits to student learning over
a nonflipped, active-learning approach. This is the first step
in our ongoing research to parse out the causal mechanisms
involved in this new methodology. Our future research will
involve testing these same causal mechanisms across a wide
variety of classrooms and student bodies to confirm the uni­
versality of our findings and to shed further light on a new
educational innovation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Funding from an internal Mentoring Environment Grant support­
ed this project. We thank the many graduate and under­graduate
students who assisted in the development of curriculum for this
project: Amy Buxton, Stephanie Cox, Ted Piorczynski, Jordan
Hatch, Ephraim Taylor, Andrew Schmutz, Dallas Ralph, and James
Dalgleish.