Cell Biology Education
Vol. 1, 145–153, Winter 2002
Learning Cell Biology as a Team: A Project-Based Approach
to Upper-Division Cell Biology
Robin Wright*,‡ and James Boggs†
*Department of Zoology and †Department of Communications, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington 98195
Submitted March 29, 2002; Revised July 22, 2002; Accepted July 29, 2002
Monitoring Editor: Elizabeth Vallen
To help students develop successful strategies for learning how to learn and communicate complex information in cell biology, we developed a quarter-long cell biology class based on team
projects. Each team researches a particular human disease and presents information about the
cellular structure or process affected by the disease, the cellular and molecular biology of the
disease, and recent research focused on understanding the cellular mechanisms of the disease
process. To support effective teamwork and to help students develop collaboration skills useful
for their future careers, we provide training in working in small groups. A ﬁnal poster presentation, held in a public forum, summarizes what students have learned throughout the quarter.
Although student satisfaction with the course is similar to that of standard lecture-based classes,
a project-based class offers unique beneﬁts to both the student and the instructor.
Keywords: collaborative learning, upper-division cell biology, team building, assessment, project-based learning, human diseases.
INTRODUCTION
A major challenge in teaching and learning cell biology is
the enormous and continually expanding information base
in our discipline. In just the year 2001, the National Libraries
of Medicine PubMed database listed 136,775 articles with the
word cell in their title or abstract. Nearly 6,300 articles published in 2001 contain the phrase “cell biology” or “cellular
biology.” This increasing wealth of information makes designing a series of courses that “covers” all aspects of cell
biology virtually impossible during the 4–5 yr that an undergraduate student spends at the university. The challenge
is even more acute for universities such as the University of
Washington, where most students take a single 10-week class
in cell biology without any required laboratory section.
Students at the University of Washington can obtain Bachelor of Science degrees in cellular and molecular biology, ecology, evolution, and conservation biology, botany, zoology,
neurobiology, microbiology, or biochemistry. Several cell biology courses are offered, including an introductory class (Introduction to Molecular Cell Biology, Biology 355) and two
DOI: 10.1187/cbe.02-03-0006
‡Corresponding author. E-mail address: .
upper-division courses (Cell Biology, Biology 401; Molecular
and Cellular Biology of Plants, Botany 428). None of these
classes is required for completion of any of the biological sciences majors, but the 400-level cell biology courses are electives for all the degree programs. In addition, many cellular and molecular biology majors choose to take Biology 401
and a two-quarter biochemistry series in lieu of three quarters of biochemistry. (A signiﬁcant overlap exists between
the content of Biology 401 and the third quarter of a yearlong biochemistry series, Biochemistry 442.) About 75% of
the molecular and cellular biology majors take Biology 401
during their undergraduate education at the University of
Washington. Students entering Biology 401 have taken 1 yr of
general biology, which includes approximately 15 weeks of
instruction in cell biology, genetics, and physiology. Students
also must have completed at least two quarters of organic
chemistry and either introductory cell biology or an upperdivision class in genetics, physiology, or biochemistry. Thus,
students enter Biology 401 with considerable experience in
traditional, content-driven courses that cover material relevant to cell biology.
Biology401isa5-creditcourse,representingapproximately
one-third of an average student’s 15-credit-hour-per-quarter
course load. The traditional, lecture-based course meets four
times each week in three 50-min lectures and one 2-h, teaching
C⃝2002 by The American Society for Cell Biology
R. Wright and J. Boggs
assistant (TA)–led discussion section during which students
analyze portions of research papers (see 
washington.edu/students/icd/S/biology/401mbhille.html).
Assessment of student performance is based on writing assignments, exams, and discussion-section participation. This
traditional course design emphasizes learning key areas of
cell biology content, as well as experimental methodology
and analysis. Student evaluations at the end of the class
indicatethattheyarewellsatisﬁedwiththecourse(seehttp://
www.google.com/u/washington?q=biol+401&hq=inurl%3
Awww.washington.edu%2Fcec).
After several years of teaching a traditional version of the
upper-division cell biology course, I became concerned that
students were not learning how to learn cell biology. My emphasis on content encouraged them to learn a lot of facts and
ﬁgures but did not foster a true mastery of the skills that
would be important for life after college, much less for graduate school or for professional careers in teaching or biomedical
ﬁelds. As a result, I designed a new course that replaced essentially all faculty-delivered lectures with student-led team
projects on the cellular and molecular biology of speciﬁc human diseases. This course redesign has proven to be successful in helping students learn how to navigate the complexity
and volume of knowledge in cell biology, as well as to gain
insight and appreciation for cell biology research. In addition, because I have much more substantive interactions with
my students, the course has renewed my own delight in and
commitment to teaching.
LOGISTICS OF THE PROJECT-BASED CELL
BIOLOGY COURSE
General Course Format
As shown in the syllabus (see Appendix A), the revised class
meets three times per week for 2 h. The 2-h class period is important for providing a sufﬁciently large block of time for students to make progress on their projects and helps in scheduling team presentations. After experimenting with other daily
schedules, I determined that holding class meetings on three
consecutive days (e.g., Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and Thursdays) is ideal. This schedule usually eliminates missed class
periods because of holidays, and the clustering helps studentsscheduletheirworkhoursandothercommitments.This
schedule also provides research-active instructors with larger
blocks of time to focus on their own research.
The class period is used for occasional lectures, classwide
discussions, team meetings, team project presentations, and
evaluation reviews. The occasional lectures are given as the
need arises to share information with the entire class. For example, I usually give a 20-min sample talk on a novel disease
to serve as an example for the second presentation. In addition, I often give an informal lecture on broadly relevant
research methods such as immunoblotting and cloning techniques. We also discuss effective writing strategies, slide design, and ways to make an effective poster, using examples
from my lab and from previous classes. However, on most
days no formal presentation is scheduled. Instead, students
are allowed to leave the classroom as necessary to work on
computers or in the library. The instructor and a graduate TA
are available in the classroom to discuss any issue related to
content, experiments, presentation skills, or writing. The instructor and the TA also frequently go to the nearby computer
facility to discuss the project as students work. Project presentations occur during the 2nd, 5th, 9th, and 10th weeks of class.
Students are required to purchase an appropriate cell biology textbook, such as Molecular Biology of the Cell . The class is also given a list of the key cell biology
research and review journals that are likely to be most useful in this class. Each team, in consultation with the instructor, identiﬁes and assigns to the rest of the class appropriate
textbook readings concerning their topic. For the second and
third presentations, students are given instructor-chosen review articles and primary research articles as foundations on
which to base their research and presentations. Students obtain from the library and the Internet additional information
that is necessary to complete their projects. In early classes,
a course web site was maintained that featured instructorchosen information resources. However, this practice was discontinued because most of our current students are extremely
skillful in doing Internet searches and did not ﬁnd the class
web site particularly useful. In addition, this resource did not
promote the student’s responsibility for and skill in obtaining and evaluating resources. Thus, instead of providing our
own lists of relevant resources, we devote considerable class
time to discussion of information literacy issues, including
how to evaluate a potential source’s reliability, and students
are expected to ﬁnd additional information on their own.
Four to ﬁve students work together as a team to research,
prepare, and present both oral and written reports concerning the cell biology of a particular human disease. Depending
on student input, the teams either focus on the same disease
throughout the quarter or switch midway through the quarter. Student preferences are usually about equal on the matter
of maintaining versus switching topics, and they realize the
breadth versus depth trade-offs inherent in this decision.
The overall course is divided into four segments. The ﬁrst
three are punctuated with a paper and an oral presentation:
the ﬁrst segment focuses on the organelle or cellular process
affected by the disease; the second segment deals with the cellular and molecular biology of the disease; the third segment
focuses on recent research, with topics ranging from disease
pathology to development of therapies to use of model organisms. The ﬁnal segment is a poster presentation that allows
students to bring all the information together into a coherent
whole and serves as an impressively visible metric of how
far they have come in their understanding and mastery of
complicated information. The logic of this progression from
simple to complex mirrors how most researchers, as experienced learners, approach new material. When confronted
with a need to learn something completely new, we often begin with textbooks, move into review articles, and ﬁnally dig
into the primary research.
Team Evaluation
At the beginning of each project segment, students receive an
evaluation checklist that also serves as the grading standard
for that project (see Appendixes B–D and Table 1). Separate
grades are given for the oral presentation and the paper. Evaluation of the work is explained in detail in a conference with
Cell Biology Education
Disease-Oriented Team Projects in Cell Biology Education
Table 1. Evaluation criteria and checklist for poster
TheCellBiologyofHumanDiseasePosterSessionwillbeheldinthecommonsofMaryGatesHallfrom8:30to10:30onWednesday,August16.
You will need to arrive by about 8:00 in order to set your poster up. We'll provide tables and tape. If you have any special needs, please
let us know by Monday, August 14th. Each team member will take turns standing by the poster and asking questions while the other team
members view the other posters and make notes on the worksheet. We'll change about every 15 minutes.
Part of presentation
Poster Presentations
Give take-home message in title.
Is title legible from a distance of
Does title include authors' names?
Affected Organelle
Summarize information about the structure & function of the affected organelle.
Describe the general features of the
organelle. Include a picture or diagram.
Describe where the organelle is found
within the cell. Picture may be useful.
What are the basic functions that this
organelle carries out? Why do cells
need this organelle? Can cells live
without this organelle? What about
multicellular organisms such as
What other organelles contribute
to the function of this organelle?
How does what you have learned
from OTHER projects in the class
affect your understanding of this
organelle?
What kinds of problems do defects in
this organelle cause the cell?
the organism?
Give history, symptoms, treatment of disease.
Overview of disease.
How does the defect in the gene
that causes this disease alter
the function of the organelle it
Are there other related diseases?
Do they all affect this organelle?
Current Research Results
Summarize research from paper you read.
What was the question that the
research addressed?
What was the key experiment?
What were the major conclusions?
What future directions does this
research lead to?
Vol. 1, Winter 2002
R. Wright and J. Boggs
Part of presentation
The poster should be attractive, well organized, and easy to read.
Was the poster well organized, easy to
read, novel, innovative?
Did anything stand out above the
Table 1. (Continued)
the team, during which the focus is on what needs to be done
to improve the quality of the presentation and paper. During
this conference, we also ask questions about how the team
is functioning and make suggestions for solving perceived
problems with the process. After receiving this feedback (see
Appendix A, Section IX, for an example) and that of the rest
of the class, teams are usually allowed to rewrite their paper
for a new grade.
Individual Evaluation
Full credit is earned by all team members who adequately
contribute to the team project. The paper contains information about each student’s individual contributions, including
which student was the primary author of each section. In addition, the team maintains a project log that details each team
meeting, who was in attendance, and what was accomplished
(Table 2). Finally, each team member completes a conﬁdential
evaluation of the contributions of all other team members
(Table 3). This information is typed up by the instructor to
provide individual feedback (see Appendix A, Section X, for
examples). By examining individual evaluations, the project
log, the paper, and the individual portion of the presentation, the instructor can accurately evaluate whether each team
member deserves full participation credit.
Initially, I was concerned about achieving fairness and accuracy in assigning appropriate grades to individuals that
reﬂected both the quality of the group’s work and an individual’s contribution to that work. However, this system of
checks and balances, together with the detailed conference
with the team after each class segment, enables a substantive evaluation of student performance that is of potentially
higher quality than that possible with traditional written exams. For example, the written documentation about the team
process (log, individual evaluations, etc.) ﬂags problems with
equality of effort. These problems are discussed in the team
conference, and members who did not contribute equally are
given a decreased portion of the points earned. For instance,
during the conference I may suggest that a particular individual appears to have contributed only 80% as much effort as
that of the other team members. Often, the individual and his
or her teammates admit the accuracy of the evaluation, and
I assign the individual 80% of the total points earned by the
team. Alternatively, the team members may explain the individual’s contributions more accurately and that person earns
full credit. Thus far, none of the end-of-quarter evaluations
have revealed a concern by students that someone received a
grade that he or she did not earn, which afﬁrms that my assessment of an individual’s grade is perceived to be fair and
In the week following a presentation, the instructor meets
with each team to review the grading, highlight the positive
aspects of the presentation and paper, and point out areas for
improvement. Each student receives a written synopsis of this
critique, together with a typewritten summary of colleagues’
evaluations of their contributions (see Appendix A).
Broadening of Learning and Individual
Accountability
The philosophy of this class emphasizes group responsibility in contrast to that of the individual. Because the nature of modern biology also emphasizes group responsibility, as evidenced by the primacy of multiauthored papers,
this emphasis is a valid representation of the current status of the cell biology discipline. However, as a way to encourage and evaluate each student’s individual mastery of
his or her topic as well as the topics of the other teams, one
or two take-home exams or individual projects are assigned
during the quarter. These exams or projects provide opportunities to promote greater breadth of learning and emphasize the importance of learning from one another. A sample
assignment is to prepare a paper that compares and contrasts
the molecular mechanisms of each disease presented in class.
Class Size
The size of the class is limited by the number of student presentations that can be effectively given within two class periods. The second and third presentations (cellular and molecular biology of the disease and recent research) require 30-min
time slots: 20 min for the talk, 5–8 min for questions, and a few
minutes to change to the next team. Consequently, a single
class section that meets in 2-h blocks can include as many as
40 students (eight teams of 5 students). A class with more than
40 students would need to be broken into multiple sections,
each with 40 or fewer students. The major factor determining the smallest class size for a team-based approach is the
need to have a sufﬁcient number of projects so that students
are exposed to a breadth and variety of cell biological information. I estimate that a minimum of six projects is required
to meet this breadth goal. Thus, the smallest class size that
would function well in this team-based framework would be
18 (six teams of 3 students). In my experience, smaller groups
do not function as effectively in building teamwork skills.
However, if the teamwork aspect of the course is not a priority, the class could contain as few as 6 students, each working
independently.
Cell Biology Education
Disease-Oriented Team Projects in Cell Biology Education
Table 2. Example of a team project loga
7/19, 10:40–1:00
The group met in the computer lab after the presentations to assign the members parts to revise the organelle paper. Rob
and Jim worked on addressing the comments on the latter half of the paper while Pearl and Katy worked on the ﬁrst half. Sally had begun to
design the template for the next presentation. Before we left, the group agreed on ﬁnishing the assigned revisions and will send them to Sally
for ﬁnal editing over the weekend.
7/23, 5:00–6:00
Katy and Sally met in Hitchcock Hall to work on the last of the editing for the ﬁnal version of the paper.
7/24, 8:30–10:40
After hearing the short session on several biology research methods from Robin, the group decided to present the immunoprecipitation and immunoﬂuorescence data from the research paper. The group went to the computer lab to do additional research on these
methods. Pearl talked to Robin about the experiments presented in the paper.
7/25, 8:30–10:40
The group shared their new information with each other. After the guild meeting, the group ﬁlled out the research worksheets
together and assigned each member to look into new concepts, methods, and vocabulary of the journal article to share and inform the rest of
the members by next session.
7/26, 8:30–10:40
Sally came with an outline of the results of the journal article. The group composed an outline for the slides and presentation.
The group deciphered the results by talking to each other and to Robin and the TA. Katy agreed to e-mail all of the members a copy of the
7/31, 8:30–10:40
After Robin showed examples of posters from previous years, the group made up an agenda for the presentation and discussed
more about the content of the slides. The group agreed to meet in the computer room for the next session.
8/1, 8:30–10:40
Jim and Katy continued to work on the structure of the slides as the rest of the group worked on the poster. Pearl and Rob
looked for images from the Web for the poster.
8/2, 8:30–1:00
The group met in the computer lab again to work on the slides. Jim came with images and a diagram for the slides. Pearl gave
her ideas and opinions on the poster to Sally, who had most of the poster ﬁnished. Sally left a little after noon for her class and the group
decided to meet on Friday (8/3) at 10 am in the Odegaard Library. Jim said he might not show up for that session. Robin will be gone until
Tuesday for a family emergency. The group agrees to work with him via e-mail to complete the project.
8/3, 10:00–12:30
Pearl, Sally, and Katy met in the Odegaard Library to tweak the poster and slides, as well as prepare for the actual presentation.
Jim came in at 11:30 to work on his part of the presentation. Jim agreed to type the project log and to submit the poster ﬁle to the print shop so
it will be printed by Monday. The group discussed plans for revision of the previous paper.
aStudent names have been changed to protect privacy.
Table 3. Team members' feedback forms
YOUR NAME:
Team Member's Name:
Not at all
How well did this member of your team listen and take into account the suggestions
of others?
How fully did this team member participate in planning and carrying out the projects?
How valuable were this team member's contributions to the success of the projects?
Assume that the amount of time you spent on the project is 100%. What proportion of effort did this individual put into the poster presentation relative to the amount of effort you put in?
If this person worked HARDER than you did, he or she will have a score that is greater than 100. For example, if he or she worked twice as
hard as you, he or she will have a score of 200.
If this person did NOT work as hard as you did, he or she will have a score that is less than 100. For example, if he or she worked 1/2 as
hard as you, he or she will have a score of 50.
Do you have any helpful suggestions, rants, or raves that you want me to pass on to this person? (I will type them out so your handwriting
won't be recognized.)
Vol. 1, Winter 2002
R. Wright and J. Boggs
SELECTION OF DISEASES FOR THE
PROJECT-BASED CELL BIOLOGY COURSE
Two major criteria drive the choice of a particular disease for
inclusion as a topic for learning cell biology. First, a recent
research paper concerning a cell biologically relevant aspect
of the disease must be available. Consequently, selection of
the speciﬁc diseases to use in a particular quarter begins with
searches for one to three recent research papers that use a variety of experimental approaches relevant to cell biology. The
second criterion for choosing a particular disease is to provide a balance of topics so that the class will be introduced
to a broad spectrum of cell biological subjects. For example, I
typically try to select a spectrum of diseases that, when considered together, represent most major organelles within eukaryotic cells.
Although partial understanding of the underlying pathology of most of the selected diseases is not essential, it is helpful. A balance of “we don’t yet know” opportunities along
with diseases whose molecular bases have been well deciphered seems to work best for the class as a whole. Appendix
E lists the diseases that were chosen during the past 2 yr, along
with references to assigned review and research papers.
PROMOTION OF EFFECTIVE TEAMWORK
The Challenge of Change
Probably the most frightening aspect of switching from
lecture-based teaching to a project-based class is the challenge
of making sure that teams work together effectively. Devoting
most class periods to teamwork helps, because scheduling a
time at which all team members can meet outside scheduled
class periods is frequently impossible. However, simply having time to work together does not ensure that individuals
within a team can actually work together effectively. To this
end, the initial organizing of teams on the ﬁrst day of class
represents a critical nexus on which the success of the entire class rests. We devote most of the ﬁrst 2-h class period
to dividing students into teams and discussing how to work
well in groups. Use of a “guild system,” as developed by Dr.
James Boggs, has proven extremely effective for promoting
effective teamwork and setting the stage for students to learn
how to interact cooperatively. Additional suggestions for effective team building in undergraduate biology classes are
given by Allen and Duch .
The Guild Concept
Before establishing teams, we divide the class into groups,
or “guilds,” on the basis of each student’s perception of his
or her individual strengths. Four guilds seem to work well
in building teams: 1) an administrator guild that organizes
team efforts, 2) an artist guild that helps the team think creatively, 3) a communicator guild that facilitates interpersonal
interactions among team members, and 4) an expeditor guild
that steps in and performs functions as needed. After guilds
are established, project teams are formed with individuals
who represent each guild. Typically, each team includes only
one individual from the administrative guild, but it can have
multiple representatives from any of the other guilds.
The First Day of Class
Afterreviewingthesyllabus,gradingcriteria,addsanddrops,
and other straightforward logistical issues related to the class,
we begin by having each person tell us a positive adjective
that describes one of his or her major strengths or “gifts.”
One way to help students think about this adjective is to ask
them to tell us how their friends would describe them. After
a few minutes, the instructor asks each student to share this
adjective or phrase with the rest of the class.
One by one, each student gives a descriptive adjective,
which the instructor writes on the board without comment so
that the adjectives are grouped into appropriate sets. For example, “organized” would be written on an unlabeled section
of the board reserved for people who will become members
of the administrator guild. “Creative” would be written on
the area of the board reserved for the artist guild. “Flexible”
would be written on an area of the board reserved for the expeditor guild. “Friendly” would be written on an area of the
board reserved for the communicator guild. Characteristics
appropriate for each guild are listed in Table 4. The instructor
keeps tabs on only the administrator guild types and works
to ensure that the number of administrators equals the eventual number of teams. If enough administrators have been
found, the instructor asks the student to provide a second
adjective and writes that word instead of the one that was
ﬁrst offered. Because everyone has multiple strengths, this
shufﬂing of individuals into other groups is not viewed negatively, especially because the purpose of the grouping has
not yet been revealed to the students.
The students move so that they are sitting in groups as
listed on the board and work together to select a guild name
and motto. The students then discuss the positive contributions that their strengths bring to effective teamwork. Then,
so that each individual can recognize the ways in which his
or her strengths, if taken too far or used inappropriately, can
cause problems for teams, the groups are asked to discuss
the negative aspects of the guild. For instance, if someone
in the administrator guild is “determined,” he or she may
drive the others too hard and cause discord in the group.
After the guilds explore their strengths and weaknesses, the
whole class reconvenes to discuss the positive and negative
contributions of their guild members to effective teamwork.
The class examines each guild’s perspectives of its roles in
team efforts and spends some time talking about the advantages and challenges of working together. Finally, teams are
formed with one individual from the administrator guild and
the remaining members from each of the other guilds. On the
basis of experimenting for 4 yr with larger and smaller team
sizes, I settled on having teams with four or ﬁve members
as being ideal for spreading the work out equally and for
buffering personality conﬂicts.
After introducing themselves to one another and spending
time obtaining contact information, the teams are immediately set to work. They select a number from a hat and receive a corresponding folder that contains a story about an
individual with the disease that they will be researching for
the quarter. References to the identity of the disease have been
removed from the story, but students are told that the disease
is caused by a single genetic defect. They are asked to work
together to devise a hypothesis to explain what cellular structure or process is altered as a result of the mutation.
Cell Biology Education
Disease-Oriented Team Projects in Cell Biology Education
Table 4. Sample personal strength descriptors grouped into guilds
Administrator guild
Artist guild
Communicator guild
Expeditor guild
Detail oriented
Task oriented
Meticulous
Disciplined
A people person
Good record keeper
Sympathetic
Conscientious
Responsible
Innovative
Have special skill in some
area (writing, computers,
Theatrical
Jack of all trades
Determined
Understanding
Arbitrator
Hard working
Resourceful
Methodical
Good listener
The Structuring of Team Efforts
The initial three to four class periods are structured so that the
teams must work together to complete speciﬁc tasks, such as
learning how to do BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search
Tool) searches to identify their gene of interest. As the quarter
progresses, direction from the instructor is gradually reduced
to the point that the team does all planning for upcoming
events. Appendix F provides an example of a structured activity that helps the teams learn how to plan and organize
their projects.
Guild Meetings
Teams work together for several class periods, then a short
guild meeting is called in which guild members can discuss
what is working well in their groups, what problems are arising, and which ways they can effect positive change in their
team. Such meetings are more important in the early weeks of
the class (i.e., just before and after the ﬁrst presentation) than
later in the class. Teams seem to rapidly settle into a clear understanding and appreciation of each person’s role and move
forward with the tasks at hand. In addition, students learn
to take on multiple roles as their talents and interests allow.
Thus, the most important gains provided by the guild exercise may be in forming more “balanced” teams and in helping students realize, appreciate, and respect their teammates’
abilities and contributions.
VALUE OF THE PROJECT-BASED CELL BIOLOGY
More than 60% of all students who enter the University of
Washington think that what they will learn in their major
will be “extremely important” for their success after leaving
college.1 However, when our students are surveyed 5–10 yr
after graduation, only slightly more than 25% of the students
1D.E. McGhee, University of Washington Entering Student
Survey 2001, Item 16, 
0203freq.pdf, last accessed March 17, 2002.
ﬁnd that what they learned in their major is “essential” for
their current primary activity.2 In contrast, the perceived importance of skills such as communication, problem solving,
leadership, and working together effectively increases. Not
surprisingly, students believe that their university training
does a good job “teaching them their major” but not as well in
helping them gain the skills that they tell us are important for
success after college. The unfortunate conclusion is that we
are doing a good job teaching our students things that may
not matter much in the long run. The desire to make a longterm difference in students’ lives and careers was one factor
that motivated our developing a project-based cell biology
Project-based cell biology moves the students away from a
focus on content to a clearly deﬁned focus on communication,
leadership, teamwork, and other skills needed for lifelong
success, while modeling how scientists in general, and cell
biologists in particular, learn new material. Although many
students act as if they have been waiting all their lives to be
allowed to tackle a problem creatively, others students are
less comfortable with such open-ended activities . As a consequence, my course evaluation scores remain essentially the same whether I teach a
traditional lecture-based cell biology course or a completely
project-based course. The student-perceived “effectiveness
of the instructor” is usually decreased for the project-based
course, probably because I am facilitating their independent
learning rather than lecturing.
The most common criticism from students in the projectbased course is that they think they did not learn as much
as they would have in a lecture-based class. I believe that
part of this dissatisfaction is an illusion; students appear to
base their perception of the amount that they learned on the
number of pages of lecture notes that they accumulate or the
number of chapters that they were assigned to read. Student
satisfaction with problem-based cell biology increased when
I began handing out all the team articles and project papers
and asking students to search for connections between their
2D.E. McGhee, Undergraduate Degree Recipients: Five and
Ten Years After Graduation, Item 11, 
edu/oea/0006t.pdf, last accessed March 17, 2002.
Vol. 1, Winter 2002
R. Wright and J. Boggs
disease, organelle, process, and so forth, and those presented
by the other teams (Appendix G). The amount of information
we were “covering” became obvious as their notebooks ﬁlled
with the presentation notes and papers from each team, as
well as the entire complement of review and research articles
for all the class projects.
An initial concern of many students confronting a projectbased course for the ﬁrst time stems from the requirement that
they work in groups. Some students worry that their grades
will suffer or that other team members will not work as hard
and they will consequently receive a grade that they do not
deserve. The underlying concern appears to be one of fairness. The integrated system of checks and balances (project
logs, conﬁdential team member evaluation, etc.) helps assure
students that grading will be fair and take into account individualcontributions.End-of-quarterevaluationsconﬁrmthat
the students perceive the grading to be fair, which indicates
that these initial fears were unfounded. To deal with perceptions that an individual effort would be of higher quality than
a group effort, I occasionally allow an individual to turn in
a paper that represents his or her exclusive effort. With only
one exception thus far, individual efforts are of poorer quality and receive lower grades than those of the corresponding
team efforts. Once students see this result, they quickly become converts to the team approach.
In assessing course effectiveness, an initial issue is the student composition in the traditional classes versus that in the
project-based class. Because the traditional classes are offered
during the academic year and the project-based class is offered in the summer, the two types of classes may serve different populations of students. Comparisons of the summer 2000
class (project based) and the autumn 2000 class (traditional)
Table 5. Comparison of biology grades of students before and after taking upper-division cell biology (Biology 401)
Students taking project-based cell biology coursea
Students taking traditional cell biology courseb
No. students/
No. students/
Discipline
Average gradesc
no. courses taken
Average gradesc
no. courses taken
Biochemistry
Before cell biology
2.84 ± 0.24
2.79 ± 0.47
After cell biology
3.37 ± 0.37
Before cell biology
2.86 ± 0.87
3.18 ± 0.32
After cell biology
Before cell biology
After cell biology
Before cell biology
2.51 ± 0.34
3.30 ± 0.32
After cell biology
Microbiology
Before cell biology
3.28 ± 0.46
2.18 ± 0.76
After cell biology
Before cell biology
3.19 ± 0.48
3.11 ± 0.78
After cell biology
3.02 ± 0.74
2.71 ± 1.02
aSummer 2000 class.
bFall 2000 class.
cStandard deviation included when 20 or more data points were available.
uncovered two interesting differences: on average, students
takingtheproject-basedclasshadlessthanhalfasmanytransfer credits as those taking the traditional class, and the summer class contained four nonmatriculated students. Nonmatriculated students are rarely included in the academic-year
Biology 401 classes because of high demand for the class by
matriculated students. Despite these differences, both classes
appear to include students with similar academic potential.
For example, both classes have similar overall grade point averages . In addition, both classes have similar graduation rates: 83% of the summer 2000 class (project
based) and 85% of the autumn 2000 class had obtained a biology degree by spring 2002. Most students in both classes are
molecular and cellular biology majors.
Direct comparisons of student performance following
lecture-based versus project-based courses are difﬁcult or
impossible because the two courses have different learning
objectives and outcomes. However, one measurement of
the effectiveness of project-based learning is evaluation of
student performance at the beginning and at the end of the
quarter. In the summer 2001 class, the average grade for the
ﬁrst project presentation was a “B” and the average paper
grade was a “D.” By the second project, the average presentation grade improved to a solid and impressive “A,” a gain
that was maintained in the ﬁnal presentation, which also was
“A”-quality work. The average paper grade on the second
project improved to a “B+” and was an “A” for the third
project. The rapidly improving and generally high grades in
the project-based class demonstrate the ability of students
working in teams to meet and often exceed even very high
expectations.
Cell Biology Education
Disease-Oriented Team Projects in Cell Biology Education
Because of the nontraditional focus and format of the
project-based cell biology class, one concern is that it may not
prepare a student for subsequent traditional biology classes
as well as a lecture-based cell biology class does. We do
not have access to students’ graduate record examinations
(GRE) or Medical College Admission Test (MCAT) scores.
Consequently, to assess this possibility, we compared the
grades of the students taking Biology 401 in summer 2000
(project-based class) with those of the students taking
Biology 401 in autumn 2000 (traditional class). The comparison, shown in Table 5, indicates that students taking the
project-based class and those taking the traditional class had
similar grades in subsequent biology classes. Thus, taking
the project-based class did not adversely affect student
performance in subsequent classes.
Perhaps as important as the students’ improved performance during the quarter and their overall satisfaction with
the course (see Appendix H) is that teaching a project-based
class energizes me as a teacher and as an individual. I have
learned new skills and approaches by watching how my students interact with one another. For example, one team struggled with an unusual team member, to the point that I offered
them the option of essentially “voting the person off the island.” The team refused and, through their gentle but persistent efforts, was able to develop strategies for interacting
with the recalcitrant individual, which enabled this person to
contribute in substantial and novel ways to the team’s efforts.
Seeing such dedication in my students inspires me to greater
efforts to teach all my classes in a way that is inclusive and
moreunderstandingofdifferentlearningstyles,personalities,
perspectives, strengths, and weaknesses.
Some of my students have been incredibly creative in ways
that I would never have had the opportunity to see if I had
not relinquished “control” of the class. For example, one team
got in touch with a local epidermolysis bullosa (EB) support
group and became acquainted with a young man who had
this disease. They invited this young man to talk to the class
about what it was like to live with EB. I have rarely seen a
class as engaged, actually riveted, as when this young man
talked about the traumas of being ridiculed when he was in
elementary and high school for having to sit out of physical
education classes or wear shoes several sizes too large. This
engagement translates itself into a wonderful and welcome
beneﬁt: I have never heard a single student in my class ask,
“Do I need to know this?” or “Is this going to be on the exam?”
Life is the exam, and my students tell me that their experiences in our project-based class help prepare them for future
academic and personal challenges.