Distributed Hierarchical Processing
in the Primate Cerebral Cortex
Daniel J. Felleman1 and David C. Van Essen2
1 Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy,
University of Texas Medical School, Houston, Texas
77030, and 2 Division of Biology, California
Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125
In recent years, many new cortical areas have been
identified in the macaque monkey. The number of identified connections between areas has increased even
more dramatically. We report here on (1) a summary of
the layout of cortical areas associated with vision and
with other modalities, (2) a computerized database for
storing and representing large amounts of information
on connectivity patterns, and (3) the application of these
data to the analysis of hierarchical organization of the
cerebral cortex. Our analysis concentrates on the visual
system, which includes 25 neocortical areas that are
predominantly or exclusively visual in function, plus an
additional 7 areas that we regard as visual-association
areas on the basis of their extensive visual inputs. A
total of 305 connections among these 32 visual and
visual-association areas have been reported. This represents 31 % of the possible number of pathways if each
area were connected with all others. The actual degree
of connectivity is likely to be closer to 40%. The great
majority of pathways involve reciprocal connections between areas. There are also extensive connections with
cortical areas outside the visual system proper, including
the somatosensory cortex, as well as neocortical, transitional, and archicortical regions in the temporal and
frontal lobes. In the somatosensory/motor system, there
are 62 identified pathways linking 13 cortical areas,
suggesting an overall connectivity of about 40%. Based
on the laminar patterns of connections between areas,
we propose a hierarchy of visual areas and of somatosensory/motor areas that is more comprehensive than
those suggested in other recent studies. The current
version of the visual hierarchy includes 10 levels of
cortical processing. Altogether, it contains 14 levels if
one includes the retina and lateral geniculate nucleus
at the bottom as well as the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus at the top. Within this hierarchy, there are
multiple, intertwined processing streams, which, at a
low level, are related to the compartmental organization
of areas VI and V2 and, at a high level, are related to
the distinction between processing centers in the temporal and parietal lobes. However, there are some pathways and relationships (about 10% of the total) whose
descriptions do not fit cleanly into this hierarchical
scheme for one reason or another. In most instances,
though, it is unclear whether these represent genuine
exceptions to a strict hierarchy rather than inaccuracies
or uncertainties in the reported assignment.
During the past decade, there has been an explosion
of information about the organization and connectivity of sensory and motor areas in the mammalian cerebral cortex. Many laboratories have concentrated
their efforts on the visual cortex of macaque monkeys,
whose superb visual capacities in many ways rival
those of humans. In this article, we survey recent
progress in charting the layout of different cortical
areas in the macaque and in analyzing the hierarchical
relationships among these areas, particularly in the
visual system.
The original notion of hierarchical processing in
the visual cortex was put forward by Hubel and Wiesel
 to account for a progressive increase in
the complexity of physiological receptive field properties in the cat visual cortex. In particular, they suggested that a serial, feedforward scheme could account for the generation of simple cells from LGN
inputs, and complex cells, in turn, from simple cells.
Likewise, the properties of hypercomplex cells and
even "higher-order hypercomplex cells" were attributed to inputs from their immediate predecessors.
However, the pure form of this hypothesis is difficult
to reconcile with the finding of highly reciprocal connectivity and parallel channels discovered in more
recent studies of the visual pathway . On the other hand, there
is no a priori reason to restrict the notion of hierarchical processing to a strictly serial sequence. In general, any scheme in which there are well-defined levels of processing can be considered hierarchical.
The notion that anatomical criteria could be used
to delineate a hierarchy of cortical areas first received
detailed scrutiny about a decade ago . Since this hypothesis was last reviewed
systematically , the number of identified visual areas and identified connections has increased greatly. In addition, 2 recent studies have proposed
hierarchical relationships for parietal, temporal, and
frontal areas that are largely, but not completely, consistent with one another and with our previous
schemes. Here, we provide a critical examination of
the degree to which the entire ensemble of available
data fits into an overall hierarchical scheme. We also
review the evidence that the principle of hierarchical
Cerebral Cortex Jan/Feb 1991;1:1—47; 1047-3211/91/»2.00
organization applies to other functional modalities
and to other species besides macaques.
A related theme in our analysis concerns the nature
of concurrent processing streams in the visual cortex.
These streams are linked at the input side to specific
subcortical inputs from the magnocellular (M) and
parvocellular (P) layers of the LGN and, at the
output side, to functionally distinct regions of the
parietal and temporal lobes . Our
analysis will emphasize that, on the one hand, there
is considerable segregation of information flow
throughout the visual pathway; on the other hand,
there is also substantial intermixing and cross talk
between streams at successive stages of processing.
It is likely that these complexities in the anatomical
circuitry reflect the multiplicity of computational
strategies needed for efficient visual function .
Subdivisions and Interconnections of the Visual Cortex
A Cortical Map
Our primary format for illustrating the location of
different visual areas involves the use of 2-D cortical
maps that are generated from contours of layer 4 in a
series of regularly spaced histological sections .
Previous summary maps showing the distribution of
areas 
were based on section drawings from a hemisphere
published by Brodmann . That map was not
especially accurate, however, because of the large and
somewhat nonuniform spacing between sections, and
no scale was provided. We have therefore generated
a complete map from a hemisphere used in a previous
study from this laboratory, in which information about
the pattern of interhemispheric connections and about
cortical myeloarchitecture was available for identk
fying certain visual areas .
Figure 1 shows the overall layout of the map, including the section contours upon which the map was
based (thin lines; 2-mm spacing between sections),
the location of cortex within sulci (shading), and the
position of the fundus of each sulcus (dashed lines).
As in previous cortical maps, it was necessary to introduce a few cuts, or discontinuities, to prevent serious distortions in the representation, and these are
indicated by heavy solid lines along the perimeter.
In addition to the obvious cut that surrounds area VI
(the elliptical region on the left), there are 2 smaller
discontinuities, one along the ventrolateral side of
the frontal lobe (upper right), and the other at the
temporal pole (lower right). The remainder of the
perimeter of the map represents intrinsic borders between the cortex and various noncortical structures
(e.g., the dentate gyrus, amygdalar nuclei, and corpus
callosum). This map also differs from its predecessors
in that it contains the entirety of the cerebral cortex,
including archicortical, paleocortical, and transitional regions, as well as the standard 6-layered neocortex.
Visual Areas
Our current understanding of the layout of different
visually related areas is indicated by the color-coded
scheme in Figure 2. Altogether, there are 32 separate
neocortical areas that are implicated in visual processing, based on the occurrence of visually responsive neurons and/or the presence of major inputs from
known visual areas. Each of these visual areas is shaded with a different color. The overall extent of the
visual cortex corresponds closely to the visually responsive regions identified in the 2-deoxyglucose
study of Macko and Mishkin . However, not all
of these areas are exclusively visual in function.
Nonvisual contributions include inputs from other
sensory modalities (especially auditory and somatosensory), visuomotor activity (i.e., related to eye
movements), and attentional or cognitive influences
 . We have drawn a distinction between 25 areas
that appear to be predominantly or exclusively visual
and another 7 neocortical areas that are less intimately
linked to vision and will be considered visual-association areas. This is unlikely to reflect a strict dichotomy, though, and there may well be a continuum
in the degree to which various areas are selectively
involved in visual processing.
There are 9 visual areas in the occipital lobe, which
are shaded in purple, blue, and reddish hues in Figure
2. The 10 visual areas of the parietal lobe (1 of which
is associational) are in shades of yellow, orange, or
light brown; the 11 areas of the temporal lobe are in
various shades of green; and the 2 visual-association
areas of the frontal lobe are in dark shades of brown.
The criteria used in identifying these areas are discussed in detail below.
On the remainder of the cortical map, various functional or regional domains are delimited in black and
white by heavy outlines. These include somatosensory, auditory, motor, olfactory, gustatory, subicular,
hippocampal, entorhinal, retrosplenial, and cingulate
regions, plus medial, dorsal, lateral, and orbital regions
of the prefrontal cortex. Most of these regions have
been further subdivided into specific cortical areas,
indicated by fine lines, on the basis of cortical architecture and/or connectivity. Many of these areas are
denoted by the same type of numbering scheme
promulgated by Brodmann . However, in many
instances, we have used areal identifications from more
recent studies that differ substantially from Brodmann's original scheme. .
The demarcation of areal boundaries on the cortical map involved several stages. As noted, a few
visual areas were explicitly identified by architectonic
criteria in the hemisphere from which the map was
made, and the locations of several additional areas
were constrained by the pattern of interhemispheric
connections that had been determined in this hemisphere. For the remaining areas, it was necessary to
transpose boundaries not only from a different brain,
2 Organization of Macaque Visual Cortex • Felleman and Van Essen
A 2-0 map of cerebral cortex in macaque monkey, prepared by the method of Van Essen and Marred . Rne tofid Ones represent the contours of layer 4
from a ssriss of 16 horizontal sections taken at 2-mra interval! through the cortex. Hwien
along the margins of the map correspond to the different section tevets indicated in
the lateral [upper feft) and medial (inter kfi\ views of the hemisphere. St&fog indicates cortex lying within various tufa, an) the fundus of each sulcus is indicated by nasty
dashed lines. SoV foes along the perimeter of the map nlicate regions where artificisl cuts have been made to reduce distortions. Dssted Snes along the perimeter represent
the margins of the cortex, where it adjoins various noncortxal structures: the corpus calbsum/indoseum gnseum ((op), olfactory tubercle and amygdatar nuda [ritfo), and dentate
gyrus of the htppocampus . AUT. amsrior mtdde tEmporsI subs; AS, arcuate sukus; CaS, csfcarine sutaa; CaS, central sulcus: CiS, cingubte sukuc HF,
hrppocarnpal fissure: IOS, inferior nxtphal sulcus: PS, mtraparietal sukus; LS. lunate sukuc OTS, occiuitDieinMal sutas; POS, peneOHnapnal sukus: PS, principal sutcuc RF.
rhinsl fissure; SF. syhnan fissure; STS, superior temporal sukus.
Cerebral Cortex Jan/Feb 1991, V 1 N 1 3
MEDIAL PREFRONTAL
Map of cortical areas in the macupja. The brawns of 32 visual areas are inditatad with colors that indicate whether they are in the ocapital lobe [purple, Hue,
and reddish ftues|, parietal lobe \yeSow, ormgt and ligtl brom hues), temporal lobe [great hues], or frontal lobe [trom Aues). The references used in placemen of boundaries
for the different visual areas are fated in Table 1. The scale appfies arty ID the map; the brain drawings are smater by 20% (cf. fig. 1). The specific studies used in estimating
the border of the various nonvisual areas are as foBowc Somstosensory areas 3a. 3b, 1, 2, 5, 7b, 3L Ri (retroHisutar), PB (postaudhory), fy (msufar granular), and Id , Jones et aL (197B), Robinson end Burton |1980). Friedman a a). . Huerta et aL , and Andersen et aL .
Note that, in this scheme, areas 1 and 2 intervene between SI and area 3b. bi other primates, inducting the marmoset and the owl monkey, Sll appears to directly adjoin area
3b, and it has been suggested diet more derated mapping will reveal the same manuanau in the macaque . Auditory areas Al
(primary auditory), Rl (rostrotateraf), CM (caudomecfial). tnd L (lateral) were based on Merenieh and Brugge (1973L The postaudhory area (ft) is described as a somatoseraory
area by Robinson and Burton and as an auditory area by Friedman et at . We have included it as pan of the auditory a r m in our analysis, but obviously this
issue merits further investigation. Areas of the hippocampal comptai (HC), including the entorhinal conei (ER), areas 35 and 36. presuboifum, prosutriculum, subkulum, and fields
CA1 and CA3, were based on Amaral et aL , Insausi et aL , and Saunters et aL {1988). Olfactory areas, including the pirifarra cortex (P1R) and paianiygdatoid
conn (PAC), were based on Insausti e) aL . Orbhofromal areas 11, 12, and 13. prnsrxortai (Pro), periaUocortei (Pall), lateral prefromal area 45. dorsal preframa) areas
9 and 10, and medial prefmntal areas 14. 25, and 32 were based on Barfaas and Pandys 11989) and fnsaustj et aL . Motor areas 4 (primary motor) and 6 (premotor and
arcuate premnor, or 6s and 6i), supptsmemary motor area ISAM], and medial eye field \MEF, or supplementary eye fields, SEF) were based on Brodmam . Mateffi et al.
 , tnsaustj et aL . Schlag and Sd%fley , Hutchins et aL . and Mam et aL . Finally, dngutata and other l i n t i areas 23. 24. 29 (retrosptenial).
30 (PGrn or 7m), and prostrate [PS, divided by an artificial cut into dorsal (d) and ventral (v) sectors] were based on msaustj et al. and Sarites . A few regions
in the posterior ortutofraraal, lateral prefromal, and anterior sytvian cortices have not been dosety stnfied and are left unspecifiad here.
4 Organization of Macaque Visual Cortex • Felleman and Van Essen
but usually from a diflFerent type of representation as
well, because the best available information on areal
boundaries, in may cases, was on a drawing of a brain
or on a series of brain sections cut at a diflFerent angle
than the horizontal plane used for our map.1
Table 1 provides additional information pertaining
to the identi6cation and characterization of diflFerent
visual areas. The areas are grouped according to their
geographic location in diflFerent lobes (column 1).
Columns 2 and 3 give the acronyms and full-length
names, respectively, that we prefer for each area. Column 4 provides information about the degree of topographic organization, rated on a scale of 1-4 (see
below). It also identifies the visual-association areas
alluded to above. Column 5 provides a measure of
the confidence with which diflFerent areas have been
identified, as discussed below. Column 6 provides 1
or more references that have been particularly useful
in determining the extent and the boundaries of each
area. These citations do not necessarily reflect either
the most recent study or the original study involved
in its identification. They are designated by abbreviations based on the first letters of the authors' surnames plus the publication year. A key that links these
abbreviations to the standard text citations is given in
the table notes. This format, which we will use in
other tables as well, provides a compact representation that allows more rapid recognition of specific
references than is attainable with a simple numerical
In general, 3 methodological approaches have been
most useful in identifying diflFerent visual areas: (1)
Connectivity analysis relies on finding a characteristic pattern of inputs and outputs for each cortical
area. This approach has proven useful for nearly all
visual areas and is considered in detail below. (2)
Architectonicstelies on a distinctive structure as seen
in Nissl, myelin, or other staining techniques. It offers
a reliable approach for only a minority of the areas
listed in Table 1 and was used to map 3 of the areas
(VI, V3, and MT) in the particular hemisphere illustrated in Figure 2. (3) Topographic organization relies on an orderly mapping of the visual field in each
area, as revealed physiologically or anatomically.
About half of the identified visual areas show a measurable degree of topographic organization. However, the precision and orderliness of the visual representation varies widely. As indicated in column 4 of
Table 1, we have grouped areas into 4 categories:
extremely precise and regular topography (category
1), intermediate resolution (category 2), coarse and
irregular (category 3), and finally, little or no discernible topography (category 4). In addition, some
visual areas (most notably V3 and VP) contain incomplete representations, including only the superior (S)
or inferior (I) contralateral quadrant; nonetheless,
several lines of evidence argue that these areas should
be considered distinct from one another . Hence, topographic information,
like architectonics, is a valuable tool, but can be inadequate or even misleading when applied in isolation from other approaches.
In addition to these 3 primary methodological approaches, the identification of some areas has been
facilitated by information about physiological characteristics, as evidenced by distinctive receptive field
properties of neurons, and by examining the behavioral consequences of restricted lesions or focal
electrical stimulation. Ideally, each area should be
independently identifiable using all 5 of the aforementioned approaches. In practice, however, the
identification of most areas is based only on a subset
of these approaches, often just 1 or 2 (cf. Van Essen,
Different cortical areas vary in the reliability with
which they have been identified and the precision
with which their borders have been mapped, as indicated by the 3 categories of confidence level in
column 5 of Table 1. The first 2 categories include
areas we consider to have been identified with a reasonably high degree of confidence. Category 1 refers
to areas, such as VI and V2, whose borders have been
mapped with considerable precision (usually to within 1-2 mm). Category 2 refers to areas, such as V3A
and V4, whose identity is widely accepted but whose
borders are known only approximately. Category 3
includes areas whose identification is less secure and
more open to debate. This is the largest of the 3 categories, and it signifies that the basic task of determining how the cortex is partitioned into specific
areas is by no means complete.
Most regions of the visual cortex have more than
1 name that is in common use. Table 1 provides a
partial listing of these alternative terminologies. In
dealing with the nomenclature issue, we have drawn
a distinction between (1) names that are simply different descriptors for what is clearly the same underlying visual area (e.g., areas 17 vs. VI, V3vvs. VP, and
MT vs. V5; column 7), and (2) names that reflect substantially different schemes for partitioning the cortex
(column 9). In some cases, the alternative scheme is
a more coarse partitioning than the one we prefer
(e.g., TEO vs. PITd and PITv). In other cases, the
alternative scheme is even more fine grained (e.g.,
POa-i and POa-e vs. LIP). In still other cases, most
notably in the inferotemporal cortex (IT), the relationship between different schemes is more complex
and irregular.
Surface Area
Measurements of the surface area of different regions
of the cortical map (Table 2) provide useful information about the absolute and relative amounts of
cortical machinery devoted to different types of processing. The total extent of the cerebral cortex in this
particular hemisphere, after correcting for shrinkage
during histological processing, is 10,575 mm2, of which
9940 mm2 (94%) is neocortex. Besides the neocortex,
there are 245 mm2 of the hippocampus proper (fields
CA1 and CA3, the subiculum and the prosubiculum),
120 mm2 of paleocortex (pyriform and periamygdaloid cortex), and 270 mm2 of transitional cortex [entorhinal cortex (ER), periallocortex, parasubiculum,
presubiculum, and prostriate cortex]. The visual cor-
Cerebral Cortex Jan/Feb 1991, V 1 N 1 5
Visual areas in the macaque monkey
Confiraphy*
References'
Visual area 1
Visual area 2
Visual area 3
Ventral posterior
Visual area V3A
Visual area 4
Ventral occipitotemporal
V4 transitional
Middle temporal
VNM, '84; VNMB. '86
GGS. '81; VNMB. '86
VZ, 78; GSG, '88
Z. 78; GSG, '88
«7K S5: VFDOK. '91
DU. '86: GSG. '88
VMB. '81: DU. '86: MV. '87
Floor of superior temporal
Posterior inferotemporal (dorsal)
Posterior inferotemporal (ventral)
Central inferotemporal (dorsal)
Central inferotemporal (ventral)
Anterior inferotemporal (dorsal)
Anterior inferotemporal (ventral)
Superior temporal polysensory
(posterior)
Superior temporal polysensory
(anterior)
VFDOK. '91
VFDOK. '91
VFDOK, '91
VFDOK. '91
VFDOK. '91
VFOOK. '91
VB, '47; SP, 76
VB, '47; SP, 76
Medial superior temporal (dorsal)
Medial superior temporal (lateral)
Parieio-occipital
Posterior intraparietal
Lateral intraparietal
Ventral imraparietal
Medial intraparietal
Medial dorsal parietal
Dorsal prelunate
FBV. n CGOG. '88
AAC. '85; AAES. '90; BAS, '90
BAS. '90; MV. '83: UD. '86
AAC. '85: MA. '86
AAC,'85; AAES,'90
Frontal eye field
BGBS. '85: SDGM. '89
B, '88; BP, '89
The visual areas in the macaque monkey are grouped according to physical location (column 1) and identified according to acronym, full name, and alternative names. Alternative
partitioning schemes for the same region are indicated in column 9, as well.
'Topography refers to degree of topographic organization and is rated according to a qualitative 4-point scale, going from extremely precise (rating 1) to completely nontopographic
(rating 4). S and I refer to areas that contain an incomplete representation of superior and inferior quadrants, respectively, and A refers to areas that are associational.
' Confidence refers to the confidence with which each area has been identified and charted and is rated by a qualitative 3-poim scale: confident identification and well-defined
borders (rating 1), confident identification but only approximate border determination (rating 2). and significant uncertainties in both identification and border assignments (rating 3).
' Reference key (italic entries signify abstracts):
Andersen. Asanuma, and Cowan. 1985
Andersen. Asanuma, Essick, and Siegel. 1990
Brodmann. 1905
Brady, 1985
Barbas. 1988
Blatt, Andersen, and Stoner, 1990
Bruce, Desimone. and Gross. 1981
Bruce. Goldberg. Bushnell, and Stanton, 1985
Barbas and Pandya. 1989
Baylis, Rolls, and Leonard, 1987
Boussaoud, Ungerleider, and Desimone. 1990
Colby. Ganass, Olson, and Gross, 1988
Cavada and Goldman-Rakic. 1989a
Desimone and Ungerleider, 1986
Fenstemaker, 1986
Felleman, Burkhalter. and Van Essen, 1987
tex (including the visual-association areas) occupies
an estimated 5385 mm2, or 55% of the neocortex. As
noted previously, the visual cortex dwarfs the regions
devoted to somatosensory, motor, and auditory processing, which occupy 11%, 8%, and 3% of neocortex,
respectively. Finally, the remainder of the neocortex
consists of areas in the cingulate region on the medial
wall (450 mm2), in the prefrontal cortex (930 mm2),
and in the insular region between the frontal and
temporal lobes. To provide a physical perspective for
these numbers, it is useful to note that the visual
cortex as a whole has about the same surface area as
a medium-sized cookie (about 8 cm diameter), while
the entire cerebral cortex in one hemisphere corresponds to a large cookie (about 12 cm diameter).
Individual visual areas on the cortical map span a
50-fold range in size. VI and V2 are by far the largest,
with each occupying 1100-1200 mm2, or 11-12% of
the neocortex. V4 is about half their size (540 mm2).
Ten areas are in the intermediate range of 100-200
6 Organization of Macaque Visual Cortex • Felleman and Van Essen
Alternative Name
Alternative Scheme
References'
V4/TEO border
TEd; TEp; TEa/TEm
TEv; TEp; TE3/TE2
TEd; TEa; TEm/TEa
TEv; TEa; TE1/TE2
STP;PGa/lPa/TP0 3
STP;IPa/TP0 1,2
F. '86; IY. '87
F. '86; IY, '87
SP. 78; BRL '87; IY, '87; YNSI.
SP. 78; BRL '87; IY, '87; YNSI,
SP, 78; BRL '87; IY, '87; YNSI,
SP, 78; BRL '87; IY. '87; YNSI,
BDG, '81; SP, '89
BDG, '81; SP, '89
DSR area; DMZ
pan of V3A
7ip; UPd/llPv; POa-e/POa-i
VIP*; 7ip; POa-i; IPd
SYTKFI. '86: UD, '86
SP, '80, '86; CG, '89; BAS, '90
SP, '80; UD, '86; B. '88; CG, '89
IPG; PP; PG
VB, '47; BUD, '9
Principal sulcus
W, '40; VB. '47
Fellemn. DeYoe. and Van Essen, 1985
Ganass. Gross, and Sandell. 1981
Ganass. Sousa, and Gross, 1988
Iwai and Yukie, 1987
Iwai and Yukie, 1988
Komatsu and Wura, 1988a
May and Andersen, 1986
Maguire and Baizer, 1984
Maunsell and Van Essen, 1983
Maunsell and Van Essen. 1987
Newsome, Maunsell, and Van Essen. 1986
Stanton, Deng, Goldberg, and McMullen, 1989
Seltzer and Pandya. 1976
Seltzer and Pandya, 1978
Seltzer and Pandya, 1980
Seltzer and Pandya. 1986
SYTKFI. '86
VFDOK, '91
Seltzer and Pandya, 1989b
Saito, Yukie, Tanaka, Kikosaka, Fukada, and Iwai,
Shipp and Zeki, 1985
Ungerleider and Desimone, 1986b
Van Essen. 1985
Von Bonin and Bailey. 1947
Van Essen, Felleman, DeYoe. Olavarria. and Knienm,
Van Essen, Maunsell, and Bixby, 1981
Van Essen, Newsome, and Maunsell, 1984
Van Essen, Newsome. Maunsell, and Bixby, 1986
Van Essen and Zeki. 1978
Walker, 1940
Yukie and Iwai, 1988
Zeki, 1978a,b
mm2, and 18 areas are small (by macaque standards),
ranging from 100 mm2 down to a low value of 25 mm2
There are several sources of uncertainty associated
with these estimates of surface area. The cortical map
itself (Fig. 2) has some areal distortions, whose magnitude is likely to be in the range of 10%-20% for
most regions of the map, but is probably larger in
some regions .
There are also inaccuracies in our transposition of
areal boundaries defined in other studies onto the
particular hemisphere used for this map (see above).
These are hard to quantify, but they probably reflect
errors of 50% or more for some areas. Finally, there
is intrinsic variability in the size as well as the location
of particular areas from one brain to the next. Areas
with sharply defined borders such as VI and MT show
roughly 2-fold individual variability in surface area
 , and it seems likely that
this range will be applicable to most, if not all, cortical
Cerebral Cortex Jan/Feb 1991, V 1 N 1 7
Surface area of conical subdivisions in the macaque
Subdivision
% of Visual
Visual Areas
Total Occipital
Total Temporal
Total Parietal
Total Frontal
Total Visual Cortex
Other Neoconex
Somatosensory
Prefrontal
(Areas 9,10,11,12,13,14,25,32.45)
(Areas 23.24,29,30, PS)
Perirhinal (35/36)
Unspecified Neoconex
Total Neoconex
Transitional Cortex
Hippocampal Formation
Total Hippocampal Cortex
Transitional Areas
Presubiculum
Parasubiculum
Entorhinal
8 Organization of Macaque Visual Cortex • Felleman and Van Essen
Subdivision
% of Visual
Total Transitional Conex
Pateoconex
Periamygdaloid
Total Paleoconex
Total Norvneoconex
Total Cerebral Conex
This table shows surface area estimates for different conical areas, geographic regions, and modality-specific regions. Surface areas were calculated from the 2-D conical map
illustrated in Figure 2. Values are shown as absolute surface areas (mm
2, corrected for tissue shrinkage) and as percent of total visual conex, total neoconex, and/or total cerebral
conex. Absolute values are shown to 2 significam digits or, for small areas, to the nearest 5 mm
2. A number of uncenaimies apply to all of these estimates (see text), and the
values for individual areas should, in general, be regarded as accurate only to within about a factor of 2.
areas. Thus, the values in Table 2 should be regarded
as only rough approximations to the physical extent
of any given area in any particular hemisphere.
Connectivity
Nearly all of the areas included in this scheme can
be distinguished on the basis of their overall pattern
of connectivity, and for many, this is the primary basis
for identification. This can be seen from Table 3, which
gives a concise summary of the corticocortical visual
pathways identified as of mid-1990. Each entry in the
2-D matrix denotes the status of a pathway (present,absent, unknown, or questionable) from an area shown
on the left to an area shown on the top. Specifically,
a plus sign (+) signifies an identified pathway, a dot
(•) signifies a pathway that has been tested for and
found absent, "NR" (nonreciprocal) signifies a pathway that is reported to be absent in one direction
even though the projection in the reverse direction
has been demonstrated, and a question mark (?) signifies a pathway that has been reported but is questionable owing to individual variability in occurrence
or conflicting reports from different laboratories. For
each area, one can quickly ascertain all of its outputs
by scanning the appropriate horizontal row and all of
its inputs by scanning the appropriate vertical column. In some cases, a pathway has been identified
that involves a coarse subdivision (e.g., PIT) but cannot yet be assigned to the finer subdivisions indicated
by more recent evidence (e.g., PITd and PITv). Consequently, we have included entries for both coarser
and finer subdivisions when appropriate in the table.
Additional information on the characteristics of
these pathways is provided in a subsequent section
(see Table 5). This will include specific references
for every connection and documentation of the questionable or controversial nature of certain connections. Many of the recently identified pathways are
reported only in abstracts, and it is important not to
give them the same credence as pathways that are
illustrated or otherwise well documented in full-length
reports. On the other hand, our description would be
out of date if we included only the latter category.
The compromise that we have adopted is to use large
symbols for pathways in Table 3 that are documented
in full-length publications and small symbols for the
remainder.
It is apparent that each visual area has many inputs
and outputs. Moreover, the particular pattern of connections is distinctive for each area, in terms of the
overall constellation of inputs and outputs. In most
cases, this pattern provides a characteristic "fingerprint" that can uniquely distinguish one area from all
others. This is particularly true for areas whose connections have been thoroughly studied, such as those
in the occipital lobe. Many areas, particularly the recently defined ones, have yet to be studied in detail;
hence, our description of the connectional pattern is
surely far from complete. For example, areas MDP
and MIP each have only 2 connections shown in Table
3, but neither of these areas has yet been studied by
making direct tracer injections into them.
Our emphasis on connectional information in the
identification of areas continues a recent trend away
from the traditional primacy given to architectonically
defined subdivisions. The justification for this is largely empirical. There are now numerous instances where
the original architectonic subdivisions of the classical
neuroanatomists conflict with areas defined by connections or topographic organization. In several of
these cases, reexamination of cortical architecture has
revealed previously unrecognized architectonic transitions that do coincide with the boundaries of visual
areas identified on connectional grounds, as in the
cases of V3 and MT and
FST . It is likely that there
will be additional examples of this type, in part because standard Nissl and myelin stains can now be
supplemented with histochemical and immunocytochemical markers that reveal distinctive patterns for
different areas . Also, newly developed procedures for flatten-
Cerebral Cortex Jan/Feb 1991, V 1 N 1 9
Matrix of connections in visual cortex
V4 VOT V4I H
CITv AlTd AITv STPp
ISTdHSTI PO PIP UP
VIP HIP HDP DP
This table is a connectivity matrix for interconnections between visual conical areas in the macaque. Each row shows whether the area listed on the left sends outputs to the
areas listed along the top. Conversely, each column shows whether the area listed on the top receives inputs from the areas listed along the left. Large plus symbols ( + ) indicate
a pathway that has been reported in 1 or more full-length manuscripts: small plus symbols indicate pathways identified only in abstracts or unpublished studies. Specific citations
are listed in Table 5. Dots j ) indicate pathways explicitly rested and found to be absent. Blanks indicate pathways not carefully tested for. Question marks (?) denote pathways
whose existence is uncertain owing to conflicting reports in the literature. "NR" and "NR?" indicate nonreciprocal pathways, i.e.. connections absent in the indicated direction
even though the reciprocal connection has been reported. Shaded boxes along the diagonal represent intrinsic circuitry that exists within each area: these are not included among
the pathways tabulated in the following table.
ing the cortex prior to sectioning can facilitate the
recognition of subtle architectonic transitions ,
and the remainder of which are less well characterized (V3A, V4t, and VOT). V3A was originally identified and mapped by Van Essen and Zeki , but
its borders have been revised (see area PIP below).
10 Organization of Macaque Visual Cortex • Felleman and Van Essen
Desimone and Ungerleider identified area V4t
(transitional V4) as a narrow strip between MT and
the dorsal half of V4; it can be distinguished from
both of these neighbors by its architecture, connectivity, and neuronal receptive field properties . In ventral occipital cortex, we have identified
area VOT (the ventral occipitotemporal area) as a
narrow cortical strip sandwiched between the ventral
half of V4 and the inferotemporal cortex . V4t and VOT contain representations of the
lower and upper parts of the visual field, respectively;
we provisionally consider them to be separate areas
with incomplete visual representations, much as has
been argued for areas V3 and VP . This region includes 3 areas
(PO, PIP, and DP) situated posteriorly, 5 areas (7a,
LIP, VIP, MIP, and MDP) situated more anteriorly and
arranged in a lateral-to-medial swath that adjoins the
somatosensory cortex, and 2 areas (MSTd and MST1)
within the dorsal part of the superior temporal sulcus
(STS). MST was originally identified as the region
receiving direct inputs from MT and lying near the
fundus of the STS .
As initially defined, however, MST is not a homogeneous region. There is now evidence for splitting it
into 3 distinct areas: a dorsal region (MSTd), a "lateral" region (MST1) that is situated ventro-antero-lateral to MSTd, and a region situated even further ventro-antero-laterally in the floor of the superior temporal
sulcus (FST), which lies within the temporal lobe but
which we consider here because of its affinity with
the MST complex. This partitioning is based on findings of (1) different receptive field properties in all
3 regions , (2) different connections of all 3
areas , and (3) differential effects on pursuit eye movements from selective
stimulation of MSTd versus MST1 (Komatsu and Wurtz,
Area PIP (posterior intraparietal) lies in a region
once considered to be part of V3A , but the 2 areas can now be distinguished
by their topographic organization and by their connections with other visual areas . Area PO (parieto-occipital) is a
topographically organized area situated medial and
dorsal to PIP . Areas MIP (medial
intraparietal) and MDP (medial dorsal parietal) have
been identified on the basis of their connections with
area PO . Area DP, which occupies the dorsal aspect of the prelunate gyrus, is a major
source of visual inputs to area 7a . DP has been distinguished from adjoining areas (V4, V3A, and 7a) primarily on the basis of differential connections, but also on the basis of visual
topography and receptive field size and responsiveness . Area 7a, as described by
Andersen et al. , occupies the posterior part of
the inferior parietal lobule and extends only a short
distance into the intraparietal sulcus. Area VIP (ventral intraparietal) occupies the fundus of the intraparietal sulcus . LIP
(lateral intraparietal) lies in the lateral bank of the
intraparietal sulcus, in between VIP and area 7a . However, there is considerable
uncertainty about the border between these areas. On
the basis of projection patterns from MT, Maunsell
and Van Essen suggested that VIP was restricted to the fundus of the intraparietal sulcus. Ungerleider and Desimone found that MT projections sometimes extend substantially farther up the
lateral bank of the sulcus into a heavily myelinated
zone that they termed VIP*. This region lies within
area LIP as described by Andersen et al. and
may correspond to area LIPv of Blatt et al. and
to the posterior portion of area POa-i of Seltzer and
Pandya . Overall, it remains unclear whether
this heavily myelinated strip should be considered
part of VIP or LIP or as a distinct area unto itself.
The numerous visually related areas of the temporal lobe can be subdivided into 3 broad groups (not
counting area FST, which has already been discussed
with the parietal areas). The first group lies within
the classical inferotemporal cortex (IT), which extends from the lower (posterior) bank of the STS to
the lateral bank of the occipitotemporal sulcus. The
second group lies within the polysensory strip occupying the upper (anterior) bank of the STS. The
third group lies more medially, including the parahippocampal gyrus, and has traditionally been regarded as part of the limbic cortex.
In the present scheme, IT has been subdivided
into 6 distinct areas. These can be grouped into 3
pairs, each containing separate dorsal and ventral subdivisions .
In particular, we distinguish among dorsal and ventral
subdivisions of posterior inferotemporal cortex (PITd
and PITv), central inferotemporal cortex (CITd and
CITv), and anterior inferotemporal cortex (AITd and
AITv). The dorsal areas lie largely within the lower
bank of the STS, extending a short distance onto the
middle temporal gyms. The ventral areas occupy most
of the middle and inferior temporal gyri and extend
into the lateral bank of the occipitotemporal sulcus.
The distinction between posterior and central pairs
is based on topographic organization (present to a
crude degree in PITd and PITv but not CITd and
CITv) and on the laminar organization of projections
back to V4 . Anterior inferotemporal cortex (AIT) differs from CIT in having much
weaker connections with V4. The distinction between
dorsal and ventral subdivisions (PITd vs. PITv and
CITd vs. CITv) is based, in part, on the large sepa-
Cerebral Cortex Jan/Feb 1991, V 1 N 1 11
ration of foci resulting from single V4 injections. In
addition, the dorsal subdivisions are reported to have
strong connections with nuclei in the amygdalar complex, whereas the ventral subdivisions are more
strongly connected with the subicular/hippocampal
complex . However, a potential qualification to this latter distinction
is that the border between dorsal and ventral subdivisions suggested by Iwai et al. is more ventral
than that illustrated in Figure 2, theirs being approximately in line with the anterior middle temporal sulcus.
Several previous studies have subdivided IT mainly along the anteroposterior axis , the dorsoventral
axis , or a mixture of both . Our scheme is, in effect, a combination of the Iwai and Yukie anteroposterior
partitioning with their subsequent dorsoventral partitioning .
Immediately dorsal to IT is a long strip of polysensory cortex on the dorsal (anterior) bank of the
STS. This strip was identified as the superior temporal
polysensory area (STP) by Bruce et al. , because they encountered many auditory and somatosensory responses along with a high incidence of visual responsiveness. Based on
connectional
differences described in several studies , we have
drawn a distinction between a posterior region, STPp,
and an anterior region, STPa. Although it is based to
a substantial degree on their connectional data, our
scheme differs from that of Seltzer and Pandya .
They partitioned this region into 3 longitudinal strips,
areas TPO, PGa, and IPa. More recently , they further subdivided the widest
of these strips, area TPO, into 4 subregions along the
anteroposterior dimension (TPO1-4). We have refrained from using their finer-grained scheme pending clarification of how robust and consistent the connectional differences are between different subregions.
In the parahippocampal gyms, areas TF and TH
are associated with vision by virtue of their connections with more than a half dozen different visual
areas. Both of these areas are also strongly connected
with the entorhinal cortex, area 36, and the cingulate
cortex , but they apparently lack strong
connections with the somatosensory cortex .
Finally, in the frontal cortex, 2 regions have been
implicated in visual, visuomotor, or visually guided
memory functions. FEF (the frontal eye field) is an
area that plays an important role in saccadic eye movements and has extensive connections with visual areas
in the occipital and parietal lobes . It overlaps partially
with architectonic area 8a of Walker , but the
2 are not coextensive . Immediately anterior to FEF is area 46 , which fills most of the principal
sulcus and extends onto its dorsal and ventral lips.
Based on the heterogeneous pattern of connectivity
with parietal and temporal areas, there are probably
distinct subdivisions within area 46 , but a coherent scheme for subdividing it has yet to emerge.
The collection of visual areas just described is by
no means a closed system. There are additional linkages to cortical areas associated with motor function,
higher cognitive functions, and other sensory modalities. For example, some visual areas have strong
connections with the entorhinal complex, a group of
areas that serve as a major gateway to and from the
hippocampal formation. There are also pathways that
link the visual cortex to the cingulate cortex and to
various subdivisions of the prefrontal cortex. Some of
these will be discussed later in relation to the notion
of hierarchical processing and information flow. Finally, all visual areas also have extensive connections
with multiple subcortical nuclei, which will be discussed below.
Reciprocity and Distributed Connectivity
Up to this point, we have used the information in
Table 3 to distinguish different areas on the basis of
their specific connections. This tabulation also provides a useful framework for discussing other important principles concerning the numbers and patterns
of connections among different areas.
The first principle is that of reciprocity of corticocortical connections. More than a decade ago, it was
noted that pathways within the visual cortex tend to
be bidirectional, such that if area A projects to area
B, then area B is likely to project in turn to area A
 . The
degree to which this relationship holds is reflected
in the symmetry of Table 3 about the diagonal axis
(shaded boxes). If connections were invariably reciprocal, each entry would have a counterpart at the
mirror-symmetric position on the opposite side of the
Altogether, there are 305 identified pathways entered in Table 3, including 53 pathways reported only
in abstracts and 13 pathways explicitly listed as questionable on the basis of conflicting reports (cf. Table
5). The majority of these pathways (242) are demonstrably bidirectional, forming 121 pairs of reciprocally
interconnected areas (Table 4). Of the remaining
"singlet" pathways, nearly all (58 of 63) are cases in
which there has not been a clear-cut test for the reverse direction. However, there are a few examples
of apparently unidirectional corticocortical pathways.
In particular, there is a reported lack of reciprocity
in the projections from V4t to VI , from V2 to FST, and from V4t and DP to MST1
 . An intermediate example is
the linkage between VI and V4, which reportedly is
robust and consistent from V4 to VI , but relatively weak and occasional from VI to
V4 , in a way that may depend
on eccentricity . Thus, the reciprocity of connections may, in some cases, vary among
individuals or from one location to another within an
area. However, in evaluating such possibilities, it is
important to bear in mind that different tracer substances and different injection protocols can vary
enormously in their sensitivity and thus in their ability
to reveal relatively weak or diffuse projections. Pathways that appear absent or sparse using one pathwaytracing approach may appear much more robust when using
larger injections of a more sensitive tracer . For this reason, we have avoided attempting to systematically report the magnitude or density
of these connections, even though such information
would be extremely useful to have.
Table 4 provides several additional types of information about the overall population statistics for the
connections between cortical areas. In particular, it
is possible to estimate the average number of corticocortical connections made by each visual area, the
range among different areas, and what fraction of the
total number of possible connections are actually
made. Analyses of this type become increasingly
meaningful now that the number of identified pathways has outstripped the ability and/or desire of most
investigators to keep track of them all individually.
There are several ways of evaluating the data, however, owing to the fact that the charting of visual pathways is still far from complete. A lower bound on the
overall degree of connectivity can be set from the
overall number of 305 identified pathways linking 32
visually related neocortical areas. Because each pathway is an input to one area and an output from another, this works out to an average of about 19 connections per area (nearly 10 inputs and 10 outputs
per area). A better estimate can be obtained by considering only those areas that have been extensively
studied using both anterograde and retrograde tracer
injections. For the 5 best-studied areas, VI, V2, V3,
V4, and MT, the average number of connections per
area is 27. The average number of areas with which
there is any linkage (i.e., a connection in at least 1
direction) is 15 for this group. Interestingly, there is
more than 2-fold variability in connectivity even among
these well-studied areas. At the low end, VI has "only"
16 connections that link it to 9 areas (3 robust, reciprocal pairs plus various minor, occasional, or unidirectional pathways). At the high end, V4 has 39 identified connections with 21 areas, signifying that it is
linked to about % of all known visual areas. Moreover,
the majority of these are robust pathways, suggesting
that V4 may play a pivotal role in many different aspects of cortical processing.
In a fully interconnected network involving N areas, there would be a total of N(N - 1) connections.
For N= 32 areas, this number would be 992 pathways
(446 pairs). By expressing the 305 reported pathways
as a fraction of this theoretical limit, we conclude that
nearly H of all possible connections have been em-
Connectivity patterns among visual areas
Reciprocity
Total number of pathways
Reciprocal pathways
Singlet pathways
Critically tested
Not critically tested
Connectivity
Total number of pathways
Total number of areas
Average number of pathways pa area
Highest number of pathways per area
Average number of pathways per well-studied area
Average number of linkages per well-studied area
Maximum possible connectivity among 32 areas
Observed pathways
pirically demonstrated. If each area has an average of
27 connections, as found for well-studied areas, the
connectivity level would exceed 40% of the theoretical limit (432/992). If we take into account the fact
that only about 680 of the 992 possible pathways have
been explicitly tested, the 305 identified pathways
represent a connectivity level of approximately 45%.
Finally, if we assume that each area is connected with
15 other areas on average and that nearly all of these
linkages will turn out to be reciprocal, then the estimated connectivity level approaches 50%. Of course,
some of the pathways whose existence is reported to
be questionable or only occasional in occurrence may,
upon more careful scrutiny, turn out to be absent
altogether, but we doubt that this will occur very frequently. Thus, no matter how the estimates are generated, there is no escaping the notion that the visual
cortex is a highly distributed information-processing
system. To keep this conclusion in perspective, however, we reemphasize that different pathways vary
enormously in strength. Quantitative data on this issue are scarce, but we estimate that there may be a
range of 2 orders of magnitude or more in the percentages of cells that project from a given target area.
The fraction of pathways that are "robust," in the
sense of showing heavy labeling when analyzed with
conventional tracers, may be only 30%-50% of the
total number of identified connections.
Hierarchical Relationships in the Visual Cortex
The possibility that the visual cortex might operate
by a strictly serial processing scheme can be ruled
out just from knowing the multiplicity of connections
per area and the near ubiquity of reciprocal connections. On the other hand, it seems highly unlikely
that the visual cortex is a network that altogether lacks
any distinction between processing levels. Many studies, both electrophysiological and lesion based, indicate that some visual areas, such as those in the
temporal and parietal lobes, are involved in a higher
level of information processing than that mediated by
occipital areas such as VI and V2 . Between these 2
extremes (a strictly serial scheme on the one hand
and a completely nonordered network on the other),
there are many intermediate possibilities. One hypothesis is that cortical areas are hierarchically organized in some very well-defined sense, with each
area occupying a specific position in relationship to
all other areas, but with more than 1 area allowed to
occupy a given hierarchical level. Another possibility
is that a hierarchy exists only in a loose sense, for
instance, at the level of the different cerebral lobes,
but not in any precisely definable manner for individual cortical areas.
To illustrate the importance of such distinctions,
consider for a moment an analogy with various groupings characteristic of human societies, including social, political, and business organizations (e.g., the
U.S. government). Except in a complete anarchy, there
is generally some form of hierarchical organization,
in which there are leaders and followers, chairpersons
and committee members, or various other measures
of rank. Some organizations have an utterly rigid hierarchy, in which every individual knows precisely
his or her place within a pecking order. Others are
less well defined, and there may be basic uncertainties
as to who ranks above whom in various interactions.
Still others may be inherently fluid and context dependent, in that one person ranks above another in
one particular circumstance but below the other in
another circumstance (e.g., on different committees).
Distinguishing among such possibilities can be pivotal for understanding the operation of any complex
system, whether it be in the domain of the cerebral
cortex or of human society. It is worth noting in general terms that information flow in a hierarchical system (1) can go in both directions (upwards and downwards), (2) can skip over intermediate levels to go
directly from a low to a high level, and (3) can travel
in parallel through multiple, functionally distinct
Current ideas about hierarchical organization in
the primate visual system were spurred by notions of
forward and feedback pathways suggested by connectivity patterns. In particular, Rockland and Pandya
 noted that projections in one direction tend
to originate from superficial layers and terminate in
layer 4, whereas those directed in the opposite direction tend to arise from deep as well as superficial
layers and to terminate outside layer 4. They suggested that these 2 directions might correspond to
forward and feedback directions of information flow.
Subsequently, this notion was used as a basis for proposing an explicit, anatomically based hierarchy of
visual cortical areas .
In addition to ascending (forward) and descending
(feedback) pathways, a few pathways were hypothesized to represent lateral information flow between
areas at the same level. This designation was assigned
to pathways terminating in a columnar pattern, involving all cellular layers to a comparable extent. The
original version of the cortical hierarchy in the macaque visual pathway spanned 6 levels and was based
on 36 distinct pathways among 13 identified cortical
areas. Subsequently, this was extended to 7 hierarchical levels, based on 92 pathways among 17 cortical
areas .
The number of identified pathways for which useful laminar information is available has more than
tripled in the past 5 years. Given this huge increase
in recently available information, our aim here is to
assess whether the same or similar principles of organization allow for the incorporation of many more
cortical areas and pathways into a single, internally
consistent hierarchy. Our analysis indicates that the
hierarchy can indeed be expanded to include all of
the visually related areas for which connectional data
exist. However, this has entailed a significant modification in the criteria used for distinguishing forward
and feedback pathways. There are also a number of
apparent inconsistencies. Some of these may represent bona fide exceptions to the general rule, but we
suspect that the majority reflect inaccurate assignments stemming from technical considerations that
will be discussed below.
Our revised criteria for identifying hierarchical relationships are illustrated schematically in Figure 3.
This scheme is similar to previously published ones
 , but it has been
expanded to include all major types of laminar patterns identified to date. The different patterns are arranged to show the laminar distributions of cells of
origin and axonal terminations that we consider to be
indicative of ascending (A, upper row), lateral (L,
central row), and descending (D, bottom row) pathways.
For the axonal terminations of any given pathway,
we distinguish 3 characteristic patterns as revealed
by anterograde tracer injections (Fig. 3, center column). In one pattern (F), terminations are densest
in layer 4, though they may also be prominent in layer
3 and other layers, as well. In another pattern (M),
terminations preferentially avoid layer 4, usually
forming a multitier pattern including both superficial
and deep layers. Occasionally, patterns are encountered that involve primarily superficial layers (e.g.,
layers 1 and 2 in the projection from V4 to VI; predominantly layer 3 in the projection from AITd to
FEF). Even though these are not strictly multilaminar,
we have grouped them in the same category because
they appear to represent descending pathways. In the
third pattern (C), terminations extend in a columnar
fashion continuously and with relatively uniform density across layer 4, often extending the entire thickness of the cortex.
For the cells of origin of each pathway, we distinguish 3 characteristic patterns as revealed by retrograde labeling experiments (Fig. 3, left and right columns). In one pattern (S), a large majority of cells
(>70%) lie in supragranular layers. In another pattern
(I), a large majority (>70%) lie in infragranular layers. In the third pattern (B), there is a strongly mixed
14 Organization of Macaque Visual Cortex • Felleman and Van Essen
UNiLAMINAR
TERMINATION
(F, C, or M)
DESCENDING
(FEEDBACK)
Laminar patterns of cortical connectjvny used for making hierarchcal asngnmems. Throe charactenstc petusits of muiiiiduoii are indicated in the tttuiBl
These indude preferential termination in layer 4 (the f pattern), corumrar ( 0 pattern involving approximately equal density of termination in aB layers, and a miiilaminar (M)
pattern that preferentially avoids layer 4. There are also 3 characteristjc patterns for the cells of origin of different pathways. BDarranar |fl) patterns, shown on the right indude
approximately equal number! of cells from superficial and deep layers (no more than a 70X-3O% split) and are found to occur with aO 3 types of lamina lion pattern. IWaminar
patterns indude pratarinaraly superfcial-tayer mpms {5 pattern), which correlate with F-type tamaidma. and fredormnamty infragranular-layer input (/ patiern), which correiate
with M-type tunnuius. Whhin ths general framework, a number of variations on a theme can be ercouraered. Some pathways terminate primarily in superficial layers, but we
group them with the M pattern because they avoid layer 4. Other pathways ere quasi columnar, but do not include all layers; we classify them as a C pattern if the labeling in
layer 4 a neither heavier nor sparser than in adjrinmrj layers.
(bilaminar) distribution, with roughly similar proportions (30%-70%) of the labeled cells in each compartment.
Ascending projections were originally proposed
always to originate predominantly from superficial
layers . However, a few pathways,
such as that from DP to 7a ,
are now known to originate in a bilaminar (B) pattern
and yet terminate mainly in layer 4 (F pattern). Such
B-F combinations invalidate one of the initial assumptions about feedforward pathways, but they do
not necessarily invalidate the notion of hierarchical
organization. The key issue is whether a consistent
hierarchical scheme can be identified using a modified set of criteria. The modification that we propose
is to treat any bilaminar retrograde pattern as ambiguous if it is the only type of laminar information available. Conversely, it is compatible with any of the 3
hierarchical relationships (A, L, or D) that may be
indicated from other data on a given pathway. A similar suggestion has been made by Andersen et al.
 and Boussaoud et al. .
A Database for Anatyxtng Hierarchical
Relationships
Our goal in this section is to apply the scheme illustrated in Figure 3 as objectively and rigorously as
Cerebral Cortex Jan/Feb 1991, VI N 1 It
possible to the analysis of hierarchical relationships
in the visual cortex, while taking into account the
uncertainties and qualifications that are associated with
some of the experimental data. In principle, the task
is no different than for the hierarchical schemes that
we and others have proposed previously. However,
in practice, we found the analysis to be much more
difficult, owing to the sheer amount and complexity
of anatomical data now available. It became essential
to establish a computerized database in order to handle the data efficiently and examine all relationships
critically. We used the EXCEL database package, which
runs on both Macintosh and PC-compatible computers.
The format we used for the database is illustrated
in Table 5. The first 12 columns on the left provide
information about the laminar patterns of connections
and the hierarchical relationships that can be inferred
from them. The 6 columns on the right provide specific citations, listed separately for the origins and
terminations of each pathway.
Each row across the table deals with both pairs of
a reciprocal linkage (e.g., from VI to V2 in columns
1-5 and from V2 back to VI in columns 6-10). The
connections of VI are listed first, because its outputs
(left) are all of the ascending type and its inputs (right)
are all descending. Those of V2 are listed next, because its outputs are all ascending, except for the
linkage with VI that has already been accounted for.
The sequence continues by selecting areas in an order
(V3, VP, etc.) chosen so that the output pathways
remaining to be listed (columns 1-5) are all ascending, lateral, or indeterminate, the descending pathways having already been listed.
The complete hierarchical analysis involved 4 major stages, and it is useful to outline the overall sequence briefly before discussing each stage in detail.
For each pathway under consideration, the first step
is to use the available laminar information to make
assignments according to the categories we have proposed for retrograde labeling (S, B, or I designations
in columns 3 and 8) and anterograde labeling (F, C,
or M designations in columns 4 and 9) - One or 2 key
references for each of these assignments are listed in
the appropriate column (13, 14, 16, or 17) on the
right. For pathways that have been identified in several studies, we have selected those references that
provide the best information on laminar patterns,
rather than necessarily the first study or the most recent study. As in Table 1, the references are designated by abbreviations that are matched to the standard citation format in the table notes. With a little
experience, one can quickly recognize the specific
study associated with any given finding contained in
the table. In order to facilitate making distinctions
between pathways that are identified on the basis of
abstract versus those documented by full reports, all
of the abstracts in the reference key are italicized.
The second step in the analysis is to make assignments of the direction of information flow (ascending,
lateral, or descending) based on the laminar information available for each pathway. Using the criteria
illustrated in Figure 3, the entries in column 3 and 4
are used to make the assignments of A, L, or D shown
in column 5, while the entries in columns 8 and 9
are used for the assignments shown in column 10.
Columns 5 and 10 also contain many "u" entries,
which stand for a pathway whose existence is documented but whose hierarchical assignment is undefined, either because there is no laminar information
whatsoever or because the only information is the
nonspecific B (bilaminar) cell-of-origin pattern. The
third step is to examine all reciprocal pairs, in order
to see whether there is complementarity of the 2 patterns indicated in columns 5 and 10. If one pathway
is ascending, the reciprocal path should be descending (an A-D pair), and if one is lateral, its counterpart
should also be lateral (an L-L pair). The results are
indicated in column 11. The fourth and final step is
to determine whether an internally consistent global
hierarchy can be assembled by using the relationships
inferred from the entire collection of pairwise comparisons. Before we reached this step, there were numerous complexities and subtleties that required
careful attention and merit explicit discussion.
Table 5 also contains additional information pertaining to the existence, special nature, or controversial nature of certain pathways, which is indicated in
columns 15 and 18 for the 2 directions. Each of these
"special" references is preceded by an "E" if the existence of the pathway has been demonstrated but
there is no laminar information for either the origin
or termination, by an "S" if the pathway is notably
sparse, by an "R" if it occurs only rarely, and by an
"A" if the pathway has been reported to be altogether
absent. However, for simplicity, we filled in this last
entry (absent pathways) only for cases of particular
interest, for example, when other studies have reported the presence of that pathway or of the pathway
in the reciprocal direction. There are a total of 38
entries in the sparse, rare, or absent groups, amounting to slightly more than 10% of the total number of
The most critical stage of the entire analysis was
the entry and validation of experimental data on laminar patterns (Table 5, columns 3, 4, 8, and 9). This
is based on information from a total of 52 studies,
listed in the table notes. For many studies, the relevant information was already available in an appropriate format, and data entry was straightforward.
However, in numerous cases, it was difficult to decide
on the appropriate assignment, for reasons that can
be grouped into 2 broad categories: (1) Areal uncertainties: Many pathways have been reported using a
different partitioning scheme than ours for identification of areas (cf. Table 1), and others have been
demonstrated by illustrating the connections as they
relate to geographical landmarks, without explicit assignment of both tracer injection sites and target sites
to specific areas. The ease and reliability with which
such data could be related to our partitioning scheme
varied widely and depended to a large extent on how
much detailed information was given about the pathways under consideration. To facilitate this process,
16 Organization of Macaque Visual Cortex • Felleman and Van Essen
we often made recourse to comparisons with a scale
model of the macaque brain, which was available in
our laboratory and was painted according to the
scheme illustrated in Figure 3. (2) Laminar uncertainties: As with the areal assignments, the determination of laminar patterns associated with each pathway was often difficult, depending on the nature and
extent of published information available. Obviously,
the easiest cases were those in which the laminar
patterns had been analyzed and tabulated using criteria similar to or identical to ours . However, in many
publications, the critical patterns are often illustrated
or described only in sketchy or fragmentary fashion.
Altogether, we made numerous judgment calls,
many of which are explicitly indicated by question
marks (e.g., S?) or mixed assignments (e.g., C/M?) in
the relevant columns of Table 5. Because this was an
interactive process, frequently requiring discussion
and reassessment of the data, it was important to be
able to access the published information quickly and
repeatedly. For this reason, our computerized database included, in addition to the relevant publications, a listing of their specific page numbers and
figure numbers that are particularly informative about
laminar patterns. This information is not included in
Table 5, simply for reasons of clarity and space.
Step 1: Individual Laminar Patterns
Columns 3 and 8 of Table 5 contain data on cells of
origin for 217 pathways, 177 of which fell clearly in
the S, B, or I categories illustrated in Figure 3. The
40 irregularities (25 S/B, 14 I/B, and 1 S? patterns)
are of several types: (1) borderline patterns (e.g., results showing labeling of roughly V> infragranular and
Vi supragranular neurons but without sufficient quantitation to decide unambiguously between S vs. B
patterns), (2) heterogeneous results within a single
hemisphere (e.g., some S clusters and some B clusters
from a single injection), (3) heterogeneity across different hemispheres used in the same study, and (4)
discrepant outcomes reported by different studies.
Overall, it is difficult to ascertain how many of these
instances represent genuine biological variability
within a well-defined pathway and how many represent technical complications and uncertainties. With
respect to determining hierarchical relationships,
however, the presence of a mixed result (S/B or I/B)
in a single pathway does not represent an inherent
conflict, because a bilaminar pattern is consistent with
all possibilities, ascending, descending, or lateral.
Such a conflict would arise if a mixed S/I pattern were
encountered for a particular pathway, but we are not
aware of any examples of this type. In cases where
there is a mixed pattern of origin (S/B or I/B) and
no data on termination patterns, a question mark (A?
or D?) is used to indicate uncertainty about the hierarchical assignment.
With regard to patterns of termination, columns 4
and 9 of Table 5 contain data on 156 pathways, 132
of which fit cleanly into the F, C, or M categories of
Figure 3. The 24 exceptions are listed individually in
Table 6 because, unlike the various irregularities in
patterns of cell origin, they represent a potentially
serious challenge to our simple scheme for hierarchical relationships. For example, a genuinely mixed
F/C pathway would suggest that one area is simultaneously level with and higher than another area.
This would be logically inconsistent with a static hierarchy based on our particular anatomical criteria.
Although it is obviously critical to know whether these
mixed patterns are genuine or artifactual, in most cases,
there is insufficient information to resolve the issue
unambiguously. Perhaps the clearest example of laminar heterogeneity is the projection from MT to V4,
which has been shown in 2 studies to include some
patches having a columnar pattern and other patches
having a multilayer pattern . It is unlikely that this heterogeneity is an artifact resulting
from mistaken assignments of the borders of V4 or
MT. Interestingly, however, there is independent evidence for a form of compartmental organization within V4, based on its pattern of connectivity with different subregions of V2 . It is unclear
whether these 2 types of heterogeneity bear any systematic relationship to one another. Other examples
of mixed, or variable, laminar patterns (MST to PO;
MSTd and MST1 to FST; LIP to PO and MSTd) represent situations in which both the target area and
the injected area are small and lack sharply defined
borders. Hence, it is possible that the heterogeneity
sometimes resulted from imperfect border assignments in which the injection site or the target region
might inadvertently have included 2 areas at different
hierarchical levels.
In some instances, the descriptions involve relatively sparse connections in which it is difficult to
discern laminar patterns precisely . In other cases, the reported
distribution is borderline or intermediate between a
clear-cut F or C pattern. For example, the projection
from MT to V3A is a borderline pattern in which the
text describes a columnar (C) pattern , but in the accompanying illustration (their Fig. 2), the labeling appears slightly
denser in superficial and deep layers than in layer 4
and hence could arguably correspond to a multilayer
(M) pattern .
Interestingly, there are only 2 cases of F/M termination patterns, that is, involving a direct conflict
between ascending and descending directions. In one
case , there is
independent evidence that the target region includes
2 separate areas (STPp and STPa) at different hierarchical levels, but the projections are not described in
sufficient detail to ascertain whether the F pattern is
in STPa and the M pattern in STPp, as we would predict. In the other case , the projection was to 2 separate foci in the
arcuate sulcus having different termination patterns,
but it is unclear whether both foci were within the
Cerebral Cortex Jan/Feb 1991, VI N 1 17
Connectivity table for visual areas
Termination
Hierarchical
relationship
IB Organization of Macaque Visual Cortex • Felleman and Van Essen
Output References'
FDKOV, '88
Termination
 
Termination
E: AAES, '90
E: AAES, '90
R: BUD, '90
A: BUD, '90
E: AAES.'90
E: AAES, '90
E: BSA. '87
E: BSA '87
E: AAES,'90
R: BUD, '90
S: BUD. '90
A: BUD. '90
R: BUD. '90
R: BUD. '90
S: BM. '81
Cerebral Cortex Jan/Feb 1991, V 1 N 1 23
Terrronation
Termination
Hierarchical
relationship
This table shows connections among visual conical areas listed in Table 1. Each row deals with pairs of a reciprocal linkage with the outputs listed in columns 1-5 and the inputs
listed in columns 6-10. For each pathway, the laminar origin (S, supragranular; B, bilaminar; I. infragranular). laminar pattern of termination |F, layer 4 predominant; C, columnar;
M. multilayer avoiding layer 4), and pathway direction (A. ascending; I lateral; D. descending) is listed when known. The symbol " u " indicates the pathway has been demonstrated
but the laminar features are unknown. Columns 11 and 12 refer to the hierarchical relationships between the pairs of areas. A-0 indicates an ascending-descending pair where the
lamina; patterns of connections in both directions are consistent with a hierarchical pairing extending across layers of a hierarchy. Level indicates the number of hierarchical levels
the pathway traverses {in either direction) in the hierarchy illustrated in Figure 4. Columns 13-15 and 16-18 provide references to each of the illustrated input and output pathways,
respectively. Columns 15 and 18 provide pathway information: E. the existence of a pathway without laminar information: R, rare pathway: S. sparse pathway; A. absent pathway.
Only those pathways whose absence provides some controversy are listed in this column.
' Reference key (italic signifies abstracts or unpublished observations):
Andersen. Asanuma. Essidc. and Siegel. 1990
Brady, 1985
Barbas. 1986
Barbas. 1988
Burkhalter. Felleman, Newsome, and Van Essen. 1986
Barbas and Mesulam. 1981
Barbas and Mesulam. 1985
Barbas and Pandya. 1989
Blan. Stoner, and Anderson. 1987
Boussaoud. Ungerleider. and Desimone. 1990
BiMalter and Van Essen. 1983
A. Burkhalter and D. C. Van Essen, unpublished observations
Cragg, 1969
Colby. Gattass. Olson, and Gross, 1988
Cavada and Goldmanflakic. 1989a
Desimone. Fleming, and Gross. 1980
OeYoe and Van Essen. 1985
Fenstemaker, 1986
Felleman. Burkhalter, and Van Essen. 1987
Felleman. DeYoe. Knierim, Olavarria. and Van Essen,
Felleman, Knierim, and Van Essen, 1986
Felleman and Van Essen, 1983
Felleman and Van Essen. 1984
D. J. Felleman and D. C. Van Essen, unpublished obser
Goldman-Rakic. Selemon. and Schwartz. 1984
Huerta. Krubitzer. and Kaas, 1987
KQnzle and Akert. 1977
Le'timhz 1980
Livingstone and Hubel. 1984a
Maunsell and Van Essen. 1983
Mesulam. Van Hoesen. Pandya. and Geschwind. 1977
24 Organization of Macaque Visual Cortex • Felleman and Van Essen
Output References'
Termination
Input References'
Termination
; CG, '89;
MVPG, '77; CG,
MVPG, 77; CG,
MVPG, 77; CG.
HKK. '87; BP. '89
BM. '81; HKK. '87
E: SP. '87
Newsome. Maunsell, and Van Essen. 1986
Perkel. Bullier. and Kennedy. 1986
Rockland and Pandya. 1979
Shiwa, 1987
Schwartz and Goldman-Rakic. 1984
Selemon and Goldman-Rakic, 1988
Seltzer and Pandya. 1976
Seltzer and Pandya. 1980
Seltzer and Pandya, 1984
Seltzer and Pandya. 1987
Seltzer and Pandya. 1989a
VFDOK, '91
Seltzer and Pandya. 1989b
Ungerieider and Desimone, 1986a
Ungerieider and Desimone, 1986b
Ungerieider, Ganass. Sousa. ami Mishkin. 1983
Van Essen, Felleman, DeYoe, Olavarria, and Knierim
Van Essen, Newsome. Maunsell. and Bixby, 1986
Yukie and Iwai. 1985
Zeki. 1978a
Zeki. 1978b
Zeki. 1980
Cerebral Cortex Jan/Feb 1991, V 1 N 1 25
Irregular and mismatched
Irregular Terminations
connectivity patterns
Origin-Termination
Mismatches
Termination
architectonically defined FEF. The remaining 22 irregular patterns are all C/F or C/M mixtures and
therefore involve an apparent conflict of only one step
(lateral vs. ascending or lateral vs. descending). We
suspect that this bias for C/F and C/M patterns is not
a coincidence and that it may be important for understanding the significance of mixed or intermediate
termination patterns (see below).
Step 2: Matching Origins and Terminations
The next step is to assess the consistency of retrograde
and anterograde patterns for the 88 pathways in which
both types of laminar information are available. In 39
of these cases, the retrograde pattern is bilaminar and
hence is compatible with any anterograde pattern.
There are 26 S-F and 8 I-M combinations, both of
which are strongly consistent with an orderly hierarchical relationship. In addition, most of the 16 cases
with mixed patterns on either the retrograde or the
anterograde side also are fully consistent with this
scheme (e.g., S/B-F, etc.). In a few cases, however, there are possible hierarchical inconsistencies,
which are listed separately as "origin-termination
mismatches" in Table 6. In 4 instances, the assignment for the origin is mixed (S/B). If further investigation reveals that these are B patterns, then there
would be no conflict with the C or M terminations.
If, on the other hand, any of them turn out to be S
patterns, it would be an overt conflict with the criteria
we have used. In the remaining 2 cases (area 46 to
STPp and STPp to 46), the reported origin is an explicitly (S) pattern giving rise to an M or C termination
pattern . It
will be important to reexamine these pathways using
combined retrograde and anterograde tracers and injections unequivocally restricted to a single visual
Step 3: Reciprocal Relationships
Analysis of reciprocal pathways provides the next test
of the consistency of hierarchical relationships. From
the data in column 11 of Table 5, there are 65 linkages
in which the pattern is explicitly identifiable as ascending in one direction and descending in the other
(49 designated as AD, 16 designated as A-D?). There
are only 5 linkages that are identifiably lateral in both
directions (L/L), and all of these are questionable in
one way or another. There are also 10 possible exceptions to this pattern, which are listed as "reciprocity mismatches" in Table 6 and also are indicated
by "NC" or "NC?" (not consistent) in column 11 of
In nearly all of the irregular cases (9 of 10), the
comparison involves hierarchical assignments that are
questionable on 1 or more counts, owing to the types
of uncertainties described in the preceding 2 sections. Thus, while these putative counterexamples
should be taken seriously, they should not all be regarded at present as unequivocal violations of our
scheme. The strongest case for a genuine violation is
the linkage between MSTd and 7a, which is reported
to be descending from 7a to MSTd but lateral in the
reverse direction .
26 Organization of Macaque Visual Cortex • Felleman and Van Essen
Reciprocity Mismatches
Hierarchical
Mismatches
Step 4: Global Hierarchical Constraints
We now address whether these pairwise relationships
can be used to generate an overall hierarchy involving
the entire collection of visual areas and pathways. To
avoid logical inconsistencies, each area must be placed
above all areas from which it receives ascending connections and/or sends descending connections. Likewise, it must be placed below all areas from which it
receives descending connections and/or sends ascending connections. Finally, if an area has lateral
connections, these must be with other areas at the
same hierarchical level. All of the information needed
to construct such a hierarchy is contained within Table 5, but it is not formatted optimally for the task.
We therefore created an intermediate tabulation that
greatly facilitated the process (Table 7).
Table 7 represents a "constraint chart" that indicates, for each visual area, all of the other areas with
which it is connected and the hierarchical relationships that can be inferred solely on the basis of their
direct linkages. For example, based only on what is
known about it own connections, MT is unequivocally
at a lower level than 7 areas (VIP, LIP, FST, MSTd,
FEF, and 46), level with 1 area (V4t), and higher
than 4 areas (VI, V2, V3, and VP). In addition, MT is
constrained to be level with or higher than areas V3A,
V4, and PO, based on the mixed pattern of connectivity with those areas. Finally, MT has a known connection with area PIP that provides no constraints at
all, making their hierarchical relationship indeterminate.
Once all of these pairwise relationships were tabulated, we began the task of generating an internally
consistent hierarchy. This was done in a "bottom-up"
fashion, by progressively adding areas to successive
stages on the basis of information contained in the
"higher than" and "level with" columns of Table 7.
The sequence begins by identifying the area, namely
VI, that has no entries in the "higher than" or "level
with" categories and must therefore be at the lowest
hierarchical level. The next level is populated by the
area, namely V2, whose listing of "higher than" includes only the lowest area, VI. The process continues iteratively by adding at the next stage only areas
whose listing of "higher than" includes those areas
already entered in the emerging hierarchy. If more
than 1 entry at a given level occurs, it is critical that
they either be unconnected or be connected by lateral
or indeterminate pathways. In cases where the constraint chart only partially restricts the positioning of
areas (e.g., MT is level with or higher than V4), we
chose the configuration that left all areas in the lowest
possible state and minimized inconsistencies within
the overall hierarchy. The resultant choices for these
flexible cases are indicated by entering the linkage
in the appropriate subcolumn within Table 7. This
process continues iteratively until all hierarchical levels are established. Once the positioning of all areas
is achieved, the wiring diagram can be added by inclusion of all linkages listed in the constraint table.
The hierarchical scheme that results from this analysis is shown in Figure 4. It includes all of the 32
visual cortical areas organized into 10 hierarchical
levels. Each visual area is represented by a box colored in the same shade as on the cortical map (Fig.
2). In addition, we have included at the bottom the
2 subcortical levels (retina and LGN) that represent
the primary source of visual inputs to the cortex. Finally, we have included at the top several uncolored
entries that represent some of the linkages of the
visual system to other sensory modalities and to
"higher" associational cortex (see below).
As already noted, the coloring scheme for different
areas provides information about the geographical location and the cortical processing stream in which
they reside. In the upper part of the hierarchy, orange
and yellow hues represent parietal areas, green hues
represent temporal areas, and brown hues represent
frontal areas. For the areas in the occipital lobe (lower
part of Fig. 4), the primary distinction is between the
M (magnocellular) stream (red and pink areas) and
components of the P (parvocellular) stream (purple,
blue, and violet). The P stream can be further split
into the P-B (parvo-blob) and PI (parvo-interblob)
streams of VI and V2 . Connections of VI and V2 that can be assigned
explicitly to components of these streams are indicated appropriately in the figure-, those that have not
been specifically linked are represented by the lines
emerging from the generically labeled boxes in VI
Cerebral Cortex Jan/Feb 1991, V l N 1 27
Hierarchical constraints
Lower than
V2.V3.V3A.PIP.V4,V4t.MT.
V3. VP, V3A. V4, V4t. MT, PO. MSTd. MSTI. FST,
V3A. PIP. V4, V4t. MT, PO.
MSTd. FST. UP. VIP, FEF. TF
PIP. V4. PO. MT, VOT. MSTd, FST, UP. VIP,
V4. DP, MSTd, MSTI, FST, UP, FEF
V4, PO, DP
MSTd, MSTI, 7a, FEF
VOT. DP, UP, FST, PITd, PITv, CITd. CITv.
FEF?. AITv. TF. TH. 46
MSTd?. MSTI?, FST. FEF
MSTd. MSTI, FST, LIP, VIP, FEF, 46
PITd, PITv
MSTI?, 7a, 46
7a. FEF. 46
FEF. STPp. PIT?. TF
CITv?, AlTd?, AITv?
CITd?, CITv?, AlTd?, AITv?. TF?, TH
AlTd?, AITv?
AlTd?, AITv?, TF
AlTd, TF, TH
STPa. TF, TH
TF, TH, 46
and V2. A similar strategy is used to represent connections between regions representing more than a
single area in our partitioning scheme. For example,
there are connections of PIT that cannot yet be assigned specifically to PITd or PITv. The connection
between 7a and STP is also of this type, but we have
shown this as a linkage with STPa in particular, in
order to avoid the complications of an STP entry that
would have to be placed between 2 levels. Areas MIP
and MDP have been placed at the fifth hierarchical
level, even though the connections known for both
areas are ambiguous (bilaminar retrograde labeling)
28 Organization of Macaque Visual Cortex • Felleman and Van Essen
Higher than
Indeterminam
VOT. PIP. VIP
V1.V2.V3.VP. PIP
V1.V2.V3.VP.V3A. PIP
V1.V2.V3.VP
V2, MT. 7a
V3A.V4t.MIP.MDP,
PIT. LIP. VIP. MST1. TF
V3A.PIP.V4
V2.V3,VP.V3A,V4,V4t.
V2. PO. LIP, 7a
V3,VP,V3A.V4,MT
V2,V3,VP,V3A,V4t?,
V1?,V2,V3A.MT.P0,
PO, VIP, MSTI
V4, PITd. PITv
PO, DP, UP
V2,V3.VP,V3A,PO,
V4?.V4t,MT,MSTd.
MSTI, VIP, LIP
MSTd, MSTI. FST
PIP, VIP, FST, MSTI,
STP, MIP, MOP
DP, CIT, FST, STPp
7a, FEF, PITd?, PITv?,
CITd?,CITv?,46
V4, PITd?, PITv?,
ClTd?, CITv?
V4, MT. DP, UP, PIT,
V3.VP.V4, PITv, MSTd,
CITv, AITv, 7a, STPp,
V4, PITv, CIT, AITv,
STPp, STPa, 7a
STPa. TF. TH
and would technically be consistent with placement
at any lower level. This assignment is obviously provisional, pending additional connectivity information. However, it would be surprising if either MDP
or MIP ultimately ended up at a lower level, because
there is a strong tendency for areas positioned more
anteriorly in the cortex (to the right on the cortical
map) to be situated at higher levels of the hierarchy.
This hierarchy is consistent with all but 3 of the
relationships listed in the constraint chart. One exception is the linkage between FST and TF, which
constrains TF to be level with or lower than FST
Cerebral Cortex Jan/Feb 1991, V 1 N 1 29
V2 I P-B | PI
Hierarchy of visual areas. This hierarchy shows 32 visual conical areas, shaded according to the same scheme as m Figure Z. 2 subcortical visual stages (the retinal
gangfion cefl toyer and the LGN). pKo several nnnvisual areas (area 7b of somatosensory ranex. penhinsl area 36. the ER. and the hippocampal complex). These areas are
connected by 187 linkages, most of which have been demonstrated to be reciprocal pathways.
 . Another is the connection
between MSTd and PIT, which constrains PIT to be
higher than MSTd. The third is the connection between AITd and 46, which constrains 46 to be level
with or lower than AITd. All attempts to reposition
these areas led to an even larger number of inconsistencies. Hence, we regard the current version as a
"best fit" to the available data. It is notable that all 3
of these inconsistencies involve relationships that were
already questionable from an earlier stage of the analysis.
The sheer complexity of Figure 4 makes it difficult
30 Organization of Macaque Visual Conex • Felleman and Van Essen
in many places to trace the lines representing specific
pathways. In order to permit inspection and updating
of these connections in a flexible manner, we created
the hierarchy on a graphics drawing program (CANVAS)
that runs on Macintosh computers. Each area and all
of its connections are represented in a different "layer" that can be independently switched on or off,
thereby allowing easy visualization of any desired
subset of the overall hierarchy.
The current hierarchy is more extensive than, but
otherwise largely consistent with, recently published
hierarchical schemes that have been based on similar
anatomical criteria . However, there are a
few significant differences that merit explicit mention.
Our new version differs from the Van Essen 
scheme in having area 7a moved 1 step higher and
area DP 1 step lower. The differences with the Andersen et al. scheme are slightly greater: (1)
We have DP 1 step lower and PO 2 steps lower than
in theirs; (2) we have MSTd/1 level with LIP, rather
than above it; (3) instead of a single area IT sitting
above 7a, we have multiple subdivisions of IT, and
AITd/v above and CITd/v level with 7a; and (4) instead of a single STP, we have STPp and STPa, with
only the former being level with 7a. The differences
with the Boussaoud et al.. scheme include (1)
our positioning of areas V3A and DP each at 1 stage
lower than in theirs, (2) our positioning of 7a at 1
stage higher than their PP/IPG, and (3) our position-
Ing of TF several stages higher than in theirs. In most
instances, these differences can be traced to the way
in which different Investigators have interpreted the
various irregularities and conflicts that we have already discussed in connection with Table 6.
Significance of Hierarchical
Irregularities
The red lines in Figure 4 indicate the 33 linkages
having one or another of the hierarchical irregularities discussed in connection with Table 6. Their presence raises the issue of whether the cortex is inherently only a' 'quasi-hierarchical" structure that contains
a significant number (perhaps 10%) of bona fide irregularities and exceptions to any set of criteria that
can be devised. Alternatively, the visual cortex might
contain an essentially perfect anatomical hierarchy
that has been imperfectly studied using inherently
"noisy" methods of anatomical analysis. Either interpretation is an interesting one, in our opinion, but
we doubt that it is possible to obtain a clear-cut answer
on the basis of currently available data.
The anatomical data on which our analysis is based
are often fuzzy and replete with uncertainties of one
or another type. Thus, it would have defied the odds
if every single one of the 305 pathways had fit precisely into an orderly hierarchy. It is very likely that
at least a few of the laminar and hierarchical assignments cited in our analysis will change when additional experimental data become available. If one suspects that the underlying biology is extremely orderly,
one would predia that the apparent discrepancies
listed in Table 6 will largely disappear upon careful
HistrjQrarn of number of rriervchJCBi levels trsverssd by different pathways.
Most pathways traverse ordy 1 or 2 leveb, but a few ascend or descend as merry
as 6 or 7 levels.
reexamination, thereby improving the overall fit to
the hierarchy. This might be accompanied by changes
in some of the specific hierarchical assignments. If,
on the other hand, one suspects that a hierarchical
relationship merely reflects a strong statistical bias,
the prediction would be that an increasing number
of unambiguous inconsistencies with our scheme will
be found. This is a matter of speculation at the moment, and we do not take a strong stand on either
side, except to emphasize that the issue is amenable
to experimental validation or refutation. To distinguish incisively among different alternatives, however, It is crucial that reports of anatomical connectivity be as precise and quantitative as possible with
regard to basic questions of (1) the confidence with
which sources and targets have been identified in
relation to areal boundaries and (2) the exact laminar
distribution of anterograde and retrograde tracers.
As a reminder, we note that about 10% of the pathways shown in Figure 4 are distinctive in terms of
being sparse, occasional, or controversial in nature,
and a somewhat larger percentage is based on information currently available only in abstracts. We found
that resolution limits made it impractical to flag these
special cases by distinctive colors in the figure, but
they can nonetheless be readily tracked down with
reference to Tables 3 and 5.
Number of Levels Traversed
While some pathways link areas at the same or immediately adjacent hierarchical levels, the majority of
pathways traverse more than 1 level. For example, VI,
at the first cortical level, projects to areas at the next
4 levels, from the second (V2) to the fifth (MT). The
extreme limit is represented by the projections from
areas V3 and VP (level 3) to parahlppocampal areas
TF and TH (level 10), thereby traversing 7 hierarchical levels. Moreover, because V3 receives direct inputs from VI, it is, in principle, possible for signals
to span the entire visual hierarchy with only 1 relay.
The route from VI to MT to area 46 provides another
example of this type.
A systematic analysis of this issue is shown in Figure 5a, which is a histogram of the number of levels
separating all pairs of visual areas known to be interconnected. The mean value is 1.8 levels. Signals that
traversed the hierarchy at approximately this rate
Cerebral Cortex Jan/Feb 1991, V 1 N 1 31
descending
N U M B E R O F L E V E L S
C R O S S E D
a s c e n d i n g
RelaiiorBhp of laminar pattern fur ceb of origin to number of levels usvaioi The pen majority of btaniiai patterns {open /Enionsj arise from pathways uuvasmg
no more than 2 levels, vifaress unOaninar patterns are encountBred over the entuB range and are ospsctsfiy prBdomnant for pathwsvs Haver ung 3 or more levels.
would pass through 5 or 6 stages between start and
Given that ascending pathways and descending
pathways can both be associated with a retrograde
labeling pattern that can be either bilaminar or unilaminar (supragranular for ascending, infragranular
for descending), we wondered whether there was
anything systematic about the occurrence of one or
the other pattern. Figure 6 shows that there is an
interesting difference along these lines. Descending
and ascending pathways are indicated, respectively,
by negative and positive values for the number of
levels crossed. Pathways originating from unilaminar
patterns are indicated by solid bars,, those of bilaminar
origin are indicated by open bars, and the mixed assignments (S/B and I/B) are indicated by shading.
There is considerable overlap between bilaminar and
unilaminar populations. Nonetheless, it is apparent
that the more specific unilaminar projections, on average, traverse more hierarchical levels than do the
bilaminar projections: 2.68 levels for I patterns, 2.76
levels for S patterns, and 1.71 levels for B patterns,
excluding all of the lateral pathways. These differences (S vs. B; I vs. B) are highly significant (p <
0.005, Student's t test). Stated differently, a majority
(60%) of the pathways traversing only 1 level are of
bilaminar origin, whereas a majority (66%) of those
traversing 2 or more levels are of unilaminar origin.
In the anterograde direction, it is instructive to
consider the subset of pathways that show mixed, or
borderline, termination patterns (C/M and C/F patterns in Tables 5, 6). On average, these pathways traverse less than 1 level (—0.8), which is less than half
what would be expected if they were picked randomly
from the overall pool. Thus, it appears that, in both
retrograde and anterograde directions, differences in
laminar patterns are statistically correlated with the
number of levels separating any given pair of areas,
as well as the sign (ascending, descending, or lateral)
of the relationship.
A related set of questions arises when considering
connectivity patterns and hierarchical relationships
among adjacent visual areas, that is, ones that share
a common boundary in the intact cortex. In terms of
connectivity, the great majority of areas that adjoin
one another are directly and reciprocally interconnected. There are only a few clear-cut exceptions,
such as the reported lack of a connection between
ventral area V2 and adjoining areas TF and TH. Thus,
while many pathways connect areas that are widely
separated within the cortex, it is rare to see adjoining
areas that fail to communicate directly with one another.
In terms of hierarchical relationships, the majority
of adjoining areas are either at the same level or are
separated by only 1 level. However, there are numerous examples of neighboring areas separated by
2 or 3 levels (e.g., V2/V4, VP/V4, and PIP/VIP). The
maximum hierarchical jump between neighbors is the
8 steps between V2 and TF/TH, but very few others
are separated by more than 1 level.
Finally, the tendency for areas more anterior in the
cortex (to the right on the map in Fig. 2) to be at a
higher level, or at least the same level, is quite striking. This geographical relationship was pointed out
by Rockland and Pandya , at a time when only
a handful of well-defined areas were known, and our
point here is simply that the trend persists even at
the much finer grain of analysis now available. However, there are a few specific counterexamples, such
32 Organization of Macaque Visual Cortex • Felleman and Van Essen
as the fact that TF and TH are posterior to, but at a
higher level than, AITd and AITv, and likewise for 7a
versus MT, MSTd, MST1, and FST. With the exception
of MDP and MIP (see above), these geographical considerations played absolutely no role in the formulation of the cortical hierarchy, so we regard the "anterior signifies upwards" trend to be genuine and
perhaps of significance with regard to the way in which
the number of visual areas has increased during evolution.
Hierarchical Relationships in Other Regions
and in Other Species
The visual cortex has extensive connections with a
variety of nonvisual areas, both cortical and subcortical. It is naturally of interest to know the levels at
which communication takes place between different
functional modalities and whether these other systems are themselves hierarchically organized.
Four nonvisual areas, chosen because they can be
directly linked to the visual hierarchy in an orderly
fashion, are shown by the noncolored boxes in Figure
4. One of these is somatosensory area 7b, which is
connected to areas MSTd and MSTp in a way that places it at the eighth hierarchical
level. This allows us to link the visual hierarchy with
a somatosensory hierarchy that will be discussed below.
The 3 remaining entries shown in Figure 4 [area
36, the entorhinal cortex (ER), and the hippocampal
complex (HC)] are all associated with the limbic system. Area 36 (TG, or temporal polar cortex) is a strip
of polysensory neocortex that adjoins entorhinal cortex, area TF, and AITv. It can be placed at the same
level as TF because it receives lateral projections from
TF and area 46 as well as ascending projections from
7a and perhaps also AIT . The analysis is less straightforward for entorhinal cortex, a complex of several small areas all having a transitional architecture
that lacks the cell-dense layer 4 characteristic of most
neocortical areas. Entorhinal cortex receives neocortical inputs preferentially from the superficial layers
of areas STPp, STPa, TF, TH, 46, and 36 . This suggests that entorhinal cortex is at a higher level than all of the neocortical areas with which it is connected. The fact that
the inputs from these neocortical areas terminate in
superficial layers of ER 
appears, at first glance, to argue against this assignment. However, we presume that the superficial terminations may be related to the absence of a standard
granular layer 4 in ER. This interpretation fits well
with the fact that the projections from the olfactory
bulb, which clearly represent ascending sensory inputs, also terminate in superficial layers in both the
pyriform cortex and the olfactory portion of entorhinal cortex .
At the top of the hierarchy, we have placed the
hippocampal complex, an archicortical region that
includes the dentate gyrus, fields CA1 and CA3, and
the subiculum, parasubiculum, and presubiculum. The
architecture and connectivity of the hippocampal
complex is radically different from the neocortical
areas discussed above .
Hence, it should not be surprising that a modified set
of criteria would be necessary for making any hierarchical assignments. Our assignment is based on the
fact that the projection from entorhinal cortex arises
predominantly from superficial layers, at least in the
rat , and terminates strongly
in the dentate gyrus ,
which, despite its different topology, is a granular
layer analogous to neocortical layer 4. Also, the reciprocal projection from CA1 terminates mainly in
deep layers of entorhinal cortex , and hence is complementary to the neocortical inputs that terminate mainly in superficial
layers. Thus, the hippocampal complex is arguably at
a higher level than neocortical and transitional cortical areas. We reiterate, however, that this illustration
is deceptive in one sense, because the hippocampus
and entorhinal complex are by no means the only
high-level targets of visual information flow (see below).
Somatosensory and Motor Cortex
The notion that forward and feedback connections
can be used to delineate hierarchical relationships is
nearly as old for the somatosensory cortex as it is for
the visual cortex. The first hierarchical scheme proposed for the somatosensory cortex involved 4 stages
of processing among 5 somatosensory areas . More recent studies have extended this
hierarchical analysis to include more areas and connections, including several motor areas . As in the visual system,
the number of areas and pathways has become so large
that it is difficult to analyze all of the critical relationships without having an organized database for the
relevant circuitry. Because of our interest in understanding the detailed hierarchical relationships among
different modalities, we have extended our analysis
to include the 62 known connections among 13 areas
of the somatosensory and motor cortices. The laminar
information pertaining to these pathways is contained
in Table 8, whose format is identical to that of Table 5.
As in the visual system, reciprocity of connections
between areas appears to be a general rule, but there
are several possible exceptions, including pathways
from 7b to 1, SII to 4, and granular insular (Ig) to
dysgranular insular (Id) that apparently lack connections in the reverse direction. The great majority of
pathways fit cleanly into ascending, descending, and
lateral connections according to the same criteria used
for the visual cortex. However, by this point, it should
not be surprising to find that there are a few irregularities that must be addressed. For example, the projection from SII to 7b appears to terminate in a mixed
C/F (columnar/forward) pattern , and there are conflicting reports on the ter-
Cerebral Cortex Jan/Feb 1991, VI N 1 33
Connectivity table for
sensdrimotor
Termination
Termination
Hierarchical
relationship
This table shows comections among somatosensory and motor areas in the macaque. Format and symbols are identical to those used in Table 5.
• Reference key:
Andersen, Asanuma, Essick. and Seigel. 1990
Friedman, 1983
Friedman, Jones, and Burton. 1980
Friedman. Murray. O'Neill, and Mishlun. 1986
GodschaHc. Lemon. Kuypers. and Ronday. 1984
Jurgens. 1984 (squirrel monkey)
34 Organization of Macaque Visual Conex • Felleman and Van Essen
Output References'
Termination
(E, R, S, A)
Input References'
Termination
VP. 78; PK, '86
E: PK. '86
A; FMOM, '86
A: FMOM, '86
JCH. 78: K. 78;
J, '84(SqM)
E: PK. '86
GLKR, '84;
FMOM, '86;
MCGR. '86;
A: FJB, '80
A: FMOM, '86
GLKR, '84;
FMOM. '86;
E: FJB, '80
J. '84(SqM);
J. '84fSqM|
Jones. Coulter, and Hendry, 1978
Kunzle. 1978
Matelli, Camarda. Glickstein, and Rizzolani. 1986
Muakkassa and Stride 1979
Neal. Pearson, and Powell, 1987
Pons and Kaas, 1986
Primrose and Stride. 1985
Vogt and Pandya. 1978
Cerebral Cortex Jan/Feb 1991, VI N 1 3B
A proposed Iraardiy for somaiosensory and motor areas, based on 62
linkages among 10 sornatosensory and 3 motor areas. HudJdicsl assortments are
based on the laminar Biformfiton contained in Table 7. Also included in the hierarchy
are connections with visual area I t (ri. Rg. 4| and with higher associational areas
35 end 36. Countng the highest level, there are 10 levels in the hierarchy, and
possibly an etevemh, depending on uncertainties with regard to imamnaatutt among
motor areas (see ten).
mination pattern in the reverse direction, with Neal
et al. and Andersen et al. reporting a
descending projection from 7b to SII and Friedman
et al. reporting an ascending projection. There
are also apparent inconsistencies in the linkages between areas 2 and 5, 2 and 7b, and 5 and 4, in that
both directions appear to be of the ascending pattern
 . However,
some of these assignments are based on our interpretation of 1 or 2 schematic illustrations, and it is
important that these questionable cases receive further scrutiny. In the motor cortex, a critical issue is
whether the projections among areas 4 and 6 and SMA
(supplementary motor area) are all of the columnar
(C) pattern or whether there are ascending projections from 4 to SMA and descending projections from
6 to 4. The patterns illustrated in the literature are
difficult to interpret unambiguously, but Primrose and
Strick reported in an abstract that the premotor
areas (SMA and 6) appear to be at a higher level than
area 4 on the basis of both anterograde and retrograde
labeling patterns. The ascending anterograde patterns
they described terminated preferentially in layer 3
rather than layer 4, but this seems a reasonable assignment given that the motor cortex lacks the granular layer 4 characteristic of most other neocortical
Figure 7 shows the somatosensory-motor hierarchy that results from the systematic application of the
pairwise hierarchical assignments contained in Table
8. Somatosensory areas are outlined with heavy lines,
motor areas are shaded, and other areas (visual and
associational) are outlined with fine lines. In brief,
this hierarchy starts with areas 3a and 3b at the bottom
and extends in successive stages through areas 1, 2,
5, retroinsular (Ri), SII, 7b, Ig, and Id. The motor
areas included are areas 4, 6, and SMA, with area 4
placed at a lower level than the other 2. The other
nonsomatosensory areas shown (with thin outlines)
are area 7a of the visual cortex and associational areas
35 and 36 of the perirhinal cortex, which are included
in order to indicate the relationship to areas shown
in the visual hierarchy (Fig. 4).
Remarkably, the 9 levels of the somatosensorymotor hierarchy are nearly as many as the 10 levels
of the visual hierarchy, even though there are fewer
than half the number of areas involved. This scheme
is based on a larger number of connections than in
the schemes proposed by Friedman et al. and Neal et al. , but it is similar to
theirs in most respects. The major difference with the
Friedman et al. scheme is that we have placed
each area at an explicit level of the hierarchy, rather
than relying as they did on a large number of arrows
to reflect pairwise hierarchical relationships. It was
only after doing this that we appreciated that there
are so many levels in the somatosensory-motor hierarchy. Also, we have placed area 7b above SII, rather
than below as in their scheme, pending resolution of
the conflicting observations mentioned above. The
differences with the Neal et al. scheme involve
the relative placement of areas 5, Ri, SII, 7b, and Ig,
which we have repositioned on the basis of the additional evidence included in our analysis.
As already noted, the pathways between the somatosensory and visual systems allow the different
modalities to be linked into a unified sensorimotor
hierarchy. The configuration of this unified hierarchy
can be inferred from examination of Figures 4 and 7
together, but it can also be visualized directly, in a
manner that we have illustrated elsewhere . For the most part, each level in the visual
system can be matched to a corresponding level in
the somatosensory-motor system, and vice versa. This
is not invariably the case, however, because area 36
is 3 levels above areas 7a and 7b in Figure 7 but only
2 levels above them in Figure 4. This suggests that
one of the intervening somatosensory-motor levels
lacks a corresponding visual level, assuming that these
hierarchical assignments are indeed all correct.
Auditory Cortex
In the auditory system, Galaburda and Pandya 
analyzed connections among 12 cytoarchitectonic areas that they identified within the superior temporal
gyrus and supratemporal plane of the lateral sulcus.
These areas were grouped into 4 rostrocaudally aligned
triplets of "root," "core," and "belt" areas. Their anal-
Si Organization of Macaque Visual Cortex • Felleman and Van Essen
ysis showed the same basic types of laminar patterns
found in the visual and somatosensory systems, including S, B, and I patterns for cells of origin. With
anterograde labeling, they found that the feedbacktype pattern was generally strongest in layer 1, but
otherwise conformed to the F, C, and M description
that we have used. They reported that rostral-to-caudal projections tended to be of the descending pattern, and that caudal-to-rostral projections tended to
be ascending in some cases but columnar in others.
In the mediolateral direction, their description suggests that each of the belt areas is at a higher level
than the corresponding core area. However, the relationship described for the root areas is incompatible
with an internally consistent hierarchy: The root areas
show a descending projection to both belt and core
areas, but the reciprocal projection from belt and core
to the root areas are described as columnar. Clearly,
this issue merits further investigation, in order to ascertain whether these constitute unequivocal conflicts with an orderly hierarchy of auditory areas. One
small piece of evidence in further support of an auditory hierarchy comes from a single tracer injection
in the postauditory area (Pa), which demonstrated
descending projections to Al and ascending connections to a different auditory area , but there is insufficient information about
the laminar patterns to ascertain specific hierarchical
relationships.
Other Cortical Regions
The remaining regions of the neocortex yet to be
incorporated into our analysis include much of the
frontal lobe (orbitofrontal, lateral prefrontal, dorsal
prefrontal, and medial prefrontal), as well as cingulate, retrosplenial, and insular regions. Many of these
regions have strong interconnections with areas near
the top of the visual hierarchy, including areas 46 and
7a, and with somatosensory areas, as well . However, there
is not a great deal of information about the specific
laminar patterns for pathways to and from precisely
defined areas in these regions. One striking finding
is that large paired injections centered in areas 7a and
46 led to interdigitating columnar patterns of terminations in some regions (e.g., cingulate cortex and
orbitofrontal cortex), even though the same injections contributed to complementary (ascending and
descending) patterns in other regions, such as the
STS . If this observation is confirmed using small tracer injections
clearly confined to single cortical areas, it would indicate a clear breakdown in hierarchical relationships. Thus, there is a strong possibility that substantial portions of frontal and cingulate cortex lie outside
the hierarchical framework proposed here for sensory
and motor areas. In this regard, it is of interest that
the incidence of irregularities in the current visual
hierarchy (red lines in Fig. 4) seems to increase at
progressively higher levels, suggesting a gradual rather than abrupt breakdown. However, this trend may
instead simply represent the greater uncertainty and
ambiguity about many of the high-level assignments.
The olfactory system is the last of the sensory modalities for which laminar information about some of
the major connections is available. In the macaque,
there are several paleocortical and transitional cortical areas associated with olfaction (pyriform cortex,
periamygdaloid cortex, and the olfactory portion of
the entorhinal cortex). Each of these regions receives
direct inputs from the olfactory bulb that, as already
noted, terminate preferentially in superficial layers of
cortex . The reciprocal projection
from ER terminates in the deeper layers of the pyriform cortex, at least in the rat .
Thus, using a different set of criteria for forward and
feedback directions, it should be possible to determine whether an orderly anatomical hierarchy can be
identified in the olfactory system.
Subcortical Projections
All visual areas that have been appropriately examined have extensive connections with a variety of subcortical structures. Indeed, it would not be surprising
if the sheer number of corticosubcortical pathways
exceeds that of the corticocortical pathways analyzed
in this article. These include linkages with nuclei in
the forebrain (amygdala, claustrum, caudate nucleus), thalamus (pulvinar, reticular nucleus), midbrain
(superior colliculus), brain stem (pons), hypothalamus, and basal forebrain, to name just some of the
prominent structures . In many cases,
the connections are strongly reciprocal in nature, just
as is characteristic of corticocortical pathways.
The pulvinar complex is physically the largest visually related nucleus and the most interesting to
consider with respect to possible hierarchical relationships. The projections from cortex to different
pulvinar subdivisions originate predominantly from
layer 5, and the reciprocal projections from the pulvinar terminate most heavily in layers 4 and 3 of the
extrastriate cortex . This
would be consistent with the pulvinar lying near the
bottom of the hierarchy and providing ascending projections to the extrastriate cortex. Interestingly, however, the pulvinar projection to VI terminates mainly
in superficial layers, even though the reciprocal pathway originates from layer 5, just as for extrastriate areas
 . Thus, there is no clear
basis for placing the pulvinar in a specific hierarchical
relationship relative to VI. The claustrum, on the other hand, projects to layer 4 of VI and receives inputs
Cerebral Cortex Jan/Feb 1991, V 1 N 1 37
Hierarchy of visual cortical areas in cat. bated on corrections and
laminar patterns reported by Symonds and Rosenquist {1984a.b). Sixteen cortical areas
have been arranged into 8 hierarchical levels. Interestingly, the fourth and fifth levels
each contain many areas, whereas aO rater levels contain only single entries. ALG.
amendateral gyrus area: ALLS, anurotaerei lateral suprasyivian; AMIS, ameromsdial
lataral suprasytvian; DLS, dorsototeral suprasytvian: PUS. posterotateraJ lateral suprasylviart PMLS, posteromedial toteral aqrasytvian: SVA, splenial visual area; VLS,
ventrotateral suprasyivian.
from layer 6, at least In the cat and thus is arguably at a lower level than any
of the cortical areas.
The amygdala receives inputs from mainly superficial layers of areas in the inferotemporal complex
and STP, whereas its inputs from TF and TH are mainly
from infragranular layers . This
is consistent with the amygdala being at a well-defined level just below TF and TH. Information on the
anterograde terminations from the amygdala to specific cortical areas would be particularly useful for
testing this possibility more precisely, by ascertaining
whether there is an ascending (F) pattern to TF and
TH and a descending (M) pattern to the other targets.
Other Species
Although the macaque has been the most thoroughly
studied, there is also a considerable body of information about laminar connectivity patterns in other
species. Among other primates, the owl monkey,
squirrel monkey, and bushbaby all show striking similarities with the macaque in the layout and internal
organization of the visual cortex, and there are clear
homologies among VI, V2, MT , and
perhaps many more areas .
In these species, pathways between visual areas are
in general reciprocal, with asymmetries in laminar
patterns similar to that in the macaque . Thus,
it seems likely that similar principles of hierarchical
organization apply throughout the primate order, but
this hypothesis clearly merits closer scrutiny.
Among nonprimates, the cat and the rat have been
most closely studied. In the cat, 18 visual areas have
been identified , and connections
between areas are generally reciprocal , just as in primates.
The laminar distributions for individual pathways
generally fit to 1 of the 3 categories we have used,
namely, S, B, or I for cells of origin and F, M, or C
for terminations . Laminar patterns for pathway terminations have
not been studied as extensively as for the cells of
origin, but the illustrations provided in Symonds and
Rosenquist suggest that the anterograde and
retrograde labeling patterns are typically consistent
with our scheme for ascending and descending pathways (Fig. 3). Moreover, when hierarchical assignments can be made independently for each direction
of a reciprocal pair, the patterns are in general complementary. On the other hand, it has been explicitly
suggested that connectivity patterns in the cat are not
consistent with an anatomical hierarchy . This argument
is based mainly on the occurrence of a bilaminar origin for pathways that would otherwise be constrained
to be ascending, as in the specific case of area 19
projecting to area 21a. However, we have already discussed the need in the primate cortex to treat bilaminar retrograde labeling patterns as completely ambiguous with regard to hierarchical assignments.
By applying our revised criteria to connectivity patterns described in Symonds and Rosenquist 
for visual cortex in the cat, we have constructed an
orderly hierarchy that involves 62 connections among
16 areas organized into 8 levels (Fig. 8). In particular,
areas 17, 18, and 19 are located at the first, second,
and third stages, respectively. Thus, each occupies a
different level despite the fact that they all receive
major, direct inputs from the LGN . This serves to reinforce a point already made
in relation to the macaque, namely, that major pathways often traverse more than 1 hierarchical level.
They are followed by 2 levels, each containing numerous entries (areas PLLS, PMLS, SVA, and ALG at
the fourth level and areas AMLS, ALLS, DLS, VLS, 21a,
and 20b at the fifth level). Finally, the top 3 levels
revert to the pattern of containing only single entries
(area 7 at the sixth level, area 20a at the seventh level,
and area 21b at the eight level). There are a few apparent inconsistencies with this scheme, however.
Specifically, using retrograde tracers, the connections
between PMLS and PLLS are reported to have an infragranular labeling pattern in both directions, and
the projection from VLS to area 19 has a predominantly supragranular origin, even though it is constrained to be higher by its other connections. These
laminar assignments were based on relatively small
numbers of retrogradely labeled cells, however. With
anterograde tracers, the projections from area 21a and
area 19 appear not to terminate in a feedback pattern
in area 18 despite their being constrained to be at a
higher level. Overall, we infer that the cat may have
a similar pattern of hierarchical organization as in the
38 Organization of Macaque Visual Cortex • Felteman and Van Essen
macaque, as well as a similar incidence of irregularities whose biological significance remains to be determined. As in the macaque, however, this scheme
is provisional in many respects and is likely to be
subject to various revisions. Other recent reports have
used different partitioning schemes for distinguishing
visual areas, especially in the suprasylvian sulcus , and much remains to be determined
about the connectivity of many of these areas.
In the rat, a recent study by Coogan and Burkhalter
 has revealed consistent asymmetries in anterograde labeling patterns between visual areas, in
a manner strongly analogous to the hierarchical relations we have described for primates. These findings
differ from an earlier report by Miller and Vogt ;
the difference may be attributed to the greater sensitivity and resolution of the tracer used by Coogan
and Burkhalter . The available evidence suggests that there are at least 3 hierarchical levels involving 5 visual areas in the rat. There are several
additional visual areas in the rat whose connectivities have yet to be
explored in detail, so it may be that further analysis
will reveal evidence for additional hierarchical stages.
In summary, a strategy based on laminar connectivity patterns, particularly in the anterograde direction, provides a rational and objective basis for systematically assessing hierarchical relationships
throughout the mammalian neocortex. With appropriate refinements in the criteria for distinguishing
forward and feedback connections, we have shown
that this hierarchy encompasses the full extent of primate visual and somatosensory-motor cortex. However, much remains to be done in order to resolve
the modest number of apparent discrepancies and to
ascertain just how generally this hypothesis applies
across systems and species.
Intertwined Processing Streams in the Visual Cortex
One of the striking features of the visual hierarchy is
the extensive degree of parallel processing, as manifested by the presence of many areas at each level in
the middle portion of the hierarchy (6 areas at level
5, 7 areas at level 7, and 5 areas at level 8 in Fig. 4).
This contrasts sharply with the presence of only 1 or
2 areas at most levels in the somatosensory-motor
hierarchy (Fig. 4 vs. Fig. 7).
The notion of parallel processing streams in the
visual system has received considerable attention during the past decade and is the topic of several recent
reviews . However, the highly distributed
connectivity that we have analyzed in the present study
raises questions that merit additional discussion. The
central issue we wish to address in the remainder of
this article is the relationship between the low-level
M and P streams that originate in the retina and the
high-level streams associated with areas in the temporal and parietal lobes .
If one considers only the most robust anatomical
pathways, there is striking evidence for segregated
streams over many hierarchical stages .
This is reflected in the color coding of areas in Figure
4. In brief, the M stream, indicated in shades of red,
includes the M layers of the LGN, layer 4B (and also
layer 4Ca) of VI, the cytochrome oxidase (CO)-enriched thick stripes of V2, and areas V3, MT, MST, and
probably also areas V4t and V3A. The M stream provides a notably heavy input into areas of the parietal
lobe, which are indicated in orange. The P stream
originates from P neurons in the retina and LGN (purple), which then splits into 2 distinct streams that are
relayed through layers 4C/3 and 4A of VI. They are
represented in the superficial layers of VI by the socalled blob and interblob regions revealed by CO
histochemistry. The blobs and interblobs project, respectively, to the thin stripes and interstripes of V2;
these 2 compartments, in turn, have segregated projections to V4. Both the P-B (blob-associated) stream,
shown in shades of violet and the P-I (interblob-associated) stream shown in shades of blue project
heavily (by way of V4) to areas in inferotemporal cortex, which are indicated in shades of green.
Superimposed on this skeletal framework are numerous additional pathways, many of which suggest
extensive cross talk at different stages of processing,
beginning even within VI. Some of this cross talk
appears to be mediated by intrinsic circuitry within a
single area. Malpeli et al. used reversible inactivation of specific LGN layers to show that about
VS of the cells in VI can be activated independently
through either the M or the P pathway. Anatomical
substrates that might underlie this cross talk include
dendritic arbors that traverse more than 1 geniculate
afferent termination zone in layer 4C, robust projections from P-dominated layer 4QS to M-dominated
layer 4Ca, and projections from the M-dominated layer 4B to the P-dominated superficial layers of VI . In VI, the
intrinsic connections of blobs and interblobs are
highly specific to regions of the same type , but in V2, there appears to
be a greater degree of cross talk in the intrinsic connections of different stripes .
A second form of cross talk occurs in the ascending
connections between areas. At intermediate levels of
the hierarchy, areas MT, V3, V3A, and V4t all are dominated by M inputs (from the thick stripes of V2 in all
cases, plus layer 4B of VI for MT and V3). However,
several of these areas receive substantial input from
other stripe compartments of V2. In particular, projections to MT occasionally arise from thin stripes as
well as thick stripes . Also, the projections to V3,
V3A, and V4t arise from more than 1 stripe compartment in V2 . Area V4 is dominated by P inputs in terms of the direct projections
from V2 thin stripes and interstripes, yet it also re-
Cerebral Cortex Jan/Feb 1991, V 1 N 1 39
ceives major projections from each of the aforementioned M-dominated areas V3, MT, V3A, and V4t.
A comparable degree of cross talk persists in the
ascending projections leading to the parietal and inferotemporal lobes. V4 projects most strongly to inferotemporal areas, but it also has substantial projections to parietal cortex, directly to VIP and LIP and
indirectly through DP, MST, MST1, and MT. Likewise,
MT projects heavily to the parietal cortex (directly to
VIP and indirectly via MSTd and MST1), but it also
has indirect connections with inferotemporal areas
via FST and V4. There are also direct connections
between parietal and inferotemporal areas (LIP-PITv
and 7a-AITd), as well as indirect linkages by way of
FST, STP, and frontal lobe areas.
A third mode for interaction between streams is by
way of feedback pathways. For example, there is evidence that feedback from areas V4 and MT may include multiple stripe compartments in V2, suggesting
greater cross talk in the descending than in the ascending direction . On the other hand, we have seen
cases in which the feedback from V3 and V4 to V2 is
more restricted than the reciprocal ascending pathway (D. J. Felleman and D. C. Van Essen, unpublished
observations). The overall issue of cross talk in feedback pathways clearly deserves further investigation.
Taken as a whole, this anatomical description does
not support a rigid segregation of pathways all the
way from the magnocellular/parvocellular dichotomy
at the low end to the parietal/temporal dichotomy at
the high end. It remains to be seen to what degree
the divergence and convergence that we have discussed at the level of areas and compartments as a
whole persists when one examines the inputs and
outputs of single cells.
Single Neuron
Connectivity
Thus far, we have concentrated on the connections
of entire areas or of layers and compartments within
areas, without addressing the issue of heterogeneity
among the individual neurons that make up a layer
or an area. Presumably, any given neuron, for example, in V4, projects to far fewer areas than the total of
39 areas with which V4 is reported to be linked. In
the extreme, any single neuron might project, at most,
to 1 other cortical target area. Most of what we know
about this issue comes from a relatively small number
of double-retrograde-labeling studies in cats and
monkeys, in which tracers are injected into topographically corresponding portions of 2 different areas . In general, diis approach reveals a
significant number of doubly labeled cells, signifying
that individual neurons can indeed have collaterals
projecting to more than 1 area. Although the percentage of doubly labeled cells is relatively modest
 , the interpretation of this number must take into account the likelihood that many,
if not most, singly labeled neurons had collaterals
that went to different areas that had not received a
tracer injection. The average number of target areas
per cortically projecting neuron could plausibly be
well under or well over 2. In the cat, there is evidence
that this number is greater for descending pathways
than for ascending pathways, and that some cells can
even contribute simultaneously to both directions, by
making both an ascending and a descending connection .
Functional Implications
We have concentrated in this study primarily on an
anatomical analysis that suggests 5 key principles of
primate cortical organization: (1) a large number of
visual areas, (2) highly distributed connectivity among
areas, (3) reciprocity of connections, (4) hierarchical
organization, and (5) distinct, yet intertwined, processing streams. We now comment on what these
principles might signify for understanding the functions of different visual areas.
Distributed Hierarchical
Processing
The hierarchical scheme for visual cortex that we have
presented is grounded explicitly on anatomical criteria. Whether each level of the hierarchy represents
a distinct stage of information processing is a separate
issue that must be addressed mainly by physiological
and behavioral approaches. One type of physiological
evidence in support of the hierarchy comes from comparisons of receptive field size, as conventionally plotted using moving bars or edges (the "classical" receptive field). In VI, receptive fields are typically very
small, and they increase progressively at successive
stages of the hierarchy, ultimately approaching the
entire visual field in extent in some of the inferotemporal and parietal areas . Ideally, one would like to know whether
these increases occur in stepwise fashion at each hierarchical stage. However, such information is not
readily attainable, given that several factors contribute
to differences in receptive field size, including a strong
dependence on eccentricity, plus effects of anesthesia
and of interanimal variability.
Another important physiological measure concerns the occurrence of emergent receptive field
properties at progressively higher levels of the hierarchy. For example, area VI clearly represents a more
advanced stage of processing than the LGN by virtue
of the emergence or sharpening of selectivity for stimulus orientation, spatial frequency, length, direction,
and binocular disparity . Until recently, however, there
were few examples of this type to distinguish different
extrastriate areas from one another or even from VI.
That situation is now changing, and a few of the more
notable examples are worth explicit mention: (1) Many
cells in V2, but not in VI, are responsive to patterns
that elicit percepts of subjective contours in human
observers . (2) Some cells in
MT, but not in VI, are selective for the motion of a
complex pattern rather than the individual oriented
40 Organization of Macaque Visual Cortex • Felleman and Van Essen
components . (3) Some cells
in the inferotemporal cortex are selective for faces or
other complex patterns .
These and other examples support the notion that
higher stages of the cortical hierarchy represent more
advanced levels of processing. Much more evidence
is needed to test the generality of this hypothesis,
The physiological properties discussed thus far
(increases in classical receptive field size and more
advanced receptive field selectivities) may largely reflect the contributions of ascending pathways and of
circuitry intrinsic to each area. The massive descending pathways that are so prominent anatomically may
subserve a different set of functions. One likely possibility is that descending connections contribute to
a set of modulatory surround influences, in which
stimuli well outside the classical receptive field can
dramatically influence the responses to stimuli within
the receptive field. Such modulatory effects have now
been demonstrated in the analysis of motion , color ,
form , and texture . Another perspective is that descending pathways may contribute to the modulation
of response properties by visual attention in area V4
 and more generally, for
dynamic control of the routing of information through
each visual area . However, there is no
strong basis at present for assigning any of these interactions to a strictly corticocortical system as distinct
from pathways involving the pulvinar or other subcortical structures. Finally, descending pathways may
play a critical role in memory processes (including
their formation, consolidation, and/or readout) at
higher cortical levels, particularly in the temporal lobe.
These examples illustrate how the existence of
feedback pathways can remain consistent with the
notion of hierarchical processing in the broad sense,
even though they rule out a strictly serial scheme.
The physiological properties of any given cortical
neuron will, in general, reflect many descending as
well as ascending influences. Nevertheless, the cell
may represent a well-defined hierarchical position in
terms of the types of information it represents explicitly and the way in which that information is used.
Functionality of Processing Streams
Why should the visual system contain processing
streams that, in some respects, remain distinct through
many successive stages of the hierarchy, yet show significant anatomical cross talk at many (perhaps all)
stages? To address this question, it is useful to consider the way in which visual information is encoded
at each hierarchical stage and how this information
may be used for perception and visually guided behavior.
Physiological distinctions between processing
streams are evident from the outset, in that M and P
channels differ markedly in how they represent information along spatial, temporal, and spectral dimensions . At any given eccentricity, P cells, on average,
have smaller receptive fields and higher spatial resolution, whereas M cells have higher temporal resolution, higher contrast sensitivity, and a lower absolute threshold. P cells tend to give sustained responses,
whereas M cells respond only transiently. P cells also
have spectrally opponent receptive fields, whereas M
cells carry only a nonlinear representation of spectral
contrast. These differences suggest an overall strategy
in which the M and P channels handle distinct, but
partially overlapping, portions of an information space
that includes the dimensions of space, time, and spectral composition .
In the visual cortex, each processing stream maintains a distinct profile of receptive field characteristics
 . Most notably, the P-B stream
contains a high incidence of cells that are wavelength
selective, suggesting that it is particularly involved in
color perception. The M stream contains a high incidence of cells selective for direction of motion and
for binocular disparity, suggesting that it is heavily
involved in the analysis of motion and depth. The PI
stream contains a high incidence of orientation-selective cells, suggesting that it is involved in pattern
and form recognition. However, selectivity for these
low-level stimulus parameters is, in general, distributed across more than 1 processing stream. For example, wavelength selectivity is common among neurons in the PI stream as well as the P-B stream;
orientation selectivity and disparity selectivity are
common in both the PI stream and the M stream.
This physiological description is consistent with the
anatomical picture of streams that are distinct, yet
closely interlinked by cross talk at many levels.
Two types of reasoning support the notion that
such cross talk and intermixing of information may
reflect sensible design principles for the visual system. They can best be illustrated in relation to a specific example, such as the way in which we analyze
an object that is moving across the visual field. First,
consider what sources of information are useful for
signaling object motion. If the object is moving rapidly, it will elicit responses mainly in M cells, because
of their sensitivity to transient changes. However, if
the object is moving very slowly, or if it is defined
mainly by a high spatial frequency pattern, the evoked
activity may be carried mainly by P cells. Hence, in
order to have a motion-analyzing system that operates
efficiently over a wide range of velocities, it would
make sense to draw information primarily from the M
channel, with the P channel playing an important, but
subsidiary, role. There is now direct physiological
evidence in support of this hypothesis .
Once motion information has been extracted, there
are several distinct ways in which it can be used. The
most obvious is for computing the trajectory in which
the object is headed. In addition, velocity information
contributes to our perception of depth , shape (by way of structure from
motion), and texture (by way of dynamic reflectance
changes, as in a rippling surface). Consequently, it
may be important for this information to be distributed both to parietal areas and to inferotemporal areas
in order to mediate different aspects of perception.
For both form and distance perception, a stronger
case can be made for a major role of both channels.
The cues for shape and for depth arise from a wide
range of spatial frequencies; moreover, form and distance perception are robust for static images, where
the P channel presumably dominates, and for moving
or transient images, where the M channel presumably
dominates. For the P channel to be inoperative in
these processes would imply that the high-resolution
information conveyed by 90% of LGN neurons is irrelevant to processes that are demonstrably capable
of hyperacuity levels of performance. For the M channel to be inoperative in either process would pose a
puzzle as to how we do so well at perceiving depth
and form at low contrast and also under scotopic conditions, where M cells are much more sensitive than
P cells . The effects of selectively
lesioning the M and P layers of the LGN on specific
behavioral tasks provide support for the notion that
M and P channels each contribute to multiple aspects
of perception .
In a more general sense, there appears to be a
complex, but orderly, relationship between low-level
sensory cues (e.g., orientation, velocity, disparity, and
spectral composition), high-level aspects of perception (e.g., perception of shape, surface qualities, and
spatial relationships), and the processing streams that
generate one from the other . The mapping is not 1:1, because many lowlevel cues are represented in more than 1 stream, both
in the retina and at cortical levels, and because the
attributes that we perceive about objects in the world
can often be derived from more than 1 sensory cue.
The determination of which particular computational
strategies are associated with specific pathways, areas,
compartments, and processing substreams remains a
largely unresolved challenge for the future.
In the somatosensory cortex, there is physiological
evidence for parallel channels that are manifested at
the first hierarchical level by the partitioning of area
3b into modules dominated, respectively, by rapidly
adapting and slowly adapting afferents 
and by the preferential activation of area 3a by muscle
spindle afferents . This functional segregation may persist at
higher levels in terms of the preferential activation
of area 1 by transient cutaneous stimulation and area
2 by sustained or deep pressure stimulation . At a still higher level, it has been suggested on
the basis of lesion studies as well as connectional data
that there may be a ventrally directed pathway, particularly involving SII, Ig, and Id, that is primarily
involved in tactile object recognition, and a dorsally
directed pathway, particularly involving areas 5 and
7b, that is primarily involved in somatomotor guidance, spatial perception of the body, and other somesthetic spatial functions .
Clearly, these observations suggest interesting analogies with the different processing streams in vision.
Comparisons across these systems may help to clarify
the nature of the tasks they must perform and the
computational strategies that provide efficient and
general solutions within the framework of the stereotyped architecture of the mammalian neocortex.
1. An accurate physical model of the macaque brain was a
valuable adjunct in transferring areal boundaries on to the
conical map. Two such enamel-painted, plaster-coated, styrofoam models were available, one at 3 times life size and
the other at a scale of 9-fold. They were based on the outlines
of cortical layer 4 in a series of horizontal sections of the
right hemisphere of a different brain than that used to generate the cortical map in this figure. Boundaries of individual
cortical areas identified in the studies indicated in the text
and in Table 1 were marked onto the brain model, mainly
on the basis of the relationship to various geographical landmarks. Once the physical model had been marked, the various areal boundaries were transposed to outlines of the
sections on which the model was based. The next step was
to transpose boundaries to sections of the brain from which
the cortical map was made. Although both the model and
the map were based on quasi-horizontal sections, they were
not precisely coplanar, and there were also modest individual differences in the exact size and configuration of various
gyri and sulci. Nonetheless, we were able to determine an
orderly mapping from one set of sections to the other and
to use this mapping to transpose areal boundaries from one
hemisphere to the other. The last step was a straightforward
transposition from individual sections to the corresponding
contours of the cortical map. The manually generated map,
complete with areal boundaries, was optically scanned and
used as a template for creating the color map with the CANVAS
program on a Macintosh II computer. Boundaries for each
area and for major cortical regions were traced over this
template to create separate objects that could be independently colored, as in Figure 2, and also analyzed for surface
area (see Table 2).
We thank R. Andersen and L. Ungerleider for providing
 
thank J. Whitehead and K. Tazumi for the fabrication of the
physical brain models that were used for analyzing the location of cortical areas. This work was supported by NIH
Grant EY02091 and ONR Grant N00014-89-1192 to D.V.E.
and by an Alfred P. Sloan research fellowship and a Whitehall
Foundation Grant to D.J.F. Readers interested in acquiring
copies of the EXCEL database or of the CANVAS cortical hierarchy should communicate with D.J.F.
Address correspondence to Dr. Van Essen, Division of
Biology, 216-76, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125.