University of Huddersfield Repository
Tran, Van Tung, Yang, Bo-Suk and Tan, Andy Chit Chiow
Multi-step ahead direct prediction for machine condition prognosis using regression trees and
neuro-fuzzy systems
Original Citation
Tran, Van Tung, Yang, Bo-Suk and Tan, Andy Chit Chiow Multi-step ahead direct prediction
for machine condition prognosis using regression trees and neuro-fuzzy systems. Expert Systems
With Applications, 36 (5). pp. 9378-9387. ISSN 0957-4174
This version is available at 
The University Repository is a digital collection of the research output of the
University, available on Open Access. Copyright and Moral Rights for the items
on this site are retained by the individual author and/or other copyright owners.
Users may access full items free of charge; copies of full text items generally
can be reproduced, displayed or performed and given to third parties in any
format or medium for personal research or study, educational or not-for-profit
purposes without prior permission or charge, provided:
The authors, title and full bibliographic details is credited in any copy;
A hyperlink and/or URL is included for the original metadata page; and
The content is not changed in any way.
For more information, including our policy and submission procedure, please
contact the Repository Team at: .
 
Multi-step ahead direct prediction for machine condition
prognosis using regression trees and neuro-fuzzy systems
Van Tung Trana, Bo-Suk Yanga,*, Andy Chit Chiow Tanb
School of Mechanical Engineering, Pukyong National University,
San 100, Yongdang-dong, Namgu, Busan 608-739, South Korea
bSchool of Mechanical, Manufacturing and Medical Engineering,
Queensland University of Technology, G.P.O. Box 2343, Brisbane, Qld. 4001, Australia
This paper presents an approach to predict the operating conditions of machine based on
classification and regression trees (CART) and adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS)
in association with direct prediction strategy for multi-step ahead prediction of time series
techniques. In this study, the number of available observations and the number of predicted
steps are initially determined by using false nearest neighbor method and auto mutual
information technique, respectively. These values are subsequently utilized as inputs for
prediction models to forecast the future values of the machines’ operating conditions. The
performance of the proposed approach is then evaluated by using real trending data of low
methane compressor. A comparative study of the predicted results obtained from CART and
ANFIS models is also carried out to appraise the prediction capability of these models. The
results show that the ANFIS prediction model can track the change in machine conditions and
has the potential for using as a tool to machine fault prognosis.
Keywords: Machine fault prognosis; Long-term time series prediction; ANFIS; CART; Direct
prediction methodology.
1. Introduction
The fault progression process of mechanical systems usually consists of a series of degraded
states mainly due to component wear and fatigue during the operation process. In order to
sustain the operating life of these components, selective maintenance strategies are regularly
performed. Maintenance strategy is traditionally carried out by either corrective maintenance or
preventive maintenance. The detailed introduction and the ability to apply these strategies could
be found in . Condition based maintenance (CBM) is the second type of preventive
maintenance strategy of which structure consists of the modules as follows: sensing and data
acquisition, signal processing, condition monitoring, fault diagnosis and health assessment,
prognosis, decision support, and presentation . It is based on the actual condition and can
assess whether the equipment is in need of maintenance or not; and if it is necessary, determine
when the maintenance actions need to be executed. Moreover, with the assistance of prognosis,
an alarm level can be set when the predicted values and the actual fault symptom of failure fall
within the warning region. This will provide the adequate time for the system operators to take
remedial actions, inspect the condition of the equipment, and conduct a repair on the defect
before the catastrophic failure occurs. Therefore, an effective and efficient machine condition
prognosis is essential for effective maintenance strategy and has become the key component of
CBM system . Nevertheless, prognosis has been a difficult task of CBM and can be broadly
classified into three categories: experience-based, model-based, and data-driven based.
Experience-based prognostic approaches require the component failure history data or
operational usage profile data. They involve in collecting statistical information from a large
number of component samples to indicate the survival duration of a component before a failure
occurs and use these statistical parameters to predict the remaining useful life (RUL) of
individual components. Generally, they are the least complex forms of prognostic techniques
and their accuracy is not high because they base solely on the analysis of the past experience.
Model-based prognostic approaches are applicable to where the accurate mathematical
models can be constructed based on the physical fundamentals of a system. These approaches
use residuals as features, which are the outcomes of consistency checks between the sensed
measurements of system and the outputs of a mathematical model . Some of the published
researches using these approaches can be found in references . However, these techniques
are merely applied for some specific components and each requires a different mathematical
model. Changes in structural dynamics and operating conditions can affect the mathematical
model as it is impossible to model all real-life conditions. Furthermore, a suitable model is
difficult to establish to mimic the real life.
The data-driven prognostic approaches are also known as data mining or machine learning
techniques. They utilize and require large amount of historical failure data to build a prognostic
model that learns the system behavior. Among these techniques, artificial intelligence is
regularly used because of its flexibility in generating appropriate model. Schwabacher and
Goebel have demonstrated the capability of using artificial intelligent techniques for
prognosis. Other outstanding data-driven approaches have been proposed by Vachsevanos and
Wang ; and Huang et al. . In , they used dynamic wavelet neural network to predict
the failure growth based on the vibration signals to estimate the RUL of bearings. Huang et al.
 applied self-organizing map and back propagation neural networks methods using vibration
signals to predict the RUL of ball bearing. Wang et al. utilized and compared the results of
two predictors, namely, recurrent neural networks and ANFIS, to forecast the damage
propagation trend of rotating machinery. A hybrid approach of fuzzy logic and neural networks
was employed in to predict the RUL of bearings of small and medium size induction
motors. An approach based on data-driven prognostic technique applied in aircraft systems can
be referred in .
In our previous work, we have proposed a data-driven prognosis approach that used
regression trees as prediction model and one-step ahead (OS) prediction methodology for
forecasting the machines’ operating conditions . In this paper, a multi-step ahead (MS)
prediction methodology is proposed for the same purpose. MS prediction plays a crucial role in
industry by providing information on the RUL of machine ranging from system identification to
ecology. It is divided into three strategies involved recursive prediction, direct prediction which
is dealt with this study, and DirRec prediction . The detail of these strategies will be
presented and compared further in the next section.
Other problems to be dealt with MS methodology will also be addressed in this paper as
follows: the number of initial observations (embedding dimension) should be used as the inputs
for prediction model; the number of steps (time delay) can be predicted by the prediction model
to obtain the optimum performance. The former problem can be solved by using the false
nearest neighbor method (FNN) or the Cao’s method in which FNN is commonly used.
The latter can be calculated by using published methods such as auto-correlation , average
displacement , and auto mutual information (AMI) . In this study, AMI is chosen to
estimate the time delay. After determining the embedding dimension and time delay, the
prediction model is subsequently established. CART and ANFIS are utilized as the
prediction model for the purposes of comparing the forecasting ability for MS prediction in the
machine condition.
2. Background knowledge
2.1. Multi-step ahead strategies
Multi-step ahead is a difficult task as well as challenging task for time series prediction
problem due to the growing uncertainties which arise from various sources, such as the
accumulated errors and the lack of information . As mention in previous section, there are
three strategies that could be frequently used for creating prediction model. The variance of
these strategies is introduced and compared as follows
2.1.1. Recursive prediction strategy
In order to predict h future values, the prediction model uses the predicted value of the
previous step as a known value to forecast iteratively the next value until h future values are
obtained. Given the observations
, the first future value can be
predicted by using OS prediction:
where d denotes the number of inputs or the embedding dimension. For predicting the next
value, the same prediction model is used:
The predicted value
ˆty + is used as a known value in equation (2) for current forecasting
time. The similar process is executed iteratively for h-2 remaining values. However, the
accumulated error in previous predicting process will be added in the following step. Hence,
this reduces the performance of prediction accuracy of recursive strategy.
2.1.2. DirRec prediction strategy
The predicting process of this strategy is similar with the above strategy. Nevertheless, the
difference is that a new model is generated for each iteration when the predicted value is
obtained. For instance, the value
ˆty + is predicted by the new prediction model which is
retrained with temporary training set included the initial training set and
ˆty + . This strategy also
has the same drawback of recursive strategy even though the new model is created after each
step of the predicting process.
2.1.3. Direct prediction strategy
The direct prediction strategy can forecast the sequence of h future values
from a given observations
by using H
different prediction models. In order to generate these models, the training set D is initially
created from the time series by using a sliding window of length d+h. Let X and Y be the input
and output vectors, respectively. The input X corresponds to the first d values of window whilst
the output Y is the remaining h values of window. The training set D comprised X and Y vectors
is structured in the form shown in Table 1. Therefore, by learning each training set
independently, H prediction models are sequentially generated with the same input X but
different output Yi which include all the values in the ith column Y in D. Obviously, the direct
prediction strategy provides a higher accuracy due to the avoidance of the accumulated errors
and is therefore used in this paper for MS prognosis. MS prediction with direct prediction
strategy has been applied in many fields, such as time series prediction and the state of river
flow .
Table 1 Training data D for direct prediction strategy
2.2. Time delay estimation
There are several methods published in literatures could be used to choose the time delay.
However, most of them are based on empirical concepts and is not easy to identify which of the
method is the best for a particular task. In this paper, time delay is dealt with AMI method
which is mutual information between two measurements taken from a single time series. AMI
estimates the degree to which the time series x(t+τ) on average can be predicted from x(t), i.e.
the mean predictability of future values in the time series from the past values .
The AMI between x(t) and x(t+τ) is:
is the normalized histogram of the distribution of values observed for x(t) and
is the joint probability density for the measurements of x(t) and x(t+τ).
The rate of decrease of the AMI with increasing time delay is a normalized measure of the
complexity of the time series. The first local minimum of the AMI of time series has been used
to determine the optimal time delay that makes the coordinates for an embedding procedure less
pair-wise dependent in a well controlled manner.
2.3. Determining the embedding dimension
Assuming a time-series of x1, x2, …, xN. The time delay vector
d constructed from this
time series with time delay τ and embedding dimension d is defined as follows:
The FNN method is based on the concept that in the passage from dimension d to dimension
d+1, where one can differentiate between points which are ‘true” or “false” neighbor on the
orbit. The criteria for identification of false nearest neighbors can be explained as follows:
iy d as the nearest neighbor of
iy d in a d dimensional embedding space. The
nearest neighbor is determined by finding the vector which minimizes the Euclidean distance:
Considering each of these vectors under a d+1 dimensional embedding:
The vectors are separated by the Euclidean distance:
The first criterion of FNN which identifies a false nearest neighbor is:
is a tolerance level.
The second criterion is:
where RA is a measure of the size of the attractor and Atol is a threshold that can be chosen in
practice. If both equations (9) and (10) are satisfied, then
d is a false nearest neighbor of
iy d . Once the total number of FNN is calculated, the percentage of FNN is measured. An
appropriate embedding dimension is the value where the percentage of FNN falls to zero.
2.4. Prediction models
2.4.1. Regression trees
CART method has been extensively developed for classification or regression purpose
depending on the response variable which is either categorical or numerical. In this study,
CART is utilized to build a regression tree model. Beginning with an entire data set, a binary
tree is constructed with the repeated splits of the subsets into two descendant subsets according
to independent variables. The goal is to produce subsets of the data which are as homogeneous
as possible with respect to the response variables. Regression tree in CART is built by using the
following two processes: tree growing and tree pruning.
observations
is a set of independent variables and
is a response associated with xi. In order to build the tree, learning data L is recursively
partitioned into two subsets by binary split until the terminal nods are achieved. The result is to
move the couples
to left or right nodes containing more homogeneous responses. The
predicted response at each terminal node t is estimated by the mean
of the n(t) response
variables y contained in that terminal node.
The split selection at any internal node t is chosen according to the node impurity that is
measured by within-node sum of squares:
When a split is performed, two subsets of observations tL and tR are obtained. The optimum
split s* at node t is obtained from the set of all splitting candidates S in order that it verifies:
where R(tL) and R(tR) are sum of squares of the left and right subsets, respectively.
Tree pruning: The tree gained in tree growing process has many terminal nodes that increase
precision of the responses. However, this is frequently too complicated and over-fitting is highly
probable. Consequently, it should be pruned back.
Tree pruning process is performed by the following procedure:
Step 1: At every internal node, an error-complexity is found for the number of descendant
subtrees. The error-complexity is defined as:
is the total within-node sum of squares, T~ is the set
of current nodes of T and T~ is the number of terminal nodes in T, α  0 is the complexity
parameter which weights the number of terminal nodes.
Step 2: Using the error-complexity attained in step 1, the internal node with the smallest
error is replaced by terminal node.
Step 3: The algorithm terminates if all the internal nodes have converge to a terminal node.
Otherwise, it returns to step 1.
Cross-validation for selecting the best tree: There are two possible methods to select the best
tree. One is through the use of independent test data and the other is cross-validation that is used
in this study.
The learning data L is randomly divided into v approximately equal group, and (v−1) groups
are then utilized as the learning data for growing the tree model. The remaining group is
employed as testing data for error estimation of tree model. As a result, v errors are obtained by
v iterations with variation of the combinations of the learning data and testing data. The mean
and standard deviation of the errors are given:
⋅is the average relative error, d is the cross-validation tree, σ is the standard error,
⋅is the testing data error. The best tree Tt selection is adopted:
R ⋅is the cross-validation error and Tmin is the tree with the smallest cross-validation
2.4.2. Adaptive Neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS)
Architecture of ANFIS: The ANFIS is a fuzzy Sugeno model put in the framework of adaptive
systems to facilitate learning and adaptation . Such framework makes the ANFIS modeling
more systematic and less dependent on expert knowledge. In order to present ANFIS
architecture, two fuzzy if-then rules based on a first-order Sugeno model are considered:
Rule 1: If (x is A1) and (y is B1) then
Rule 2: If (x is A2) and (y is B2) then
where x and y are the inputs, fi are the outputs within the fuzzy region specified by the fuzzy
rule, Ai and Bi are the fuzzy sets, {
p q r is a set of design parameters that are determined
during the learning process. The ANFIS architecture to implement these rules consists of five
layers as shown in Fig. 1. In this architecture, circles indicate fixed nodes and squares indicate
adaptive nodes. Nodes within the same layer perform identical functions as detailed below.
Fig. 1 Schematic of ANFIS architecture
Layer 1: all the nodes are adaptive nodes. The outputs of this layer are the fuzzy membership
grade of the inputs, which are given by:
Theoretically,
can adopt any fuzzy membership function. For example, if
the bell functions are chosen then:
where {ai, bi, ci} are the modifiable parameters governing the shape of the membership
functions. Parameters in this layer are referred to as premise parameters.
Layer 2: The nodes are fixed nodes denoted as Π, indicating that they perform as a simple
multiplier. Each node in this layer calculates the firing strengths of each rule via multiplying the
incoming signals and sends the product out. The outputs of this layer can be represented as:
Layer 3: The nodes are also fixed nodes. They are labeled with N, indicating that they play a
normalization role to the firing strengths from the previous layer. The ith node of this layer
calculates the ratio of the ith rule’s firing strength to the sum of all rules’ firing strengths:
Layer 4: The nodes are adaptive nodes. The output of each node in this layer is simply the
product of the normalized firing strength and a first order polynomial. Thus, the outputs of this
layer are given by:
iw is the output of layer 3, and {pi, qi, ri} are consequent parameters.
Layer 5: There is only a single fixed node labeled with Σ. This node performs the summation
of all incoming signals. Hence, the overall output of the model is given by:
Learning algorithm of ANFIS: The task of the learning algorithm for ANFIS architecture is to
tune all the modifiable parameters, namely premise parameters {ai, bi, ci} and consequent
parameters {pi, qi, ri}, to make the ANFIS output match the training data . From the ANFIS
architecture, it can be observed that when the values of premise parameters are fixed, the output
of network can be expressed as a linear combination of the consequent parameters:
The least squares method can be easily used to identify the optimal values of these
parameters. When the premise parameters are not fixed, the search space becomes larger and
convergence of the training becomes slower. A hybrid algorithm combining the least squares
method and the gradient descent method is adopted to solve the problem. The hybrid algorithm
is composed of a forward pass and a backward pass. In the forward pass, the least squares
method is used to optimize the consequent parameters with the fixed premise parameters. Once
the optimal consequent parameters are found, the backward pass commences immediately. In
the back pass, the gradient descent method is used to adjust the premise parameters
corresponding to the fuzzy sets in the input domain, whilst the consequent parameters remain
fixed. This procedure is repeated until either the squared error is less than a specified value or
the maximum number of training epoch is encountered.
3. Proposed system
The proposed system for prognosis of machine condition comprises four procedures
sequentially as shown in Fig. 2: data acquisition, data splitting, training-validating model, and
predicting. The role of each procedure is explained as follows:
Step 1 Data acquisition: this procedure is used to obtain the vibration data from machine
condition. It covers a range of data from normal operation to obvious faults of the machine.
Step 2 Data splitting: the trending data attained from previous procedure is split into two
parts: training set and testing set. Different data is used for different purposes in the prognosis
system. Training set is used for creating the prediction models whilst testing set is utilized to test
the trained models.
Step 3 Training-validating: this procedure includes the following sub-procedures: estimating
the time delay and determining the embedding dimension based on AMI and FNN method,
respectively; creating the prediction models and validating those models. Validating the
prediction models are used for measuring their performance capability.
Step 4 Predicting: multi-step ahead or long-term direct prediction method is used to forecast
the future values of machine condition. The predicted results are measured by the error between
predicted values and actual values in the testing set. Models and updated data are also carried
out in this procedure for the next prediction time.
Fig. 2 Proposed system for machine fault prognosis.
4. Experiment
The proposed method is applied to a real system to predict the trending data of a low
methane compressor which is an important equipment in petrochemical plant. This compressor
shown in Fig. 3 is driven by a 440 kW motor, 6600 volt, 2 poles and operating at a speed of
3565 rpm. Other information of the system is summarized in Table 2.
Fig. 3 Low methane compressor: wet screw type.
Table 2 Information of the system
The condition monitoring system of this compressor consists of two types: off-line and online. In the off-line system, the vibration sensors are installed along axial, vertical, and
horizontal directions at the locations of drive-end motor, non drive-end motor, male rotor
compressor and suction part of compressor. In the on-line system, acceleration sensors are
located at the same places as in the off-line system but only in the horizontal direction.
The trending data was recorded from August 2005 to November 2005 which included peak
acceleration and envelope acceleration data. The average recording duration was 6 hours during
the data acquisition process. This data consists of approximately 1200 data points as shown in
Figs. 4 and 5, and contains information of machine history with respect to time sequence
(vibration amplitude). Consequently, it can be classified as time-series data. The proposed
method is employed to predict the future condition of vibration amplitude based on the past and
current states.
Fig. 4 The entire peak acceleration data of low methane compressor.
Fig. 5 The entire envelope acceleration data of low methane compressor.
The machine is in normal condition during the first 300 points of the time sequence. After
that time, the condition of the machine suddenly changes. This indicates that there are some
faults occurring in the machine. These faults were identified as the damages of main bearings
of the compressor (notation Thrust: 7321 BDB) due to insufficient lubrication. Consequently,
the surfaces of these bearings were overheated and delaminated .
5. Results and discussions
With the aim of forecasting the change of machine condition, the first 300 points were used
to train the system. Before being used to generate the prediction models, the time delay τ is
initially calculated according to the method mentioned in section 2.2. Theoretically, the optimal
time delay is the value at which the AMI obtains the first local minimum. From Fig. 6, the
optimal time delay of peak acceleration training data is found as 7. Similarly, 5 is the optimal
time delay value of envelope acceleration training data.
Fig. 6 Time delay estimation. (a) Peak acceleration, (b) Envelope acceleration.
Using FNN method described in section 2.3, the optimal time delay τ is subsequently utilized
to determine the embedding dimension d. It is noted that the tolerance level Rtol and threshold
Atol must be initially chosen. In this study, Rtol = 15 and Atol = 2 are used according to . The
relationship between the false nearest neighbor percentage and the embedding dimension for
both peak acceleration data and envelope data is shown in Fig. 7. From the figure, the
embedding dimension d is chosen as 4 for both data sets where the false nearest neighbor
percentage reaches to 0.
Fig. 7 The relationship between FNN percentage and embedding dimension. (a) Peak
acceleration, (b) Envelope acceleration.
After calculating the time delay and embedding dimension, the process of generating the
prediction models is carried out. Based on the time delay and embedding dimension values, the
training data is created as mentioned in section 2.1.3. Using this training data, the CART model
and the ANFIS model are established. In case of the CART model, the number of response
values for each terminal node in tree growing process is 5 and 10 cross-validations are decided
for selecting the best tree in tree pruning. Furthermore, in order to evaluate the predicting
performance, the root-mean square error (RMSE) is utilized as following
where N, yi, i represent the total number of data points, the actual value, and predicted value
of prediction model in the training data or testing data, respectively.
Figs. 8(a) and 9(a) perform the training and validating results of the CART models for peak
acceleration and envelope acceleration data, respectively. The actual values and predicted values
are almost identical with very small RMSE values ranging from 0.002217 to 1.3314×10-5. It
indicates that the learning capability of CART model is extremely good. Similarly, the ANFIS
models are also created for both training set of peak acceleration and envelope acceleration.
There are four inputs for each ANFIS model due to the embedding dimension value. For each
input, a bell shape is chosen for each membership function (MF) and the number of MFs is 2. It
means that the region value of each input is divided into two, namely, small and large. In order
to evaluate the learning process, the convergence of RMSE is utilized. If the decreasing rate of
the RMSE as well as the performance is not significant, the learning process can be terminated.
In this study, after executing 100 epochs, all RMSEs of the outputs reach the convergent stage
for both the peak acceleration data and envelope acceleration data as shown in Fig. 10.
Alternatively, the parameters of MFs, which are premise parameters and consequent parameters,
are automatically adjusted through the learning in order that the outputs of ANFIS model match
the actual values in training data. The changes of MF shapes are depicted in Fig. 11. The
training and validating results of ANFIS models for both the peak acceleration data and
envelope acceleration data are respectively shown in Figs. 8(b) and 9(b). From these figures, the
RMSE values are sequentially 0.00876 and 0.08886. These values are higher than those of the
CART models. The reason could be that the number of MFs is improperly chosen. For higher
accuracy of RMSEs, the MFs can be increased. Nevertheless, this will also increase the
computational complexity and take too much training time.
Fig. 8 Training and validating results of peak acceleration data. (a) CART, (b) ANFIS
Fig. 9 Training and validating results of envelope acceleration data. (a) CART, (b) ANFIS.
Fig. 10 RMSE convergent curve. (a) Peak acceleration, (b) Envelope acceleration.
Fig. 11 The changes of MFs after learning. (a) Peak acceleration, (b) Envelope acceleration.
Figs. 12 and 13 show the predicted results of the CART models and the ANFIS models for
peak acceleration and envelope acceleration data. The RMSE values of the CART model and the
ANFIS model for those data are summarized in Table 3. Although, the RMSEs of ANFIS
models are slightly higher values than those of CART models in both cases of peak acceleration
and envelope acceleration data, the predicted results of ANFIS models can keep track with the
changes of the operating condition of machine more precisely. This is of crucial importance in
industrial application for estimating the time-to-failure of equipments. As mentioned above, the
predicted results of ANFIS models can be improved by adjusting the parameters of ANFIS.
However, these changes should take into consideration the increase of computational
complexity and time-consumption of the training process which may lead to unrealistic
application in real life.
Fig. 12 Predicted results of peak acceleration data. (a) CART, (b) ANFIS.
Fig. 13 Predicted results of envelope acceleration data. (a) CART, (b) ANFIS.
Table 3 The RMSEs of CART and ANFIS
5. Conclusion
Machine condition prognosis is extremely essential in foretelling the degradation of
operating conditions and trends of fault propagation before they reach the final failure threshold.
In this study, multi-step ahead direct prediction for the operating conditions of machine based
on data-driven approach has been investigated. The CART models and ANFIS models are
validated by its ability to predict future state conditions of a low methane compressor using the
peak acceleration and envelope acceleration data. The predicted results of CART models are
slightly better than those of ANFIS. Nonetheless, they are incapable of tracking the change of
machines’ operating conditions with high accuracy as compared to ANFIS models. The
tracking-change capability of operating conditions is of crucial importance in estimating the
RUL of industrial equipments. This means that ANFIS has the potential for using as a tool to
machine condition prognosis.