Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society
1983, Vol. 21 (2j, 97-100
Cognitive failure: Everyday and
laboratory performance
MARYANNE MARTIN
University of Oxford, Oxford, OX13UD, Eng/and
The hypothesis that everyday cognitive failures are associated over individuals with levels
of focused-attention performance was examined in a series of experiments. Everyday cognitive
failure was assessed by the Cognitive Failures Questionnaire, and focused-attention performance was assessed using the Stroop, reverse Stroop, and dichotic-listening paradigms, together
with the Embedded Figures Test. No reliable association between the two types of measure
was observed. In addition, questionnaire results indicated a significant relation between
reported cognitive failure and memory performance (using the Short Inventory of Memory
Experiences and the Everyday Memory Questionnaire) but not attentional performance (using
the Everyday Attention Questionnaire).
In the last 10 years, there has been a movement
toward investigating practical aspects of memory and
cognition , This has on occasion led to a trend away from
well controlled, although sometimes somewhat artificial,
laboratory studies toward more ecologically valid field
studies, This paper tries to link these two approaches by
examining the relationship between laboratory measures of performance and cognitive failures that occur in
everyday life, An everyday cognitive failure is a cognitively based error that occurs during the performance
of a task that a person is normally successful in executing, For example, most people have had the experience
of at least starting to throwaway something that they
meant to keep, while simultaneously retaining the thing
that they meant to throw out.
The study of everyday cognitive failures has attracted
interest for three reasons. First, for certain dangerous
tasks such as flying, the occurrence of cognitive failure
can have serious effects . Second, even when the
external consequences of cognitive failure are not important, the phenomenon may still be important for what it
reveals about a person's psychological functioning. For
example, Broadbent, Cooper, Fitzgerald, and Parkes
 found that individuals who make a large number
of cognitive failures are particularly susceptible to the
adverse psychological effects of a high-stress environ-
The author is grateful to Sara M. Dickson for testing the
subjects in Experiments 1-5 and in the first group of Experiment 6, to Johanna C. Ward and Gregory V. Jones for testing the
second and third groups, respectively, of Experiment 6, and to
the Science and Engineering Research Council and the Medical
Research Council for their support of the research. Requests
for reprints should be addressed to Maryanne Martin, Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, South
Parks Road, OxfordOXl 3UD, England.
ment. Third, analysis of the types of cognitive failures
that commonly occur may shed light on the way in
which higher order mental functions are organized.
To assess the incidence of everyday cognitive failures
directly, it seems necessary to use a self-report technique.
Two major self-report methods have been employed,
diaries and questionnaires. The diary method, in which
subjects keep a daily record over a period of some weeks
of their cognitive failures, allows a wide range of naturally
occurring examples of cognitive failure to be collected
 . Such collations are akin
to those of verbal errors . The questionnaire method has been used in particular for examining
various aspects of memory. Herrmann reviews
14 such questionnaires. Among these, three deal with
everyday failures of cognition that are not restricted to
memory. Two were compiled by Reason, the Error
Proneness Questionnaire (EPQ) and the Slips of Action
Inventory (SAl), based on his earlier questionnaire
studies . The third, which
will be employed here, is the self-report questionnaire
developed by Broadbent et al. . This is termed the
Cognitive Failures Questionnaire (CFQ). The CFQ
contains 25 items that cover failures of perception,
memory, and motor function. Respondents indicate for
each question the frequency with which that type of
cognitive failure has occurred to them during the last
6 months, on a 5-point scale ranging from "never" (1)
to "very often" (5).
In addition to the above-mentioned self-report
indexes, it would also be advantageous to possess an
objective laboratory measure that correlates with the
incidence of cognitive failure in everyday life. This is for
two reasons. First, the use of the latter might be preferable in some situations, such as personnel selection,
because it would not be affected by biases in the extent
to which a person is willing to report the occurrence of
Copyright 1983 Psychonomic Society, Inc.
cognitive failures. Second, the nature of any laboratory
task that does prove to be related to everyday cognitive
failure is likely to provide an insight into the specific
cognitive mechanisms that are responsible for producing
cognitive failures. One class of experimental tasks that
might in principle prove relevant to cognitive failure are
those that test memory. However, Broadbent et a1.
 have found no significant correlations between
individuals' CFQ scores and performance on several such
measures: immediate memory for nine-item lists, longterm memory for categorized material, performance in
the Williams delayed recall test, and the magnitudes of
suffIx and articulatory suppression effects.
The hypothesis to be tested here is that everyday
cognitive failure is associated with diffIculties in focusedattention performance. The relevance of attention in this
area has recently been pointed to by Reason (in press):
"There is at least one, largely neglected, class of everyday events that can yield important clues as to the role
of attention in the guidance of routinised behaviour,
namely the slips of action that seemingly arise from the
misdirection of focal attention." A series of experiments
was carried out to test the hypothesis that, over individuals, the reported incidence of cognitive failure would be
negatively related to objective performance in a focusedattention paradigm. The first experiment employed the
widely used Stroop method to assess individuals' ability to
focus their attention on simple color naming.
EXPERIMENT 1
This experiment tested 32 members of the Oxford subject
panel. Following administration of the CFQ, subjects were
instructed to sort packs of 30 cards into piles on the basis of
each card's ink color. There were six colors (yellow, orange,
green, blue, purple, black). In the experimental condition, the
ink formed the name of one of the colors. Pilot observations had
indicated that the largest Stroop effects were obtained not when
all color names differed from the ink in which they were written,
but when approximately one-half did. Thus for half of the cards
ink and name were conflicting, and for the other half they were
matching. In the control condition, the ink formed a row of Xs.
Subjects performed the sorting either in silence or while counting aloud from I to 10.
Results and Discussion
The magnitude of the Stroop effect was defined as
experimental cards minus control cards sorting time,
divided by control sorting time. The correlation between
CFQ score and Stroop effect did not reach significance
for performance in either the silent [r(30) = .00] or the
counting [r(30) = .23] conditions. There was, however,
a significant correlation [r(30) = -.38, P < .05] between
the Stroop effect and one of the products of an early
factor analysis of the CFQ, Factor B, for performance
while counting, although not while silent [r(30) = -.24] .
In addition, there were no significant correlations
between CFQ score and the absolute card sorting time
for either the experimental cards [silent condition,
r(30) = -.04; counting condition, r(30) = -.11] or the
control cards [silent condition, r(30) = -.07; counting
condition, r(30) = .12] .
A second experiment was carried out in order to
assess the reliability of the above findings.
EXPERIMENT 2
The method of this experiment was the same as that of
Experiment 1, except that a new set of 32 subjects was tested.
Results and Discussion
As before, there was no significant correlation between
the Stroop effect and overall CFQ score for performance
in either the silent [r(30) = .03] or the counting [r(30) =
.02] condition. In this experiment, however, the correlations between the Stroop effect and Factor B were also
nonsignificant for both silent and counting performance
[r(30) = .11 and -.09, respectively]. In addition, there
were no significant correlations beween CFQ score and
the absolute card sorting time for either the experimental cards [silent condition, r(30) = -.14; counting
condition, r(30) = -.13] or the control cards [silent condition, r(30) = -.16; counting condition, r(30) = -.13].
A third experiment examined performance in a
Stroop paradigm in which the subjects' task was the
reverse of the normal one.
EXPERIMENT 3
A further set of 32 members of the Oxford subject panel was
tested. Following administration of the CFQ, subjects sorted
packs of 30 cards on the basis of the six color names (identities
as before) written on the cards. The names were written in inks
that in the experimental condition included each of these colors
(with equal numbers of cards having conflicting ink colors and
names and matching ink colors and names) and in the control
condition were all a different color, brown. Subjects performed
the sorting either in silence or while continuously repeating
aloud the syllable "blah."
Results and Discussion
The correlation between CFQ score and the size of
the reverse-procedure Stroop effect did not reach significance for performance in either the silent [r(30) = .10]
or the continuous articulation [r(30) = -.17] conditions. In addition, there were no significant correlations
between CFQ score and the absolute card sorting time
for either the experimental cards [silent condition,
r(30) = .02; continuous articulation condition, r(30) =
-.19] or the control cards [silent condition, r(30) = -.10;
continuous articulation condition, r(30) = -.04] .
The fust three experiments failed to demonstrate a
reliable relation between CFQ and Stroop performance.
Accordingly, a further experiment was carried out using
a different focused-attention task, dichotic listening,
with an ordered recall procedure similar to that of
COGNITIVE FAILURE
EXPERIMENT 6
Martin .
EXPERIMENT 4
The subjects were 20 members of the Oxford subject panel.
On each trial, subjects were presented with 4 successive pairs of
digits at a rate of 2 pairs/sec, with one member of each pair
being presented to each ear. They were instructed to concentrate
their attention on the words of only one side. Subsequently,
subjects attempted to recall either the attended words followed
by the unattended words, or the reverse.
Results and Discussion
The correlations between CFQ scores and each of the
experimental measures were nonsignificant [for attended
words recalled first and second, r(18) = .28 and .01,
respectively; for unattended words recalled first and
second, r(I8) = .08 and .24, respectively].
In view of the failure to establish an association
between CFQ score and performance on an experimental
focused-attention task, a further study was carried out
using a standardized test of focused-attention ability,
the Embedded Figures Test.
EXPERIMENT 5
A further 20 members of the Oxford subject panel were
administered the CFQ followed by the Embedded Figures Test
 . In this test, the subject's task is to locate a previously seen fIgure within a larger
matrix. Two measures can be derived from this test: the total
time taken to find the fIgure, and the number of exposures of
the original figure that were necessary during searching.
Results and Discussion
The CFQ scores were not significantly correlated with
either the total time taken to fmd embedded figures
[r( 18) = .00] or the number of exposures of the original
figure that were necessary [r(18) = .16].
Finally, in view of the failure to fmd any relationship
between CFQ and laboratory measures of focused attention, it was considered important to determine whether
there was any relationship between the CFQ and subjective measures of attention. For this reason, correlations were computed between the CFQ and Martin's
Everyday Attention Questionnaire (EAQ; see Martin &
Jones, in press). In addition, in view of the earlier
interest in the relationship between the CFQ and memory performance, correlations were also computed
between the CFQ and two recent subjective memory
measures. These were Martin's Everyday Memory
Questionnaire (EMQ; Martin & Jones, in press) and
the Short Inventory of Memory Experiences .
In this study, three separate groups of subjects were studied.
The fIrst and second comprised 20 and 40 Oxford University
undergraduates, respectively, while the third comprised 30
Bristol University undergraduates. All three groups were administered the EMQ, EAQ, and CFQ (in that order); the fIrst group
was also administered the SIME.
Results and Discussion
In each case, there were no significant correlations
between CFQ scores and EAQ scores [r(18) = .06,
r(38) = -.08, r(28) = .03, for the first, second, and third
groups, respectively] . However, there were significant
correlations between the CFQ and EMQ [r(18) = -.64,
P < .01; r(38) = -.30, P < .06; r(28) = -.53 , P < .01].
In addition, for the first group, the correlation between
CFQ and overall SIME F-scale score was r(18) = .74
(p < .01). The last result is comparable with Reason's
fmding of a correlation of
r(92) = .59 (p < .01) for the same measures.
GENERAL DISCUSSION
The experiments reported here failed to demonstrate a
reliable relation between the incidence of cognitive failure in
everyday life, as assessed by the CFQ, and performance on
focused-attention tasks in the laboratory. Martin has recently
found the latter to be correlated with EAQ scores (Martin &
Jones, in press), and it is thus not unexpected that these also
were found here to be not significantly related to CFQ scores.
On the other hand, significant correlations were observed
between the CFQ and two different memory questionnaires, the
SIME and the EMQ. As noted earlier, Broadbent et al. 
did not find significant relations between CFQ scores and
several different laboratory measures of memory performance.
One possible explanation of this difference is that the exercise
of memory in everyday life relies critically upon processes that
are not generally tapped by laboratory tasks. One area of memory that has been neglected in the search for a relation between
CFQ and a laboratory measure of memory is that of incidental
learning. This may prove particularly fruitful, because although
memory questionnaires in general do not correlate well with
objective performance, the EMQ does correlate with recall
following incidental learning. In a study by Martin, Ward, and
Clark (in press), the EMQ was administered to all subjects.
Individuals who reported better everyday memory remembered
more previously presented trait words, when they were unexpectedly asked to recall them [r(38) = .36, p < .05).
The correlations between CFQ and memory questionnaires
observed here are reassuring for accounts of cognitive failure
that invoke memory models. A comparable relation has also
been found by Reason between his SAl and SIME, reported in
Broadbent et al. . Perhaps the best known of the memory
accounts is that of Norman , which is based on the notion
of the schema, an organized memory unit. Norman classifies
cognitive failures into three major categories: errors in the
formation of an intention, faulty activation of a schema, and
faulty triggering. This type of analysis suggests that objective
correlates of the CFQ are more likely to be found in memory
tasks that involve greater use of schemata, such as story recall.
So far, the memory tasks studied in relation to the CFQ have
mostly involved learning lists of unrelated material, in which
the potential role of schemata is diminished.
Finally, it should be noted that the experimental tasks
employed here were instances of focused-attention rather than
distributed-attention paradigms. That is, in each case, the participant's task was to concentrate upon a single channel of information designated by the experimenter. In a distributed-attention
task, alternatively termed a divided-attention task , on the other hand, the participant's ability to
process two or more channels concurrently is measured. It is
possible in principle that cognitive failures arise from difficulties
in distributing rather than in focusing attention. Consistent with
this, there is some evidence that CFQ scores are related to levels
of dual-task (but not corresponding single-task) performance
 .
This distinction between focused and distributed attention
becomes clearer when attentional constraints are described
within the terms of production-system theory . A production system consists of a
set of productions, or rules, that act upon a data base. Two
problems can occur if a number of productions are executed in
parallel . First, cross-talk can occur due to
imperfect segregation of the different productions. This is
essentially the problem of inadequate focusing of attention.
Second, it is necessary to implement metarules, production rules
that have other productions as their arguments, in order to
organize the various productions necessary for the achievement
of higher order goals . Inadequate metarules will give rise to problems in distributing attention. Thus it appears, taking together the results described here
and those of Martin and Jones (in press), that high levels of
cognitive failure are a consequence of inadequate metarules and
not of increased cross-talk.