Computational Intelligence, Volume 22, Number 2, 2006
SENTIMENT CLASSIFICATION OF MOVIE REVIEWS USING
CONTEXTUAL VALENCE SHIFTERS
ALISTAIR KENNEDY AND DIANA INKPEN
School of Information Technology and Engineering,
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, K1N 6N5, Canada
We present two methods for determining the sentiment expressed by a movie review. The semantic orientation
of a review can be positive, negative, or neutral. We examine the effect of valence shifters on classifying the reviews.
We examine three types of valence shifters: negations, intensiﬁers, and diminishers. Negations are used to reverse
the semantic polarity of a particular term, while intensiﬁers and diminishers are used to increase and decrease,
respectively, the degree to which a term is positive or negative. The ﬁrst method classiﬁes reviews based on the
number of positive and negative terms they contain. We use the General Inquirer to identify positive and negative
terms, as well as negation terms, intensiﬁers, and diminishers. We also use positive and negative terms from other
sources, including a dictionary of synonym differences and a very large Web corpus. To compute corpus-based
semantic orientation values of terms, we use their association scores with a small group of positive and negative
terms. We show that extending the term-counting method with contextual valence shifters improves the accuracy
of the classiﬁcation. The second method uses a Machine Learning algorithm, Support Vector Machines. We start
with unigram features and then add bigrams that consist of a valence shifter and another word. The accuracy of
classiﬁcation is very high, and the valence shifter bigrams slightly improve it. The features that contribute to the high
accuracy are the words in the lists of positive and negative terms. Previous work focused on either the term-counting
method or the Machine Learning method. We show that combining the two methods achieves better results than
either method alone.
Key words: sentiment classiﬁcation, semantic orientation, valence shifters, machine learning, evaluation.
INTRODUCTION
Documents can be categorized in various ways, for example, by subject, genre, or the
sentiment expressed in the document. We focus on sentiment classiﬁcation (into positive or
negativeopinions).Oneusefulapplicationofsentimentclassiﬁcationisinquestionanswering.
Cases where a user is asking an opinion question such as What are the reasons for the
U.S.-Iraq war? will require the system to determine the perspective of the different sources,
using sentiment classiﬁcation . Another
application is text summarization. If a program can pick out the sentiment of a review, it
can use it to label the review; this could be an important part of the process of summarizing
reviews .
Two approaches to classifying sentiment are compared in this article. The ﬁrst approach
is to count positive and negative terms in a review, where the review is considered positive if
it contains more positive than negative terms, and negative if there are more negative terms.
A review is neutral if it contains an equal number of positive and negative terms. Instead of
having a strict equality for neutral reviews, we can allow a margin of several terms.
Positive and negative terms are initially taken from the General Inquirer (hereafter GI). GI is a dictionary that contains information about English word
senses, including tags that label them as positive, negative, negation, overstatement, or
understatement.
An enhanced term-counting method also takes contextual valence shifters into account.
Valence shifters are terms that can change the semantic orientation of another term, for
example, they make a positive term become negative. Examples of negation terms are not,
never, none, nobody. There are many other factors that affect whether a particular term is
positive or negative, depending on how it is used in a sentence, as shown in Polanyi and
Zaenen ; however, we do not address all of them. Terms that change the intensity of
a positive or negative term are also examined. These terms increase or decrease the weight
C⃝2006 Blackwell Publishing, 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA, and 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK.
SENTIMENT CLASSIFICATION OF MOVIE REVIEWS
of a positive or negative term. We also add positive and negative terms from several other
sources and test their contribution to the accuracy of the classiﬁcation.
The second approach uses Machine Learning (ML) to determine the sentiment of
the reviews. We trained Support Vector Machine (SVM) classiﬁers that use unigrams
(single words) as features.
An enhanced version of this method uses as features, in addition to unigrams, some speciﬁc bigrams. We selected only bigrams that contain a combination of a negation, intensiﬁer,
or diminisher with another feature word. Rather than having bigrams such as very good where
very is an intensiﬁer, we identify the bigram as int good where int indicates any intensiﬁer.
There are similar features for diminishers and negations. This is done to capture the type
of the valence shifter. The two words in a bigram do not have to be right beside each other in
the sentence. We used a parser to determine which negations/intensiﬁers/diminishers apply
to which terms.
We note that the term-counting method has the advantage that it does not require training;
thus it can be applied to reviews where training data are not available. The term-counting
method is easily modiﬁed to include the linguistic analysis of Polanyi and Zaenen .
We can directly measure the impact of valence shifters on sentiment classiﬁcation.
Methods based on ML are much more effective in terms of the accuracy of classiﬁcation.
With ML algorithms it is more difﬁcult to show improvements by incorporating valence
shifters, because they are already included, to some degree, in the basic classiﬁer. Even
when the classiﬁer uses only unigrams as features, combinations of features detected by
the ML algorithm can capture some aspects of the valence shifters. This can happen when
combinations of terms, including valence shifters appear regularly in one class of documents
(although not necessarily adjacent to each other). Because all terms in a document will affect
its classiﬁcation, valence shifters might have already been considered in classiﬁcation.
We also combined the term-counting method and ML method. To do this, we needed
predictions accuracy scores for the two methods. The two ways we used to combine the scores
are: a simple weighted average of the two scores, and a meta-classiﬁer that uses the scores
as features. By combining the two methods we are able to improve the results over either of
the method alone.
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
Sentiment classiﬁcation of reviews has been the focus of recent research. It has been
attempted in different domains such as movie reviews, product reviews, and customer feedback reviews . Much of the research until now has focused
on training ML algorithms such as SVMs to classify reviews. Research has also been done on
positive/negative term-counting methods and automatically determining if a term is positive
or negative .
Determining Sentiment
Research on predicting the semantic orientation of adjectives was initiated by
Hatzivassiloglou and McKeown . An unsupervised learning algorithm was used in
Turney and Turney and Littman to determine the semantic orientation of individual terms. The algorithm started with seven known positive terms and seven known
negative terms. The algorithm took a search term and used AltaVista’s NEAR operator to
ﬁnd how many documents have the search term near the seven positive terms and the seven
COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE
negative terms. The difference in pointwise mutual information (PMI) score with the two
sets was then used to determine the semantic orientation from pointwise mutual information
(SO-PMI) score, which gives the degree to which each term is positive or negative . The PMI score of two words w1 and w2 is given by the probability of the
two words occurring together divided by the probabilities of each word in part:
PMI(w1, w2) = log P(w1, w2)
P(w1)P(w2) = log hits(w1, w2)N
hits(w1)hits(w2)
The formula for the semantic orientation of a word can be expressed as:
SO-PMI(word ) = PMI(word, p query) −PMI (word, n query),
where the positive and negative reference terms are
p query = good OR nice OR excellent OR positive OR fortunate OR correct
OR superior
n query = bad OR nasty OR poor OR negative OR unfortunate OR wrong
OR inferior.
OR and NEAR are operators offered by the AltaVista search engine (NEAR is no longer
supported). By approximating the PMI values using number of hits returned by the search
engine and ignoring the number of documents in the corpus (N), the formula becomes
SO-PMI(word) = log hits(word NEAR p query)hits(n query)
hits(word NEAR n query)hits(p query).
The semantic orientation of bigrams can also be determined . The semantic
orientation of terms and phrases can be used to determine the sentiment of complete sentences
and reviews. Four hundred ten reviews from epinions.com were taken and the accuracy of
classifying the documents was found when computing the sentiment of phrases for different
kinds of reviews. Results ranged from 84% for automobile reviews to as low as 66% for
movie reviews .
Machine Learning for Determining Sentiment
One of the most common methods of classifying documents into positive and negative
terms is to train an ML algorithm to classify the documents. Several ML algorithms are compared in Pang et al. and Pang and Lee , where it was found that SVMs generally
gave better results than other classiﬁers. Unigrams, bigrams, part of speech information, and
the position of the terms in the text were used as features; however, using only unigrams was
found to give the best results. Bayesian belief networks have also been used to determine the
sentiment of a document .
Sentiment classiﬁcation has also been done on customer feedback reviews .
A variety of features were used in SVMs in an attempt to divide the data set not only into
positive and negative, but to give rankings of 1, 2, 3, or 4, where 1 means “not satisﬁed” and
4 means “very satisﬁed.” The proposed system was fairly good at distinguishing classes 1
and 4, with about 78% accuracy. Separating classes 1 and 2 from 3 and 4 was more difﬁcult
and was only 69% accurate. These results were achieved when using the top 2,000 features
selected by log-likelihood ratios.
SENTIMENT CLASSIFICATION OF MOVIE REVIEWS
Distinguishing Objective from Subjective Statements
Methods for extracting subjective expressions from corpora are presented in Wiebe
et al. . Subjectivity clues include low-frequency words, collocations, and adjectives
and verbs identiﬁed using distributional similarity. In Riloff and Wiebe a bootstrapping process learns linguistically rich extraction patterns for subjective expressions. Highprecision classiﬁers label unannotated data to automatically create a large training set, which
is then given to an extraction pattern learning algorithm. The learned patterns are then used
to identify more subjective sentences.
A method of distinguishing objective statements from subjective statements is presented
in Pang and Lee . This method is based on the assumption that objective and subjective
sentences are more likely to appear in groups. First, each sentence is given a score indicating if
the sentence is more likely to be subjective or objective using a Na¨ıve Bayes classiﬁer trained
on a manually annotated subjectivity data set. The system then adjusts the subjectivity of
a sentence based on how close it is to other subjective/objective sentences. Although any
improvements found using this method were not statistically signiﬁcant, it was shown that
you could reduce the size of a document, by removing objective sentences without decreasing
the quality of the sentiment classiﬁcation.
A similar experiment is presented in Yu and Hatzivassiloglou . A Na¨ıve Bayes
classiﬁer is used to discover opinion sentences by training it on a labeled data set. They
also combine multiple Na¨ıve Bayes classiﬁers for the same task, where each Na¨ıve Bayes
classiﬁer focuses on a different part of the feature set. The feature sets included unigrams,
bigrams, trigrams, part of speech information, and polarity. Once it was discovered whether
a sentence is objective or subjective, a simple classiﬁer (with unigrams as features) was used
to determine the sentiment of the sentence.
THE DATA SET
We use a data set of classiﬁed movie reviews prepared by Pang and Lee . This data
set contains 2,000 movie reviews: 1,000 positive and 1,000 negative. A previous version of
this data set, containing only 700 positive and 700 negative reviews, was used in Pang et al.
 . The reviews were originally collected from the Internet Movie Database (IMDb)
archive rec.arts.movies.reviews. Their classiﬁcation as positive or negative is automatically
extracted from the ratings, as speciﬁed by the original reviewer. They are currently available at
 Only reviews where the author
indicated the movie’s rating with either stars or some numerical system were included. No
single author could have more than 20 reviews in the original data set.
METHODOLOGY
The Term-Counting Method
As we mentioned, the idea behind the term-counting method is simple: if there are more
positive than negative terms then it is considered to be positive. If there are more negative
than positive terms it is considered to be negative. If there are equal numbers of positive
and negative terms it is neutral. We could have a margin instead of strict equality for neutral
reviews; however, in our data set there are no neutral reviews. Therefore, in our case we prefer
to have very few reviews classiﬁed as neutral. This idea of counting positive and negative
COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE
H4Lvd Positiv Pstv Pleasur Exprsv WlbPsyc WlbTot Noun PFREQ
97% noun-adj: Enjoyment, enjoyable
H4Lvd Negativ Ngtv Hostile ComForm SV RspLoss RspTot SUPV
3% idiom-verb: Make fun (of) – to tease, parody
FIGURE 1. GI entries for the word fun.
H4Lvd Negate NotLw LY — adv: Expresses negation NotLw LY adv: Expresses negation
H4Lvd Positiv Pstv Virtue Ovrst EVAL PosAff Modif — Virtue Ovrst EVAL PosAff Modif
H4Lvd Undrst Quan If LY — Quan If LY
FIGURE 2. GI entries for the words not, fantastic, and barely (the tags Pstv and Ngtv are earlier versions of
Positiv and Negativ in GI).
terms and expressions was proposed by Turney . We augment this method by taking
contextual valence shifters into account.
Identifying positive and negative terms: The main resource used for identifying positive and
negative terms is the GI1 . GI is a system that lists terms as well as different
senses for the terms. For each sense it provides a short deﬁnition as well as other information
about the term. This includes tags that label the term as being positive, negative, a negation
term, an overstatement, or an understatement. The labels are for each sense of a word. For
example, there are two senses of the word fun as seen in Figure 1. One sense is a noun or
adjective for enjoyment or enjoyable. The second sense is a verb that means to ridicule or
tease, to make fun of . The ﬁrst sense of the word is positive, while the second is negative.
The entry also indicates that the ﬁrst sense is more frequent than the second sense (estimated
to occur 97% of the times while the second sense occurs only 3% of the times).
We also examine negations, intensiﬁers, and diminishers. In GI intensiﬁers are known as
overstatements and diminishers are known as understatements. Figure 2 shows the GI entries
of the words not, fantastic, and barely, which are examples of a negation, an overstatement,
and an understatement, respectively.
The GI contains 1,915 positive senses and 2,291 negative senses. We add more positive and negative senses from Choose the Right Word (hereafter CTRW).
CTRW is a dictionary of synonyms, which lists nuances of lexical meaning, extracted by
Inkpen et al. . After adding them, we obtain 1,955 positive senses and 2,398 negative
senses. An example of a negative term from CTRW is smugness, while a positive example is
soothing. Both of these terms are not found in GI. There are 696 overstatements and 319 understatements in GI. When we add those from CTRW, we obtain 1,269 overstatements and
412 understatements.
We also add positive and negative terms from other sources: a list of positive and negative
adjectives (Adj) , and a Web corpus (more details about the corpus
are given in Section 5.1). In this list of adjectives we ﬁnd negative terms such as whiney
and positive terms such as trendy. In the corpus, we use SO-PMI scores to discover new
positive and negative terms. Names such as Hitler and Saddam are found to be negative using
SO-PMI. An example of a positive word found using SO-PMI is happily, which does not
appear in GI, CRTW, or the list of adjectives.
1 
SENTIMENT CLASSIFICATION OF MOVIE REVIEWS
Lemmatization: The method of counting positive and negative terms requires us to transform
the terms into their base forms (lemmas) to be able to check if a term is in our list of terms.
The terms from GI are all in base form, there are no plurals and other inﬂected forms. When
computing semantic orientation from a corpus, we can keep the terms in their inﬂected forms,
or we can lemmatize them. For the ML experiments presented in Section 4.3, we lemmatized
the terms to reduce the number of features used in classiﬁcation. There are many lemmatizers
available. We used the lemmatizer incorporated into the Xerox Incremental Parser (XIP) .
Word sense disambiguation: There are many terms that have multiple meanings. These terms
have multiple deﬁnitions in GI. If a term is found for which there are many different deﬁnitions
we may need to ﬁnd out which deﬁnition corresponds to the correct sense. Often if one sense
of a term is positive/negative, the other senses of the term will also be positive/negative. In
GI there are only 15 words for which there are both positive and negative senses and only
12 words for which there are both intensiﬁer and diminisher senses. After adding terms from
CTRW there are 19 words that have both positive and negative senses and 37 words that
have both intensiﬁer and diminisher senses. We attempt two methods to determine which
label to use for each word, without doing word sense disambiguation. In the ﬁrst method we
simply take all the senses and sum the number of senses that are positive and negative. If
there are more positive senses than negative we consider the term positive, if there are more
negative senses than positive, we consider it negative, and if there is an equal number, or no
positive/negative senses, then it is considered neutral. The second method is to select the
label of the sense that is estimated to be the most frequent, as listed by GI. We found that the
second method works better; therefore, the results presented in Section 5 are for this case.
Incorporating Valence Shifters into the Term-Counting Method
There are two different aspects of valence shifting that are used to extend our termcounting method. First, we take into account negations that can switch the sentiment of
positive or negative terms in a sentence. Second, we take intensiﬁers and diminishers into
Negations: Negations are terms that reverse the sentiment of a certain word . For example consider the sentence This movie is good versus This movie is
not good. In the ﬁrst one good is a positive term and thus this sentence is positive. When
not is applied to the clause, good is being used in a negative context and thus the sentence
is negative . We parsed the texts using the Xerox parser to obtain
the scope of the negations.
Intensiﬁers and diminishers: Intensiﬁers and diminishers are terms that change the degree
of the expressed sentiment. For example, in the sentence This movie is very good, the phrase
very good is more positive than just good alone. Another example of an intensiﬁer is deeply
from the phrase deeply suspicious, which increases the intensity of the word suspicious
 . On another side, in the sentence This movie is barely any good,
the term barely is a diminisher, which makes this statement less positive. Another term
that decreases the intensity of a phrase is rather from the phrase rather efﬁcient . These are examples of overstatements and understatements from GI.
Overstatements are intensiﬁers, which increase the intensity of a positive/negative term,
while understatements are diminishers, which decrease the intensity of that term. We note
that the word understatement has other uses in linguistics (it could mean an entire clause or
phrase). Here we use it to mean a diminisher term. To allow for intensiﬁers and diminishers
COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE
all positive sentiment terms in our system are given a value of 2. If they are preceded by
an intensiﬁer in the same clause then they are given a value of 3. If they are preceded by a
diminisher in the same clause then they are given a value of 1. Negative sentiment terms are
given a value of −2 by default and −1 or −3 if preceded by a diminisher or an intensiﬁer,
respectively. These values were proposed by Polanyi and Zaenen in their linguistic
analysis study. There are a few places where this system does not work quite as you might
expect. For example, if you have the phrase not very good then the not and very will combine
to give a value of −3, which is then multiplied by 2 (the value for good) to give −6. This is a
more negative value than you probably want for the phrase not very good. We could extend
the scoring method to deal with such cases, but they are very rare in our data set.
CTRW also contains a large number of terms, which are listed as having high strength
or low strength. These strengths do not strictly mean that they are intensiﬁers or diminishers,
but many of them can be used as such. We compared results when adding intensiﬁers from
CTRW with only using the intensiﬁers from GI.
The exact scope of these modiﬁers was extracted from a parsed version of the reviews.
The reviews were parsed with the Xerox parser. We limited the valence shifters to negations,
intensiﬁers, and diminishers. There are other, more complex, valence shifters that could be
implemented .
The Support Vector Machine Classiﬁers
ML approaches were shown to achieve good results on the task of sentiment classiﬁcation. Pang et al. presented results on the movie review data set. The SVM classiﬁer
outperformed the Na¨ıve Bayes (by 4 percentage points). On the earlier version of the data
set, the SVM classiﬁer outperformed the Na¨ıve Bayes and the maximum entropy classiﬁer
(by 4 and 5 percentage points, respectively). Therefore, we decided to use only the SVM
algorithm in our experiments. Other classiﬁers not only are likely to achieve lower accuracy, but most of them have difﬁculties in dealing with the very large number of features
(up to 35,000). The features used by Pang et al. are unigrams and bigrams from the reviews.
SVM is a state-of-the-art supervised kernel method for ML. It was successfully adapted
to text classiﬁcation by Joachims . The basic idea behind kernel methods is to embed
the data into a suitable feature space F via a mapping function φ : X →F, and then use a
linear algorithm for discovering nonlinear patterns. The kernel function K acts as an interface
between the data and the learning algorithm. During the learning phase, a weight λi ≥0 is
assigned to any example xi ∈X. All the labeled instances xi such that λi > 0 are called
support vectors. The support vectors lie close to the best separating hyper-plane between
positive and negative examples. New examples are then assigned to the class of its closest
support vectors, according to equation φ(x) = n
i=1 λi K(xi, x) + λ0.
Our basic ML classiﬁer uses unigrams as features. We try three different methods for
selecting unigrams. The ﬁrst method is to simply select all unigrams that occur more than
three times in the data set, to eliminate very rare terms and spelling errors 
did the same in their experiments). The second method is to use only the unigrams from the
reviews that appear in GI as positive or negative terms. This has the advantage of drastically
reducing the feature set. The third method for selecting unigrams is to use all the positive
and negative terms from GI, CTRW, and Adj as the feature set. The second and third feature
sets incorporate into the ML approach information from the lists of positive and negative
terms. The values of the features are Boolean. The value is 1 if the feature word appears in
the review to be classiﬁed, and 0 otherwise. We could have used as value the frequency of
the word in the review, but Pang et al. showed that in this case the performance of SVM is
worse than in the case of Boolean values.
SENTIMENT CLASSIFICATION OF MOVIE REVIEWS
Our enhanced ML classiﬁer takes the three different feature sets that are described for
the basic ML classiﬁer and then incorporates particular bigrams. For each feature term w
we add three bigrams: one for a negation of the terms, one for an intensiﬁer, and one for
a diminisher. These three bigrams are given Boolean values and are referred to as neg w
(negation), int w (intensiﬁer), and dim w (diminisher). For example, if the term w has an
intensiﬁer applied to it then int w = 1, or if it had a negation and a diminisher applied to it
then neg w = 1 and dim w = 1. If some of these feature bigrams do not occur in the data
set, we do not use them as features.
Combining the Term-Counting Method and the Machine Learning Method
To combine the two approaches we consider the results of the two methods on each review.
We need prediction accuracy scores for the two methods. For the term-counting methods we
devised our own prediction accuracy score, as the difference between the number of positive
terms and the number of negative terms divided by the total number of positive and negative
terms in the review. For the ML methods a score is provided by SVM Light 
for each document. This score is not a conﬁdence score per se; it is the value of the decision
function used by SVM (its sign—positive or negative—gives the class). While the score
produced by SVM Light, does not have an absolute meaning, its relative values were used
for ranking documents after classiﬁcation . In our combined method we
combine the term-counting score with the SVM score. We also combine the term-counting
score with a binary SVM score (+1 or −1, to reﬂect the class selected by SVM).
We combine the scores of the two methods in two ways: by taking a weighted average
of the scores for each document (we simply add the score of the term-counting method,
multiplied by a weight, to the SVM score); by training a meta-classiﬁer that uses the two
prediction accuracy scores as features for another SVM classiﬁer.
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND RESULTS
The Term-Counting Systems
Table 1 presents the results of the experiments for both a basic system and an enhanced
system. The basic system simply counts positive and negative terms, while the enhanced
system adds the treatment of contextual valence shifters. Several dictionaries and word lists
were used in the experiments: the GI; additional positive and negative terms, and additional
overstatements and understatements from CTRW; list of positive/negative adjectives (Adj);
and a longer list of positive/negative terms (SO-PMI).
We look at the accuracy of the classiﬁcation (it varies from 61% to 63.4% in Table 1),
as well as the precision, recall, and F-measure for each class. The precision, recall, and
F-measure show whether the loss in performance is for the positive or for the negative class.
In the table we ﬁrst present results for the basic and the enhanced systems when using only
the terms in GI. Next, we present the results of the basic and enhanced systems when more
positive and negative terms and more intensiﬁers and diminishers are added from CTRW.
Then we present the results when positive and negative adjectives from are added. The 1,718 adjectives in this list come with semantic orientation
scores based on hit counts collected through the AltaVista search engine. The scores are
computed using Turney’s method explained in Section 2.1. We
determined two thresholds: terms with SO-PMI value below 1.1 were labeled as negative,
terms rated above 1.7 were labeled as positive. To pick the thresholds we tried a variety of
different thresholds and evaluated them by computing the accuracy of the classiﬁer on a small
COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE
Results for all Systems, for the Term-Counting Methods∗
Basic: GI & CTRW
Basic: GI & CTRW & Adj
Basic: GI & SO-PMI 1
Basic: GI & SO-PMI 2
Enhanced: GI
Enhanced: GI & CTRW
Enhanced: GI & CTRW & Adj
Enhanced: GI & SO-PMI 1
Enhanced: GI & SO-PMI 2
∗The basic system counts positive and negative terms. The enhanced system adds contextual valence shifters.
Various lists of terms are used.
sample of the data. The terms with scores between the two thresholds are considered neutral.
In Table 1 this list of terms is denoted as Adj.
In the last two versions of the basic and enhanced system that we present in Table 1,
we used a much longer list of positive and negative terms. We computed SO-PMI scores
for all the 38,790 content words in our data sets. To determine the SO-PMI scores we also
used Turney’s method, but instead of using AltaVista’s NEAR operator (which is no longer
available) we used the Waterloo MultiText System with a corpus of about one terabyte of text
gathered by a Web crawler . We collected co-occurrence counts in a
window of 20 words. The formula is similar to the one from Section 2.1:
SO-PMI(word) = log hits( > word .. p query)hits(n query)
hits( > word .. n query)hits(p query)
except that the NEAR operator is replaced with counts in a window of 20 words.
After we computed the SO-PMI scores, we used the positive/negative terms from GI
to automatically determine the best thresholds for the positive and negative terms. Terms
with scores greater than 0.818 are positive, while terms with values less than −0.1845 are
negative. This method gave a list of 4,357 positive terms and 12,633 negative terms, referred
to as SO-PMI 1 in Table 1. We also tested this method with thresholds of 0.818 and −0.818,
obtaining 4357 positive and 4291 negative terms—a more balanced ratio. This list is referred
to as SO-PMI 2 in Table 1. We note that the positive/negative labels computed with SO-PMI
are not always reliable. For example, when looking at the SO-PMI scores of the words from
SENTIMENT CLASSIFICATION OF MOVIE REVIEWS
Results of the Machine Learning Experiments Using Leave-One-Out Cross-Validation
Basic: SVM, GI unigrams
Basic: SVM, GI&CTRW&Adj unigrams
Basic: SVM, all unigrams
Enhanced: SVM, GI unigrams + bigrams
Enhanced: SVM, GI&CTRW&Adj unigrams
Enhanced: SVM, All unigrams + bigrams
our large list that are also in GI, the accuracy of labeling them is 65% for the best possible
thresholds (0.818 and −0.1845).
We also ran tests that take negations into account, but not intensiﬁers or diminishers. For
the movie reviews this method performed better than the basic system but worse than the
enhanced system. The results of this system are not included in this paper. For example, we
did not show in Table 1 the results without the additional intensiﬁers and diminishers from
CTRW, because these results were nearly identical to the one shown for the versions GI and
CTRW. Therefore, we can say that negation terms contribute a lot; however, when intensiﬁers
and diminishers are added on top of negations their impact is not as large.
The Machine Learning Experiments
Table 2 presents the results of the SVM classiﬁers. They are obtained by leave-oneout cross-validation (the classiﬁers are trained on all examples except one; the testing is
done on the left-out example; the process is repeated for all the examples in the data set).
We used the tool SVM Light . The basic system uses only unigrams as
features, while the enhanced system uses unigrams as well as certain bigrams containing a
negation/intensiﬁer/diminisher with a feature word.
The words used as unigram features are lemmatized to their base form. Lemmatizing
eliminates about 5,500 features, while eliminating unigrams that occur three times or less
eliminates about 19,000 additional features. We used three different sets of unigram features.
The ﬁrst of these unigram feature sets consists of the positive/negative terms from GI, a total
of 3,066 features (words from GI that also appear in our corpus). The second feature set uses
the positive/negative terms from GI&CTRW&Adj, which gives a total of 3,596 features. The
last one uses all unigrams that appear more than three times, as described above. This leads
to a total of 14,290 features. The enhanced system takes the unigram features and adds the
valence shifting bigrams as features. When using GI there are a total of 7,534 features, for
GI&CTRW&Adj there are 8,889 features and when adding bigrams to all unigrams there
are 34,718 features. Bigrams were only added if they contained unigrams that existed in the
corresponding unigram ﬁle. The total number of features for each system are summarized in
COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE
The Number of Features Used in Each Classiﬁer
Feature Set
Number of Features
All unigrams
All unigrams + bigrams
GI unigrams
GI unigrams + bigrams
GI&CTRW&Adj unigrams
GI&CTRW&Adj unigrams + bigrams
The best accuracy, 85.9%, is achieved by the last system in Table 2. The improvement obtained by adding the valence shifting bigrams is small, but statistically
signiﬁcant2 (α = 0.05). It is remarkable that we were able to beat the very high baseline
represented by the basic system. Pang et al. found that by adding all the bigrams as
features, the SVM classiﬁer performed worse than when using only unigrams. We have found
that by selecting speciﬁc bigrams it is possible to improve over just unigrams. Pang et al.
 and Pang and Lee could not improve the results of SVM neither by adding
bigrams nor by separating the objective part of the reviews.
Results of Combining the Two Methods
To test the combined method, we performed 10-fold cross-validation on the reviews data
set. For each fold, we used 900 positive and 900 negative reviews for training and 100 positive
and 100 negative reviews for testing. We computed the document scores for both the SVM
and the term-counting methods. The term-counting method gives scores in the range from
−1 to 1 for each document, while the SVM scores can range from as low as −2.7 to as high
as 2.8 for our data.
In our weighted voting method, we multiplied the score of the term-counting method
by a threshold and then we added the two classiﬁers scores for each document. We chose
the threshold by testing various values and seeing which one maximizes the accuracy over
10 runs of the cross-validation (the optimal threshold was 0.65). We also trained an SVM
meta-classiﬁer that uses the scores of the two classiﬁers as features. Then we repeated the
experiment by using a binary score for the original SVM classiﬁer (to indicate the predicted
class). The results of all these combination methods were very close to each other; therefore
we report only the best results, for the SVM meta-classiﬁer with non-binary scores.
Table 4 shows the results of the combined systems. First, we combine the basic termcounting system with the basic ML system. Then we combine the enhanced systems for
term counting and the ML that uses valence shifter bigrams. We found that the basic termcounting method is 66.5% accurate, while the basic ML method is 84.9% accurate. When we
combine the two methods we obtain an accuracy of 85.4%. For the enhanced system that uses
valence shifters, we originally get 67.8% accuracy for the term-counting method and 85.5%
for the ML method. When the two classiﬁers are combined together we get 86.2% accuracy,
an increase of 0.7 percentage points. Although combining the systems improves the results,
2We performed statistical signiﬁcance tests using the paired t-test, as described in Manning and Sch¨utze .
SENTIMENT CLASSIFICATION OF MOVIE REVIEWS
Results of Combining the Term-Counting and Machine Learning Experiments∗
(1) Basic: Term counting, GI&CTRW&Adj
(2) Basic: SVM, all unigrams
Basic: Combined
(1) Enhanced: Term counting, GI&CTRW&Adj
(2) Enhanced: SVM, all unigrams + bigrams
Enhanced: Combined
∗The results of the two SVM classiﬁers are repeated from Table 2 with the difference that here we report results
of 10-fold cross-validation not leave-one-out cross-validation.
the improvement is not statistically signiﬁcant. But the improvement from the system Basic:
SVM, All Unigrams to the system Enhanced: Combined is signiﬁcant, 1.3 percentage points.
By looking at the distribution of the errors in the 10-fold cross-validation experiments
(Table 4), we see that the combined method has the potential to improve the results, because
there are quite a few cases where SVM incorrectly classiﬁes something, but the term-counting
method classiﬁes it correctly. When using unigrams as features, out of the 2,000 reviews,
there were 302 misclassiﬁcations for SVM; of those, 149 were correctly classiﬁed by the
term-counting method. SVM works worse for positive than for negative examples, getting
172 wrong, of which the term-counting method got 91 right. For negative examples, SVM
misclassiﬁed 130 examples, of which the term-counting method correctly classiﬁed 58. When
using unigrams and bigrams as features, there were 290 misclassiﬁcations by SVM, 163
of which were classiﬁed correctly by the term-counting method. For positive examples,
SVM made 166 errors, of which 97 were correctly classiﬁed by term counting. For negative
examples SVM made 124 errors, of which term counting got 66 right. It seems that the
term-counting method correctly classiﬁes about half of the mistakes made by SVM (while
making many more mistakes itself ). It also seems to do a better job for the positive reviews
than for the negative reviews.
DISCUSSION OF THE RESULTS
The Effects of Valence Shifters on the Term-Counting System
Our ﬁrst goal was to determine the effectiveness of adding contextual valence shifters to
the simple method of counting positive and negative terms. From our experiments it is clear
that the addition of valence shifters has an improving effect on the classiﬁcation of reviews.
It can be seen in Table 1 that the accuracy for both data sets with all dictionaries and word
lists improves when contextual valence shifters are added. In most cases the F-measure also
improves when contextual valence shifters are included.
COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE
To measure only the impact of the valence shifters, for the positive/negative termcounting method, we compare the basic system and the enhanced systems. The improvement
is statistically signiﬁcant in all cases. For example, the gain of 1.7 percentage points (from
61.1% to 62.8%) between Basic: GI and Enhanced: GI from Table 1 is statistically signiﬁcant
at the level α = 0.05.
Ourenhancedterm-countingmethodworkedrelativelywellincomparisontoexperiments
done using human judges. In Pang et al. two humans selected less than 20 positive and
negative words each to determine the sentiment of movie reviews. These two humans scored
58% and 64%, compared to our 67.8% for our best term-counting system with valence
shifters. These results cannot be directly compared with ours, though, because they were
tested on an earlier version of the data set; also we gathered polarity terms without any
domain knowledge that the human-made lists contained.
The Effect of Adding More Positive and Negative Terms
Two other things that we examined are the effect of adding more positive and negative
terms, as well as the effects of adding more intensiﬁers and diminishers. Adding positive and
negative terms from CTRW generally improved the accuracy of the classiﬁcation. This is true
for both the basic and the enhanced system (with and without contextual valence shifters).
Adding overstatements and understatements from CTRW did not make a difference.
When we added a large number of positive and negative terms with automatically computed SO-PMI values, the performance was not always better. The accuracy decreased, especially for SO-PMI 1, which has too many negative terms. For Basic: GI the accuracy
of classiﬁcation falls from 61.1% to 58.1% for Basic: GI & SO-PMI 1. This is probably
due to the fact that the positive/negative labels computed with SO-PMI are not always reliable. It is not always the case that SO-PMI hurts the results though, because for Basic
GI & SO-PMI 2 the accuracy improves to 61.9%. The performance is better when using
GI & SO-PMI 2, and worse when using GI & SO-PMI 1 compared to using only GI, for both
the basic and the enhanced systems.
Comparing the Systems
Our enhanced term-counting system, in its best variant (Enhanced: GI&CTRW&Adj),
achieved a statistically signiﬁcant increase of 6.7 percentage points, compared to the baseline
basic system (Basic: GI), improving from 61.1% to 67.8%.
The results found using ML are much higher, in the range of 80–85.9%. For every set of
unigram features the results did improve slightly by adding our special bigrams. The initial
classiﬁcation accuracy for just unigram features was 85.2%, adding valence shifter bigrams
improves it by just 0.7% to 85.9%. We also found that by using just known positive and negative terms as features we were able to obtain good results. By using only the positive/negative
terms from GI as features we were able to get 80.3% accuracy. Results improved by using
the positive/negative terms from GI&CTRW&Adj to 82.0%. These results were improved
by between 0.7% and 0.8% by including valence shifter bigrams; this improvement is not
statistically signiﬁcant. The high accuracy obtained by the SVM classiﬁers that use only
unigrams for the lists of positive/negative words as features, shows that the positive and
negative terms have an important contribution to the success of the ML method. When we
trained an SVM classiﬁer using only the top most frequent 3,066 unigrams as features, the
accuracy was high (84.4%); this is probably due to the fact that, in addition to the positive
and negative terms, there are some other highly discriminate words (e.g., names of actors
that usually appear in good movies).
SENTIMENT CLASSIFICATION OF MOVIE REVIEWS
We found that combining the two systems slightly improved the results. We were able to
get an improvement of 1.3% by using only the SVM method by combining the document’s
scores from the SVM with those from the term-counting method. Despite the fact that term
counting alone did not perform very well, it was able to give a considerable boost to the ML
method, which already had results in the mid 80% range. The improvement could be due to
the fact that the two classiﬁers do not make the same kind of classiﬁcation errors.
Pang and Lee showed that adding all the bigrams can hurt the results of sentiment
classiﬁcation when using SVMs; however, we have shown that adding speciﬁc bigrams can
actually help the results. We have also shown that the term-counting method together with
the valence shifters can be used to improve the accuracy of a basic SVM classiﬁer.
FUTURE WORK
There are many possible directions for future work. For example, we would like to explore
the effect of using only subjective sentences in classifying reviews for both the term-counting
methods and the ML method.
The positive and negative terms may not all be equally positive or negative. Positive and
negative terms can be given weights (those could be, e.g., their SO-PMI scores) to show
just how positive or negative they are. Overstatements and understatements could also be
Another way to improve the accuracy of classifying movie reviews could be to automatically build small domain models of salient objective key phrases. Positive and negative terms
in these key phrases would be ignored in the term-counting method.
In the ML experiments, one direction of future research is to identify the named entities
and to measure their contribution to the accuracy of the SVM classiﬁers. For example, it
could be the case that some names of popular actors or directors appear most often in movies
with positive reviews.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We wish to thank Egidio Terra and Charlie Clarke for giving us permission to use the
Waterloo MultiText System with the terabyte corpus of Web data, and Peter Turney and his
colleagues at NRC/IIT for giving us access to their local copy of this system. Our research is
supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC)
and the University of Ottawa.