Bayesian Design of Plasma Diagnostics
H. Dreier, A. Dinklage, R. Fischer∗, M. Hirsch, P. Kornejew
Max–Planck–Institut f¨ur Plasmaphysik, EURATOM Association,
Teilinstitut Greifswald, D–174891 Greifswald, Germany
∗Boltzmannstr. 2, D–85748 Garching, Germany
A framework for diagnostics design based on Bayesian probability theory is introduced. The design is assessed in ﬁgures of an expected utility which measures the
information gain from measurements. The approach is applied on design studies for
a multi-chord interferometer for Wendelstein 7-X.
DESIGN OF PLASMA
DIAGNOSTICS
The design of plasma diagnostics is a typical task to be resolved along the preparation
of fusion experiments.
Requirements for a
design process are
• highest accuracy of measurements
• high resolution (t, ⃗x)
• robustness
• extensibility
In addition, the design process has to meet
with constraints such as accessibility or economic restrictions.
A typical design process consists of a number of considerations based on typical use
cases or - synonymously - set of assumptions
on the expected physical scenarios and possibilities for the technical realization of the
measurement. In a real experiment, however,
the data produced by the diagnostics are ultimately employed for the resolution of physical issues, or in other words the quantitative
assessment of hypotheses.
One can conclude that – as the analysis of
data – the design of plasma diagnostics is a
complicated task which includes all aspects
of plasma physics and the analysis of noisy
and often incomplete data. But the design
task exhibits two more challenges, that is
1. one has to deal with expected data of a
future experiment and
2. one needs to quantify the beneﬁt of a
design consideration.
The latter point allows one for design decisions (e.g. is it justiﬁed to add an additional
laser beam in a multichord interferometer).
Consequently, the design process is generally considered to be an intricate problem
and many (correct) design decisions are based
on experience from former set-ups. Since the
overall process requires the inclusion of many
diﬀerent aspects, approaches to quantify the
expected utility of a diagnostics are beneﬁcial
for design considerations.
This paper summarizes a framework which
addresses the issues raised and provides a
mathematical formulation to support the design process. Results for an application on
design considerations of the interferometer
set-up for Wendelstein 7-X are shown in .
DESIGN STRATEGY
Fig. 1 shows a simpliﬁed work-ﬂow of the
overall design procedure. The essential part
is the optimization of the expected utility of
the set-up with respect to design parameters
(e.g. the chord position).
In order to formulate the design procedure
as an optimization problem, the quantities
to be measured are to be speciﬁed. Beyond
crude estimates of ranges, it is intended to
employ predictive modelling for W7-X speciﬁc physical issues, e.g. conﬁnement studies. This philosophy is reﬂected by the choice
FIG. 1: Elements of the design procedure.
of ”start-up” diagnostics for Wendelstein 7-X
which is oriented to resolve physical issues of
stellarator optimization . In assistance, the
robustness of the results is assessed by any
available additional information, e.g. global
scaling laws in the case of conﬁnement studies.
The resulting expected quantities are
fed to a virtual instrument which implements
the forward model of the measurement and –
an essential part – describes the error statistics (likelihood). For the range of expected
data, the optimization procedure may also
include a weighting with respect to the quantity ranges of interest. Technical and physical
considerations enter the process at diﬀerent
stages. For a proof of results the analysis of
data from the virtual instrument is part of
the design strategy.
BAYESIAN EXPERIMENTAL
Lindley proposed an approach based on
decision theory to design. It begins with the
choice of an appropriate utility function re-
ﬂecting purpose and costs of an experiment.
For the quantiﬁcation of the utility of a setup, the Kullback-Leibler distance UKL measures the information gain from the ignorance
on a quantity φ before a measurement to the
knowledge after data D are taken:
UKL(D, η) =
It is measured in bits, if the base-2 logarithm
Uncertainties are encoded as probability
density functions P. The conditional probability P(φ| D) means the probability that φ
is true given the data D. Please note, that
UKL depends both on the data D and the design parameters η which are the optimization
parameters.
An integration over the range of expected
data, where the evidence of the data is represented by the probability density function
P(D|η), yields the expected utility function
P(D| η)UKL(D, η)dD,
which is a function of the design parameters
It is a measure of the mean information gain from the data, averaged over the
expected data space.
The principle of Bayesian diagnostic design ist the maximization of the EU with respect to η.
Using Bayes theorem
P(φ|D, η) = P(D|φ, η) · P(φ)
the EU is given by
P(φ)P(D|φ, η)
formulation
likelihood
P(D|φ, η) and a probability density function
P(φ) which reﬂects the range of interest and
weighting for φ.
The likelihood can be regarded as a representation of a diagnostics model. It contains
the forward calculation and the error statistics of the forward model parameters. The
expected utility is now a function of the design parameters η only and is subject of optimization studies .
OPTIMIZATION STUDIES FOR
THE W7-X INTERFEROMETER
The error statistics of the measurement
has crucial impact on the expected utility .
For the examples presented here, a constant
error is chosen which is about a few percent,
depending on the actual data value.
For the creation of virtual data, a parametrized density function is used:
n(r) = φ1 · 1 + φ4 · (r/rmax)2
 (r/rmax)2
The parameters φ1 . . . φ4 represent the maximum density, position of the edge gradient,
steepness and bulge of the density distribution.
Fig. 2 shows the expected utility for a single beam, where the optimization target is
the reconstruction of each parameter φi. The
result is displayed in ﬁgures of two angles η1
and η2 which represent the starting and end
point of a chord on a circumventing circle as
indicated in Fig. 3.
The results indicate the diﬀerent impact
of shaping.
Coarsely, the chord represents
the maximum signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)
chord for the respective parameter. For the
maximum (Fig. 2(a)) a beam traversing the
plasma center yields best SNR. Since the
shaping eﬀects of the other parameters are
most distinct at the plasma edge, the resultant reconstruction has maximum information gain for sightlines traversing the edge
region. The parameters steepness and bulge
have nearly coinciding optimum chords as to
be seen in Fig. 3 where the outmost beam is
degenerated (bulge, steepness).
The beneﬁt of this approach is a quantiﬁcation of the design quality which also allows
FIG. 2: Expected Utility for estimation of maximum
density (a), gradient position (b), steepness (c) and
bulge (d). The data space is generated by a variation
of (a) φ1 = 0 . . . 5 × 1020m−3, (b) φ2 = 0.6 . . . 0.95,
(c) φ3 = 1 . . . 30 and (d) φ4 = −1 . . . 0. The star symbol marks the maximum of the EU. The insets show
the corresponding density proﬁle variation where the
maximum ordinate is ne = 1 × 1020m−3 and the abscissae are eﬀective radii (reff/a).
FIG. 3: Density distribution in the toroidal plane for
the W7-X interferometer. The chords shown represent the optimum reconstruction of data (cf. 2). The
center beam corresponds to Fig. 2(a), the outmost
beam to Figs. 2(c) and (d).
the diagnostician to estimate the robustness
of a design chosen.
FIG. 4: Restricted access to the plasma due to port
system (left), accessible chord positions in EU plot
for the gradient position case (lightened areas, right).
Technical constraints arise due to restricted access to the plasma vessel through the
ports. Fig. 4 indicates accessible chords in
ﬁgures of the parametrization chosen.
The eﬀect of the technical restrictions can
be quantiﬁed and compared to ideal access.
A translation of the expected utility to measurement uncertainties is straightforward but
depends on the forward function of the virtual instrument.
DISCUSSION
Bayesian diagnostics design is applied on
plasma diagnostics.
The design allows for
a quantiﬁcation of design considerations and
estimates for their robustness.
The reconstruction of density proﬁles by means of a
multichannel infrared interferometer at Wendelstein 7-X shows how measuring capabilities can be detected and complicated entanglements of measurement and geometry revealed.
The impact of technical boundary
conditions can be quantiﬁed as well as the information gain by the inclusion of additional
 P. Kornejew, M. Hirsch, T. Bindemann, A.
Dinklage, H. Dreier, H.-J. Hartfuß, Rev. Sci.
Instrum. (these proceedings).
 H.J. Hartfuß et al., Rev. Sci. Instrum. 68,
1244 
 Lindley, D. V. Bayesian Statistics - A Review
 .
 R. Fischer, in Bayesian Inference and Maximum Entropy Methods in Science and Engineering, AIP Conference Proc. 735, 76
 H. Dreier, A. Dinklage, R. Fischer, M.
Hirsch, P. Kornejew, E. Pasch, Fusion Sci.
Technol. 50, 262 .