Bacterial community structures are unique and resilient
in full-scale bioenergy systems
Jeffrey J. Wernera, Dan Knightsb, Marcelo L. Garciac, Nicholas B. Scalfonea, Samual Smithd, Kevin Yarasheskid,
Theresa A. Cummingse, Allen R. Beerse, Rob Knightf, and Largus T. Angenenta,1
aDepartment of Biological and Environmental Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853; bDepartment of Computer Science, University of Colorado,
Boulder, CO 80309; cDepartment of Energy, Environmental and Chemical Engineering, Washington University, St. Louis, MO 63130; dWashington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110; eAnheuser-Busch, Inbev Inc., St. Louis, MO 63118; and fDepartment of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of
Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309
Edited by Norman R. Pace, University of Colorado at Boulder, Boulder, CO, and approved January 26, 2011 
Anaerobic digestion is the most successful bioenergy technology
worldwide with, at its core, undeﬁned microbial communities that
have poorly understood dynamics. Here, we investigated the
relationships of bacterial community structure (>400,000 16S rRNA
gene sequences for 112 samples) with function (i.e., bioreactor performance) and environment (i.e., operating conditions) in a yearlong monthly time series of nine full-scale bioreactor facilities
treating brewery wastewater (>20,000 measurements). Each of
the nine facilities had a unique community structure with an unprecedented level of stability. Using machine learning, we identi-
ﬁed a small subset of operational taxonomic units (OTUs; 145 out of
4,962), which predicted the location of the facility of origin for
almost every sample (96.4% accuracy). Of these 145 OTUs, syntrophic bacteria were systematically overrepresented, demonstrating
that syntrophs rebounded following disturbances. This indicates
that resilience, rather than dynamic competition, played an important role in maintaining the necessary syntrophic populations. In
addition, we explained the observed phylogenetic differences
between all samples on the basis of a subset of environmental
gradients (using constrained ordination) and found stronger relationships between community structure and its function rather
than its environment. These relationships were strongest for two
performance variables—methanogenic activity and substrate removal efﬁciency—both of which were also affected by microbial
ecology because these variables were correlated with community
evenness (at any given time) and variability in phylogenetic structure (over time), respectively. Thus, we quantiﬁed relationships
between community structure and function, which opens the
door to engineer communities with superior functions.
community dynamics | UniFrac | community function | digester | sludge
he production of bioenergy from wastes is an essential component in the global development of sustainable energy
sources (1). Anaerobic digestion, which is the most prominent
bioenergy technology worldwide, uses undeﬁned microbial cultures to produce methane from organic substrates (2). Methanogenic bioreactors are maintained on the basis of decades of
observed relationships between performance and operating
parameters. However, differences underlying bioreactors that
perform well and bioreactors that perform inadequately are often
poorly understood (3). This has led to a general perception that
methanogenic bioreactors are unreliable or unstable, inhibiting
their wider adoption for bioenergy production (2). A deeper
analysis of the structure and dynamics of bioreactor microbial
communities as a function of performance and operating conditions has the potential to reveal important and unappreciated
structure–function relationships.
The efﬁcient and stable operation of methanogenic bioreactors
relies on syntrophic relationships among a community of microbes,
including fermenting bacteria, specialized acidogenic and acetogenic syntrophs, and methanogenic archaea (4), with diverse and
parallel pathways for substrate metabolism. Many studies have
sequenced clones of the most abundant organisms in methanogenic bioreactors (4, 5), but the population dynamics are poorly
understood. Ecological theories based on stochastic models and
principles of island biogeography suggest that bioreactor community dynamics may be governed by chaotic shifts among functionally redundant organisms (6). In laboratory-scale systems,
researchers have observed stable community structures in functionally stable (7) and unstable (8, 9) bioreactors, community shifts
that could be explained by reactor conditions (10, 11), and even
chaotic community shifts in functionally stable bioreactors (12, 13).
It is difﬁcult to assess the observed discrepancies between stable
communities and those that are more dynamic. One hurdle has
been the limitations of techniques for quantifying microbial community structure, both in sequencing depth and limited resolution
of ﬁngerprinting. Deep-sequencing time series, such as those used
in the current study, present an opportunity to study microbial
community structure and dynamics, informed by phylogeny.
To be useful for bioenergy production, a microbial community
must have a stable metabolic function over time, despite the
unavoidable perturbations and disturbances that occur in realworld systems. Here, we focus on three ecological factors that
play important roles in maintaining a stable and robust community function: (i) a functionally diverse microbial community
provides a suite of parallel pathways for each trophic step.
Hashsham et al. (14) observed that systems with a larger number
of parallel pathways have a more robust function over time. (ii)
Evenness in the structure of microbial diversity ensures that the
community has more capacity to use its varied array of metabolic
pathways. Wittebolle et al. (15) demonstrated that microbial
communities with greater evenness have a more robust function.
Finally, (iii) the dynamics of populations over time allow for the
community to adjust following perturbations and disturbances,
providing the system with access to the total functional diversity
and environmental speciﬁcity available in the community. Allison and Martiny (16) divided the population dynamics that
maintain community function over time into three basic mechanisms: resistance (in which a population maintains abundance
over time), resilience (in which a population rebounds following
a disturbance), and redundancy (in which a disturbed population
is replaced by a new population whose function is redundant with
the original).
Author contributions: J.J.W., D.K., R.K., and L.T.A. designed research; J.J.W., D.K., M.L.G.,
N.B.S., T.A.C., and A.R.B. performed research; S.S. and K.Y. contributed new reagents/
analytic tools; J.J.W., D.K., R.K., and L.T.A. analyzed data; and J.J.W., D.K., R.K., and
L.T.A. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Data deposition: The sequence reported in this paper has been deposited in the GenBank
database (accession no. SRA029112, study no. SRP005270).
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: .
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1015676108/-/DCSupplemental.
March 8, 2011
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1015676108
We hypothesized that, in stable anaerobic bioreactors, the
variation in both individual populations and phylogenetic structure will be related to variation in function (i.e., bioreactor
performance) and environment (i.e., operating conditions). We
used barcoded 454 pyrosequencing of bacterial 16S rRNA genes
to analyze samples from an unprecedented monthly time series
of nine full-scale methanogenic bioreactors (112 samples with an
average of >3,500 sequences each). These data were paired with
extensive daily measurements of bioreactor performance and
operating conditions (over 20,000 measurements). We observed
that the methanogenic bioreactors of this study were composed
of stable bacterial communities that were resilient following
disturbances, both in terms of population proﬁles and phylogenetic structure. We applied constrained ordination to relate
phylogenetic community structure (UniFrac variation) to environmental gradients. After comparing these results with other
supervised and unsupervised methods of ordination and machine
learning, we identiﬁed the function and environment variables
that best explained community structure and populations that
were most reliably associated with differences in bioreactor
phylogenetic structure.
Monthly biomass samples were collected for 1 y from nine different full-scale methanogenic
granular-sludge bioreactor facilities treating brewery wastewater.
We sampled four upﬂow anaerobic sludge blanket (UASB) facilities (locations U1, U2, U3, and U4), and other reactor con-
ﬁgurations based on the UASB design, including four expanded
granule sludge bed (EGSB) facilities (locations E1, E2, E3, and
E4), and one internal circulation (IC) facility (location I1). Two
additional, earlier time series had
been sampled for locations E3 and E4. Performance and operating condition data were measured on a daily basis, including
substrate loading rate (feeding rate, F) normalized to biomass
(M; F:M ratio, also referred to as sludge loading rate), soluble
chemical oxygen demand (sCOD) concentrations (a measurement of how much soluble organic material is in wastewater),
volatile fatty acid (VFA) concentrations, pH, temperature, FeCl2
feed-supplement concentrations, methane production rate, and
monthly biomass assays, yielding a wide range of aceticlastic
methanogenic activity values and relative percentage of the acetate oxidation pathway compared with the total removal of
acetate. Barcoded 454 pyrosequencing of bacterial 16S rRNA
gene amplicons from 112 biomass samples resulted in 412,734
nonchimeric reads of sufﬁcient quality and an average of 3,680
reads per sample. Tables S1 and S2 summarize the performance,
operating conditions, and sequencing data obtained for each
facility/time point. Taxonomic divisions were dominated by Proteobacteria (mostly Syntrophobacterales and Desulfuromonales),
Bacteroidetes, Spirochaetes, Clostridia, Chloroﬂexi, and Synergistia (Fig. S1). A small proportion of sequences (8 ± 3%; SD)
were unclassiﬁed.
Bacterial communities at each location fell into stable, consistent phylogenetic clusters over the 1-y period of sampling. The
phylogenetic variation, which was measured via UniFrac (17)
distances, is displayed in Fig. 1A as a plot of the ﬁrst two UniFrac
principal coordinates. Ordination results, such as those in Fig. 1,
are used to visualize distances and variation between samples (SI
Methods). The UniFrac distance between samples represents the
difference between microbial communities on the basis of the
fraction of evolutionary history in a phylogenetic tree that is
unique to one of the communities rather than shared by both.
The close clustering within locations indicates that samples from
the same location through time were more similar to each other
in phylogenetic structure than they were to samples from other
locations. The additional time series from year 2003 (samples
labeled ’03 in Fig. 1A) for locations E3 and E4 clustered closely
to the later 2007–2008 time series; the separate years were closer
to each other than the average distance to samples from the
next-closest facility (P < 0.01; two-tailed independent Student
t test comparing between-year distances to distances to the nextnearest location). The consistency of E3 and E4 reactor communities throughout the 4-y time period demonstrates surprising
phylogenetic stability over an extensive period.
No single performance or operating condition variable consistently explained the UniFrac clustering. To determine which
environmental gradients best explained variation in phylogenetic
structure, we used constrained redundancy analysis (RDA) to
predict the UniFrac principal coordinates (Fig. 1B) using a linear
combination of several environmental gradients. The arrows indicate the size and direction of the coefﬁcients of the environmental variables in the linear model (i.e., the vector for each
environment variable used to produce Fig. 1B). Comparing these
constrained coordinates to the unconstrained principal components analysis (PCA) of the same data (Fig. 1C) shows that most
of the phylogenetic variation in the ﬁrst two axes can be explained
using four performance and environmental condition variables.
For example, in the ﬁrst axis, constrained RDA explains 80% as
much phylogenetic variation as the unconstrained ordination
(7.2% in Fig. 1B vs. 9.0% in Fig. 1C). Because these ordination
techniques were used to visualize complex variation among many
Phylogenetic distances between samples (i.e., reactor communities) determined via UniFrac principal coordinates analysis (PCoA; average unweighted
UniFrac distance matrix was calculated from 100 even rarefactions of 500 sequences per sample). (A) PCoA of all samples. (B) UniFrac data redundancy analysis
constrained by the four highest-loading environment variables: methanogenic activity, soluble chemical oxygen demand (sCOD) removal efﬁciency, feeding
rate normalized to biomass (F:M ratio), and temperature. (C) PCA of UniFrac data for direct comparison with B. Sample points formatted by facility location
(E1–E4, I1, and U1–U4), sample year , and reactor type (blue, EGSB; green, IC; black, UASB).
Werner et al.
March 8, 2011
MICROBIOLOGY
samples, a graph in two dimensions inherently represents a small
proportion of total inertia. The important factor is that the constrained projection along environmental gradients (Fig. 1B) successfully replicated the variation in community structure (Fig.
1C). The four environmental gradients most useful for constraining RDA in Fig. 1B were weighted more favorably (longer
vector arrow in Fig. 1B) toward measures of community function
—the performance variables methanogenic activity and sCOD
removal efﬁciency—than environment—the operating condition
variables F:M ratio and temperature. To avoid overﬁtting, we
chose these four gradients from the full set on the basis of their
higher weighting in constrained RDA using all variables (Fig.
S2A). In addition, we veriﬁed our methods by comparing these
results to constrained RDA with four randomly generated variables that should not correspond with community structure (Fig.
S2B). Our results demonstrate that the variation in phylogenetic
community structure could be explained by the variation in the
four identiﬁed environmental gradients. In addition to explaining
phylogenetic variation, a similar weighting of environmental
gradients also explained some of the variation in the operational
taxonomic unit (OTU) relative abundances, as tested by canonical correspondence analysis (CCA) (Fig. S3).
Community dynamics in each facility were analyzed in terms of
their time series. A community that undergoes continuous dynamic succession would be expected to progress along a trajectory in a UniFrac time series with each successive time point
increasing in distance from the initial community sample. The
time series of UniFrac distances within individual locations did
not, however, show such a trajectory. Rather, bacterial community dynamics were governed by small, random shifts within the
location clusters (small, here, is judged relative to the distances
between different facilities). Occasionally, large phylogenetic
shifts occurred within a facility, but they were observed to be
temporary. For example, Fig. 2 shows a time series from facility
U1, which consisted of two community disturbances followed by
returns to equilibrium. UniFrac distances from the location average (Fig. 2A) followed a ﬂat line, which indicates that the
changes in phylogenetic structure as a function of time consisted
of random variation, or systematic variation with a tendency to
revert to the mean (e.g., the ﬁnal time point was just as close to
the cluster average as other time points).
The two disturbances in community structure in U1 occurred
following perturbations in which the sludge loading rate (F:M
ratio) was reduced by ∼50% (Fig. 2C). In the ﬁrst case
(December 24–January 6), the feeding rate (F) decreased due to
a holiday break in production. In the second case (June 1), the
decrease in F:M ratio followed a sharp increase in F:M ratio.
The increase was due to an increase in production, whereas the
subsequent decrease in F:M ratio was due to an increase in
the total biomass (M) in the form of dormant granules from the
same facility that were added to the total system average (106%
increase in total biomass). This disturbed the average community
by adding community components that had been starved for an
extensive period. The major shifts in taxonomic groups during
each disturbance (Fig. 2B) included drastic reductions in the
relative abundance of the syntrophic Deltaproteobacteria orders
Syntrophobacterales and Desulfuromonadales, concurrent with
increases in the relative abundance of Bacteroidetes. Following
each disturbance, the community returned to the normal facility
cluster (Fig. 2A), demonstrating resilience to perturbations in
feeding rate and addition of starved biomass. The decrease in
relative abundance of Syntrophobacterales for each disturbance
was expected, because they specialize in propionate oxidation,
which would have had a reduced ﬂux during starvation. The
concurrent reduction in the Desulfuromonadales division may
have been due to similar sensitivity to limited acetate or alcohol
ﬂux or to changes in the dynamics of Fe(III) or elemental sulfur
formation, which some of their members use as electron acceptors (18). During each disturbance, the facility maintained
optimal performance (Fig. 2 D and E). All performance and
operating condition data for each of the nine facility time series
are available in Fig. S4.
In addition to analysis of phylogenetic distances, we also
compared time series on the basis of the relative abundance of
the 4,962 observed OTUs (deﬁned as 97% sequence similarity
via the uclust seed-based algorithm). Due to the size and variability of the OTU table, we identiﬁed predictive OTUs using
sparse supervised learning, which has been successfully applied
to classiﬁcation of microarray data (19) and 16S amplicon length
heterogeneity proﬁles (20). We chose location of the facility as
the class attribute to be predicted, because the community phylogenetic structure was observed to cluster most closely on the
basis of facility location, and because facilities were also unique
and consistent in terms of performance data (Fig. S5). We ranked
OTUs on the basis of their utility for predicting location (measured as z score) and selected a subset of the 145 most predictive
OTUs using the nearest shrunken centroids (NSC) method (19).
Cross validation conﬁrmed that the OTU subset had 96.4% accuracy in predicting sample location origin by NSC. The samplenormalized relative abundances of the predictive OTUs are displayed in Fig. 3A as a function of location and time, along with
z scores indicating their predictive power (Fig. 3D). These predictive populations represent OTUs that had stable, consistent
Time series of sequencing, performance [soluble chemical oxygen
demand (sCOD) removal efﬁciency and efﬂuent volatile fatty acid (VFA)
concentration] and operating condition [feeding rate normalized to biomass
(F:M ratio)] data variables for facility U1: (A) UniFrac distance from the location average. (B) Relative abundance of dynamic taxonomic groups (BACD,
Bacteroidetes; DSRM, Desulfuromonales; SYNB, Syntrophobacterales). (C)
F:M ratio. (D) sCOD removal efﬁciency. (E) Efﬂuent VFA concentration.
Vertical dashed lines indicate two signiﬁcant disturbances in the phylogenetic community structure. Error bars on A and B represent the SD of 100
and 10 random subsamples, respectively, with 500 sequences per subsample.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1015676108
Werner et al.
relative abundance proﬁles that were unique to a speciﬁc facility
location or set of locations.
The relative abundance data (Fig. 3B) show that the classiﬁable taxonomic groups represented by the predictive OTU subset
consisted mostly of Bacteroidetes, Syntrophobacterales, Desulfuromonadales, Spriochaetes, and small subsets of Synergistia,
Clostridia, and Chloroﬂexi. To determine which classiﬁable
OTUs had more stable or consistent populations, we calculated
the over-/underrepresentation in the predictive subset compared
with the total relative abundance of taxonomic classiﬁcations in
the original OTU table (Fig. 3C). Syntrophic divisions Syntrophobacterales (an order of Deltaproteobacteria) and Synergistia
had signiﬁcant overrepresentation among the predictive OTUs
throughout all locations, indicating that their populations were
more stable and consistent than the average OTU. This may have
been due to their specialized metabolic functions of short-chain
fatty acid oxidation, making their populations less vulnerable to
competition from functionally redundant OTUs. During disturbances, such as the data shown in Fig. 2, Syntrophobacterales
populations were those most sensitive to perturbation, but they
were resilient following the disturbance. Clostridia and Chloro-
ﬂexi were both signiﬁcantly underrepresented in the predictive
subset, suggesting that their populations were more dynamic than
the average OTU, which may be due to the functional redundancy of competing populations. The most overrepresented division, AC1 (a phylum in the Greengenes taxonomy), represents
an uncharacterized bacterial phylum found in reducing environments (e.g., anaerobic marine sediment) (21). The relatively high
stability and speciﬁcity of AC1 OTUs suggest they may ﬁll
a specialized niche in methanogenic bioreactors.
The resiliency of the predictive OTUs can be clearly seen in
the heat map. For instance, proﬁles for E1, E4, U1, and U2 all
contain atypical horizontal stripes (disturbances), at some point
in their time series, for which the machine learning prediction
failed (red asterisks in Fig. 3A). For each of these samples, at
later time points (progressing downward), the subcommunity
proﬁle returned to its original composition. The resilience of this
predictive OTU subset was representative of resilience in the
phylogenetic community structure as a whole (Fig. S4).
There were other measures of community structure that correlated with the measures of function identiﬁed as important in
constrained RDA. Methanogenic activity increased with increasing evenness of the community measured via the Gini coefﬁcient (normalized scale from 0 to 1; Fig. 4A). This agreed with
the observations of Wittebolle et al. (15) that greater evenness in
bioreactor communities was associated with functional stability.
In addition, efﬁciency of sCOD removal was correlated with
phylogenetic variability, which was measured for each sample as
its average UniFrac distance to other samples from the facility
cluster (Fig. 4B). This suggests that community dynamics help
maintain efﬁcient performance.
Subset of OTUs (145 out of 4,962 total OTUs) selected by machine learning as predictive of location (accuracy = 0.964). (A) Heat map shows the
complete time series (112 samples) ordered vertically per location with only the predictive OTUs. The sampling time progresses downward for each location
(time). Each location has a unique OTU composition, sorted horizontally by a z score. Relative abundance of OTUs within in each sample are colored in yellow;
absent OTUs are in dark blue. (B) Microbial composition (abundance of taxa) of each sample for the predictive OTU subset (white space in B represents the
remainder of OTUs with other classiﬁcation). (C) Relative over-/underrepresentation of taxa denote the change in relative abundance when comparing this
predictive OTU subset to all observed OTUs for this study, to summarize taxonomic divisions that were more or less predictive (more or less stable and location
speciﬁc) than the average OTU. (D) z scores quantify the predictive ability of OTUs for each location. The four samples that failed to classify correctly are
marked with red asterisks.
Werner et al.
March 8, 2011
MICROBIOLOGY
Discussion
Syntrophic Populations Were Highly Stable, Resilient, and Speciﬁc for
Function and Environment. Our results showed that the ecological
dynamics of syntrophic populations (Syntrophobacterales and
Synergistia) behaved as expected of functional specialists—
populations were stable, resilient, and highly selective along
environmental gradients. This observation agrees well with previous genomic sequencing efforts, which have shown that syntrophic bacteria are locked into speciﬁc metabolic functions
within the overall trophic structure. Syntrophs have relatively
small genomes that feature unusual core metabolic pathways and
have limited capabilities to process alternative substrates (22).
The resilience we observed from these specialized bacteria suggests that a disturbed community is likely to rebound to previous
populations of syntrophs, rather than undergo competitive
growth of different syntrophs that have similar function. In other
words, resilience was relatively important compared with resistance or redundancy for maintaining function of syntrophic
populations. The dynamics of higher-level fermenter populations,
such as Clostridia and Bacteroidetes, were markedly different
from those of the syntrophs, relying more on redundancy to
maintain the overall community function. From a practical
standpoint, these results suggest that biomass amendments to
address failures in syntrophic short-chain fatty acid oxidation may
be possible with close consideration of speciﬁc OTUs that are
most appropriate for the given bioreactor, but attempts to control
or maintain speciﬁc fermenter populations may be more difﬁcult.
Better Functioning Communities. Our observed relationships may
also teach us how to improve the function of a community. We
showed that communities with greater evenness had a higher
methanogenic activity. Wittebolle et al. (15) had observed that
community evenness corresponded with functional stability because a more even community had a higher capacity to use redundant functional pathways, complimenting other observations
that communities with more parallel pathways had more efﬁcient
response to glucose shock (14). These previous data were collected
in short-term batch experiments, and here we show that evenness
is also important for full-scale systems operated for years rather
than weeks. In addition, we have shown that communities with
a greater phylogenetic variability functioned more efﬁciently.
Therefore, the superior performing bioreactors consisted of communities with strategies to incorporate greater functional diversity
through greater evenness and variability/dynamics. These performance trends were not apparent when merely looking at species richness.
Relating Community Structure to Function and Environment. We
have demonstrated that we can explain variation in bacterial
phylogenetic structure with measured environmental gradients
(function and environment) using constrained ordination. To
quantify these relationships, we merged a time series of highthroughput 16S rRNA gene sequencing data with a massive
amount of performance and operating condition measurements
for bioreactors with mixed microbial communities. The predictive
capabilities of our observed relationships, linking phylogenetic
structure to function, were empirical, compared with mechanismbased systems biology approaches that have also seen some success in predicting functional differences among complex microbial communities (23). However, 16S rRNA genes are essentially
a proxy for genomic content, which is an underlying reason why
phylogeny-based empirical relationships can yield powerful correlations between community structure and function as observed
in this study. Similar analyses have the potential to yield informative models for understanding and engineering the function
of other microbial communities, such as in the human gut, soils,
and oceans. There remain many challenges in relating microbial
community structure to function and environment that we must
overcome. Factors that have not yet been addressed include the
unknown extent of hysteresis (the dependence of current community on the previous community, as opposed to a deterministic
relationship with environment) and the undeﬁned time lags between community structure, environment, and function. To address these questions, future advances are needed in the analysis
of integrated time series data from different temporal scales.
Sampling, Ampliﬁcation, and Sequencing. Granular biomass was sampled
monthly from the brewery wastewater treatment facilities listed in Table S1.
All reactors sampled were of an upﬂow conﬁguration with anaerobic granular biomass. Samples were taken from all active reactors at a given facility, at
all granule bed sampling ports, and these subsamples were combined as
a single time point. Samples were stored at −80 °C before processing. We
extracted DNA from all samples in parallel, using the phenol/chloroform
method. Barcoded primers (24) were used to amplify bacterial rRNA gene
region 27F-338R, optimized for phylogenetic differentiation among pyrosequencing reads (25). Sequencing was performed using the Roche 454 FLX
pyrosequencing platform at the Cornell University Life Sciences Core Laboratory Center (SRA029112). Details of DNA processing and sequencing and
assay methods for acetate oxidation are available in SI Methods.
Analysis of Bacterial 16S rRNA Gene Sequences. Sequences generated from
pyrosequencing of bacterial 16S rRNA gene amplicons were processed using
the Quantitative Insights Into Microbial Ecology (QIIME v1.1) (26) pipeline,
with default settings. Flowgrams were denoised with the Denoiser algorithm, clustered into OTUs at 97% pairwise identity using the seed-based
uclust algorithm, and representative sequences from each OTU were aligned
to the Greengenes imputed core reference alignment (27) using PyNAST
(28). Chimeras (159 total OTUs) were removed from the reference set on the
basis of identiﬁcation as chimeric via Chimera Slayer and conﬁrmation via
either Bellerophon or CCode, and veriﬁcation that the putative chimera
appeared in only one sample, using mothur 1.12 (29). The alignment was
then ﬁltered to remove gaps and hypervariable regions using a Lane mask,
The importance of redundancy in community function. (A) Methanogenic activity of each sample as a function of Gini coefﬁcient (calculated
from 100 rarefactions of 100 sequences each; linear regression slope = −1.8 ±
0.3 gCOD gVSS−1 d−1 SE, R2 = 0.29). (B) sCOD removal efﬁciency of each
sampling time point as a function of the phylogenetic variation from the
mean (measured as the UniFrac distance of each time point from the facility
average; linear regression slope = 54 ± 6% SE, R2 = 0.45); methanogenic
activity units are reported as g chemical oxygen demand (COD) methane
produced per g volatile suspended solids (VSS) biomass used in the activity
assay (maximum aceticlastic methanogenesis rate normalized to biomass).
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1015676108
Werner et al.
and an approximately maximum-likelihood tree was constructed from the
ﬁltered alignment using FastTree (30). An unweighted UniFrac distance
matrix (17) was constructed from the phylogenetic tree and visualized using
principal coordinates analysis (PCoA; as implemented in QIIME). Unweighted
UniFrac algorithm was chosen because short-term effects may cause ﬂuctuation in relative abundance that can obscure associations of interest. We
classiﬁed the taxonomy of OTU representative sequences using the naïve
Baysian classiﬁer as implemented in mothur 1.12, adapted from the algorithm of the RDP Classiﬁer (31), using the Greengenes sequence database
mapped to the Greengenes taxonomy as a training set.
Machine Learning. Daily operating and performance data were obtained from
the operator databases at each facility, and an environmental data matrix
was constructed from daily reactor data as an average of the 25 d preceding
the biological sample. Supervised linear discriminant analysis (LDA) was used
to separate locations on the basis of environmental data using the VisRank and
FreeVis modules of Orange 2.0b. For analysis of OTUs, the OTU table was
trimmed to exclude OTUs occurring in <10% of the samples (<12 samples) or
OTUs without a sample containing more than four reads. OTUs were ranked
for predicting location via NSC, and the predictive model was cross-validated
(sixfold) using the PAMr 1.4 package for R (19) and a threshold of 6.5 (Fig. S6).
Constrained Ordination. Before performing RDA, the UniFrac distance matrix
was reoriented using PCoA. The PCoA scores along each axis were then
regressed on the set (or subset) of environmental variables, and the resulting
“ﬁtted” PCoA matrix was subjected to eigenanalysis via the singular value
decomposition (SVD) to obtain the ﬁnal constrained sample ordination
scores. For comparison, we also performed the SVD on the full PCoA matrix
(unconstrained RDA). This process of applying RDA to the principal coordinates of a distance matrix is relatively new in computational ecology, also
known as “distance-based redundancy analysis” (32) or “canonical analysis
of principal coordinates” (33). The advantage of this approach is that it can
be combined with any distance metric, including one based on phylogeny,
such as UniFrac. The analysis was repeated using the four variables with
highest factor loading from the full analysis. Although iron addition had
a high factor loading in the full analysis, it was excluded from the reduced
analysis because it was only added to UASB-type reactors. In contrast, CCA
and unconstrained correspondence analysis (CA) are eigenanalysis approaches that work directly with the OTU relative abundance matrix. To
perform CA, the relative abundance matrix was converted to χ2 distances,
ﬁtted to the relative abundance, and then decomposed with the SVD to
obtain both sample and OTU scores. CA has the effect of ordinating samples
according to a hypothetical environmental gradient that maximizes the
dispersion of the OTU modes along that gradient, assuming that each OTU
has a unimodal response to the gradient. To perform CCA, the χ2 distance
matrix was ﬁrst regressed on the canonical environmental variables (as in
RDA), before the SVD was applied. CCA has the effect of constraining the
hypothetical gradient scores in CA to be a linear combination of the observed canonical variates. In both CA and CCA, the inertia recovered by each
axis is a portion of the sum of all sample OTU χ2 distances. All CA, CCA, and
RDA analyses were performed using the Vegan Community Ecology Package
1.17–2 for R.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank wastewater treatment operators at
Anheuser-Busch, Inbev for supplying samples and data records. We thank
Ruth E. Ley and anonymous reviewers for insightful comments. This research was supported by National Research Initiative of the Department of
Agriculture (USDA) National Institutes for Food and Agriculture (NIFA) 2004-
35504-14896, Cornell University Agricultural Experiment Station federal
formula funds NYC-123444 received from the USDA NIFA, a subcontract
from GE Global Research funded by DOE DE-FC26-08NT05870, Colorado
Center for Biofuels and Bioreﬁning C2B2, and the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute. Mass spectrometry resources were funded by National Institutes
of Health Grants NIDDK020579, NIDDK05634, and NCRR000954.
1. Angenent LT, Karim K, Al-Dahhan MH, Wrenn BA, Domíguez-Espinosa R 
Production of bioenergy and biochemicals from industrial and agricultural wastewater. Trends Biotechnol 22:477–485.
2. Lettinga G Anaerobic digestion and wastewater treatment systems. Antonie
van Leeuwenhoek 67:3–28.
3. Leitão RC, van Haandel AC, Zeeman G, Lettinga G The effects of operational
and environmental variations on anaerobic wastewater treatment systems: A review.
Bioresour Technol 97:1105–1118.
4. BrionesA,RaskinL Diversityanddynamics ofmicrobialcommunitiesinengineered
environments and their implications for process stability. Curr Opin Biotechnol 14:
5. Rivière D, et al. Towards the deﬁnition of a core of microorganisms involved in
anaerobic digestion of sludge. ISME J 3:700–714.
6. Curtis TP, Head IM, Graham DW Theoretical ecology for engineering biology.
Environ Sci Technol 37:64A–70A.
7. LaPara TM, Nakatsu CH, Pantea LM, Alleman JE Stability of the bacterial
communities supported by a seven-stage biological process treating pharmaceutical
wastewater as revealed by PCR-DGGE. Water Res 36:638–646.
8. Malin C, Illmer P Ability of DNA content and DGGE analysis to reﬂect the
performance condition of an anaerobic biowaste fermenter. Microbiol Res 163:
9. Goberna M, Insam H, Franke-Whittle IH Effect of biowaste sludge maturation
on the diversity of thermophilic bacteria and archaea in an anaerobic reactor. Appl
Environ Microbiol 75:2566–2572.
10. McMahon KD, Stroot PG, Mackie RI, Raskin L Anaerobic codigestion of
municipal solid waste and biosolids under various mixing conditions—II: Microbial
population dynamics. Water Res 35:1817–1827.
11. Hori T, Haruta S, Ueno Y, Ishii M, Igarashi Y Dynamic transition of a
methanogenic population in response to the concentration of volatile fatty acids in
a thermophilic anaerobic digester. Appl Environ Microbiol 72:1623–1630.
12. Fernández A, et al. How stable is stable? Function versus community
composition. Appl Environ Microbiol 65:3697–3704.
13. Zumstein E, Moletta R, Godon JJ Examination of two years of community
dynamics in an anaerobic bioreactor using ﬂuorescence polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis. Environ Microbiol 2:69–78.
14. Hashsham SA, et al. Parallel processing of substrate correlates with greater
functional stability in methanogenic bioreactor communities perturbed by glucose.
Appl Environ Microbiol 66:4050–4057.
15. Wittebolle L, et al. Initial community evenness favours functionality under
selective stress. Nature 458:623–626.
16. Allison SD, Martiny JBH Colloquium paper: Resistance, resilience, and redundancy in microbial communities. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105(Suppl 1):11512–11519.
17. Lozupone C, Knight R UniFrac: A new phylogenetic method for comparing
microbial communities. Appl Environ Microbiol 71:8228–8235.
Dissimilatory
microorganism Desulfuromonas acetoxidans. Appl Environ Microbiol 59:734–742.
19. Tibshirani R, Hastie T, Narasimhan B, Chu G Diagnosis of multiple cancer types
by shrunken centroids of gene expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99:6567–6572.
20. Yang CY, et al. An eco-informatics tool for microbial community studies:
Supervised classiﬁcation of Amplicon Length Heterogeneity (ALH) proﬁles of 16S
rRNA. J Microbiol Methods 65:49–62.
21. Dhillon A, Teske A, Dillon J, Stahl DA, Sogin ML Molecular characterization of
sulfate-reducing bacteria in the Guaymas Basin. Appl Environ Microbiol 69:
2765–2772.
22. McInerney MJ, Sieber JR, Gunsalus RP Syntrophy in anaerobic global carbon
cycles. Curr Opin Biotechnol 20:623–632.
23. Röling WFM, Ferrer M, Golyshin PN Systems approaches to microbial
communities and their functioning. Curr Opin Biotechnol 21:532–538.
24. Hamady M, Walker JJ, Harris JK, Gold NJ, Knight R Error-correcting barcoded
primers for pyrosequencing hundreds of samples in multiplex. Nat Methods 5:
25. Liu Z, Lozupone C, Hamady M, Bushman FD, Knight R Short pyrosequencing
reads sufﬁce for accurate microbial community analysis. Nucleic Acids Res 35:e120.
26. Caporaso JG, et al. QIIME allows analysis of high-throughput community
sequencing data. Nat Methods 7:335–336.
27. DeSantis TZ, et al. Greengenes, a chimera-checked 16S rRNA gene database
and workbench compatible with ARB. Appl Environ Microbiol 72:5069–5072.
28. Caporaso JG, et al. PyNAST: A ﬂexible tool for aligning sequences to a template
alignment. Bioinformatics 26:266–267.
29. Schloss PD, et al. Introducing mothur: Open-source, platform-independent,
community-supported software for describing and comparing microbial communities.
Appl Environ Microbiol 75:7537–7541.
30. Price MN, Dehal PS, Arkin AP FastTree 2—approximately maximum-likelihood
trees for large alignments. PLoS ONE 5:e9490.
31. Wang Q, Garrity GM, Tiedje JM, Cole JR Naive Bayesian classiﬁer for rapid
assignment of rRNA sequences into the new bacterial taxonomy. Appl Environ
Microbiol 73:5261–5267.
32. Legendre P, Anderson MJ Distance-based redundancy analysis: Testing
multispecies responses in multifactorial ecological experiments. Ecol Monogr 69:1–24.
33. Anderson MJ, Willis TJ Canonical analysis of principal coordinates: A useful
method of constrained ordination for ecology. Ecology 84:511–525.
Werner et al.
March 8, 2011
MICROBIOLOGY