Arbitrary Style Transfer in Real-time with Adaptive Instance Normalization
Serge Belongie
Department of Computer Science & Cornell Tech, Cornell University
{xh258,sjb344}@cornell.edu
Gatys et al. recently introduced a neural algorithm that
renders a content image in the style of another image,
achieving so-called style transfer. However, their framework requires a slow iterative optimization process, which
limits its practical application. Fast approximations with
feed-forward neural networks have been proposed to speed
up neural style transfer. Unfortunately, the speed improvement comes at a cost: the network is usually tied to a ﬁxed
set of styles and cannot adapt to arbitrary new styles. In this
paper, we present a simple yet effective approach that for the
ﬁrst time enables arbitrary style transfer in real-time. At the
heart of our method is a novel adaptive instance normalization (AdaIN) layer that aligns the mean and variance of the
content features with those of the style features. Our method
achieves speed comparable to the fastest existing approach,
without the restriction to a pre-deﬁned set of styles. In addition, our approach allows ﬂexible user controls such as
content-style trade-off, style interpolation, color & spatial
controls, all using a single feed-forward neural network.
1. Introduction
The seminal work of Gatys et al. showed that deep
neural networks (DNNs) encode not only the content but
also the style information of an image. Moreover, the image style and content are somewhat separable: it is possible
to change the style of an image while preserving its content. The style transfer method of is ﬂexible enough to
combine content and style of arbitrary images. However, it
relies on an optimization process that is prohibitively slow.
Signiﬁcant effort has been devoted to accelerating neural
style transfer. attempted to train feed-forward
neural networks that perform stylization with a single forward pass. A major limitation of most feed-forward methods is that each network is restricted to a single style. There
are some recent works addressing this problem, but they are
either still limited to a ﬁnite set of styles , or
much slower than the single-style transfer methods .
In this work, we present the ﬁrst neural style transfer
algorithm that resolves this fundamental ﬂexibility-speed
dilemma. Our approach can transfer arbitrary new styles
in real-time, combining the ﬂexibility of the optimizationbased framework and the speed similar to the fastest
feed-forward approaches . Our method is inspired
by the instance normalization (IN) layer, which
is surprisingly effective in feed-forward style transfer. To
explain the success of instance normalization, we propose
a new interpretation that instance normalization performs
style normalization by normalizing feature statistics, which
have been found to carry the style information of an image . Motivated by our interpretation, we introduce a simple extension to IN, namely adaptive instance
normalization (AdaIN). Given a content input and a style
input, AdaIN simply adjusts the mean and variance of the
content input to match those of the style input. Through
experiments, we ﬁnd AdaIN effectively combines the content of the former and the style latter by transferring feature
statistics. A decoder network is then learned to generate the
ﬁnal stylized image by inverting the AdaIN output back to
the image space. Our method is nearly three orders of magnitude faster than , without sacriﬁcing the ﬂexibility of
transferring inputs to arbitrary new styles. Furthermore, our
approach provides abundant user controls at runtime, without any modiﬁcation to the training process.
2. Related Work
Style transfer. The problem of style transfer has its origin
from non-photo-realistic rendering , and is closely related to texture synthesis and transfer . Some
early approaches include histogram matching on linear ﬁlter responses and non-parametric sampling .
These methods typically rely on low-level statistics and often fail to capture semantic structures. Gatys et al. for
the ﬁrst time demonstrated impressive style transfer results
by matching feature statistics in convolutional layers of a
DNN. Recently, several improvements to have been
proposed. Li and Wand introduced a framework based
on markov random ﬁeld (MRF) in the deep feature space to
enforce local patterns. Gatys et al. proposed ways to
control the color preservation, the spatial location, and the
scale of style transfer. Ruder et al. improved the quality
 
of video style transfer by imposing temporal constraints.
The framework of Gatys et al. is based on a slow
optimization process that iteratively updates the image to
minimize a content loss and a style loss computed by a loss
network. It can take minutes to converge even with modern GPUs. On-device processing in mobile applications is
therefore too slow to be practical. A common workaround
is to replace the optimization process with a feed-forward
neural network that is trained to minimize the same objective . These feed-forward style transfer approaches are about three orders of magnitude faster than
the optimization-based alternative, opening the door to realtime applications. Wang et al. enhanced the granularity
of feed-forward style transfer with a multi-resolution architecture. Ulyanov et al. proposed ways to improve the
quality and diversity of the generated samples. However,
the above feed-forward methods are limited in the sense that
each network is tied to a ﬁxed style. To address this problem, Dumoulin et al. introduced a single network that
is able to encode 32 styles and their interpolations. Concurrent to our work, Li et al. proposed a feed-forward
architecture that can synthesize up to 300 textures and transfer 16 styles. Still, the two methods above cannot adapt to
arbitrary styles that are not observed during training.
Very recently, Chen and Schmidt introduced a feedforward method that can transfer arbitrary styles thanks to
a style swap layer. Given feature activations of the content
and style images, the style swap layer replaces the content
features with the closest-matching style features in a patchby-patch manner. Nevertheless, their style swap layer creates a new computational bottleneck: more than 95% of the
computation is spent on the style swap for 512 × 512 input
images. Our approach also permits arbitrary style transfer,
while being 1-2 orders of magnitude faster than .
Another central problem in style transfer is which style
loss function to use. The original framework of Gatys et
al. matches styles by matching the second-order statistics between feature activations, captured by the Gram matrix.
Other effective loss functions have been proposed,
such as MRF loss , adversarial loss , histogram
loss , CORAL loss , MMD loss , and distance
between channel-wise mean and variance . Note that all
the above loss functions aim to match some feature statistics
between the style image and the synthesized image.
Deep generative image modeling. There are several alternative frameworks for image generation, including variational auto-encoders , auto-regressive models , and
generative adversarial networks (GANs) . Remarkably,
GANs have achieved the most impressive visual quality.
Various improvements to the GAN framework have been
proposed, such as conditional generation , multistage processing , and better training objectives . GANs have also been applied to style transfer and
cross-domain image generation .
3. Background
3.1. Batch Normalization
The seminal work of Ioffe and Szegedy introduced
a batch normalization (BN) layer that signiﬁcantly ease the
training of feed-forward networks by normalizing feature
statistics.
BN layers are originally designed to accelerate training of discriminative networks, but have also been
found effective in generative image modeling . Given
an input batch x ∈RN×C×H×W , BN normalizes the mean
and standard deviation for each individual feature channel:
where γ, β ∈RC are afﬁne parameters learned from data;
µ(x), σ(x) ∈RC are the mean and standard deviation,
computed across batch size and spatial dimensions independently for each feature channel:
(xnchw −µc(x))2 + ϵ
BN uses mini-batch statistics during training and replace
them with popular statistics during inference, introducing
discrepancy between training and inference. Batch renormalization was recently proposed to address this issue
by gradually using popular statistics during training. As
another interesting application of BN, Li et al. found
that BN can alleviate domain shifts by recomputing popular
statistics in the target domain. Recently, several alternative
normalization schemes have been proposed to extend BN’s
effectiveness to recurrent architectures .
3.2. Instance Normalization
In the original feed-forward stylization method , the
style transfer network contains a BN layer after each convolutional layer. Surprisingly, Ulyanov et al. found
that signiﬁcant improvement could be achieved simply by
replacing BN layers with IN layers:
Different from BN layers, here µ(x) and σ(x) are computed across spatial dimensions independently for each
channel and each sample:
Style Loss (×105)
Batch Norm
Instance Norm
(a) Trained with original images.
Style Loss (×105)
Batch Norm
Instance Norm
(b) Trained with contrast normalized images.
Style Loss (×105)
Batch Norm
Instance Norm
(c) Trained with style normalized images.
Figure 1. To understand the reason for IN’s effectiveness in style transfer, we train an IN model and a BN model with (a) original images
in MS-COCO , (b) contrast normalized images, and (c) style normalized images using a pre-trained style transfer network . The
improvement brought by IN remains signiﬁcant even when all training images are normalized to the same contrast, but are much smaller
when all images are (approximately) normalized to the same style. Our results suggest that IN performs a kind of style normalization.
(xnchw −µnc(x))2 + ϵ
Another difference is that IN layers are applied at test
time unchanged, whereas BN layers usually replace minibatch statistics with population statistics.
3.3. Conditional Instance Normalization
Instead of learning a single set of afﬁne parameters γ
and β, Dumoulin et al. proposed a conditional instance
normalization (CIN) layer that learns a different set of parameters γs and βs for each style s:
CIN(x; s) = γs
During training, a style image together with its index
s are randomly chosen from a ﬁxed set of styles s ∈
{1, 2, ..., S} (S = 32 in their experiments).
The content image is then processed by a style transfer network
in which the corresponding γs and βs are used in the CIN
layers. Surprisingly, the network can generate images in
completely different styles by using the same convolutional
parameters but different afﬁne parameters in IN layers.
Compared with a network without normalization layers,
a network with CIN layers requires 2FS additional parameters, where F is the total number of feature maps in the
network . Since the number of additional parameters
scales linearly with the number of styles, it is challenging to
extend their method to model a large number of styles (e.g.,
tens of thousands). Also, their approach cannot adapt to
arbitrary new styles without re-training the network.
4. Interpreting Instance Normalization
Despite the great success of (conditional) instance normalization, the reason why they work particularly well for
style transfer remains elusive. Ulyanov et al. attribute
the success of IN to its invariance to the contrast of the content image. However, IN takes place in the feature space,
therefore it should have more profound impacts than a simple contrast normalization in the pixel space. Perhaps even
more surprising is the fact that the afﬁne parameters in IN
can completely change the style of the output image.
It has been known that the convolutional feature statistics
of a DNN can capture the style of an image .
While Gatys et al. use the second-order statistics as
their optimization objective, Li et al. recently showed
that matching many other statistics, including channel-wise
mean and variance, are also effective for style transfer. Motivated by these observations, we argue that instance normalization performs a form of style normalization by normalizing feature statistics, namely the mean and variance.
Although DNN serves as a image descriptor in , we
believe that the feature statistics of a generator network can
also control the style of the generated image.
We run the code of improved texture networks to
perform single-style transfer, with IN or BN layers.
expected, the model with IN converges faster than the BN
model (Fig. 1 (a)). To test the explanation in , we then
normalize all the training images to the same contrast by
performing histogram equalization on the luminance channel.
As shown in Fig. 1 (b), IN remains effective, suggesting the explanation in to be incomplete. To verify our hypothesis, we normalize all the training images to
the same style (different from the target style) using a pretrained style transfer network provided by . According
to Fig. 1 (c), the improvement brought by IN become much
smaller when images are already style normalized. The remaining gap can explained by the fact that the style normalization with is not perfect. Also, models with BN
trained on style normalized images can converge as fast as
models with IN trained on the original images. Our results
indicate that IN does perform a kind of style normalization.
Since BN normalizes the feature statistics of a batch of
samples instead of a single sample, it can be intuitively
understood as normalizing a batch of samples to be centered around a single style. Each single sample, however,
may still have different styles. This is undesirable when we
want to transfer all images to the same style, as is the case
in the original feed-forward style transfer algorithm .
Although the convolutional layers might learn to compensate the intra-batch style difference, it poses additional challenges for training. On the other hand, IN can normalize the
style of each individual sample to the target style. Training
is facilitated because the rest of the network can focus on
content manipulation while discarding the original style information. The reason behind the success of CIN also becomes clear: different afﬁne parameters can normalize the
feature statistics to different values, thereby normalizing the
output image to different styles.
5. Adaptive Instance Normalization
If IN normalizes the input to a single style speciﬁed by
the afﬁne parameters, is it possible to adapt it to arbitrarily
given styles by using adaptive afﬁne transformations? Here,
we propose a simple extension to IN, which we call adaptive
instance normalization (AdaIN). AdaIN receives a content
input x and a style input y, and simply aligns the channelwise mean and variance of x to match those of y. Unlike
BN, IN or CIN, AdaIN has no learnable afﬁne parameters.
Instead, it adaptively computes the afﬁne parameters from
the style input:
AdaIN(x, y) = σ(y)
in which we simply scale the normalized content input
with σ(y), and shift it with µ(y). Similar to IN, these statistics are computed across spatial locations.
Intuitively, let us consider a feature channel that detects
brushstrokes of a certain style. A style image with this kind
of strokes will produce a high average activation for this
feature. The output produced by AdaIN will have the same
high average activation for this feature, while preserving the
spatial structure of the content image. The brushstroke feature can be inverted to the image space with a feed-forward
decoder, similar to . The variance of this feature channel can encoder more subtle style information, which is also
transferred to the AdaIN output and the ﬁnal output image.
In short, AdaIN performs style transfer in the feature space by transferring feature statistics, speciﬁcally the
channel-wise mean and variance. Our AdaIN layer plays
a similar role as the style swap layer proposed in .
While the style swap operation is very time-consuming and
memory-consuming, our AdaIN layer is as simple as an IN
layer, adding almost no computational cost.
Style Transfer Network
Figure 2. An overview of our style transfer algorithm. We use the
ﬁrst few layers of a ﬁxed VGG-19 network to encode the content
and style images. An AdaIN layer is used to perform style transfer
in the feature space. A decoder is learned to invert the AdaIN
output to the image spaces. We use the same VGG encoder to
compute a content loss Lc (Equ. 12) and a style loss Ls (Equ. 13).
6. Experimental Setup
Fig. 2 shows an overview of our style transfer network based on the proposed AdaIN layer. Code and pretrained models (in Torch 7 ) are available at: https:
//github.com/xunhuang1995/AdaIN-style
6.1. Architecture
Our style transfer network T takes a content image c and
an arbitrary style image s as inputs, and synthesizes an output image that recombines the content of the former and the
style latter. We adopt a simple encoder-decoder architecture, in which the encoder f is ﬁxed to the ﬁrst few layers (up to relu4 1) of a pre-trained VGG-19 . After
encoding the content and style images in feature space, we
feed both feature maps to an AdaIN layer that aligns the
mean and variance of the content feature maps to those of
the style feature maps, producing the target feature maps t:
t = AdaIN(f(c), f(s))
A randomly initialized decoder g is trained to map t back
to the image space, generating the stylized image T(c, s):
T(c, s) = g(t)
The decoder mostly mirrors the encoder, with all pooling
layers replaced by nearest up-sampling to reduce checkerboard effects. We use reﬂection padding in both f and g
to avoid border artifacts. Another important architectural
choice is whether the decoder should use instance, batch, or
no normalization layers. As discussed in Sec. 4, IN normalizes each sample to a single style while BN normalizes a
batch of samples to be centered around a single style. Both
are undesirable when we want the decoder to generate images in vastly different styles. Thus, we do not use normalization layers in the decoder. In Sec. 7.1 we will show that
IN/BN layers in the decoder indeed hurt performance.
6.2. Training
We train our network using MS-COCO as content
images and a dataset of paintings mostly collected from
WikiArt as style images, following the setting of .
Each dataset contains roughly 80, 000 training examples.
We use the adam optimizer and a batch size of 8
content-style image pairs. During training, we ﬁrst resize
the smallest dimension of both images to 512 while preserving the aspect ratio, then randomly crop regions of size
256 × 256. Since our network is fully convolutional, it can
be applied to images of any size during testing.
Similar to , we use the pre-trained VGG-
19 to compute the loss function to train the decoder:
L = Lc + λLs
which is a weighted combination of the content loss Lc
and the style loss Ls with the style loss weight λ. The
content loss is the Euclidean distance between the target
features and the features of the output image. We use the
AdaIN output t as the content target, instead of the commonly used feature responses of the content image. We ﬁnd
this leads to slightly faster convergence and also aligns with
our goal of inverting the AdaIN output t.
Lc = ∥f(g(t)) −t∥2
Since our AdaIN layer only transfers the mean and standard deviation of the style features, our style loss only
matches these statistics. Although we ﬁnd the commonly
used Gram matrix loss can produce similar results, we
match the IN statistics because it is conceptually cleaner.
This style loss has also been explored by Li et al. .
∥µ(φi(g(t))) −µ(φi(s))∥2
∥σ(φi(g(t))) −σ(φi(s))∥2
where each φi denotes a layer in VGG-19 used to compute the style loss. In our experiments we use relu1 1,
relu2 1, relu3 1, relu4 1 layers with equal weights.
7. Results
7.1. Comparison with other methods
In this subsection, we compare our approach with three
types of style transfer methods: 1) the ﬂexible but slow
optimization-based method , 2) the fast feed-forward
method restricted to a single style , and 3) the ﬂexible
patch-based method of medium speed . If not mentioned
otherwise, the results of compared methods are obtained by
running their code with the default conﬁgurations. 1 For
1We run 500 iterations of using Johnson’s public implementation:
 
(a) Style Loss
Gatys et al.
Ulyanov et al.
Content Image
(b) Content Loss
Figure 3. Quantitative comparison of different methods in terms of
style and content loss. Numbers are averaged over 10 style images
and 50 content images randomly chosen from our test set.
 , we use a pre-trained inverse network provided by the
authors. All the test images are of size 512 × 512.
Qualitative Examples. In Fig. 4 we show example style
transfer results generated by compared methods. Note that
all the test style images are never observed during the training of our model, while the results of are obtained by
ﬁtting one network to each test style. Even so, the quality of our stylized images is quite competitive with 
and for many images (e.g., row 1, 2, 3). In some other
cases (e.g., row 5) our method is slightly behind the quality of and .
This is not unexpected, as we believe there is a three-way trade-off between speed, ﬂexibility, and quality. Compared with , our method appears
to transfer the style more faithfully for most compared images. The last example clearly illustrates a major limitation of , which attempts to match each content patch with
the closest-matching style patch. However, if most content
patches are matched to a few style patches that are not representative of the target style, the style transfer would fail.
We thus argue that matching global feature statistics is a
more general solution, although in some cases (e.g., row 3)
the method of can also produce appealing results.
Quantitative evaluations.
Does our algorithm trade off
some quality for higher speed and ﬂexibility, and if so by
how much? To answer this question quantitatively, we compare our approach with the optimization-based method 
and the fast single-style transfer method in terms of
the content and style loss. Because our method uses a style
loss based on IN statistics, we also modify the loss function
in and accordingly for a fair comparison (their results in Fig. 4 are still obtained with the default Gram matrix
loss). The content loss shown here is the same as in .
The numbers reported are averaged over 10 style images
and 50 content images randomly chosen from the test set of
the WikiArt dataset and MS-COCO .
As shown in Fig. 3, the average content and style loss of
our synthesized images are slightly higher but comparable
to the single-style transfer method of Ulyanov et al. . In
particular, both our method and obtain a style loss similar to that of between 50 and 100 iterations of optimiza-
Chen and Schmidt
Ulyanov et al.
Gatys et al.
Figure 4. Example style transfer results. All the tested content and style images are never observed by our network during training.
tion. This demonstrates the strong generalization ability of
our approach, considering that our network has never seen
the test styles during training while each network of is
speciﬁcally trained on a test style. Also, note that our style
loss is much smaller than that of the original content image.
Speed analysis. Most of our computation is spent on content encoding, style encoding, and decoding, each roughly
taking one third of the time. In some application scenarios such as video processing, the style image needs to be
encoded only once and AdaIN can use the stored style
statistics to process all subsequent images. In some other
cases (e.g., transferring the same content to different styles),
the computation spent on content encoding can be shared.
In Tab. 1 we compare the speed of our method with previous ones . Excluding the time for style encoding, our algorithm runs at 56 and 15 FPS for 256 × 256
and 512 × 512 images respectively, making it possible to
process arbitrary user-uploaded styles in real-time. Among
algorithms applicable to arbitrary styles, our method is
nearly 3 orders of magnitude faster than and 1-2 orders of magnitude faster than . The speed improvement
over is particularly signiﬁcant for images of higher resolution, since the style swap layer in does not scale well
to high resolution style images. Moreover, our approach
achieves comparable speed to feed-forward methods limited
to a few styles . The slightly longer processing time
of our method is mainly due to our larger VGG-based network, instead of methodological limitations. With a more
efﬁcient architecture, our speed can be further improved.
Time (256px) Time (512px) # Styles
Gatys et al.
14.17 (14.19) 46.75 (46.79)
Chen and Schmidt 0.171 (0.407) 3.214 (4.144)
Ulyanov et al.
0.011 (N/A)
0.038 (N/A)
Dumoulin et al.
0.011 (N/A)
0.038 (N/A)
0.018 (0.027) 0.065 (0.098)
Table 1. Speed comparison (in seconds) for 256 × 256 and 512 ×
512 images. Our approach achieves comparable speed to methods
limited to a small number styles , while being much faster
than other existing algorithms applicable to arbitrary styles . We show the processing time both excluding and including (in
parenthesis) the style encoding procedure. Results are obtained
with a Pascal Titan X GPU and averaged over 100 images.
7.2. Additional experiments.
In this subsection, we conduct experiments to justify our
important architectural choices. We denote our approach
described in Sec. 6 as Enc-AdaIN-Dec. We experiment with
a model named Enc-Concat-Dec that replaces AdaIN with
concatenation, which is a natural baseline strategy to combine information from the content and style images. In addition, we run models with BN/IN layers in the decoder,
denoted as Enc-AdaIN-BNDec and Enc-AdaIN-INDec respectively. Other training settings are kept the same.
In Fig. 5 and 6, we show examples and training curves of
the compared methods. In the image generated by the Enc-
Concat-Dec baseline (Fig. 5 (d)), the object contours of the
style image can be clearly observed, suggesting that the network fails to disentangle the style information from the content of the style image. This is also consistent with Fig. 6,
where Enc-Concat-Dec can reach low style loss but fail to
decrease the content loss. Models with BN/IN layers also
obtain qualitatively worse results and consistently higher
losses. The results with IN layers are especially poor. This
once again veriﬁes our claim that IN layers tend to normalize the output to a single style and thus should be avoided
when we want to generate images in different styles.
7.3. Runtime controls
To further highlight the ﬂexibility of our method, we
show that our style transfer network allows users to control the degree of stylization, interpolate between different
styles, transfer styles while preserving colors, and use different styles in different spatial regions. Note that all these
controls are only applied at runtime using the same network,
without any modiﬁcation to the training procedure.
Content-style trade-off. The degree of style transfer can
be controlled during training by adjusting the style weight
λ in Eqa. 11. In addition, our method allows content-style
trade-off at test time by interpolating between feature maps
that are fed to the decoder. Note that this is equivalent to
(b) Content
(c) Enc-AdaIN-Dec
(d) Enc-Concat-Dec
(e) Enc-AdaIN-BNDec (f) Enc-AdaIN-INDec
Figure 5. Comparison with baselines. AdaIN is much more effective than concatenation in fusing the content and style information.
Also, it is important not to use BN or IN layers in the decoder.
10000 15000 20000 25000 30000
Enc-AdaIN-Dec (Style)
Enc-AdaIN-Dec (Content)
Enc-Concat-Dec (Style)
Enc-Concat-Dec (Content)
Enc-AdaIN-BNDec (Style)
Enc-AdaIN-BNDec (Content)
Enc-AdaIN-INDec (Style)
Enc-AdaIN-INDec (Content)
Figure 6. Training curves of style and content loss.
interpolating between the afﬁne parameters of AdaIN.
T(c, s, α) = g((1 −α)f(c) + αAdaIN(f(c), f(s))) (14)
The network tries to faithfully reconstruct the content
image when α = 0, and to synthesize the most stylized
image when α = 1. As shown in Fig. 7, a smooth transition between content-similarity and style-similarity can be
observed by changing α from 0 to 1.
Style interpolation.
To interpolate between a set of
K style images s1, s2, ..., sK with corresponding weights
w1, w2, ..., wK such that PK
k=1 wk = 1, we similarly interpolate between feature maps (results shown in Fig. 8):
T(c, s1,2,...K, w1,2,...K) = g(
wkAdaIN(f(c), f(sk)))
Spatial and color control. Gatys et al. recently introduced user controls over color information and spatial locations of style transfer, which can be easily incorporated into
our framework. To preserve the color of the content image,
we ﬁrst match the color distribution of the style image to
Figure 7. Content-style trade-off. At runtime, we can control the balance between content and style by changing the weight α in Equ. 14.
Figure 8. Style interpolation. By feeding the decoder with a convex combination of feature maps transferred to different styles via
AdaIN (Equ. 15), we can interpolate between arbitrary new styles.
that of the content image (similar to ), then perform a
normal style transfer using the color-aligned style image as
the style input. Examples results are shown in Fig. 9.
In Fig. 10 we demonstrate that our method can transfer different regions of the content image to different styles.
This is achieved by performing AdaIN separately to different regions in the content feature maps using statistics from
different style inputs, similar to but in a completely
feed-forward manner. While our decoder is only trained on
inputs with homogeneous styles, it generalizes naturally to
inputs in which different regions have different styles.
8. Discussion and Conclusion
In this paper, we present a simple adaptive instance normalization (AdaIN) layer that for the ﬁrst time enables arbitrary style transfer in real-time. Beyond the fascinating
applications, we believe this work also sheds light on our
understanding of deep image representations in general.
It is interesting to consider the conceptual differences between our approach and previous neural style transfer methods based on feature statistics. Gatys et al. employ an
optimization process to manipulate pixel values to match
feature statistics. The optimization process is replaced by
feed-forward neural networks in . Still, the net-
Figure 9. Color control. Left: content and style images. Right:
color-preserved style transfer result.
Figure 10. Spatial control. Left: content image. Middle: two style
images with corresponding masks. Right: style transfer result.
work is trained to modify pixel values to indirectly match
feature statistics. We adopt a very different approach that
directly aligns statistics in the feature space in one shot, then
inverts the features back to the pixel space.
Given the simplicity of our approach, we believe there is
still substantial room for improvement. In future works we
plan to explore more advanced network architectures such
as the residual architecture or an architecture with additional skip connections from the encoder . We also plan
to investigate more complicated training schemes like the
incremental training . Moreover, our AdaIN layer only
aligns the most basic feature statistics (mean and variance).
It is possible that replacing AdaIN with correlation alignment or histogram matching could further improve
quality by transferring higher-order statistics. Another interesting direction is to apply AdaIN to texture synthesis.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Andreas Veit for helpful discussions. This work was supported in part by a Google Focused Research Award, AWS Cloud Credits for Research
and a Facebook equipment donation.
Figure 11. More examples of style transfer. Each row shares the same style while each column represents the same content. As before, the
network has never seen the test style and content images.