Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1520–1530,
Lisbon, Portugal, 17-21 September 2015. c⃝2015 Association for Computational Linguistics.
Finding Function in Form: Compositional Character Models for
Open Vocabulary Word Representation
Tiago Lu´ıs
Lu´ıs Marujo
Ram´on Fernandez Astudillo
Silvio Amir
Chris Dyer
Alan W Black
Isabel Trancoso
L2F Spoken Systems Lab, INESC-ID, Lisbon, Portugal
Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Instituto Superior T´ecnico, Lisbon, Portugal
{lingwang,lmarujo,cdyer,awb}@cs.cmu.edu
{ramon.astudillo,samir,tmcl,isabel.trancoso}@inesc-id.pt
We introduce a model for constructing vector representations of words by
composing characters using bidirectional
LSTMs. Relative to traditional word representation models that have independent
vectors for each word type, our model
requires only a single vector per character type and a ﬁxed set of parameters for the compositional model.
Despite the compactness of this model and,
more importantly, the arbitrary nature
of the form–function relationship in language, our “composed” word representations yield state-of-the-art results in language modeling and part-of-speech tagging.
Beneﬁts over traditional baselines
are particularly pronounced in morphologically rich languages (e.g., Turkish).
Introduction
Good representations of words are important for
good generalization in natural language processing applications. Of central importance are vector space models that capture functional (i.e., semantic and syntactic) similarity in terms of geometric locality.
However, when word vectors
are learned—a practice that is becoming increasingly common—most models assume that each
word type has its own vector representation that
can vary independently of other model components. This paper argues that this independence
assumption is inherently problematic, in particular
in morphologically rich languages (e.g., Turkish).
In such languages, a more reasonable assumption
would be that orthographic (formal) similarity is
evidence for functional similarity.
However, it is manifestly clear that similarity in
form is neither a necessary nor sufﬁcient condition for similarity in function: small orthographic
differences may correspond to large semantic or
syntactic differences (butter vs. batter), and large
orthographic differences may obscure nearly perfect functional correspondence (rich vs. afﬂuent).
Thus, any orthographically aware model must be
able to capture non-compositional effects in addition to more regular effects due to, e.g., morphological processes. To model the complex form–
function relationship, we turn to long short-term
memories (LSTMs), which are designed to be able
to capture complex non-linear and non-local dynamics in sequences . We use bidirectional LSTMs to “read”
the character sequences that constitute each word
and combine them into a vector representation of
the word. This model assumes that each character type is associated with a vector, and the LSTM
parameters encode both idiosyncratic lexical and
regular morphological knowledge.
To evaluate our model, we use a vectorbased model for part-of-speech (POS) tagging
and for language modeling, and we report experiments on these tasks in several languages
comparing to baselines that use more traditional,
orthographically-unaware parameterizations. These experiments show: (i) our characterbased model is able to generate similar representations for words that are semantically and syntactically similar, even for words are orthographically
distant (e.g., October and January); our model
achieves improvements over word lookup tables
using only a fraction of the number of parameters
in two tasks; (iii) our model obtains state-of-theart performance on POS tagging (including establishing a new best performance in English); and
(iv) performance improvements are especially dramatic in morphologically rich languages.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2
presents our character-based model to generate
word embeddings.
Experiments on Language
Modeling and POS tagging are described in Sections 4 and 5. We present related work in Section 6; and we conclude in Section 7.
Word Vectors and Wordless Word
It is commonplace to represent words as vectors.
In contrast to na¨ıve models in which all word types
in a vocabulary V are equally different from each
other, vector space models capture the intuition
that words may be different or similar along a variety of dimensions. Learning vector representations of words by treating them as optimizable parameters in various kinds of language models has
been found to be a remarkably effective means
for generating vector representations that perform
well in other tasks . Formally, such models de-
ﬁne a matrix P ∈Rd×|V |, which contains d parameters for each word in the vocabulary V . For a
given word type w ∈V , a column is selected by
right-multiplying P by a one-hot vector of length
|V |, which we write 1w, that is zero in every dimension except for the element corresponding to
w. Thus, P is often referred to as word lookup
table and we shall denote by eW
w ∈Rd the embedding obtained from a word lookup table for w as
w = P·1w. This allows tasks with low amounts
of annotated data to be trained jointly with other
tasks with large amounts of data and leverage the
similarities in these tasks. A common practice to
this end is to initialize the word lookup table with
the parameters trained on an unsupervised task.
Some examples of these include the skip-n-gram
and CBOW models of Mikolov et al. .
Problem: Independent Parameters
There are two practical problems with word
lookup tables.
Firstly, while they can be pretrained with large amounts of data to learn semantic and syntactic similarities between words,
each vector is independent. That is, even though
models based on word lookup tables are often observed to learn that cats, kings and queens exist in
roughly the same linear correspondences to each
other as cat, king and queen do, the model does
not represent the fact that adding an s at the end
of the word is evidence for this transformation.
This means that word lookup tables cannot generate representations for previously unseen words,
such as Frenchiﬁcation, even if the components,
French and -iﬁcation, are observed in other contexts.
Second, even if copious data is available, it is
impractical to actually store vectors for all word
types. As each word type gets a set of parameters
d, the total number of parameters is d×|V |, where
|V | is the size of the vocabulary. Even in relatively morphological poor English, the number of
word types tends to scale to the order of hundreds
of thousands, and in noisier domains, such as online data, the number of word types raises considerably. For instance, in the English wikipedia
dump with 60 million sentences, there are approximately 20 million different lowercased and tokenized word types, each of which would need its
own vector. Intuitively, it is not sensible to use the
same number of parameters for each word type.
Finally, it is important to remark that it is
uncontroversial among cognitive scientists that
our lexicon is structured into related forms—i.e.,
their parameters are not independent. The wellknown “past tense debate” between connectionists and proponents of symbolic accounts concerns disagreements about how humans represent
knowledge of inﬂectional processes (e.g., the formation of the English past tense), not whether
such knowledge exists . Morphemes are an
ideal primitive for such a model since they are—
by deﬁnition—the minimal meaning-bearing (or
syntax-bearing) units of language. The drawback
to such approaches is they depend on a morphological analyzer.
In contrast, we would like to compose representations of characters into representations of
words. However, the relationship between words
forms and their meanings is non-trivial . While some compositional relationships exist, e.g., morphological processes such as
adding -ing or -ly to a stem have relatively regular effects, many words with lexical similarities
convey different meanings, such as, the word pairs
lesson ⇐⇒lessen and coarse ⇐⇒course.
Our compositional character to word (C2W)
model is based on bidirectional LSTMs , which are able to
learn complex non-local dependencies in sequence
models. An illustration is shown in Figure 1. The
input of the C2W model (illustrated on bottom) is
a single word type w, and we wish to obtain is
a d-dimensional vector used to represent w. This
model shares the same input and output of a word
lookup table (illustrated on top), allowing it to easily replace then in any network.
As input, we deﬁne an alphabet of characters
C. For English, this vocabulary would contain an
entry for each uppercase and lowercase letter as
well as numbers and punctuation. The input word
w is decomposed into a sequence of characters
c1, . . . , cm, where m is the length of w. Each ci
is deﬁned as a one hot vector 1ci, with one on the
index of ci in vocabulary M. We deﬁne a projection layer PC ∈RdC×|C|, where dC is the number
of parameters for each character in the character
set C. This of course just a character lookup table,
and is used to capture similarities between characters in a language (e.g., vowels vs. consonants).
Thus, we write the projection of each input character ci as eci = PC · 1ci.
Given the input vectors x1, . . . , xm, a LSTM
computes the state sequence h1, . . . , hm+1 by iteratively applying the following updates:
it = σ(Wixxt + Wihht−1 + Wicct−1 + bi)
ft = σ(Wfxxt + Wfhht−1 + Wfcct−1 + bf)
ct = ft ⊙ct−1+
it ⊙tanh(Wcxxt + Wchht−1 + bc)
ot = σ(Woxxt + Wohht−1 + Wocct + bo)
ht = ot ⊙tanh(ct),
where σ is the component-wise logistic sigmoid function, and ⊙is the component-wise
(Hadamard) product. LSTMs deﬁne an extra cell
memory ct, which is combined linearly at each
embeddings
for word "cats"
embeddings
for word "cats"
Figure 1: Illustration of the word lookup tables
(top) and the lexical Composition Model (bottom).
Square boxes represent vectors of neuron activations. Shaded boxes indicate that a non-linearity.
timestamp t. The information that is propagated
from ct−1 to ct is controlled by the three gates it,
ft, and ot, which determine the what to include
from the input xt, the what to forget from ct−1 and
what is relevant to the current state ht. We write
W to refer to all parameters the LSTM (Wix,
Wfx, bf, ...). Thus, given a sequence of character representations eC
c1, . . . , eC
cm as input, the forward LSTM, yields the state sequence sf
0, . . . , sf
while the backward LSTM receives as input the reverse sequence, and yields states sb
m, . . . , sb
LSTMs use a different set of parameters Wf and
Wb. The representation of the word w is obtained
by combining the forward and backward states:
where Df, Db and bd are parameters that deter-
mine how the states are combined.
Caching for Efﬁciency.
Relative to eW
w , computing eC
w is computational expensive, as it requires two LSTMs traversals of length m. However, eC
w only depends on the character sequence
of that word, which means that unless the parameters are updated, it is possible to cache the value of
w for each different w’s that will be used repeatedly. Thus, the model can keep a list of the most
frequently occurring word types in memory and
run the compositional model only for rare words.
Obviously, caching all words would yield the same
performance as using a word lookup table eW
also using the same amount of memory. Consequently, the number of word types used in cache
can be adjusted to satisfy memory vs.
performance requirements of a particular application.
At training time, when parameters are changing,
repeated words within the same batch only need to
be computed once, and the gradient at the output
can be accumulated within the batch so that only
one update needs to be done per word type. For
this reason, it is preferable to deﬁne larger batches.
Experiments: Language Modeling
Our proposed model is similar to models used to
compute composed representations of sentences
from words .
However, the relationship between the meanings
of individual words and the composite meaning
of a phrase or sentence is arguably more regular
than the relationship of representations of characters and the meaning of a word. Is our model capable of learning such an irregular relationship? We
now explore this question empirically.
Language modeling is a task with many applications in NLP. An effective LM requires syntactic
aspects of language to be modeled, such as word
orderings (e.g., “John is smart” vs. “John smart
is”), but also semantic aspects (e.g., “John ate ﬁsh”
“ﬁsh ate John”).
Thus, if our C2W model
only captures regular aspects of words, such as,
preﬁxes and sufﬁxes, the model will yield worse
results compared to word lookup tables.
Language Model
Language modeling amounts to learning a function that computes the log probability, log p(w),
of a sentence w = (w1, . . . , wn). This quantity
can be decomposed according to the chain rule
into the sum of the conditional log probabilities
i=1 log p(wi | w1, . . . , wi−1).
Our language
model computes log p(wi
w1, . . . , wi−1) by
composing representations of words w1, . . . , wi−1
using an recurrent LSTM model .
The model is illustrated in Figure 2, where we
observe on the ﬁrst level that each word wi is projected into their word representations. This can be
done by using word lookup tables eW
wi, in which
case, we will have a regular recurrent language
To use our C2W model, we can simply replace the word lookup table with the model
f(wi) = eC
wi. Each LSTM block si, is used to
predict word wi+1. This is performed by projecting the si into a vector of size of the vocabulary V
and performing a softmax.
Word Lookup
Composition
Vocabulary
Figure 2: Illustration of our neural network for
Language Modeling.
The softmax is still simply a d × V table,
which encodes the likelihood of every word type
in a given context, which is a closed-vocabulary
Thus, at test time out-of-vocabulary
(OOV) words cannot be addressed.
A strategy
that is generally applied is to prune the vocabulary V by replacing word types with lower frequencies as an OOV token. At test time, the probability of words not in vocabulary is estimated as
the OOV token. Thus, depending on the number
of word types that are pruned, the global perplexities may decrease, since there are fewer outcomes
in the softmax, which makes the absolute value of
perplexity not informative when comparing models of different vocabulary sizes.
Yet, the relative perplexity between different models indicates
which models can better predict words based on
their contexts.
To address OOV words in the baseline setup,
these are replaced by an unknown token, and also
associated with a set of embeddings. During training, word types that occur once are replaced with
the unknown token stochastically with 0.5 probability. The same process is applied at the character
level for the C2W model.
Experiments
We look at the language model performance on English, Portuguese, Catalan, German
and Turkish, which have a broad range of morphological typologies. While all these languages contain inﬂections, in agglutinative languages afﬁxes
tend to be unchanged, while in fusional languages
they are not. For each language, Wikipedia articles
were randomly extracted until 1 million words are
obtained and these were used for training. For development and testing, we extracted an additional
set of 20,000 words.
We deﬁne the size of the word representation d to 50. In the C2W model requires setting the dimensionality of characters dC and current states dCS. We set dC = 50 and dCS = 150.
Each LSTM state used in the language model sequence si is set to 150 for both states and cell
memories. Training is performed with mini-batch
gradient descent with 100 sentences. The learning rate and momentum were set to 0.2 and 0.95.
The softmax over words is always performed on
lowercased words. We restrict the output vocabulary to the most frequent 5000 words. Remaining
word types will be replaced by an unknown token,
which must also be predicted. The word representation layer is still performed over all word types
(i.e., completely open vocabulary). When using
word lookup tables, the input words are also lowercased, as this setup produces the best results. In
the C2W, case information is preserved.
Evaluation is performed by computing the perplexities over the test data, and the parameters that
yield the highest perplexity over the development
data are used.
Perplexities
Perplexities over the testset are reported on Table 4. From these results, we can see
that in general, it is clear that C2W always outperforms word lookup tables (row “Word”), and that
improvements are especially pronounced in Turkish, which is a highly morphological language,
where word meanings differ radically depending
Agglutinative
Perplexity
#Parameters
Table 1: Language Modeling Results
on the sufﬁxes used (evde →in the house vs. evden →from the house).
Number of Parameters
As for the number of
parameters (illustrated for block “#Parameters”),
the number of parameters in word lookup tables is
V ×d. If a language contains 80,000 word types (a
conservative estimate in morphologically rich languages), 4 million parameters would be necessary.
On the other hand, the compositional model consists of 8 matrices of dimensions dCS×dC+2dCS.
Additionally, there is also the matrix that combines the forward and backward states of size
Thus, the number of parameters is
roughly 150,000 parameters—substantially fewer.
This model also needs a character lookup table
with dC parameters for each entry. For English,
there are 618 characters, for an additional 30,900
parameters. So the total number of parameters for
English is roughly 180,000 parameters (2 to 3 parameters per word type), which is an order of magnitude lower than word lookup tables.
Performance
As for efﬁciency, both representations can label sentences at a rate of approximately
300 words per second during training. While this
is surprising, due to the fact that the C2W model
requires a composition over characters, the main
bottleneck of the system is the softmax over the
vocabulary. Furthermore, caching is used to avoid
composing the same word type twice in the same
batch. This shows that the C2W model, is relatively fast compared operations such as a softmax.
Representations of (nonce) words
While is is
promising that the model is not simply learning
lexical features, what is most interesting is that the
model can propose embeddings for nonce words,
in stark contrast to the situation observed with
lookup table models. We show the 5-most-similar
in-vocabulary words (measured with cosine similarity) as computed by our character model on two
Nottinghamshire
Johannesburg
Gloucestershire
christening
Table 2: Most-similar in-vocabular words under
the C2W model; the two query words on the left
are in the training vocabulary, those on the right
are nonce (invented) words.
in-vocabulary words and two nonce words1.This
makes our model generalize signiﬁcantly better
than lookup tables that generally use unknown tokens for OOV words. Furthermore, this ability to
generalize is much more similar to that of human
beings, who are able to infer meanings for new
words based on its form.
Experiments: Part-of-speech Tagging
As a second illustration of the utility of our model,
we turn to POS tagging.
As morphology is a
strong indicator for syntax in many languages,
a much effort has been spent engineering features .
We now show that some of these features can be
learnt automatically using our model.
Bi-LSTM Tagging Model
Our tagging model is likewise novel, but very
straightforward. It builds a Bi-LSTM over words
as illustrated in Figure 3. The input of the model
is a sequence of features f(w1), . . . , f(wn). Once
again, word vectors can either be generated using the C2W model f(wi)
wi, or word
lookup tables f(wi) = eW
wi. We also test the usage of hand-engineered features, in which case
f1(wi), . . . , fn(wi).
Then, the sequential features f(w1), . . . , f(wn) are fed into a bidirectional LSTM model, obtaining the forward states
0, . . . , sf
n and the backward states sb
N+1, . . . , sb
Thus, state sf
i contains the information of all
words from 0 to i and sb
i from n to i. The forward and backward states are combined, for each
index from 1 to n, as follows:
li = tanh , using the standard
splits (sections 1–18 for train, 19–21 for tuning
and 22–24 for testing). We also perform tests on
4 other languages, which we obtained from the
CoNLL shared tasks . While the PTB dataset provides standard
train, tuning and test splits, there are no tuning sets
in the datasets in other languages, so we withdraw
the last 100 sentences from the training dataset and
use them for tuning.
The POS model requires two sets of hyperparameters. Firstly, words must be converted
into continuous representations and the same hyperparametrization as in language modeling (Section 4) is used. Additionally, we also compare to
the convolutional model of Santos and Zadrozny
 , which also requires the dimensionality
for characters and the word representation size,
which are set to 50 and 150, respectively. Secondly, words representations are combined to en-
code context. Our POS tagger has three hyperparameters df
WS and dWS, which correspond
to the sizes of LSTM states, and are all set to 50.
As for the learning algorithm, use the same setup
(learning rate, momentum and mini-batch sizes) as
used in language modeling.
Once again, we replace OOV words with an unknown token, in the setup that uses word lookup
tables, and the same with OOV characters in the
C2W model. In setups using pre-trained word embeddings, we consider a word an OOV if it was not
seen in the labelled training data as well as in the
unlabeled data used for pre-training.
Compositional Model Comparison
A comparison of different recurrent neural networks for the
C2W model is presented in Table 3. We used our
proposed tagger tagger in all experiments and results are reported for the English Penn Treebank.
Results on label accuracy test set is shown in the
column “acc”. The number of parameters in the
word composition model is shown in the column
“parameters”. Finally, the number of words processed at test time per second are shown in column
“words/sec”.
We observe that approaches using RNN yield
worse results than their LSTM counterparts with
a difference of approximately 2%. This suggests
that while regular RNNs can learn shorter character sequence dependencies, they are not ideal
to learn longer dependencies.
LSTMs, on the
other hand, seem to effectively obtain relatively
higher results, on par with using word look up tables (row “Word Lookup”), even when using forward (row “Forward LSTM”) and backward (row
“Backward LSTM”) LSTMs individually.
best results are obtained using the bidirectional
LSTM (row “Bi-LSTM”), which achieves an accuracy of 97.29% on the test set, surpassing the
word lookup table. The convolution model obtained slightly lower
results (row “Convolutional (S&Z)”), we think
this is because the convolutional model uses a
max-pooling layer over series of window convolutions. As order is only perserved within windows,
longer distance dependences are unobserved.
There are approximately 40k lowercased word
types in the training data in the PTB dataset. Thus,
a word lookup table with 50 dimensions per type
contains approximately 2 million parameters. In
the C2W models, the number of characters types
(including uppercase and lowercase) is approxiacc
parameters
Word Lookup
Convolutional (S&Z)
Forward RNN
Backward RNN
Forward LSTM
Backward LSTM
Bi-LSTM dCS = 50
Table 3: POS accuracy results for the English PTB
using word representation models.
mately 80. Thus, the character look up table consists of only 4k parameters, which is negligible
compared to the number of parameters in the compositional model, which is once again 150k parameters. One could argue that results in the Bi-
LSTM model are higher than those achieved by
other models as it contains more parameters, so
we set the state size dCS = 50 (row “Bi-LSTM
dCS = 50”) and obtained similar results.
In terms of computational speed, we can observe that there is a more signiﬁcant slowdown
when applying the C2W models compared to language modeling. This is because there is no longer
a softmax over the whole word vocabulary as the
main bottleneck of the network. However, we can
observe that while the Bi-LSTM system is 3 times
slower, it is does not signiﬁcantly hurt the performance of the system.
Results on Multiple Languages
Results on 5
languages are shown in Table 4. In general, we
can observe that the model using word lookup
tables (row “Word”) performs consistently worse
than the C2W model (row “C2W”). We also compare our results with Stanford’s POS tagger, with
the default set of features, found in Table 4. Results using these tagger are comparable or better than state-of-the-art systems. We can observe
that in most cases we can slightly outperform
the scores obtained using their tagger. This is a
promising result, considering that we use the same
training data and do not handcraft any features.
Furthermore, we can observe that for Turkish, our
results are signiﬁcantly higher (>4%).
Comparison with Benchmarks
Most state-ofthe-art POS tagging systems are obtained by either learning or handcrafting good lexical features or using ad-
Agglutinative
Table 4: POS accuracies on different languages
ditional raw data to learn features in an unsupervised fashion. Generally, optimal results are obtained by performing both.
Table 5 shows the
current Benchmarks in this task for the English
PTB. Accuracies on the test set is reported on column “acc”.
Columns “+feat” and “+data” de-
ﬁne whether hand-crafted features are used and
whether additional data was used. We can see that
even without feature engineering or unsupervised
pretraining, our C2W model (row “C2W”) is on
par with the current state-of-the-art system (row
“structReg”).
However, if we add hand-crafted
features, we can obtain further improvements on
this dataset (row “C2W + features”).
However, there are many words that do not contain morphological cues to their part-of-speech.
For instance, the word snake does not contain any
morphological cues that determine its tag. In these
cases, if they are not found labelled in the training
data, the model would be dependent on context to
determine their tags, which could lead to errors in
ambiguous contexts. Unsupervised training methods such as the Skip-n-gram model can be used to pretrain the word representations on unannotated corpora. If such pretraining places cat, dog and snake near each other
in vector space, and the supervised POS data contains evidence that cat and dog are nouns, our
model will be likely to label snake with the same
We train embeddings using English wikipedia
with the dataset used in , and
the Structured Skip-n-gram model. Results using
pre-trained word lookup tables and the C2W with
the pre-trained word lookup tables as additional
parameters are shown in rows “word(sskip)” and
“C2W + word(sskip)”. We can observe that both
systems can obtain improvements over their random initializations (rows “word” and (C2W)).
Finally, we also found that when using the C2W
model in conjunction pre-trained word embeddings, that adding a non-linearity to the representations extracted from the C2W model eC
w improves the results over using a simple linear trans-
word+features
C2W+features
Stanford 2.0 
structReg 
word (sskip)
C2W+word (sskip)
C2W(tanh)+word (sskip)
Morˇce 
SCCN 
Table 5: POS accuracy result comparison with
state-of-the-art systems for the English PTB.
formation (row “C2W(tanh)+word (sskip)”). This
setup, obtains 0.28 points over the current state-ofthe-art system(row “SCCN”).
Discussion
It is important to refer here that these results do
not imply that our model always outperforms existing benchmarks, in fact in most experiments,
results are typically fairly similar to existing systems. Even in Turkish, using morphological analysers in order to extract additional features could
also accomplish similar results. The goal of our
work is not to overcome existing benchmarks, but
show that much of the feature engineering done in
the benchmarks can be learnt automatically from
the task speciﬁc data. More importantly, we wish
to show large dimensionality word look tables can
be compacted into a lookup table using characters
and a compositional model allowing the model
scale better with the size of the training data. This
is a desirable property of the model as data becomes more abundant in many NLP tasks.
Related Work
Our work, which learns representations without
relying on word lookup tables has not been explored to our knowledge. In essence, our model
attempts to learn lexical features automatically
while compacting the model by reducing the redundancy found in word lookup tables. Individually, these problems have been the focus of research in many areas.
Lexical information has been used to augment
word lookup tables. Word representation learning can be thought of as a process that takes a
string as input representing a word and outputs
a set of values that represent a word in vector
Using word lookup tables is one possible approach to accomplish this.
Many methods have been used to augment this model to
learn lexical features with an additional model
that is jointly maximized with the word lookup
This is generally accomplished by either
performing a component-wise addition of the embeddings produced by word lookup tables , and that generated by the additional
lexical model, or simply concatenating both representations . Many
models have been proposed, the work in refers that additional features
sets Fi can be added to the one-hot representation and multiple lookup tables IFi can be learnt
to project each of the feature sets to the same
low-dimensional vector eW
For instance, the
work in shows that using morphological analyzers to generate morphological features, such as stems, preﬁxes and suf-
ﬁxes can be used to learn better representations
for words. A problem with this approach is the
fact that the model can only learn from what has
been deﬁned as feature sets. The models proposed
in 
allow the model to arbitrary extract meaningful
lexical features from words by deﬁning compositional models over characters. The work in deﬁnes a simple compositional model
by summing over all characters in a given word,
while the work in 
deﬁnes a convolutional network, which combines
windows of characters and a max-pooling layer to
ﬁnd important morphological features. The main
drawback of these methods is that character order is often neglected, that is, when summing over
all character embeddings, words such as dog and
god would have the same representation according to the lexical model. Convolutional model are
less susceptible to these problems as they combine windows of characters at each convolution,
where the order within the window is preserved.
However, the order between extracted windows is
not, so the problem still persists for longer words,
such as those found in agglutinative languages.
Yet, these approaches work in conjunction with a
word lookup table, as they compensate for this inability. Aside from neural approaches, characterbased models have been applied to address multiple lexically oriented tasks, such as transliteration and twitter normalization .
Compacting models has been a focus of research in tasks, such as language modeling and
machine translation, as extremely large models
can be built with the large amounts of training
data that are available in these tasks. In language
modeling, it is frequent to prune higher order ngrams that do not encode any additional information . The same be applied in machine translation by removing longer translation
pairs that can be replicated using smaller ones. In
essence our model learns regularities at the subword level that can be leveraged for building more
compact word representations.
Finally, our work has been applied to dependency parsing and found similar improvements
over word models in morphologically rich languages .
Conclusion
We propose a C2W model that builds word embeddings for words without an explicit word
lookup table. Thus, it beneﬁts from being sensitive to lexical aspects within words, as it takes
characters as atomic units to derive the embeddings for the word. On POS tagging, our models using characters alone can still achieve comparable or better results than state-of-the-art systems, without the need to manually engineer such
lexical features. Although both language modeling and POS tagging both beneﬁt strongly from
morphological cues, the success of our models in
languages with impoverished morphological cues
shows that it is able to learn non-compositional aspects of how letters ﬁt together.
The code for the C2W model and our language
model and POS tagger implementations is available from 
Acknowledgements
The PhD thesis of Wang Ling is supported by
FCT grant SFRH/BD/51157/2010. This research
was supported in part by the U.S. Army Research Laboratory, the U.S. Army Research Ofﬁce
under contract/grant number W911NF-10-1-0533
and NSF IIS-1054319 and FCT through the plurianual contract UID/CEC/50021/2013 and grant
number SFRH/BPD/68428/2010.