Quantitative Validation of Anti-PTBP1 Antibody for Diagnostic
Neuropathology Use: Image Analysis Approach
Evgin Goceri1, Behiye Goksel2, James B. Elder3, Vinay K. Puduvalli3, Jose J. Otero2, and
Metin N. Gurcan1
1Department of Biomedical Informatics, Wexner Medical Center, The Ohio State University, USA
2Department of Pathology, Division of Neuropathology, College of Medicine, The Ohio State
University, USA
3Department of Neurological Surgery, Wexner Medical Center, The Ohio State University, USA
Problem—Diagnostic neuropathology traditionally relies on subjective interpretation of visual
data obtained from a brightfield microscope. This results in high variability, inability to multiplex,
and unsatisfactory reproducibility even among experts. These diagnostic problems may affect
patient outcomes and confound clinical decision-making. Furthermore, standard histological
processing of pathological specimens results in auto-fluorescence and other artifacts, which have
nearly blocked the implementation of fluorescent microscopy in diagnostic pathology. Thus,
generation of objective and quantitative methodologies would augment the toolbox available to
neuropathologists, which would ultimately enhance clinical decision making.
Objective—To develop image analysis methods to quantitatively validate anti-PTBP1 antibody
for use in diagnostic neuropathology.
Method—We propose a computerized image analysis method to validate anti-PTBP1 antibody.
Images were obtained from standard neuropathological specimens stained with anti-PTBP1
antibody. First, the noise characteristics of the images were modeled and images are de-noised
according to the noise model. Next, images are filtered with sigma-adaptive Gaussian filtering for
local normalization, and cell nuclei are detected and segmented with a k-means based
deterministic approach.
Result—Experiments on 29 data sets from three cases of brain tumor (recurrent glioma, primary
resections of glioblastoma harboring the EGFRVIII mutation, pilocytic astrocytoma) and reactive
gliosis show statistically significant differences between the number of positively stained nuclei in
images stained with and without anti-PTBP1 antibody (p values, t-test, are 40×10−4, 33×10−4,
6×10−4 and 46×10−3, respectively).
Conclusion—The experimental of analysis of specimens from three different brain tumor groups
and one reactive gliosis group indicate the feasibility of using anti-PTBP1 antibody in diagnostic
neuropathology and computerized image analysis provides a systematic and quantitative approach
to explore feasibility.
Correspondence to: Evgin Goceri.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Int J Numer Method Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 22.
 
Int J Numer Method Biomed Eng. 2017 November ; 33(11): . doi:10.1002/cnm.2862.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
PTBP1; antibody validation; automated image analysis; neuropathology
1. INTRODUCTION
Diagnostic problems encountered by neuropathologists when evaluating the histopathology
of a complex case could be solved by improving their diagnostic toolbox. Two branch points
in neuropathological workflows require the generation of new image analysis tools and
techniques. First, the ability to identify multiple biomarkers on the same cell would help
pathologists identify distinct subtypes of cancers without exhausting tissue. A second
problem exists in the objective interpretation of biomarker expression levels. Standard
biomarker evaluation involves utilization of enzyme-based histochemical reactions, the most
common of which is DAB precipitation by HRP-linked secondary antibody systems, which
is optimally designed for binary designations of “positive” or “negative” or at best semi
quantitative, subjective designations of “1+”, “2+”, “3+”. Both problems could be resolved
by implementing modern fluorescence microscopy techniques, which permit multiplexing
and are superior quantitative modalities relative to immunohistochemistry. Unfortunately,
the implementation of fluorescence in routine diagnostic pathology is fraught with caveats.
For example, erythrocytes fluoresce in the 500–600 nm spectrums, which are commonly
used excitation spectra for epifluorescence. Furthermore, prolonged formalin fixation (a
common practice in formalin fixed, paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissue sections) results in
autofluorescence. Thus, fluorescent microscopy of routine neurosurgical biopsies would
result in visually complex images. Our objective was to develop an automated image
analysis technique that would overcome these challenges. We developed this technique by
validating Poly-pyrimidine Tract-Binding Protein 1 (PTBP1) antibody in neuropathology
specimens. We took advantage of the low autofluorescent background present in 300–500
nm spectrum of FFPE tissues, a naturally occurring idiosyncrasy of FFPE autofluorescence.
Thus, staining with DAPI, which is characterized by a peak excitation/emission spectrum of
358 nm/461 nm, can be used as a tool to identify signals. While several histopathological
image analysis methods exist in the literature , to the best of our knowledge, there is
no work that uses multiplexed guided images with PTBP1 antibody with DAPI.
The main steps for the automated validation of anti-PTBP1 antibody are: 1) de-noising
according to the type of noise in images, 2) local normalization with Sigma-Adaptive
Gaussian (SAG) filtering, and 3) cell nuclei detection and segmentation with a k-means
based deterministic approach. The contribution of this work is validating anti-PTBP1
antibody to use on routine neurosurgical biopsies by developing the computerized system
that allows automated analysis of images, which removes fluorescent background from
specimens stained with DAPI and anti-PTBP1 antibody. Quantitative evaluations are
performed by using 29 data sets from reactive gliosis and three cases of brain tumors: 1)
recurrent glioma, 2) primary resections of glioblastoma harboring the Epidermal Growth
Factor Receptor (EGFRVIII) mutation, and 3) Pilocytic Astrocytoma (PA).
Goceri et al.
Int J Numer Method Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
The remaining part of this paper is organized as follows: Description of data sets is given in
Section II. Validation of anti-PTBP1 antibody is explained in Section III. Experimental
results are shown in Section IV while conclusion and discussion is given in Section V.
2. DATA SETS
In this work, immunofluorescence images are used obtained from confocal
photomicroscopy. The data sets are provided from 29 specimens (16 samples from patients
with PA WHO Grade I, 4 samples of reactive gliosis from a patient with prior diagnosis of
glioblastoma, 4 samples from recurrent high grade glioma in a patient with prior diagnosis
of glioblastoma and 5 samples from a patient with EGFRVIII mutation positive
glioblastoma) by using a laser scanning confocal fluorescence microscope (Zeiss LSM 700).
All images were captured with a 20x objective since nuclei stained with/without anti-PTBP1
antibody or DAPI in these images can be seen clearly by pathologists. The pixel size is
0.312×0.312 micron2 in the 8-bit uncompressed images of size
of 2048×2048 pixels.
3. ANTIBODY VALIDATION BY IMAGE ANALYSIS
Due to the inherent variability amongst antibodies, quality control experiments are always
required in diagnostic pathology . Different studies suggest different proteins, which
are likely suitable to use as glioma antibodies (such as ELTD1, F11R, LINGO1, SLIT3 etc.),
with different validation approaches in the literature . However, a method to
quantitatively and objectively validate PTBP1 for gliomas (in human/animal) in formalinfixed, paraffin embedded tissue evaluated by immunofluorescence confocal microscopy does
not exist. Such automated testing is required to ultimately implement multiplexed image
acquisition in solid-tissue biopsies. Therefore, we developed a methodology to validate
PTBP1, a multifunctional RNA-binding protein, antibody using automated image analysis.
Automated validation of antibodies by image analysis is a very challenging task because of:
Tissue based problems: Cells may have irregular shapes/structures or may be
clustered. Individual cells may not be distinguished easily.
Staining based problems: Cells may not stain well, which may cause incorrect
number/shape/size of detected objects.
Antibody based problems: Quantity, quality and concentration of the antibody
may be different in different data sets or even in different images of the same
data set. These variations may cause unexpected/undesired results due to
differences in images.
Microscope based problems: Quality of the camera and microscope being may
be low. Therefore, images may be with low quality with unclear edges or noisy.
Target based problems: The variability of the target protein due to secondary
modifications, localization, epitome availability etc.
Goceri et al.
Int J Numer Method Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Our approach is designed to overcome these problems by 1) noise modeling and reduction
(Section 3.1), 2) intensity normalization (Section 3.2), 3) detection of nuclei using the
images that are stained with DAPI (to get boundary and location information) and the
images that are stained with anti-PTBP1 antibody (to get intensity values) (Section 3.3), and
4) segmentation of nuclei based on a deterministic approach (Section 3.4).
3.1. Noise Modeling and Reduction
There are different noise reduction methods, ranging from wavelet , iterative 
and diffusion methods to non-local mean and graphical model frameworks
 used for different types of noise e.g. uniform (Figure 1.a), Gaussian (Figure 1.b),
impulsive (i.e., salt & pepper) (Figure 1.c) or speckle (Figure 1.d). To determine the most
appropriate algorithm for noise reduction (i.e., to avoid poor de-noising), the type of noise in
the image should be identified. Therefore, we chose three regions (at least 100×100 pixels),
which have homogenous (or close to homogenous) intensity values, from images and
analyzed their histograms to identify noise type.
Figure 2 shows an example image stained with anti-PTBP1 antibody (Figure 2.a), three
regions (with variance σ1 = 0.5, σ2 = 2.5 and σ3 = 1), which are surrounded with yellow, red
and cyan rectangular, on the grayscale form of the image (Figure 2.b) and the histogram of
the grayscale image (Figure 2.c). We have modeled the noise in the images as speckle noise
 based on the shape of the histograms (Figure 2.d,e,f) of those three regions. Therefore,
we implemented a speckle filtering algorithm to reduce the noise in our images.
In our work, we reduce the noise by a Non-local Median based Speckle Filtering (NMSF),
which is inspired by the Non-local Means Filtering (NMF) of Coupe et al. . However,
unlike the non-local means filtering, we used median function (non-linear filter) since the
data in our images are non-linear and mean function may not always be the most efficient in
this case.
The NMSF method (1) is applied when we consider a grayscale image u = (u(xi))xi∈Ω2,
which is defined on a domain Ω2 ⊂ R2 and u(xi) ∈ R+ is the noisy at pixel xi ∈ Ω2 (please
see for details);
NL(u)(Bik) =
w(Bik, Bj)u(Bj)
where, Bi refers to the square block that is centered at xi with size |Bi| = (2α + 1)2, α ∈ N; v
(Bi) is the unobserved vector of true values of block Bi; u(Bi) is the vector gathering the gray
level values of block Bi; NL(u)(Bi) is restored block of pixel xi; w(Bi, Bj) is the weight value
used for restoring u(Bi) given u(Bj) and based on the similarity of blocks u(Bi) given u(Bj).
The weight values are calculated by,
Goceri et al.
Int J Numer Method Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
w Bik, Bj = 1
u(Bik) −u(Bj) 2
where u(Bi) = (u(1)(Bi),........u(p) (Bi))T is an image patch gathering the intensities of the
block Bi; zik is a constant value for normalization by ensuring that ΣBj∈Δik w(Bik,Bj) = 1 and
u(Bik) −u(Bj) 2
(u(p)(Bi) −u(p)(Bi))
In the NMSF method, for each block Bik centered at pixel xik, a non-local means restoration
is performed from blocks Bj. The restored value of the block Bik is the weighted average of
all the blocks Bj in the search volume. For a pixel xi included in several blocks, several
estimates are obtained and merged. The restored value of pixel xi is the mean of the different
estimations stored in vector Ai. The algorithm can be summarized as:
Divide the image into blocks with overlapping supports (The block Bik contains
P = 2α + 1 elements. Each block is centered on pixel xi, which constitutes a
subset of Ω2 and pixels are equally distributed).
Calculate NL(u)(Bik) to perform a non-local means restoration of these blocks.
Restore the pixel intensities. For a pixel xi included in several blocks Bik,
different estimates from several NL(u)(Bik) is computed and stored in a vector
Ai. The restored intensity of pixel xi is the mean of the restored values NL(u)
The noise reduction method is illustrated in Figure 3 with a Region of Interest (ROI) area,
which is shown with the yellow rectangle in Figure 3.a. (The ROI part is magnified in Figure
3.b to increase visibility of individual nuclei). The ROI part after noise reduction (Figure
3.c), residual image (i.e. difference between the original and de-noised ROI area) (Figure
3.d) and the whole image after noise reduction (Figure 3.e) are shown as grayscale. To
present better visualization, pseudo-color representation with the Hue-Saturation-Value
(HSV) color model is given in Figure 3.f,g,h for the images shown in Figure 3.b,c,d
respectively.
The effect of the noise reduction is demonstrated on a nucleus in Figure 4. The nucleus
(Figure 4.a) in the original image has speckle and blurry edges, which are smoother (Figure
4.b) after de-noising. Difference between the original and de-noised image is shown in
Figure 4.c.
The effect of noise reduction can be observed by comparing variance of 1) original image, 2)
image de-noised with NMF, and 3) image de-noised with NMSF since there is no image
obtained without noise in our work.
Goceri et al.
Int J Numer Method Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 5 shows average variances, which are calculated from images in each data set, for
three cases of brain tumor and reactive gliosis. It should be noted here that mean values of
original images and de-noised images are the same although their variances change.
Therefore, quantitative values in Figure 5 indicate that noise reduction with the NMSF
method is more successful compared to the NMF method on our images.
3.2. Local Intensity Normalization with SAG Filtering
Another problem to tackle is the non-uniform staining of the images. Therefore, we applied
a local intensity normalization method. The goal of the normalization process is to make the
variance and mean of the grayscale images uniform. In our implementation, the spatial local
normalization is performed by applying SAG filtering instead of a standard Gaussian
filtering applied globally with a fixed sigma value.
We propose SAG filtering to solve two main problems of the traditional Gaussian
smoothing: 1) It is not clear how to choose a fixed sigma that is fit to smooth each pixel with
Gaussian filter. 2) Filtering with the fixed sigma (even if it is chosen carefully for an image)
cannot smooth different images in different data sets (even different images in the same data
set) well enough for the next step (Section 3.3).
Figure 6 illustrates a grayscale image (Figure 6.a) and normalized images obtained by
standard Gaussian filtering applied globally with different sigma values (5 and 15) (Figure
6.b,c) to show variations.
The local SAG filtering based normalization is applied with the following equation:
IN(x, y) =
Ig(x, y) −μ(x, y)
where the term IN (x, y) and Ig (x, y) refers to the normalized and grayscale images,
respectively. In (4), μ(x, y) and σ(x, y) correspond to the mean and variance that are
estimated by filtering the image Ig (x, y) with a Gaussian filter whose sigma is selected
adaptively for each image.
The adaptive sigma value of the Gaussian filter is calculated using the distance map obtained
with Euclidean distance transform. To get the distance map, we use the binary image
obtained from the grayscale image Ig (x, y) by applying the adaptive thresholding method
described in .
The Euclidean distance transform is defined as a transformation, which assigns a number
that is the distance between that pixel and the nearest zero pixel in the binary image (note
that zero pixels correspond to background, non-zero pixels to nuclei in the binary image).
Let maxD be the maximum value in the distance map, the adaptive sigma value of the
Gaussian filter is obtained by:
Goceri et al.
Int J Numer Method Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
σGauss = min (T, maxD)
where T is set to 100 experimentally. In (5), we used maxD since pixels with the maximum
distance value should be smoothed as much as possible. However, inter-cell boundaries
should not be blurred while simultaneously smoothing intra-cell pixels. Therefore, the
threshold value T is used in (5) to handle over-smoothing problem.
Under-smoothing problem may occur when maxD is low; therefore, the sigma value is
defined adaptively as follows:
σGauss = max(T, maxD), if maxD < t
min(T, maxD),
where t is set to 50 experimentally. The pseudo-code of the proposed local SAG filtering
based normalization method is given in Table 1.
Figure 7 shows the image obtained with the proposed normalization approach from the
image given in Figure 6.a.
3.3. Nuclei Detection and Segmentation
In this stage, nuclei are detected and segmented on grayscale DAPI image by a k-means
based deterministic method. The proposed method mimics the pathologist workflow.
Positively stained nuclei in the images stained with anti-PTBP1 antibody (primary or
secondary) appear brighter than other objects (Figure 8.a). Therefore, visual detection of
these nuclei is performed according to their brightness. If a bright region in these images
corresponds to a nucleus in the image stained with “DAPI and anti-PTBP1 antibody” or
“DAPI but without anti-PTBP1 antibody” then the nucleus having the bright region is
considered as a nucleus positively stained with anti-PTBP1 antibody by pathologists.
Similarly, in our work, automated detection and segmentation of these nuclei stained
positively is achieved by using i) intensity values from images stained with/without anti-
PTBP1 antibody, and ii) location and shape of the nuclei from the images stained with
“DAPI and anti-PTBP1 antibody” or “DAPI but without anti-PTBP1 antibody”.
In the proposed method, the first step is to convert anti-PTBP1 (Figure 8.a) and DAPI
stained tissue images (Figure 8.b) into grayscale (Figure 8.c, d) (these images are originally
gray-scale but then artificially colored for better visualization). After noise reduction, a new
image, called DAPI_PTBP1 (Figure 8.e), is generated by combining the shape information
from the DAPI-stained image and texture information from the anti-PTBP1-stained image.
In the final step, k-means based clustering is applied with k=6 . The first cluster
corresponds to background (black) and remaining five clusters categorize gray level values
into five groups (dark gray, gray, bright, brighter and the brightest gray level value). The
sixth cluster contains the nuclei that are positively stained with anti-PTBP1 antibody with
the brightest gray level values (Figure 8.f).
Goceri et al.
Int J Numer Method Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
3.4. Numerical Analyses of Segmented Nuclei
In order to measure the effect of the anti-PTBP1 antibody, the ratio between total numbers of
nuclei segmented from the images stained with anti-PTBP1 antibody and images stained
with “DAPI and anti-PTBP1 antibody” is compared to the ratio from the images stained
without anti-PTBP1 antibody and images stained with “DAPI but without anti-PTBP1
antibody”. The following ratio is calculated:
RWith PriAnti =
NwithPTBP1
NwithDAPIandPTBP1
where NwithPTBP1 refers to number of nuclei stained (positively) with anti-PTBP1 antibody,
NwithDAPIandPTBP1 refers to number of nuclei stained (positively) with “DAPI and anti-
PTBP1 antibody”. Similarly, the following ratio is calculated by using images stained with
“DAPI but without anti-PTBP1 antibody” and images stained with anti-PTBP1 antibody:
RNoPriAnti =
NnoPriPTBP1
NwithDAPInoPriPTBP1
where NnoPriPTBP1 refers to number of nuclei stained (positively) without anti-PTBP1
antibody, NwithDAPInoPriPTBP1 refers to number of nuclei stained (positively) with “DAPI but
without anti-PTBP1 antibody”.
We can deduce that the antibody is effective, if the ratio calculated with (7) is greater than
the ratio calculated with (8), which can be written as:
NwithPTBP1
NwithDAPIandPTBP1
NnoPriPTBP1
NwithDAPInoPriPTBP1
Figure 9 shows the flow chart of applied method for validation of anti-PTBP1 antibody.
4. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Quantitative evaluations are based on the total number of nuclei that match bright regions in
images with and without anti-PTBP1 antibody. Example numerical values are given in Table
2, which is obtained from the data set of 7 images from 1 patient diagnosed with reactive
Experimental results show that the total number of nuclei in images stained with anti-PTBP1
antibody is always more than those in the images stained without anti-PTBP1 antibody (p =
1×10−3 (t-test)).
Figure 10 shows the total number of nuclei that match with bright regions in images stained
with and without anti-PTBP1 antibody in data sets from recurrent glioma (Figure 10.a),
Goceri et al.
Int J Numer Method Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
reactive gliosis (Figure 10.b), EGFRVIII (Figure 10.c) and PA (Figure 10.d) data sets. The
number of nuclei in images stained with anti-PTBP1 antibody is always higher than those in
images stained without anti-PTBP1 antibody (Figure 10).
The difference between numbers of nuclei is meaningful for those three cases of brain tumor
and reactive gliosis. Table 3 shows p values (t-test), average (μ) and standard deviation (σ) of
number of nuclei obtained from images stained with and without anti-PTBP1 antibody.
Quantitative values in Table 4 are obtained without noise reduction. Values of μ and σ given
in Table 3 are lower than those μ and σ values in Table 4 due to the effect of the NMSF
Also, it is observed from numerical values of R WithPriAnti and R NoPriAnti that the anti-
PTBP1 antibody works well (i.e., RWithPriAnti > RNoPriAnti, which can be seen in Figure 11).
5. CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
In this work, an automated image analysis method is proposed for validation of anti-PTBP1
antibody. The advantage of the proposed method is that it provides accurate, objective,
repeatable and quantitative results. The method was tested on 29 data sets diagnosed with
one of four cases: PA, WHO grade I, Second biopsy of a patient with a prior neurosurgical
resection diagnosed as glioblastoma with the new resection showing reactive gliosis, Second
biopsy of a patient with a prior neurosurgical resection diagnosed as glioblastoma with the
new resection showing recurrent high grade glioma; and first surgery of a patient showing
glioblastoma, WHO grade IV harboring EGFRVIII mutation.
The noise reduction method in this work is chosen according to the type of the noise in
images. In our data sets, images show speckle type of noise (Figures 2.c, f). Therefore, the
noise reduction approach is based on speckle filtering, which gives accurate results (Figures
3,4) because the numbers of nuclei detected with the proposed approach were confirmed by
a neuropathologist who has more than 10 years of experience in traditional pathology. Figure
5 and Table 3 show the effect of noise reduction with the proposed NMSF technique.
Intensity normalization is provided by a local normalization approach. The proposed SAG
filtering based normalization method assigns sigma value for each image automatically
instead of using a constant sigma for the Gaussian filtering.
It is observed from numerical values in Table 2 and graphs in Figure 10 that images stained
without anti-PTBP1 antibody always show less number of positively stained nuclei
compared to images stained with anti-PTBP1 antibody. Comparisons of quantitative values
show meaningful difference between those numbers of nuclei (Table 2). Ratios calculated
using images stained with and without anti-PTBP1 and DAPI indicate the efficiency of the
antibody (Figure 10). These data demonstrate and automated image analysis approach to
antibody validation for PTBP1 that can easily be applied to other biomarkers showing
nuclear localization.
Goceri et al.
Int J Numer Method Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
The proposed approach will be tested on more data sets chosen from different cases in
neuropathology as an extension of this work.