Approaches to Biology Teaching and Learning:
Understanding the Wrong Answers—
Teaching toward Conceptual Change
Kimberly Tanner* and Deborah Allen
*Department of Biology, San Francisco State University, San Francisco, CA 94132; Department of Biological Sciences,
University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19716
Underpinning science education reform movements in the
last 20 years—at all levels and within all disciplines—is an
explicit shift in the goals of science teaching from students
simply creating a knowledge base of scientific facts to
students developing deeper understandings of major concepts within a scientific discipline. For example, what use is a
detailed working knowledge of the chemical reactions of the
Krebs cycle without a deeper understanding of the relationship between these chemical reactions of cellular respiration
and an organism’s need to harvest energy from food? This
emphasis on conceptual understanding in science education
reform has guided the development of standards and
permeates all major science education reform policy documents .
However, this transition to teaching toward deep conceptual
understanding often sounds deceptively simple, when in
reality it presents a host of significant challenges both in
theory and in practice. Most importantly, few if any students
come to the subject of biology in college, high school, or even
middle-school classrooms without significant prior knowledge of the subject. It is no surprise, then, that students can
never be considered blank slates, beginning with zero
knowledge, awaiting the receipt of current scientific understanding. Yet, there is often little time invested by instructors
in finding out in depth what students already know and,
more specifically, what they do not know, what they are
confused about, and how their preconceptions about the
world do or do not fit with new information they are
attempting to learn. In this feature, we explore key ideas
associated with teaching for understanding, including the
notion of conceptual change, the pivotal role of alternative
conceptions, and practical implications these ideas have for
teachers of science at all levels in designing learning
experiences for students.
MOVING FROM KNOWING FACTS TOWARD
DEEP UNDERSTANDING THROUGH
CONCEPTUAL CHANGE
Knowing the facts and doing well on tests of knowledge do
not mean that we understand.
—Grant Wiggins and Jay McTighe 
. . . an extensive research literature now documents that an
ordinary degree of understanding is routinely missed in
many, perhaps most students. It is reasonable to expect a
college student to be able to apply in a new context a law of
physics, or a proof of geometry, or the concept in history of
which she has just demonstrated acceptable mastery in her
class. If, when the circumstances of testing are slightly
altered, the sought-after competence can no longer be
documented, then understanding—in any reasonable sense
of the term—has simply not been achieved.
—Howard Gardner 
In comparative analyses of achievement in science education
internationally, a major indictment of science education in
the United States has been the emphasis on what we’ll refer
to here as ‘‘knowing,’’ a familiarity with a broad range of
ideas in science that get covered in a course or curriculum.
This U.S. approach to education, which by many measures
continues at all educational levels today, has been dubbed
the ‘‘mile-wide, inch-deep’’ approach to science education, in
that students have familiarity with or knowledge of a host of
concepts, but the depth of their understanding of any given
science concept and its connection to broader ideas and
principles is extremely limited . Although instructors at all levels
routinely claim that students understand the material they
have taught, the traditional multiple-choice and shortanswer exams commonly used to gauge learning in most
university classrooms rarely assess understanding, but rather
knowledge. As quoted above from their book Understanding
by Design, Grant Wiggins and Jay McTighe associate
the term knowing with facts, memorization, and superficial
DOI: 10.1187/cbe.05-02-0068
Address correspondence to: Kimberly Tanner (kdtanner@
sfsu.edu).
Cell Biology Education
Vol. 4, 112–117, Summer 2005
 2005 by The American Society for Cell Biology
knowledge, whereas the term understanding signifies a more
complex, multidimensional integration of information into a
learner’s own conceptual framework. To elaborate on their
definition of understanding, Wiggins and McTighe define six
facets of understanding and its complexity as compared with
knowledge, as shown in Table 1. To demonstrate understanding in this framework, students must not only possess
rudimentary knowledge, but must also be able to explain,
interpret, and apply that knowledge, as well as have
perspective on the information, possess self-knowledge of
their own understanding, and empathize with the understandings held by others.
Striving for student understanding as a result of instruction, above and beyond memorizing or knowing, requires
that instructors take into account students’ prior knowledge
and support students in integrating new knowledge with
their existing ideas. An explicit confrontation between
preknowledge and new knowledge is the critical element
in teaching toward understanding put forward by Posner
and colleagues’ theory of conceptual change .
Although conceptual change theory has been defined by
science education researchers in a variety of terms, we define
it here as a learning process in which an existing conception (idea
or belief about how the world works) held by a student is shifted
and restructured, often away from an alternative or misconception
and toward the dominant conception held by experts in a field . Learning
that accompanies conceptual change stands in contrast to
learning that is associated with the accrual of new ideas put
forward by others. Such accumulative learning is generally
not well integrated into students’ frameworks for understanding and is thus not embraced by students in explaining
the natural world on a daily basis .
Teaching toward conceptual change, however, requires that
students consider new information in the context of their
prior knowledge and their own worldviews, and often a
confrontation between these existing and new ideas must
occur and be resolved for understanding to be achieved.
Thus, in teaching toward understanding of major concepts
in biology and achieving conceptual change for students, it is
first necessary to understand students’ prior knowledge,
examine it, identify confusions, and then provide opportunities for old and new ideas to collide. In teaching toward
conceptual change, it is counterproductive to simply cover
more material and present an extensive list of new ideas
without engaging students in their own metacognitive
analysis. As advocated by many science education reform
documents, inquiry-based science teaching may be seen as
one strategy for teaching toward conceptual change, in that
inquiry engages students in the exact same questioning of
one’s preconceptions and challenging of one’s own knowledge that is characteristic of both conceptual change and
scientific habits of mind. In this sense, working toward
conceptual change is fundamentally what scientists do in
laboratories every day, yet it is not generally the norm of
what students are doing in classrooms. If instructors are to
be successful in changing the way students think about how
living things work, in the same way biologists continue to
revolutionize our ideas about the same subject, then students
and instructors together must access prior knowledge and
uncover misunderstandings and incomplete understandings.
Perhaps paradoxically, students’ ‘‘wrong answers’’ may be
our best tool in crafting learning experiences that will move
them toward the ‘‘right’’ answers, at least ‘‘right’’ in the sense
that they are better aligned with current scientific evidence.
THE ROLE OF MISCONCEPTIONS RESEARCH
IN TEACHING TOWARD CONCEPTUAL CHANGE
To successfully engineer understanding, educators have to
be able to describe what it looks like, how it manifests itself,
and how apparent understanding (or misunderstanding)
differs from genuine understanding.
—Grant Wiggins and Jay McTighe 
A key strategy for gaining insight into the nature of
understanding and how to facilitate conceptual change in a
classroom is to investigate just the opposite, the nature of
misunderstanding. Research pioneered almost 30 years ago
by the late educational researcher Rosalind Driver laid the
groundwork for literally hundreds of studies on students’
understanding and lack of understanding of major concepts
in many scientific disciplines. In her methodological approach to studying misunderstanding, Driver and her
colleagues’ key insight was to look in detail at individual
students’ explanations of scientific phenomena through indepth interviews in which the students’ ideas could be
probed and prodded much more extensively than any paper–
pencil assessment ever could . Through this approach using detailed student interviews, Driver revealed student conceptions that were
surprising to most experts in the sciences, including
conceptions about the essence of living things; the movement
of the earth in space; the nature of light, water, and air; the
relationship between heat and temperature; and the processes
of chemical change, to name but a few . Her insights shed light on what was conceptually
Six facets of understanding from Understanding by Design 
When one understands, then one. . .
Understanding enables answering of questions such as. . .
Can explain
Why is that so? What explains such events? How does this work? How can we prove it?
Can interpret
What does it mean? Why does it matter? What of it? How does it relate to me?
How and where can we use this knowledge, skill, or process?
Has perspective
Is there adequate evidence? Is it reasonable? What are the strengths and weaknesses of the idea?
Can empathize
How does it seem to you? What do they see that I don’t? What do I need to experience if I am
to understand?
Has self-knowledge
What are the limits of my understanding? What are my blind spots?
Vol. 4, Summer 2005
Approaches to Biology Teaching and Learning
difficult for science novices, something that most science
experts are blind to because of their own familiarity with and
ease of understanding of the subject matter. Driver’s work
established a new field of educational research that has been
important since its inception, influencing both traditional
educational researchers and scientists-cum-discipline-based
science education researchers . Growth in the
area of conceptual research in science education over the last
20 years is apparent from analysis of the Students’ and
Teachers’ Conceptions and Science Education (STCSE) database, a comprehensive bibliography of papers on studies of
conceptions and misconceptions . Since its
inception in 1985, the number of references in the STCSE
database has grown from barely 700 to well over 6,000 .
In the realm of conceptions research in science education,
studies focused on understanding and lack of understanding use a variety of nomenclatures to characterize
students’ ideas—misconceptions, alternative conceptions,
and preconceptions, to name a few. While there are rationales behind the use of each, the term alternative conception will be used here to denote student understandings of
scientific concepts that are not aligned with the current
understanding of scientists. What, then, is the character of
an alternative conception? In their review ‘‘Research on
Alternative Conceptions in Science,’’ Wandersee and colleagues provide a summary of assertions that have
emerged from the research literature on alternative conceptions (Table 2).
Of these assertions, two merit particular comment. First,
with regard to Assertion 3, that alternative conceptions are
tenacious and resistant to extinction, there is more evidence
for such resistance to changing physical science concepts
(studied in greater detail) than life science concepts
 . That said, it is striking to consider
that there may be alternative conceptions that are prevalent
not only among novices, but also among practitioners
within a discipline who have not explicitly confronted their
understanding of particularly challenging or counterintuitive phenomena. Insights into why some alternative
conceptions may be more resistant to conceptual change
than others await further research and will require
significant advances. Second, in relation to the idea that
alternative conceptions often mirror the evolution of
scientific thought over time, as captured in Assertion 4,
Duit and Treagust observed that change in science
content knowledge in students may be closely linked to
knowledge of the nature of science and of how major
concepts and principles were developed or discovered. If
one accepts this contention, then student-designed experiments and exposure to scientists’ activities from a historical
and social science perspective become important considerations when designing a course to foster change .
RESEARCH ON ALTERNATIVE CONCEPTIONS
IN BIOLOGY
Although the studies initiated by Driver and her
colleagues have produced an impressive literature on
student alternative conceptions in general, the field of
research into alternative conceptions in biology is still
emerging as compared with efforts in the physical sciences
 . Analysis of the STCSE database described above
reveals that more than four times as many publications are
available in the realm of physics and chemistry as in biology
 .
Summary of assertions about alternative conceptions from the research literature 
Assertion 1
Learners come to formal science instruction with a diverse set of alternative conceptions concerning natural objects and
Assertion 2
The alternative conceptions that learners bring to formal science instruction cut across age, ability, gender, and cultural
boundaries.
Assertion 3
Alternative conceptions are tenacious and resistant to extinction by conventional teaching strategies.
Assertion 4
Alternative conceptions often parallel explanations of natural phenomena offered by previous generations of scientists
and philosophers.
Assertion 5
Alternative conceptions have their origins in a diverse set of personal experiences, including direct observation and
perception, peer culture, and language, as well as in teachers’ explanations and instructional materials.
Assertion 6
Teachers often subscribe to the same alternative conceptions as their students.
Assertion 7
Learners’ prior knowledge interacts with knowledge presented in formal instruction, resulting in a diverse set of
unintended learning outcomes.
Assertion 8
Instructional approaches that facilitate conceptual change can be effective classroom tools.
Analysis of citations (n = 6,314) from the STCSE database
 .
Cell Biology Education
K. Tanner and D. Allen
That said, the literature on alternative conceptions in the
life sciences has expanded significantly over the last 20 years,
with entries into the STCSE database increasing from
approximately 100 to now over 900 . Wandersee and colleagues describe much
of the literature as focused on four areas of life science:
1) concepts of life, 2) animals and plants, 3) the human body,
and 4) continuity of living things, including reproduction,
genetics, and evolution, with additional studies on a
smattering of other life science topics. A detailed presentation of alternative conceptions within these areas goes
beyond the scope of this feature. However, it is noteworthy
that much of the literature available has investigated
conceptions in very young students, addressing concepts of
life, plants, and animals, including the pervasive challenge
for young students to be able to consider plants to be alive
and able to reproduce . Only in the late
1980s and 1990s have researchers focused attention on
alternative conceptions of students at higher cognitive levels
and correspondingly investigated more biochemical concepts, such as cellular respiration, photosynthesis, cell
division, and transcription and translation . Although topics such as
cellular respiration and photosynthesis have been studied by
multiple groups using multiple methodologies, student
alternative conceptions for most major topics in biology
remain poorly understood. And, perhaps most importantly,
there has yet to be proposed a comprehensive framework for
making sense of alternative conceptions identified in biology
or for developing hypotheses about what makes some
biological conceptions difficult for novices to understand.
APPLICATION OF CONCEPTUAL CHANGE
THEORY TO THE CLASSROOM
Although conceptual change theory and research into
student alternative conceptions may at first seem far
removed from the practical considerations of teaching and
learning in a science classroom, there are several concrete
implications of these ideas that can guide instructional
choices, especially given the chronic challenge of too much
science to teach in too little time. In particular, teaching
toward conceptual change can significantly influence 1) differentiation of instruction, namely choices about course goals
and time spent on different topics; 2) the extent to which one
engages students in identifying their own preconceptions as
part of the learning process, using a variety of approaches; 3)
using alternative conceptions to craft diagnostic ‘‘wrong
answers’’ in assessment tools; and 4) designing assessments
to detect conceptual change.
Differentiation of Instruction to Address
the Common Alternative Conceptions
An understanding of the nature and basis of students’ prior
knowledge and alternative conceptions has immediate and
compelling application to science instruction as well as
science learning. This understanding could inform instructional choices, beginning with the establishment of goals for
a course or curriculum. Clearly, little instructional clarification is needed in areas in which students’ views overlap
with those generally accepted by scientists. Instructional
resources could thus be diverted from these areas toward
an intentional addressing of the deep-seated, often tacit
beliefs that students hold that are in varying degrees of
disharmony with scientific ones. These prior beliefs warrant
our focused instructional attention, because they serve as
anchors for both assimilation and construction of new
knowledge and thus may interfere with the learning of any
new concepts introduced in the course or may result in
unintended learning outcomes. As Wandersee et al. 
acknowledge, these alternate conceptions are present at all
levels of formal instruction, including college, and cut
across ability level, gender, and cultural boundaries, as well
Engaging Students in Identifying Preconceptions
as Essential to Instruction
According to the best-known model for conceptual change
 , if individuals are to change their ideas,
they must first become dissatisfied with their existing
conception or scheme and then proceed to judge a new
conception to be intelligible (able to be related to some
existing conceptual framework), plausible (having more
explanatory power or providing solutions to problems),
and fruitful (providing the potential for new insights and
discoveries). In acknowledgment of this model, strategies
collectively known as ‘‘conceptual change approaches’’ are
generally (but cautiously) acknowledged as being more
successful in this regard than traditional ones . In general,
these approaches are constructivist in nature—that is, they
explicitly connect the learner to his or her pre-existing
conceptions (perhaps even intentionally invoke a misconception), then require him or her to actively explore and
analyze evidence that builds on or counters the existing
ideas. These approaches may also ask the learner to identify
and use multiple resources, plan and carry out investigations, and apply the learned concepts (and skills) to new
situations. In addition, knowledge of preconceptions
naturally directs an instructor toward using learning
experiences that confront students with evidence, historical
experiments, or data-based problems that do not align with
their prior conceptions. This instruction should be rich and
varied enough to allow for multiple representations of
ideas (e.g., a debate, an essay, and a poster construction
centered around the same topical theme) that serve to
underscore and integrate understanding .
Bleeth , Martin and colleagues , and others
 find the original conceptual change
model limiting in that it has focused our attention overly
much on the teacher’s role in facilitating conceptual change,
rather than the learner’s role, as well as perhaps contributed to a pervasive notion that clings to the science
education literature—that student conceptions are ‘‘problems’’ for the teacher to overcome by a carefully designed
curriculum. They argue for inclusion of instructional
approaches that engage students directly in their conceptual change process by inviting them to be metacognitive—
to monitor, control, and reflect on their own learning. These
approaches can be as simple as asking students to assign
status constructs of plausibility and intelligibility to ideas
they generate in the course of exploring and developing
notions about major concepts (in Bleeth’s study, about force
and motion).
Vol. 4, Summer 2005
Approaches to Biology Teaching and Learning
USING ALTERNATIVE CONCEPTIONS
TO DESIGN THE ‘‘WRONG’’ ANSWERS
Although the study of alternative conceptions in biology
education is still an emerging discipline, common misconceptions held by students about several major biological
principles have been studied enough that the findings can be
employed in crafting assessment tools. This approach of
using known alternative conceptions to design ‘‘wrong
answers’’ is not a new idea, although its actual implementation in the design and validation of assessment tools in
widespread use is limited and inconsistent . As an example of this approach, Anderson
and colleagues have developed a Conceptual Inventory of Natural Selection (CINS) that employs known
alternative conceptions as ‘‘wrong answers’’ in a multiplechoice assessment tool. Presenting actual scientific studies of
natural selection, such as the work on the Galapagos finches
and on Great Britain’s peppered moth as scenarios, the CINS
is a 20-item multiple-choice instrument. In the design of this
assessment, the authors identify a scientific concept for
assessment and also utilize known alternative conceptions.
For example, in assessing students’ understanding of the role
of changes in populations over time in natural selection,
Anderson and colleagues use the sample question shown in
Table 3 from the CINS, which uses ‘‘wrong answers’’ as
distracters.
The use of alternative conceptions as specifically chosen
distracters in multiple-choice instruments is a promising
avenue for developing cost-effective and efficiently gradable
assessments that could diagnose the conceptual frameworks
in use in a large cohort of students, for example in an
introductory college course. With choices that are carefully
crafted, these assessment tools have the added value that
they could not only show which students got a correct
answer, but also point instructors toward the most prevalent
incorrect answer and likely reasons that students chose that
‘‘wrong answer.’’ In addition, with the advent of classroom
technologies such as ‘‘clicker systems,’’ there is an increasing
demand for such well-crafted assessment questions to
provide real-time feedback to instructors during the course
of interactive lectures .
Assessing for Conceptual Change
Finally, teaching toward conceptual change requires, more
generally, ongoing and varied means of assessing student
understanding
instruction.
interviewed
enrolled in a 16-week chemistry course. One of the
interviewees used three different explanatory principles
when probed for his understanding of chemical bonding
in different contexts—he used each explanation many
times in the course of the semester, or sometimes moved
among all three (assigning explanatory power to each) in
the course of a single interview. In other words, students
may have multiple and layered explanations of a single
concept, the complexity of which may not surface in
response to an assessment strategy that requires only that
students have memorized the ‘‘right answer.’’ Perhaps for
this reason, use of concept mapping (Novak and Gowin,
method for
documenting and understanding (as well as fostering)
students’ knowledge frameworks and how they may or
may not grow in structural complexity as a course unfolds
 .
In summary, teaching science for understanding is
strongly informed by the ideas that have emerged from
conceptual change theory in the educational research
literature. In addition, explicitly uncovering and addressing
students’ prior and alternative conceptions in biology is
essential if students are to integrate new ideas into existing
conceptual frameworks about how the natural world
works as a result of instruction. Importantly, the ideas of
conceptual change are no longer relevant only in the
theoretical realm, but also have practical implications for
teachers of science at all levels in designing learning
experiences for students and assessments to gauge student
understanding. In fact, the usefulness of understanding the
‘‘wrong answers’’ in designing learning experiences and
assessments adds urgency to the call for more extensive
research on student conceptions of higher-order concepts in
biology, as well as the development of a framework for
making sense of the prevalent alternative conceptions that
students harbor.