Speed/accuracy trade-offs for modern convolutional object detectors
Jonathan Huang
Vivek Rathod
Menglong Zhu
Anoop Korattikara
Alireza Fathi
Ian Fischer
Zbigniew Wojna
Sergio Guadarrama
Kevin Murphy
Google Research
The goal of this paper is to serve as a guide for selecting a detection architecture that achieves the right
speed/memory/accuracy balance for a given application
and platform. To this end, we investigate various ways to
trade accuracy for speed and memory usage in modern convolutional object detection systems. A number of successful
systems have been proposed in recent years, but apples-toapples comparisons are difﬁcult due to different base feature extractors (e.g., VGG, Residual Networks), different
default image resolutions, as well as different hardware and
software platforms. We present a uniﬁed implementation of
the Faster R-CNN , R-FCN and SSD systems,
which we view as “meta-architectures” and trace out the
speed/accuracy trade-off curve created by using alternative feature extractors and varying other critical parameters
such as image size within each of these meta-architectures.
On one extreme end of this spectrum where speed and memory are critical, we present a detector that achieves real
time speeds and can be deployed on a mobile device. On
the opposite end in which accuracy is critical, we present
a detector that achieves state-of-the-art performance measured on the COCO detection task.
1. Introduction
A lot of progress has been made in recent years on object
detection due to the use of convolutional neural networks
(CNNs). Modern object detectors based on these networks
— such as Faster R-CNN , R-FCN , Multibox ,
SSD and YOLO — are now good enough to be
deployed in consumer products (e.g., Google Photos, Pinterest Visual Search) and some have been shown to be fast
enough to be run on mobile devices.
However, it can be difﬁcult for practitioners to decide
what architecture is best suited to their application. Standard accuracy metrics, such as mean average precision
(mAP), do not tell the entire story, since for real deployments of computer vision systems, running time and memory usage are also critical. For example, mobile devices
often require a small memory footprint, and self driving
cars require real time performance. Server-side production
systems, like those used in Google, Facebook or Snapchat,
have more leeway to optimize for accuracy, but are still subject to throughput constraints. While the methods that win
competitions, such as the COCO challenge , are optimized for accuracy, they often rely on model ensembling
and multicrop methods which are too slow for practical usage.
Unfortunately, only a small subset of papers (e.g., R-
FCN , SSD YOLO ) discuss running time in
any detail. Furthermore, these papers typically only state
that they achieve some frame-rate, but do not give a full
picture of the speed/accuracy trade-off, which depends on
many other factors, such as which feature extractor is used,
input image sizes, etc.
In this paper, we seek to explore the speed/accuracy
trade-off of modern detection systems in an exhaustive and
fair way. While this has been studied for full image classiﬁcation( (e.g., ), detection models tend to be significantly more complex.
We primarily investigate singlemodel/single-pass detectors, by which we mean models
that do not use ensembling, multi-crop methods, or other
“tricks” such as horizontal ﬂipping. In other words, we only
pass a single image through a single network. For simplicity
(and because it is more important for users of this technology), we focus only on test-time performance and not on
how long these models take to train.
Though it is impractical to compare every recently proposed detection system, we are fortunate that many of the
leading state of the art approaches have converged on a
common methodology (at least at a high level). This has
allowed us to implement and compare a large number of detection systems in a uniﬁed manner. In particular, we have
created implementations of the Faster R-CNN, R-FCN and
SSD meta-architectures, which at a high level consist of a
single convolutional network, trained with a mixed regression and classiﬁcation objective, and use sliding window
style predictions.
To summarize, our main contributions are as follows:
• We provide a concise survey of modern convolutional
 
detection systems, and describe how the leading ones
follow very similar designs.
• We describe our ﬂexible and uniﬁed implementation
of three meta-architectures (Faster R-CNN, R-FCN
and SSD) in Tensorﬂow which we use to do extensive experiments that trace the accuracy/speed tradeoff curve for different detection systems, varying metaarchitecture, feature extractor, image resolution, etc.
• Our ﬁndings show that using fewer proposals for
Faster R-CNN can speed it up signiﬁcantly without
a big loss in accuracy, making it competitive with its
faster cousins, SSD and RFCN. We show that SSDs
performance is less sensitive to the quality of the feature extractor than Faster R-CNN and R-FCN. And we
identify sweet spots on the accuracy/speed trade-off
curve where gains in accuracy are only possible by sacriﬁcing speed . A model
is then trained to make two predictions for each anchor:
(1) a discrete class prediction for each anchor, and (2) a
continuous prediction of an offset by which the anchor
needs to be shifted to ﬁt the groundtruth bounding box.
Papers that follow this anchors methodology then
minimize a combined classiﬁcation and regression loss that
we now describe. For each anchor a, we ﬁrst ﬁnd the best
matching groundtruth box b (if one exists). If such a match
can be found, we call a a “positive anchor”, and assign it
(1) a class label ya ∈{1 . . . K} and (2) a vector encoding
of box b with respect to anchor a (called the box encoding
φ(ba; a)).
If no match is found, we call a a “negative
anchor” and we set the class label to be ya = 0. If for
the anchor a we predict box encoding floc(I; a, θ) and
corresponding class fcls(I; a, θ), where I is the image and
θ the model parameters, then the loss for a is measured as
a weighted sum of a location-based loss and a classiﬁcation
L(a, I; θ) = α · 1[a is positive] · ℓloc(φ(ba; a) −floc(I; a, θ))
+ β · ℓcls(ya, fcls(I; a, θ)),
where α, β are weights balancing localization and classi-
ﬁcation losses. To train the model, Equation 1 is averaged
over anchors and minimized with respect to parameters θ.
The choice of anchors has signiﬁcant implications both
for accuracy and computation.
In the (ﬁrst) Multibox
paper , these anchors (called “box priors” by the authors) were generated by clustering groundtruth boxes in
the dataset. In more recent works, anchors are generated
by tiling a collection of boxes at different scales and aspect
ratios regularly across the image. The advantage of having a regular grid of anchors is that predictions for these
boxes can be written as tiled predictors on the image with
shared parameters (i.e., convolutions) and are reminiscent
of traditional sliding window methods, e.g. . The Faster
R-CNN paper and the (second) Multibox paper 
(which called these tiled anchors “convolutional priors”)
were the ﬁrst papers to take this new approach.
2.1. Meta-architectures
In our paper we focus primarily on three recent (meta)architectures: SSD (Single Shot Multibox Detector ),
Faster R-CNN and R-FCN (Region-based Fully Convolutional Networks ). While these papers were originally presented with a particular feature extractor (e.g.,
VGG, Resnet, etc), we now review these three methods, decoupling the choice of meta-architecture from feature extractor so that conceptually, any feature extractor can be
used with SSD, Faster R-CNN or R-FCN.
Single Shot Detector (SSD).
Though the SSD paper was published only recently (Liu et
al., ), we use the term SSD to refer broadly to architectures that use a single feed-forward convolutional network to directly predict classes and anchor offsets without
requiring a second stage per-proposal classiﬁcation operation (Figure 1a).
Under this deﬁnition, the SSD metaarchitecture has been explored in a number of precursors
to . Both Multibox and the Region Proposal Network
Meta-architecture
Feature Extractor
Box Encoding φ(ba, a)
Location Loss functions
Szegedy et al. 
InceptionV3
[x0, y0, x1, y1]
Redmon et al. 
Custom (GoogLeNet inspired)
Box Center
[xc, yc, √w,
Ren et al. 
Faster R-CNN
ha , log w, log h]
He et al. 
Faster R-CNN
ResNet-101
ha , log w, log h]
Liu et al. (v1)
InceptionV3
[x0, y0, x1, y1]
Liu et al. (v2, v3)
ha , log w, log h]
Dai et al 
ResNet-101
ha , log w, log h]
Table 1: Convolutional detection models that use one of the meta-architectures described in Section 2. Boxes are encoded with respect to a matching
anchor a via a function φ (Equation 1), where [x0, y0, x1, y1] are min/max coordinates of a box, xc, yc are its center coordinates, and w, h its width and
height. In some cases, wa, ha, width and height of the matching anchor are also used. Notes: (1) We include an early arXiv version of , which used a
different conﬁguration from that published at ECCV 2016; (2) uses a fast feature extractor described as being inspired by GoogLeNet , which we
do not compare to; (3) YOLO matches a groundtruth box to an anchor if its center falls inside the anchor (we refer to this as BoxCenter).
Feature Extractor
(vgg, incep+on,
resnet, etc)
Regression
Classiﬁcation
Detection Generator
Classiﬁcation
Box Classiﬁer
Feature Extractor
(vgg, incep+on,
resnet, etc)
Regression
Objectness
Classiﬁcation
Proposal Generator
(b) Faster RCNN.
Classiﬁcation
Box Classiﬁer
Feature Extractor
(vgg, incep+on,
resnet, etc)
Regression
Objectness
Classiﬁcation
Proposal Generator
(c) R-FCN.
Figure 1: High level diagrams of the detection meta-architectures compared in this paper.
(RPN) stage of Faster R-CNN use this approach
to predict class-agnostic box proposals. use
SSD-like architectures to predict ﬁnal (1 of K) class labels.
And Poirson et al., extended this idea to predict boxes,
classes and pose.
Faster R-CNN.
In the Faster R-CNN setting, detection happens in two
stages (Figure 1b). In the ﬁrst stage, called the region proposal network (RPN), images are processed by a feature
extractor (e.g., VGG-16), and features at some selected intermediate level (e.g., “conv5”) are used to predict classagnostic box proposals. The loss function for this ﬁrst stage
takes the form of Equation 1 using a grid of anchors tiled in
space, scale and aspect ratio.
In the second stage, these (typically 300) box proposals
are used to crop features from the same intermediate feature
map which are subsequently fed to the remainder of the feature extractor (e.g., “fc6” followed by “fc7”) in order to predict a class and class-speciﬁc box reﬁnement for each proposal. The loss function for this second stage box classiﬁer
also takes the form of Equation 1 using the proposals generated from the RPN as anchors. Notably, one does not crop
proposals directly from the image and re-run crops through
the feature extractor, which would be duplicated computation. However there is part of the computation that must be
run once per region, and thus the running time depends on
the number of regions proposed by the RPN.
Since appearing in 2015, Faster R-CNN has been particularly inﬂuential, and has led to a number of follow-up
works (including SSD
and R-FCN). Notably, half of the submissions to the COCO
object detection server as of November 2016 are reported to
be based on the Faster R-CNN system in some way.
2.2. R-FCN
While Faster R-CNN is an order of magnitude faster than
Fast R-CNN, the fact that the region-speciﬁc component
must be applied several hundred times per image led Dai
et al. to propose the R-FCN (Region-based Fully Convolutional Networks) method which is like Faster R-CNN,
but instead of cropping features from the same layer where
region proposals are predicted, crops are taken from the
last layer of features prior to prediction (Figure 1c). This
approach of pushing cropping to the last layer minimizes
the amount of per-region computation that must be done.
Dai et al. argue that the object detection task needs localization representations that respect translation variance and
thus propose a position-sensitive cropping mechanism that
is used instead of the more standard ROI pooling operations
used in and the differentiable crop mechanism of
 . They show that the R-FCN model (using Resnet 101)
could achieve comparable accuracy to Faster R-CNN often
at faster running times. Recently, the R-FCN model was
also adapted to do instance segmentation in the recent TA-
FCN model , which won the 2016 COCO instance segmentation challenge.
3. Experimental setup
The introduction of standard benchmarks such as Imagenet and COCO has made it easier in recent
years to compare detection methods with respect to accuracy.
However, when it comes to speed and memory,
apples-to-apples comparisons have been harder to come by.
Prior works have relied on different deep learning frameworks (e.g., DistBelief , Caffe , Torch ) and different hardware. Some papers have optimized for accuracy;
others for speed. And ﬁnally, in some cases, metrics are
reported using slightly different training sets (e.g., COCO
training set vs. combined training+validation sets).
In order to better perform apples-to-apples comparisons,
we have created a detection platform in Tensorﬂow and
have recreated training pipelines for SSD, Faster R-CNN
and R-FCN meta-architectures on this platform. Having a
uniﬁed framework has allowed us to easily swap feature extractor architectures, loss functions, and having it in Tensorﬂow allows for easy portability to diverse platforms for
deployment. In the following we discuss ways to conﬁgure
model architecture, loss function and input on our platform
— knobs that can be used to trade speed and accuracy.
3.1. Architectural conﬁguration
Feature extractors.
In all of the meta-architectures, we ﬁrst apply a convolutional feature extractor to the input image to obtain highlevel features. The choice of feature extractor is crucial as
the number of parameters and types of layers directly affect
memory, speed, and performance of the detector. We have
selected six representative feature extractors to compare in
this paper and, with the exception of MobileNet , all
have open source Tensorﬂow implementations and have had
sizeable inﬂuence on the vision community.
In more detail, we consider the following six feature extractors. We use VGG-16 and Resnet-101 , both
of which have won many competitions such as ILSVRC and
COCO 2015 (classiﬁcation, detection and segmentation).
We also use Inception v2 , which set the state of the art
in the ILSVRC 2014 classiﬁcation and detection challenges,
as well as its successor Inception v3 . Both of the Inception networks employed ‘Inception units’ which made it
possible to increase the depth and width of a network without increasing its computational budget. Recently, Szegedy
et al. proposed Inception Resnet (v2), which combines
the optimization beneﬁts conferred by residual connections
with the computation efﬁciency of Inception units.
Finally, we compare against the new MobileNet network ,
which has been shown to achieve VGG-16 level accuracy
on Imagenet with only 1/30 of the computational cost and
model size. MobileNet is designed for efﬁcient inference in
various mobile vision applications. Its building blocks are
depthwise separable convolutions which factorize a standard convolution into a depthwise convolution and a 1 × 1
convolution, effectively reducing both computational cost
and number of parameters.
For each feature extractor, there are choices to be made
in order to use it within a meta-architecture. For both Faster
R-CNN and R-FCN, one must choose which layer to use for
predicting region proposals. In our experiments, we use the
choices laid out in the original papers when possible. For
example, we use the ‘conv5’ layer from VGG-16 and
the last layer of conv 4 x layers in Resnet-101 . For
other feature extractors, we have made analogous choices.
See supplementary materials for more details.
Liu et al. showed that in the SSD setting, using
multiple feature maps to make location and conﬁdence predictions at multiple scales is critical for good performance.
For VGG feature extractors, they used conv4 3, fc7 (converted to a convolution layer), as well as a sequence of
added layers. In our experiments, we follow their methodology closely, always selecting the topmost convolutional
feature map and a higher resolution feature map at a lower
level, then adding a sequence of convolutional layers with
spatial resolution decaying by a factor of 2 with each additional layer used for prediction. However unlike , we
use batch normalization in all additional layers.
For comparison, feature extractors used in previous
works are shown in Table 1. In this work, we evaluate all
combinations of meta-architectures and feature extractors,
most of which are novel. Notably, Inception networks have
never been used in Faster R-CNN frameworks and until recently were not open sourced . Inception Resnet (v2)
and MobileNet have not appeared in the detection literature
Number of proposals.
For Faster R-CNN and R-FCN, we can also choose the
number of region proposals to be sent to the box classiﬁer at
test time. Typically, this number is 300 in both settings, but
an easy way to save computation is to send fewer boxes potentially at the risk of reducing recall. In our experiments,
we vary this number of proposals between 10 and 300 in
order to explore this trade-off.
Output stride settings for Resnet and Inception
Our implementation of Resnet-101 is slightly modiﬁed
from the original to have an effective output stride of 16
instead of 32; we achieve this by modifying the conv5 1
layer to have stride 1 instead of 2 (and compensating for reduced stride by using atrous convolutions in further layers)
as in . For Faster R-CNN and R-FCN, in addition to the
default stride of 16, we also experiment with a (more expensive) stride 8 Resnet-101 in which the conv4 1 block is
additionally modiﬁed to have stride 1. Likewise, we experiment with stride 16 and stride 8 versions of the Inception
Resnet network. We ﬁnd that using stride 8 instead of 16
improves the mAP by a factor of 5%1, but increased running time by a factor of 63%.
3.2. Loss function conﬁguration
Beyond selecting a feature extractor, there are choices in
conﬁguring the loss function (Equation 1) which can impact
training stability and ﬁnal performance. Here we describe
the choices that we have made in our experiments and Table 1 again compares how similar loss functions are conﬁgured in other works.
Determining classiﬁcation and regression targets for each
anchor requires matching anchors to groundtruth instances.
Common approaches include greedy bipartite matching
(e.g., based on Jaccard overlap) or many-to-one matching
strategies in which bipartite-ness is not required, but matchings are discarded if Jaccard overlap between an anchor
and groundtruth is too low.
We refer to these strategies
as Bipartite or Argmax, respectively. In our experiments
we use Argmax matching throughout with thresholds set as
suggested in the original paper for each meta-architecture.
After matching, there is typically a sampling procedure designed to bring the number of positive anchors and negative
anchors to some desired ratio. In our experiments, we also
ﬁx these ratios to be those recommended by the paper for
each meta-architecture.
Box encoding.
To encode a groundtruth box with respect to its matching
anchor, we use the box encoding function φ(ba; a) = [10 ·
wa , 10· yc
ha , 5·log w, 5·log h] (also used by ).
Note that the scalar multipliers 10 and 5 are typically used
in all of these prior works, even if not explicitly mentioned.
Location loss (ℓloc).
Following , we use the Smooth L1 (or Huber ) loss function in all experiments.
3.3. Input size conﬁguration.
In Faster R-CNN and R-FCN, models are trained on images scaled to M pixels on the shorter edge whereas in SSD,
images are always resized to a ﬁxed shape M × M. We
explore evaluating each model on downscaled images as
1 i.e., (map8 - map16) / map16 = 0.05.
a way to trade accuracy for speed. In particular, we have
trained high and low-resolution versions of each model. In
the “high-resolution” settings, we set M = 600, and in
the “low-resolution” setting, we set M = 300. In both
cases, this means that the SSD method processes fewer pixels on average than a Faster R-CNN or R-FCN model with
all other variables held constant.
3.4. Training and hyperparameter tuning
We jointly train all models end-to-end using asynchronous gradient updates on a distributed cluster . For
Faster RCNN and R-FCN, we use SGD with momentum
with batch sizes of 1 (due to these models being trained
using different image sizes) and for SSD, we use RM-
SProp with batch sizes of 32 (in a few exceptions we
reduced the batch size for memory reasons). Finally we
manually tune learning rate schedules individually for each
feature extractor. For the model conﬁgurations that match
works in literature ( ), we have reproduced or
surpassed the reported mAP results.2
Note that for Faster R-CNN and R-FCN, this end-toend approach is slightly different from the 4-stage training procedure that is typically used.
Additionally, instead of using the ROI Pooling layer and Position-sensitive
ROI Pooling layers used by , we use Tensorﬂow’s
“crop and resize” operation which uses bilinear interpolation to resample part of an image onto a ﬁxed sized grid.
This is similar to the differentiable cropping mechanism
of , the attention model of as well as the Spatial
Transformer Network . However we disable backpropagation with respect to bounding box coordinates as we have
found this to be unstable during training.
Our networks are trained on the COCO dataset, using
all training images as well as a subset of validation images,
holding out 8000 examples for validation.3 Finally at test
time, we post-process detections with non-max suppression
using an IOU threshold of 0.6 and clip all boxes to the image
window. To evaluate our ﬁnal detections, we use the ofﬁcial
COCO API , which measures mAP averaged over IOU
thresholds in [0.5 : 0.05 : 0.95], amongst other metrics.
3.5. Benchmarking procedure
To time our models, we use a machine with 32GB RAM,
Intel Xeon E5-1650 v2 processor and an Nvidia GeForce
GTX Titan X GPU card. Timings are reported on GPU for
a batch size of one. The images used for timing are resized
so that the smallest size is at least k and then cropped to
2In the case of SSD with VGG, we have reproduced the number reported in the ECCV version of the paper, but the most recent version on
ArXiv uses an improved data augmentation scheme to obtain somewhat
higher numbers, which we have not yet experimented with.
3We remark that this dataset is similar but slightly smaller than the
trainval35k set that has been used in several papers, e.g., .
k × k where k is either 300 or 600 based on the model. We
average the timings over 500 images.
We include postprocessing in our timing (which includes
non-max suppression and currently runs only on the CPU).
Postprocessing can take up the bulk of the running time
for the fastest models at ∼40ms and currently caps our
maximum framerate to 25 frames per second. Among other
things, this means that while our timing results are comparable amongst each other, they may not be directly comparable to other reported speeds in the literature. Other potential
differences include hardware, software drivers, framework
(Tensorﬂow in our case), and batch size (e.g., the Liu et
al. report timings using batch sizes of 8). Finally, we
use tfprof to measure the total memory demand of the
models during inference; this gives a more platform independent measure of memory demand. We also average the
memory measurements over three images.
3.6. Model Details
Table 2 summarizes the feature extractors that we use.
All models are pretrained on ImageNet-CLS. We give details on how we train the object detectors using these feature
extractors below.
Faster R-CNN
implementation
Tensorﬂow’s
“crop and resize”
pooling . Except for VGG, all the feature extractors use
batch normalization after convolutional layers. We freeze
the batch normalization parameters to be those estimated
during ImageNet pretraining. We train faster RCNN with
asynchronous SGD with momentum of 0.9.
The initial
learning rates depend on which feature extractor we used,
as explained below. We reduce the learning rate by 10x
after 900K iterations and another 10x after 1.2M iterations.
9 GPU workers are used during asynchronous training.
Each GPU worker takes a single image per iteration; the
minibatch size for RPN training is 256, while the minibatch
size for box classiﬁer training is 64.
• VGG : We extract features from the “conv5” layer
whose stride size is 16 pixels. Similar to , we crop
and resize feature maps to 14x14 then maxpool to 7x7.
The initial learning rate is 5e-4.
• Resnet 101 : We extract features from the last
layer of the “conv4” block. When operating in atrous
mode, the stride size is 8 pixels, otherwise it is 16 pixels. Feature maps are cropped and resized to 14x14
then maxpooled to 7x7. The initial learning rate is 3e-
• Inception V2 :
We extract features from the
“Mixed 4e” layer whose stride size is 16 pixels. Fea-
Top-1 accuracy
Num. Params.
14,714,688
Inception V2
10,173,112
ResNet-101
42,605,504
Inception V3
21,802,784
Inception Resnet V2
54,336,736
Table 2: Properties of the 6 feature extractors that we use.
Top-1 accuracy is the classiﬁcation accuracy on ImageNet.
ture maps are cropped and resized to 14x14. The initial
learning rate is 2e-4.
• Inception V3 :
We extract features from the
“Mixed 6e” layer whose stride size is 16 pixels. Feature maps are cropped and resized to 17x17. The initial
learning rate is 3e-4.
• Inception Resnet : We extract features the from
“Mixed 6a” layer including its associated residual layers. When operating in atrous mode, the stride size
is 8 pixels, otherwise is 16 pixels. Feature maps are
cropped and resized to 17x17. The initial learning rate
• MobileNet :
We extract features from the
“Conv2d 11” layer whose stride size is 16 pixels. Feature maps are cropped and resized to 14x14. The initial
learning rate is 3e-3.
We follow the implementation of R-FCN closely, but use
Tensorﬂow’s “crop and resize” operation instead of ROI
pooling to crop regions from the position-sensitive score
maps. All feature extractors use batch normalization after
convolutional layers. We freeze the batch normalization parameters to be those estimated during ImageNet pretraining.
We train R-FCN with asynchronous SGD with momentum
of 0.9. 9 GPU workers are used during asynchronous training. Each GPU worker takes a single image per iteration;
the minibatch size for RPN training is 256. As of the time
of this submission, we do not have R-FCN results for VGG
or Inception V3 feature extractors.
• Resnet 101 : We extract features from “block3”
layer. When operating in atrous mode, the stride size
is 8 pixels, otherwise it is 16 pixels. Position-sensitive
score maps are cropped with spatial bins of size 7x7
and resized to 21x21. We use online hard example
mining to sample a minibatch of size 128 for training
the box classiﬁer. The initial learning rate is 3e-4. It
is reduced by 10x after 1M steps and another 10x after
1.2M steps.
• Inception V2 :
We extract features from
“Mixed 4e” layer whose stride size is 16 pixels.
Position-sensitive score maps are cropped with spatial
bins of size 3x3 and resized to 12x12. We use online
hard example mining to sample a minibatch of size 128
for training the box classiﬁer. The initial learning rate
is 2e-4. It is reduced by 10x after 1.8M steps and another 10x after 2M steps.
• Inception Resnet :
We extract features from
“Mixed 6a” layer including its associated residual layers. When operating in atrous mode, the stride size is
8 pixels, otherwise it is 16 pixels. Position-sensitive
score maps are cropped with spatial bins of size 7x7
and resized to 21x21. We use all proposals from RPN
for box classiﬁer training. The initial learning rate is
7e-4. It is reduced by 10x after 1M steps and another
10x after 1.2M steps.
• MobileNet
“Conv2d 11” layer whose stride size is 16 pixels. Position-sensitive score maps are cropped with
spatial bins of size 3x3 and resized to 12x12. We use
online hard example mining to sample a minibatch
of size 128 for training the box classiﬁer. The initial
learning rate is 2e-3. Learning rate is reduced by 10x
after 1.6M steps and another 10x after 1.8M steps.
As described in the main paper, we follow the methodology of closely, generating anchors in the same way
and selecting the topmost convolutional feature map and a
higher resolution feature map at a lower level, then adding
a sequence of convolutional layers with spatial resolution
decaying by a factor of 2 with each additional layer used
for prediction. The feature map selection for Resnet101 is
slightly different, as described below.
Unlike , we use batch normalization in all additional
layers, and initialize weights with a truncated normal distribution with a standard deviation of σ = .03. With the exception of VGG, we also do not perform “layer normalization” (as suggested in ) as we found it not to be necessary for the other feature extractors. Finally, we employ distributed training with asynchronous SGD using 11 worker
machines. Below we discuss the speciﬁcs for each feature
extractor that we have considered. As of the time of this
submission, we do not have SSD results for the Inception
V3 feature extractor and we only have results for high resolution SSD models using the Resnet 101 and Inception V2
feature extractors.
• VGG : Following the paper, we use conv4 3, and
fc7 layers, appending ﬁve additional convolutional layers with decaying spatial resolution with depths 512,
256, 256, 256, 256, respectively. We apply L2 normalization to the conv4 3 layer, scaling the feature norm
at each location in the feature map to a learnable scale,
s, which is initialized to 20.0.
During training, we use a base learning rate of lrbase =
.0003, but use a warm-up learning rate scheme in
which we ﬁrst train with a learning rate of 0.82 · lrbase
for 10K iterations followed by 0.8 · lrbase for another
10K iterations.
• Resnet 101 : We use the feature map from the last
layer of the “conv4” block. When operating in atrous
mode, the stride size is 8 pixels, otherwise it is 16 pixels. Five additional convolutional layers with decaying spatial resolution are appended, which have depths
512, 512, 256, 256, 128, respectively. We have experimented with including the feature map from the last
layer of the “conv5” block. With “conv5” features, the
mAP numbers are very similar, but the computational
costs are higher. Therefore we choose to use the last
layer of the “conv4” block. During training, a base
learning rate of 3e-4 is used. We use a learning rate
warm up strategy similar to the VGG one.
• Inception V2 : We use Mixed 4c and Mixed 5c,
appending four additional convolutional layers with
decaying resolution with depths 512, 256, 256, 128 respectively. We use ReLU6 as the non-linear activation
function for each conv layer. During training, we use
a base learning rate of 0.002, followed by learning rate
decay of 0.95 every 800k steps.
• Inception Resnet :
We use Mixed 6a and
Conv2d 7b, appending three additional convolutional
layers with decaying resolution with depths 512, 256,
128 respectively. We use ReLU as the non-linear activation function for each conv layer. During training,
we use a base learning rate of 0.0005, followed by
learning rate decay of 0.95 every 800k steps.
• MobileNet : We use conv 11 and conv 13, appending four additional convolutional layers with decaying resolution with depths 512, 256, 256, 128 respectively. The non-linear activation function we use
is ReLU6 and both batch norm parameters β and γ are
trained. During training, we use a base learning rate of
0.004, followed by learning rate decay of 0.95 every
800k steps.
4. Results
In this section we analyze the data that we have collected
by training and benchmarking detectors, sweeping over
model conﬁgurations as described in Section 3. Each such
model conﬁguration includes a choice of meta-architecture,
feature extractor, stride (for Resnet and Inception Resnet) as
SSD w/MobileNet, Lo Res
ResNet, Hi Res,
100 Proposals
Faster R-CNN w/ResNet, Hi
Res, 50 Proposals
Faster R-CNN w/Incep.on
Resnet, Hi Res, 300
Proposals, Stride 8
SSD w/Incep.on V2, Lo Res
Figure 2: Accuracy vs time, with marker shapes indicating meta-architecture and colors indicating feature extractor. Each (meta-architecture, feature
extractor) pair can correspond to multiple points on this plot due to changing input sizes, stride, etc.
Model summary
minival mAP
test-dev mAP
(Fastest) SSD w/MobileNet (Low Resolution)
(Fastest) SSD w/Inception V2 (Low Resolution)
(Sweet Spot) Faster R-CNN w/Resnet 101, 100 Proposals
(Sweet Spot) R-FCN w/Resnet 101, 300 Proposals
(Most Accurate) Faster R-CNN w/Inception Resnet V2, 300 Proposals
Table 3: Test-dev performance of the “critical” points along our optimality frontier.
well as input resolution and number of proposals (for Faster
R-CNN and R-FCN).
For each such model conﬁguration, we measure timings
on GPU, memory demand, number of parameters and ﬂoating point operations as described below. We make the entire
table of results available in the supplementary material, noting that as of the time of this submission, we have included
147 model conﬁgurations; models for a small subset of experimental conﬁgurations (namely some of the high resolution SSD models) have yet to converge, so we have for now
omitted them from analysis.
4.1. Analyses
Accuracy vs time
Figure 2 is a scatterplot visualizing the mAP of each of our
model conﬁgurations, with colors representing feature extractors, and marker shapes representing meta-architecture.
Running time per image ranges from tens of milliseconds
to almost 1 second.
Generally we observe that R-FCN
and SSD models are faster on average while Faster R-CNN
tends to lead to slower but more accurate models, requiring at least 100 ms per image. However, as we discuss below, Faster R-CNN models can be just as fast if we limit
the number of regions proposed.
We have also overlaid
an imaginary “optimality frontier” representing points at
which better accuracy can only be attained within this family of detectors by sacriﬁcing speed. In the following, we
highlight some of the key points along the optimality frontier as the best detectors to use and discuss the effect of the
various model conﬁguration options in isolation.
Critical points on the optimality frontier.
(Fastest: SSD w/MobileNet): On the fastest end of this optimality frontier, we see that SSD models with Inception
v2 and Mobilenet feature extractors are most accurate of
the fastest models. Note that if we ignore postprocessing
Incep.on V2
ResNet-101
Incep.on V3
Incep.on Resnet V2
Figure 3: Accuracy of detector (mAP on COCO) vs accuracy of feature extractor (as measured by top-1 accuracy on ImageNet-CLS). To avoid crowding
the plot, we show only the low resolution models.
Figure 4: Accuracy stratiﬁed by object size, meta-architecture and feature extractor, We ﬁx the image resolution to 300.
costs, Mobilenet seems to be roughly twice as fast as Inception v2 while being slightly worse in accuracy. (Sweet
Spot: R-FCN w/Resnet or Faster R-CNN w/Resnet and
only 50 proposals): There is an “elbow” in the middle of
the optimality frontier occupied by R-FCN models using
Residual Network feature extractors which seem to strike
the best balance between speed and accuracy among our
model conﬁgurations. As we discuss below, Faster R-CNN
w/Resnet models can attain similar speeds if we limit the
number of proposals to 50. (Most Accurate: Faster R-CNN
w/Inception Resnet at stride 8): Finally Faster R-CNN with
dense output Inception Resnet models attain the best possible accuracy on our optimality frontier, achieving, to our
knowledge, the state-of-the-art single model performance.
However these models are slow, requiring nearly a second
of processing time. The overall mAP numbers for these 5
models are shown in Table 3.
The effect of the feature extractor.
Intuitively, stronger performance on classiﬁcation should be
positively correlated with stronger performance on COCO
detection. To verify this, we investigate the relationship between overall mAP of different models and the Top-1 Imagenet classiﬁcation accuracy attained by the pretrained fea-
Figure 5: Effect of image resolution.
ture extractor used to initialize each model. Figure 3 indicates that there is indeed an overall correlation between
classiﬁcation and detection performance. However this correlation appears to only be signiﬁcant for Faster R-CNN and
R-FCN while the performance of SSD appears to be less reliant on its feature extractor’s classiﬁcation accuracy.
The effect of object size.
Figure 4 shows performance for different models on different sizes of objects. Not surprisingly, all methods do
much better on large objects. We also see that even though
SSD models typically have (very) poor performance on
small objects, they are competitive with Faster RCNN and
R-FCN on large objects, even outperforming these metaarchitectures for the faster and more lightweight feature extractors.
The effect of image size.
It has been observed by other authors that input resolution
can signiﬁcantly impact detection accuracy. From our experiments, we observe that decreasing resolution by a factor of two in both dimensions consistently lowers accuracy
(by 15.88% on average) but also reduces inference time by
a relative factor of 27.4% on average.
One reason for this effect is that high resolution inputs
allow for small objects to be resolved. Figure 5 compares
detector performance on large objects against that on small
objects, conﬁrms that high resolution models lead to significantly better mAP results on small objects (by a factor of
2 in many cases) and somewhat better mAP results on large
objects as well. We also see that strong performance on
small objects implies strong performance on large objects
in our models, (but not vice-versa as SSD models do well
on large objects but not small).
The effect of the number of proposals.
For Faster R-CNN and R-FCN, we can adjust the number
of proposals computed by the region proposal network. The
authors in both papers use 300 boxes, however, our experiments suggest that this number can be signiﬁcantly reduced
without harming mAP (by much). In some feature extractors where the “box classiﬁer” portion of Faster R-CNN is
expensive, this can lead to signiﬁcant computational savings. Figure 6a visualizes this trade-off curve for Faster R-
CNN models with high resolution inputs for different feature extractors. We see that Inception Resnet, which has
35.4% mAP with 300 proposals can still have surprisingly
high accuracy (29% mAP) with only 10 proposals. The
sweet spot is probably at 50 proposals, where we are able
to obtain 96% of the accuracy of using 300 proposals while
reducing running time by a factor of 3. While the computational savings are most pronounced for Inception Resnet,
we see that similar tradeoffs hold for all feature extractors.
Figure 6b visualizes the same trade-off curves for R-
Incep.on Resnet V2
Resnet 101
Incep.on V2
Incep.on Resnet V2
Resnet 101
Incep.on V2
Figure 6: Effect of proposing increasing number of regions on mAP accuracy (solid lines) and GPU inference time (dotted). Surprisingly, for Faster
R-CNN with Inception Resnet, we obtain 96% of the accuracy of using 300 proposals by using only 50 proposals, which reduces running time by a factor
Figure 7: GPU time (milliseconds) for each model, for image resolution of 300.
FCN models and shows that the computational savings from
using fewer proposals in the R-FCN setting are minimal
— this is not surprising as the box classiﬁer (the expensive part) is only run once per image. We see in fact that
at 100 proposals, the speed and accuracy for Faster R-CNN
models with ResNet becomes roughly comparable to that of
equivalent R-FCN models which use 300 proposals in both
mAP and GPU speed.
FLOPs analysis.
Figure 7 plots the GPU time for each model combination.
However, this is very platform dependent. Counting FLOPs
(multiply-adds) gives us a platform independent measure of
computation, which may or may not be linear with respect
to actual running times due to a number of issues such as
caching, I/O, hardware optimization etc,
Figures 8a and 8b plot the FLOP count against observed
wallclock times on the GPU and CPU respectively. Interestingly, we observe in the GPU plot (Figure 8a) that each
Figure 8: FLOPS vs time.
Figure 9: Memory (Mb) usage for each model. Note that we measure total memory usage rather than peak memory usage. Moreover, we include all data
points corresponding to the low-resolution models here. The error bars reﬂect variance in memory usage by using different numbers of proposals for the
Faster R-CNN and R-FCN models (which leads to the seemingly considerable variance in the Faster-RCNN with Inception Resnet bar).
model has a different average ratio of ﬂops to observed running time in milliseconds. For denser block models such
as Resnet 101, FLOPs/GPU time is typically greater than 1,
perhaps due to efﬁciency in caching. For Inception and Mobilenet models, this ratio is typically less than 1 — we conjecture that this could be that factorization reduces FLOPs,
but adds more overhead in memory I/O or potentially that
current GPU instructions (cuDNN) are more optimized for
dense convolution.
Memory analysis.
For memory benchmarking, we measure total usage rather
than peak usage.
Figures 10a, 10b plot memory usage
against GPU and CPU wallclock times. Overall, we observe
high correlation with running time with larger and more
powerful feature extractors requiring much more memory.
Figure 9 plots some of the same information in more detail,
drilling down by meta-architecture and feature extractor selection. As with speed, Mobilenet is again the cheapest, requiring less than 1Gb (total) memory in almost all settings.
Good localization at .75 IOU means good localization at all IOU thresholds.
While slicing the data by object size leads to interesting
insights, it is also worth nothing that slicing data by IOU
threshold does not give much additional information. Figure 11 shows in fact that both mAP@.5 and mAP@.75
performances are almost perfectly linearly correlated with
mAP@[.5:.95]. Thus detectors that have poor performance
at the higher IOU thresholds always also show poor performance at the lower IOU thresholds. This being said, we
also observe that mAP@.75 is slightly more tightly corre-
Figure 10: Memory (Mb) vs time.
lated with mAP@[.5:.95] (with R2 > .99), so if we were
to replace the standard COCO metric with mAP at a single
IOU threshold, we would likely choose IOU=.75.
4.2. State-of-the-art detection on COCO
Finally, we brieﬂy describe how we ensembled some of
our models to achieve the current state of the art performance on the 2016 COCO object detection challenge. Our
model attains 41.3% mAP@[.5, .95] on the COCO test set
and is an ensemble of ﬁve Faster R-CNN models based on
Resnet and Inception Resnet feature extractors. This outperforms the previous best result (37.1% mAP@[.5, .95]) by
MSRA, which used an ensemble of three Resnet-101 models . Table 4 summarizes the performance of our model
and highlights how our model has improved on the state-ofthe-art across all COCO metrics. Most notably, our model
achieves a relative improvement of nearly 60% on small object recall over the previous best result. Even though this
ensemble with state-of-the-art numbers could be viewed as
an extreme point on the speed/accuracy tradeoff curves (requires ∼50 end-to-end network evaluations per image), we
have chosen to present this model in isolation since it is not
comparable to the “single model” results that we focused on
in the rest of the paper.
To construct our ensemble, we selected a set of ﬁve models from our collection of Faster R-CNN models. Each of
the models was based on Resnet and Inception Resnet feature extractors with varying output stride conﬁgurations, retrained using variations on the loss functions, and different
random orderings of the training data. Models were selected greedily using their performance on a held-out validation set. However, in order to take advantage of models
with complementary strengths, we also explicitly encourage diversity by pruning away models that are too similar
to previously selected models (c.f., ). To do this, we
computed the vector of average precision results across each
COCO category for each model and declared two models to
be too similar if their category-wise AP vectors had cosine
distance greater than some threshold.
Table 5 summarizes the ﬁnal selected model speciﬁcations as well as their individual performance on COCO as
single models.4
Ensembling these ﬁve models using the
procedure described in (Appendix A) and using multicrop inference then yielded our ﬁnal model. Note that we do
not use multiscale training, horizontal ﬂipping, box reﬁnement, box voting, or global context which are sometimes
used in the literature. Table 6 compares a single model’s
performance against two ways of ensembling, and shows
that (1) encouraging for diversity did help against a hand
selected ensemble, and (2) ensembling and multicrop were
responsible for almost 7 points of improvement over a single model.
4.3. Example detections
In Figures 12 to 17 we visualize detections on images
from the COCO dataset, showing side-by-side comparisons
of ﬁve of the detectors that lie on the “optimality frontier”
of the speed-accuracy trade-off plot. To visualize, we select
detections with score greater than a threshold and plot the
top 20 detections in each image. We use a threshold of .5
for Faster R-CNN and R-FCN and .3 for SSD. These thresholds were hand-tuned for (subjective) visual attractiveness
and not using rigorous criteria so we caution viewers from
reading too much into the tea leaves from these visualizations. This being said, we see that across our examples, all
of the detectors perform reasonably well on large objects
— SSD only shows its weakness on small objects, missing
some of the smaller kites and people in the ﬁrst image as
well as the smaller cups and bottles on the dining table in
4Note that these numbers were computed on a held-out validation set
and are not strictly comparable to the ofﬁcial COCO test-dev data results
(though they are expected to be very close).
Figure 11: Overall COCO mAP (@[.5:.95]) for all experiments plotted against corresponding mAP@.50IOU and mAP@.75IOU. It is unsurprising that
these numbers are correlated, but it is interesting that they are almost perfectly correlated so for these models, it is never the case that a model has strong
performance at 50% IOU but weak performance at 75% IOU.
Trimps-Soushen
Table 4: Performance on the 2016 COCO test-challenge dataset. AP and AR refer to (mean) average precision and average recall respectively. Our model
achieves a relative improvement of nearly 60% on small objects recall over the previous state-of-the-art COCO detector.
Feature Extractor
Output stride
loss ratio
Location loss function
Resnet 101
Resnet 101
Inception Resnet (v2)
Inception Resnet (v2)
Inception Resnet (v2)
SmoothL1 + IOU
Table 5: Summary of single models that were automatically selected to be part of the diverse ensemble. Loss ratio refers to the multipliers α, β for
location and classiﬁcation losses, respectively.
Faster RCNN with Inception Resnet (v2)
Hand selected Faster RCNN ensemble w/multicrop
Diverse Faster RCNN ensemble w/multicrop
Table 6: Effects of ensembling and multicrop inference. Numbers reported on COCO test-dev dataset. Second row (hand selected ensemble) consists of
6 Faster RCNN models with 3 Resnet 101 (v1) and 3 Inception Resnet (v2) and the third row (diverse ensemble) is described in detail in Table 5.
the last image.
5. Conclusion
We have performed an experimental comparison of some
of the main aspects that inﬂuence the speed and accuracy
of modern object detectors. We hope this will help practitioners choose an appropriate method when deploying object detection in the real world. We have also identiﬁed
some new techniques for improving speed without sacri-
ﬁcing much accuracy, such as using many fewer proposals
than is usual for Faster R-CNN.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the following people for their advice and support throughout this project: Tom Duerig, Dumitru Erhan, Jitendra Malik, George Papandreou, Dominik Roblek, Chuck Rosenberg, Nathan Silberman, Abhinav Srivastava, Rahul Sukthankar, Christian Szegedy, Jasper
Uijlings, Jay Yagnik, Xiangxin Zhu.