Analysis and Control of Epidemics
A survey of spreading processes on complex networks
Cameron Nowzari, Victor M. Preciado, and George J. Pappas
August 26, 2015
NOTE: This arXiv version contains a table of contents at the end for convenience.
This article reviews and presents various solved and open problems in the development,
analysis, and control of epidemic models. Proper modeling and analysis of spreading processes
has been a longstanding area of research among many different ﬁelds including mathematical
biology, physics, computer science, engineering, economics, and the social sciences. One of
the earliest epidemic models conceived was by Daniel Bernoulli in 1760, which was motivated
by studying the spreading of smallpox . In addition to Bernoulli, there were many different
researchers also working on mathematical epidemic models around this time . These initial
models were quite simplistic and the further development and study of such models dates back
to the 1900s – , where still simple models were studied to provide insight as to how various
diseases can spread through a population. In recent years, we have seen a resurgence of interest
in these problems as the concept of ‘networks’ becomes increasingly prevalent in modeling
many different aspects of our world today. A more comprehensive review of the history of
mathematical epidemiology can be found in , .
Despite the study of epidemic models having spanned such a long period of time, it is
only recently that control engineers have entered the scene. Consequently, there is already a vast
body of work dedicated to the development and analysis of epidemic models, but far less that
provide proper insight and machinery on how to effectively control these processes. The focus
of this article is to provide an introductory tutorial on the latter. We are interested in presenting
a relatively concise report for new engineers looking to enter the ﬁeld of spreading processes
on complex networks. This article presents some of the more well-known and recent results in
the literature while also identifying numerous open problems that can beneﬁt from the collective
knowledge of optimization and control theorists.
 
Although this article focuses on the context of epidemics, the same models and tools we
present are directly applicable to a myriad of different spreading processes on complex networks.
Examples include the adoption of an idea or rumor through a social network like Twitter, the
consumption of a new product in a marketplace, the risk of receiving a computer virus through
the World Wide Web, and of course the spreading of a disease through a population – . For
this reason, we will often use the terms individuals, people, nodes, and agents interchangeably.
We begin the article by introducing and analyzing some classical epidemic models and
their extensions to network models. We then discuss various methods of controlling these
epidemic models and several extensions. After describing the main shortcomings in the current
literature and highlighting some recent preliminary works that are aimed at improving the current
state of the art, we close by providing some intuition into the current research challenges that
need to be addressed in order to fully harness the power of these works and make a real societal
Modeling and Analysis of Epidemics
Before jumping into the class of models we study in this article, we must start by
emphasizing that there are an uncountable number of ways to model spreading processes.
The underlying common factor that ties almost all epidemic models together is the existence
of ‘compartments’ in which individuals in a population are divided. The two most common
compartments that exist in essentially every single epidemic model are called ‘Susceptible’ and
‘Infected’ , , . In models that contain only these two compartments, a given population
is initially divided into these two compartments. The ‘Susceptible’ compartment (S) represents
individuals who are healthy, but susceptible to becoming infected. The ’Infected’ compartment (I)
captures individuals who are infected, but able to recover. From here there are an insurmountable
number of ways that the interactions within the population can be modeled.
Throughout this article, we focus on models where individuals can move from one
compartment to another randomly with some deﬁned rates. For instance, in this two compartment
model healthy individuals can randomly transition from S to I with some infection rate that is
a result of interactions with infected individuals. Similarly, infected individuals can randomly
transition from I to S with some recovery rate that is a result of recovering from the infection.
More details on how these rates are deﬁned are provided later. Figure 1 shows the simple
interaction described above.
In addition to models with only two compartments, there are many other epidemic models
aimed at capturing various important features of realistic diseases and spreading processes. This is
often done by adding more compartments, such as a ‘Removed’ (R) compartment representing
individuals who are no longer susceptible to the infection. This might refer to a deceased,
vaccinated, or immune individual. Other compartments have also been proposed in the literature
to study the effect of, for example, an incubation period, partial immunity, or quarantine in the
spreading dynamics – .
For brevity, we will now focus our attention on two of the oldest epidemic models
known as the Susceptible-Infected-Removed (SIR) and Susceptible-Infected-Susceptible (SIS)
models . However, we note that the following exposition can be applied to more general
compartmental models with some appropriate changes.
Let N be the total number of individuals in a population. We denote by Xi(t) ∈{S, I, R}
the state of node i ∈{1, . . . , N} at time t. We collect the state of the entire population in a state
vector X(t) = (X1(t), . . . , XN(t))T. The evolution of the states is then described by a Markov
process as follows. An individual i infected at time t recovers to the removed state at a ﬁxed
rate δi > 0. In other words, if node i is infected at time t, the probability that this node loses
its infection in the time slot (t, t + ∆t] for small ∆t is given by
Pr(Xi(t + ∆t) = R| Xi(t) = I) = δi∆t + o(∆t),
Pr(Xi(t + ∆t) = S| Xi(t) = I) = δi∆t + o(∆t).
The above represents an endogenous transition which occurs internally within each node,
independent of the states of other nodes .
Similarly, an individual i that is susceptible at time t becomes infected at a rate βeff
depends on the state of the entire population X(t). This is known as an exogenous transition
because it is inﬂuenced by factors external to the node itself. We discuss this at length in the
sections to come. Figure 2 shows the simple interaction described above.
Remark 1 (Other spreading models) We note here that this article excludes chain binomial
models (e.g., Reed-Frost model) and other similar types of models from percolation theory.
Depending on the application at hand, the model for the spreading dynamics can vary. The
main difference in the models we consider and models like Reed-Frost are that we want to
allow infected individuals to continuously try to infect healthy ones. In the Reed-Frost model,
an infected person only has one chance of infecting a healthy person. However, when thinking of
a virus like the ﬂu, a healthy person is continuously in danger of becoming sick when in contact
with an infected individual, rather than a one-time chance. For instance, the Reed-Frost model
might be more suitable for modeling the spreading of an email virus rather than an infectious
biological disease. The interested reader should see , for further details.
We would also like to brieﬂy point out that this other community is indeed active and
working on similar types of problems as the ones we will highlight in this article. Many works
exist on forecasting the cascading effects of a single infection or failure on a network , 
and how they can be mitigated through vaccination . Conversely, one may be more interested
in ﬁnding the most inﬂuential nodes or where to start an infection in a network to reach as many
people as possible , . This is often referred to as a seeding problem. Further extensions
study attack and vaccination strategies on these models and even cases in which there are
multiple contagions on multiple networks .
Classical models
Based on the above discussion, the dynamics of the SIR model is described by a 3Ndimensional Markov process. The exponential size of the state space makes this model very hard
to analyze. One standard method to simplify the analysis is to consider the evolution of the total
number of healthy and infected individuals rather than the state of each individual separately.
This is commonly referred to as population dynamics , . Furthermore, the recovery and
infection rates are often assumed to be the same for all individuals; that is, δi = δ and βeff
for all i. The standard population dynamics assumes a well-mixed population which means all
individuals affect and are affected by all other individuals equally. Figure 3 shows the described
interactions of this well-mixed population.
Stochastic population models
The SIR population model is described as follows. Letting N I(t), N R(t) ∈{0, 1, . . . , N}
be the number of infected and removed individuals at some time t, respectively, the number of
susceptible individuals is necessarily given by N S(t) = 1−N I(t)−N R(t). A common choice for
the infection rate is given by βeff = βN IN S , , for some β > 0, known as the mass
action law. In other words, the rate at which the total number of susceptible individuals become
infected is proportional to the product of the number of susceptible and infected individuals in
the population. The state at some time t + ∆t is then given by
(N I, N R) →
(N I + 1, N R)
with probability βN IN S∆t + o(∆t),
(N I −1, N R −1)
with probability δN I∆t + o(∆t),
(N S, N R)
with probability 1 −(βN IN S + δN I)∆t + o(∆t).
For the SIS model we simply force N R = 0 at all times which simpliﬁes this to
with probability βN IN S∆t + o(∆t),
with probability δN I∆t + o(∆t),
with probability 1 −(βN IN S + δN I)∆t + o(∆t).
Removing the explicit deﬁnition of time, the SIS process can then be seen as a random
walk on a line – (a similar Markov chain can be described for the SIR model)
N I →N I + 1 with probability
β(N −N I) + δ,
N I →N I −1 with probability
β(N −N I) + δ.
An important observation about this model (3) is that it is a Markov chain with a single
absorbing state N I = 0 in which all agents are healthy. In other words, once the entire population
is healthy, the infection cannot suddenly reemerge. It is known from the theory of Markov chains
that given enough time, the infection will eventually die out with probability 1 (see for a
review of Markov chains and relevant properties). Thus, the study of these systems is often
interested in answering the question of when or how quickly the infection will die out. We
comment on this later, in Remark 3.
To further simplify the problem, many works consider a deterministic approximation of
these stochastic dynamics. In fact, the simpler deterministic dynamics we introduce next predate
the introduction of the stochastic model above .
Deterministic population models
The models we present next are perhaps the two most studied epidemic models in the
literature and is covered in a large number of different books , , – , – . These
books also discuss a large variety of extensions including more complicated disease models that
have more than two states, modeling for birth and mortality rates, different types of infection
rates, and different categories for each disease state; for example, based on age or sex. We only
present the most basic models here.
Assuming a large population size N, we deﬁne pI =
the fractions of infected and susceptible individuals, respectively. Then, we can write the
deterministic SIR version of (1) as
˙pS = −βpIpS,
˙pI = βpIpS −δpI,
and the deterministic SIS version of (2) as
˙pS = −βpIpS + δpI,
˙pI = βpIpS −δpI.
These are derived by leveraging Kurtz’ theorem while assuming N to be very large .
For simplicity, we will continue the analysis only for the SIS model but note that similar
analysis can be done for the SIR model as well. Since the population size N is ﬁxed and
N R = 0, we have that pS = 1 −pI, and the above equations (5) are redundant. Hence, they can
be simpliﬁed to
˙pI = βpI(1 −pI) −δpI.
Given an initial condition pI(0), this equation can be analytically solved , , . The
solution is given by
β(e(β−δ)t−1)
Given the exact solution of pI(t), we are able to characterize its equilibrium points in the
following result.
Theorem 2 (Solutions to deterministic population model) The solution of pI(t) approaches
β as t →∞for β > δ, and 0 as t →∞for β ≤δ.
Remark 3 (Deterministic vs stochastic population models) It is important to note here that
the deterministic models are only approximations of the stochastic models. A natural question
to ask then is the following: What can the threshold result of Theorem 2 tell us about the
stochastic model in (3)? The ﬁrst thing to note is that in the stochastic model, given enough
time, the system will reach the disease-free state with probability 1. However, from Theorem 2
we see that for β > δ, the deterministic model will converge to an endemic equilibrium, meaning
the disease never dies out. Thus, rather than studying the equilibrium values of the two models,
the authors in , , look at the expected time E[T] for the stochastic model to reach
the disease-free equilibrium. Interestingly, they are able to show that for β < δ, the expected
time E[T] is upper-bounded by Nβ
δ . On the other hand, when β > δ, the expected time E[T]
grows exponentially with N.
The analysis of the deterministic model results in a very precise threshold result that
translates directly to the stochastic model as discussed in Remark 3. Threshold conditions are
often given in terms of a reproduction number R0, which is the expected number of individuals
a single infected individual will infect , over the course of its infection period. In other
words, given a fully healthy population, if we infect person i at random, R0 is the expected
number of other individuals that will become infected over the course of agent i’s infection.
This is a very useful metric with a critical value of R0 = 1. When R0 < 1 the disease does not
spread quickly enough, resulting in a decay in the number of infected individuals (in expectation).
On the other hand, when R0 > 1 the infected population grows over time (in expectation) .
In the simple model considered above, the reproduction number is given by β
δ . Furthermore, the
exact solutions and asymptotic behavior of the system are easy to obtain.
The reproduction number is an important parameter that epidemiologists are interested in
identifying for different diseases and environments as it is a single number that can predict
whether a certain outbreak of a disease will become an epidemic or die out on its own. Of
course, the problem is that computing R0 in general is not trivial, as there is no database for
things like infection rates and recovery rates for different diseases.
The main drawback of these population models is that they are very crude model derived
by making many simplifying assumptions including (i) a homogeneous incidence rate βeff and
recovery rate δ for all individuals, (ii) a two-state model, (iii) a constant population size, and (iv)
a well-mixed population (or a contact network that is a complete graph). These drawbacks were
very evident when scientists attempted to estimate the reproduction number of SARS in China
in 2002-2003 and grossly overestimated it. This led to SARS scares making global headlines
which eventually ﬁzzled out because the actual reproduction number was far less than estimated
due to the crude population models. More details on how this occurred can be found in ,
but the upshot is that more reﬁned models are needed.
Network models
In order to create more reﬁned epidemic models, it is clear that we cannot simply lump
an entire population into two compartments deﬁned by a single number. Ideally, we would be
able to model the states of all N individuals independently and allow for arbitrary interactions
among them. Not surprisingly, this is not a trivial task.
In this section we are interested in spreading processes on a given, arbitrarily topology.
Before jumping into the models we are interested in, we should mention that we are skipping
over a plethora of work that has been dedicated to extending the population models to structured
network models. More speciﬁcally, before jumping to completely arbitrary networks, there is a
large body of work that studies various, speciﬁc structures. For instance, some works study
how a disease spreads on a two-dimensional lattice or star graph – . Others consider
more complex interconnection patterns, such as power-law and small-world networks, that still
have some exploitable structure. In this context, a common method to analyze these networks
is to assume that nodes are infected at a rate proportional to the number of neighbors they
have – . These methods are justiﬁed depending on the assumptions enforced on the
network topology. A review of these types of models can be found in . In what follows, we
present epidemiological models on arbitrary networks.
Stochastic network models
Here we describe an epidemic model described as a continuous-time networked Markov
model. Consider a network of N nodes represented by a connected, undirected graph G = (V, E)
where V is the set of nodes and E ⊂V ×V is the set of edges. We deﬁne the matrix A ∈RN×N
as the adjacency matrix of the graph, deﬁned component-wise as aij = 1 if node i can be directly
affected by node j, and aij = 0 otherwise. See “Graph Theory” for further details.
We let Xi(t) denote the state of node i at time t, where Xi(t) = 1 indicates that i is
infected and Xi(t) = 0 indicates that i is healthy at time t. Infected nodes can transmit the
disease to its neighbors in the graph G with rate β > 0. Simultaneously, infected nodes recover
from the disease with rate δ > 0. Figure 4 shows the described interactions on an arbitrary
network. One can model this spreading process using the Markov process
with rate β P
with rate δ.
Notice that there exists one absorbing state in this Markov process (corresponding to the diseasefree equilibrium) that can be reached from any state X(t) = [X1(t), . . . , XN(t)]T. This implies
that, regardless of the initial condition X(0), the epidemic will eventually die out in ﬁnite time
with probability 1.
An interesting measure of the virality of a spreading process is the expected time E[T]
it takes for the epidemic to die out. In and , we ﬁnd the following threshold conditions
in terms of the infection strength, deﬁned as τ = β
Theorem 4 (Threshold for sublinear expected time to extinction) If
where λmax(A) is the maximum real eigenvalue of A, then
δ −βλmax(A)
for any initial condition X(0).
Note that Theorem 4 only provides a sufﬁcient condition for ‘fast’ extinction of a disease.
There have been many efforts to determine whether this condition is also necessary, but at the
time of writing this remains an open question on general graphs. The works , , 
show that there exists some critical value τc of the infection strength for which the expected
time to extinction grows exponentially with N when τ ≥τc. The following result formalizes this
statement and provides a lower bound on the critical values , ; however, we should also
note that stronger statements exist when considering graphs with a ﬁxed structure (e.g., lattice,
star) .
Theorem 5 (Threshold for exponential expected time to extinction) There exists
such that for τ > τc, the expected time to extinction E[T] = O
, where k depends on τ
and the structure of the graph G.
The maximum eigenvalue λmax(A) of an adjacency matrix is a parameter that captures
how ‘tightly connected’ the graph is. In general, more connections means a large λmax(A).
Intuitively, the results of Theorems 4 and 5 are saying that the more tightly connected the graph
is, the easier it is for a disease to spread.
It is worth mentioning that although the result of Theorem 4 provides an upper bound
on the expectation of the extinction time, the possibility of a persisting epidemic is not ruled
out. For example, it has been shown for star graphs that regardless of the infection strength τ,
there is a positive probability that the time to extinction is super-polynomial in the number of
nodes , , . Furthermore, for high-degree or scale-free networks (such as preferential
attachment or power-law conﬁguration model graphs ), it has been shown that this
threshold goes to zero as the number of nodes increases because the maximum eigenvalue
grows unbounded with N.
Deterministic network models
Here we describe the deterministic model of the SIS dynamics over arbitrary networks , – . We begin by assuming homogeneous recovery and infection rates, although
this assumption will be relaxed in the following section. The natural recovery rate of each node
is given by δ > 0 and the infection rate at which a node is affected by infected neighboring
nodes is β > 0. The dynamics of the spread is described by the set of ordinary differential
˙pi = −δpi +
aijβpj(1 −pi),
where pi(t) ∈ describes the (approximated) probability that an individual i is infected
at time t. See “Networked Mean-Field Approximations” for further details. This variable has
another interesting interpretation in the context of metapopulation models. In a metapopulation
model, each node does not represent an individual, but a large subpopulation (such as an entire
district or city). In this context, pi can be interpreted as the fraction of the i-th subpopulation
that is infected. See “Meta-Population Models” for further details.
As with all other epidemic models, we see that the disease-free equilibrium pi = 0 for
all i ∈{1, . . . , N} is a trivial equilibrium of the dynamics. We are now interested in ﬁnding
conditions such that this equilibrium is globally asymptotically stable. Letting p = (p1, . . . , pN)T
and recalling the infection strength τ = β
δ , the following result from – characterizes the
convergence properties of these dynamics.
Theorem 6 (Threshold condition for networks) Given the dynamics (8) for any p(0) ̸= 0, the
equilibrium p∗= 0 is globally asymptotically stable if and only if τ ≤
λmax(A). Furthermore, for
λmax(A), there exists p∗∗∈RN
(0,1) such that p∗∗is globally asymptotically stable.
Remark 7 (Deterministic vs stochastic network models) Similar to our discussion in Remark 3, there is a connection between the deterministic result in Theorem 6 and the stochastic
result in Theorem 4. Since X = 0 is an absorbing state, the stochastic dynamics will eventually
reach the disease-free state with probability 1. However, Theorem 6 claims that for βλmax(A) > δ
the deterministic model will converge to an endemic equilibrium, meaning the disease never
dies out. To resolve this apparent contradiction, we again focus our attention on the expected
time E[T] for the stochastic model to reach the disease-free equilibrium. Remarkably, Theorem 4
provides a sufﬁcient condition for a disease to quickly die out that is in agreement with the
threshold result of Theorem 6. However, as suggested by Theorem 5, it has not yet been shown
whether the same threshold condition holds for persistence of the disease in the stochastic model.
A major drawback of the above model is that it assumes a constant infection rate β and
recovery rate δ for all individuals. To further reﬁne the model, we are interested in allowing
different recovery rates for each person and different infection rates for each type of contact. This
allows for a much more general model that can capture more realistic scenarios. For instance, it
is not fair to assume that everyone you come in contact with has an equal chance to infect you.
A family member or a spouse is much more likely to infect you than a casual acquaintance. To
capture these heterogeneous effects, we develop heterogeneous network models next.
Heterogeneous network models
Here we describe the dynamics of the SIS model with heterogeneous recovery and
infection rates over arbitrary strongly connected directed graphs G = (V, E). The recovery
rate of node i is given by δi > 0. In our exposition, we consider an edge-dependent infection
rate. In other words, the infection rate at which a node i is affected by an infected node j is
given by βij > 0 if (i, j) ∈E. For simplicity, we let βij = 0 if (i, j) /∈E. The dynamics of the
SIS model in an arbitrary network is described by 
˙pi = −δipi +
βijpj(1 −pi),
where pi ∈ can be seen as either the fraction of the i-th subpopulation that is infected (in
the metapopulation case), or the probability that an individual i is infected , – .
In this model, the disease-free equilibrium pi = 0 for all i ∈{1, . . . , N} is again a
trivial equilibrium. In what follows, we derive conditions for this equilibrium to be globally
asymptotically stable. Let p = (p1, . . . , pN)T denote the state vector of the system, D =
diag (δ1, . . . , δN) the diagonal matrix of recovery rates, and B = [βij] the matrix of infection
rates. The dynamics (9) can then be written as
˙p = (B −D)p + h,
where hi = −PN
j=1 βijpipj. The following result from , , characterizes the
convergence properties of these dynamics.
Theorem 8 (Threshold condition for heterogeneous networks) Given the dynamics in (9),
for any p(0) ̸= 0, the equilibrium p∗= 0 is globally asymptotically stable if and only if
λmax(B −D) ≤0. Furthermore, for λmax(B −D) > 0, there exists p∗∗∈RN
(0,1) such that
p∗∗is globally asymptotically stable.
These stability results have been recently extended to a number of more complicated
models such as the three-state SAIS model , the four-state G-SEIV model , and even
the SI∗V ∗model with an arbitrary number of states .
Now that we have provided a basic understanding of how the SIS process evolves and the
connections between the stochastic processes and their deterministic approximations as discussed
in Remark 7, we are now ready to formulate and study some relevant control problems.
Control of Epidemics
In the previous section we presented several approaches for modeling the dynamics of
spreading processes taking place on arbitrary contact networks. We have also analyzed these
models and introduced several stability results for both the deterministic and stochastic cases.
In this section, we describe several results aimed at controlling the dynamics of the spreading
processes.
Ideally, we are interested in controlling the stochastic network models to stop the
spreading of a disease as quickly as possible. However, before getting to the details, we must
begin by talking about our effective ‘control levers’ in treating an epidemic. For simplicity, let
us consider the heterogeneous SIS dynamics (9)
˙pi = −δipi +
βijpj(1 −pi),
as a meta-population model with M subpopulations. That is, each node i is some subpopulation
(such as a town) of ni individuals in a larger population (such as a country) of N individuals
(see “Meta-Population Models” for further details). The parameters we have to play with are
then the recovery rates δi for each subpopulation and the infection rates βij that describe the
interactions between various subpopulations.
In order to mitigate the effects of an epidemic, in general we would like to increase the
recovery rates δi and decrease the infection rates βij. Increasing the recovery rate of a given
subpopulation can be done by providing better treatment to sick individuals. For instance, by
allocating more resources to this particular subpopulation they can afford more doctors or better
methods of treatment for ﬁghting a particular disease. Decreasing infection rates can be done in
numerous ways. Limiting trafﬁc/travel between subpopulations can help decrease the infection
rate. Completely quarantining a subpopulation i is equivalent to setting βji = 0 for all j since i
can no longer affect other subpopulations. Other ways of decreasing infection rates include
milder methods of prevention, such as distributing masks to a population to minimize chance
of infection; or even simply raising awareness about a disease to make people less likely to
contract the disease.
Clearly if we had inﬁnite resources, treatment power, and simply quarantined everyone
the disease would likely die quickly; however, this is not a feasible solution. Thus, given a
ﬁxed budget of some sort, it is imperative to identify which parameters speciﬁcally are the most
important in order to mitigate the effects of the disease as much as possible. We formulate these
problems and discuss the current state of the art next.
Spectral control and optimization
Here we are interested in various optimal resource allocation problems. More speciﬁcally,
given a ﬁxed budget, the idea is to optimally invest resources to best hinder the spreading of
a disease. Leveraging the results of Theorems 4-6, a natural option to mitigate the effects of a
possible epidemic is to make λmax(B −D) as small as possible.
We ﬁrst discuss the homogeneous SIS dynamics (8) where δ and β are ﬁxed parameters.
Hence, we are interested in making λmax(A) as small as possible. This can be achieved by
modifying the network structure. The work studies the effects that the network structure
has on this maximum eigenvalue. In this work, the authors study how to decrease λmax(A) in
one of two ways. The ﬁrst is to remove nodes from A. This might physically be done by either
quarantining or immunizing certain individuals, making them unable to contract the disease and,
more importantly, to spread it. Another way to reduce λmax(A) is to remove links rather than
completely removing nodes. This might physically be done by limiting trafﬁc between certain
cities or limiting interactions between certain individuals. The caveat is that we are interested
in doing this while removing the least amount of nodes or edges since these actions are likely
quite costly in the real world. The node and link removal problems of interest are then described
as follows.
Problem 9 (Optimal node removal) Given an original graph A and a ﬁxed budget C > 0,
minimize λmax(A) by removing at most C nodes from A.
Problem 10 (Optimal link removal) Given an original graph A and a ﬁxed budget C > 0,
minimize λmax(A) by removing at most C links from A.
Unfortunately, the node and link removal problems described above are NP-complete
and NP-hard, respectively . As a result, several papers instead solve convex relations or
propose heuristics to approximately solve these problems. A simple example is one in which
the nodes with the highest degrees (largest numbers of neighbors) are removed one by one
until the budget is exhausted. Other heuristics are based on various network metrics, such as
betweenness centrality , PageRank , or susceptible size , to decide which nodes
should be removed ﬁrst. Similarly, there are works that are concerned with link removal rather
than node removal , , . In , the authors solve a convex relaxation of the problem
and effectively project its optimal solution onto the original problem.
Unfortunately, the authors in study the worst-case scenarios of these suboptimal
strategies to show that network-based heuristics can perform arbitrarily poorly. Thus, it is hard to
evaluate a priori how well a suboptimal solution to Problems 9 and 10 will perform. Furthermore,
completely removing nodes or even links might not be feasible solutions anyway as this would
require fully quarantining certain subpopulations or completely shutting down certain roads or
methods of travel between various subpopulations.
Instead, let us now consider the heterogeneous network model in (9) and tune the values
of the parameters δi and βij rather than completely changing the network structure. The authors
in formulate this as an optimization problem to minimize the steady-state infection values
over heterogeneous recovery rates. A gradient descent algorithm is then proposed to ﬁnd feasible
local minima solutions. Another alternative is to utilize the result of Theorem 8. In this direction,
several papers consider the minimization of λmax(B −D) under various constraints. The effect
of minimizing this eigenvalue is to maximize the exponential decay rate of the system towards
the disease-free equilibrium.
While tuning the spreading and recovery rates, one can consider a discrete optimization
setup in which one can only tune these rates within a discrete set of feasible values. This problem
has been shown to be NP-complete in . Alternatively, one can consider a relaxation in which
these rates can take values in a feasible continuous interval. In this case, the works in ,
 propose efﬁcient methods for allocating resources to minimize the dominant eigenvalue
of relevant matrices. In and , the problem of minimizing λmax(B −D) is cast into a
semideﬁnite program framework for undirected networks. In , , this problem is solved
for directed graphs using geometric programming where the solution can be obtained using
standard off-the-shelf convex optimization software. Furthermore, geometric programs allow for
the simultaneous optimization over both the infection rates and recovery rates. See “Geometric
Programming” for further details.
In what follows, we present a simpliﬁed version of the optimization problem considered
in and show how it can be efﬁciently reformulated as a geometric program. Consider the
deterministic heterogeneous SIS model (9) with natural recovery rates δi = δi > 0 and infection
rates βi = βi > 0 for all i ∈{1, . . . , N}, where βij = βi for j ∈N in
and βij = 0 otherwise. In
other words, the rate at which a node i is infected is a node-dependent parameter rather than an
edge-dependent one. We then assume we are able to pay some cost to increase δi up to some
maximum δi > δi. Alternatively, we can also pay a cost to decrease βi down to some minimum
βi < βi. The control parameters are then given by δi and βi, where δi ≤δi ≤δi,
βi ≤βi ≤βi.
Assume we have access to cost functions fi(δi) and gi(βi) describing the associated cost
to increase δi and decrease βi, respectively. In this context, given a ﬁxed budget C > 0, our goal
is to minimize λmax(B −D) while satisfying the constraint that the total cost does not exceed
the given budget. This problem is formally stated below.
Problem 11 (Budget-constrained allocation) Given a ﬁxed budget C > 0,
λmax(B −D)
i=1 fi(βi) + gi(δi) ≤C
βi ≤βi ≤βi
δi ≤δi ≤δi.
Note that solving Problem 11 is not trivial since the objective (maximum eigenvalue)
function is not convex in general. However, the following result guarantees that, under mild
assumptions on the cost functions, this problem can be solved exactly by rewriting it as
a geometric program which can be solved using standard off-the-shelf convex optimization
software. See for further details on this equivalence.
Theorem 12 (Solution to budget-constrained allocation problem) Problem 11 can be solved
by solving the following auxiliary geometric program
λ,{βi,eδi,ui}
j=1 aijβiuj + eδiui ≤λui,
j=1 fj(βj) + egj(eδj) ≤C,
φ −δi ≤eδi ≤φ −δi,
βi ≤βi ≤βi,
for all i ∈{1, . . . , N}, with φ > maxj δj and egj(eδj) = gj(φ −δj), where β∗
i = φ −eδ∗
solve Problem 11 with rate λmax(Q) ≤λ∗−φ.
We have only considered node-dependent infection rates βi here. This is extended to the
case where these rates can be controlled over edges βij in . Aside from the discussed SIS
model, other recent works have also applied these ideas to more general models. The authors
in formulate the SDP problem for a three-state SAIS model proposed in in which
alertness to a possible epidemic is also modeled. A general four-state SEIV model is considered
in for which the authors develop equivalent geometric programs to optimize the dominant
eigenvalue over various parameters of the model simultaneously.
These types of optimal allocation strategies have been recently compared to fair strategies
in , where resources must be allocated evenly across all nodes, to show their effectiveness in
targeting resources rather than evenly spreading them. However, there are still some drawbacks
of these spectral control approaches that need to be addressed before we can fully take advantage
of their solutions in weakening the impact of diseases in the future.
The ﬁrst main drawback of these approaches is that they do not take into account the
current state of the system. This means that even nodes that are not at immediate risk of being
infected might be allocated resources to raise their recovery rates or decrease their infection rates.
Second, solving these problems exactly requires a lot of knowledge. In addition to knowing the
natural recovery rates and infection rates, we have assumed that we have exact knowledge of the
entire graph which is a bit of a stretch. Third, these are centralized solutions which may take
a long time to compute. Although we have been able to solve some variants of this problem
as discussed above efﬁciently (in polynomial time), this still may not be fast enough if these
networks are very large. Lastly, we have also assumed that once the optimal solution is found,
we are able to instantaneously set the recovery rates and infection rates to the desired values.
We will discuss the current efforts on how each of these problems are currently being
addressed and what still needs to be done in the sections to come. We begin in the next section
by relaxing this ﬁrst issue by looking at optimal control problems with feedback, rather than
one-time optimal resource allocation solutions.
Optimal control
Here we discuss various optimal control problems formulated for mitigating epidemics
under the SIS and SIR dynamics. However, since very little work has been done for the network
models thus far, we start by looking at the classical models.
Classical models
We begin by recalling and slightly modifying the SIS population model (6) to account
for a control action. Following , we rewrite the original SIS population model with δ = δ1
˙pI = βpI(1 −pI) −δ1pI,
where δ1 > 0 is the natural recovery rate of an individual. We now assume that we are able to
control this system by increasing the recovery rate of individuals in the population from δ1 to
δ2 > δ1. This can be achieved, for instance, by allocating antidotes or providing other forms of
treatment to a fraction of the population. Our control signal u ∈ is then the fraction of the
population that we provide treatment to. For simplicity, we assume that we are able to instantly
affect the recovery rates of any number of individuals in the population. The dynamics of the
controlled SIS population model is then given by
˙pI = βpI(1 −pI) −((1 −u)δ1 + uδ2) pI.
Applying the result of Theorem 2, we obtain the following corollary for a ﬁxed u(t) = ¯u.
Corollary 13 (Population dynamics threshold condition) The solution of pI(t) approaches 0
as t →∞for
Since ¯u ∈ , Corollary 13 implies that if (β −δ1)/(δ2 −δ1) > 1, the disease is too strong
and will never die out regardless of our control choices. On the other hand, when δ1 ≥β the
natural recovery rate is high enough to ensure extinction of the disease without any control action
(¯u = 0). Otherwise, it should be easy to see now that if we want to exert a minimal amount
of a ﬁxed control signal to ensure extinction of the disease, we can simply choose ¯u =
However, it may be the case that we are still willing to use control such that the infection dies
out faster than it would naturally. For instance, having a population with many sick individuals
could incur a drastic social cost that could be instead offset by a smaller cost of treatment. We
formulate this tradeoff as an optimal control problem next.
Let the cost of treatment be linear with the number of individuals treated, and similarly,
let the cost of infection be linear with the number of infected individuals. We are then interested
in minimizing the objective function
(cpI(t) + du(t))dt,
where c > 0 is associated with the cost of infection, d > 0 is the associated with the cost of
treatment, and T > 0 is the time horizon. Utilizing Pontryagin’s maximum principle, it can be
shown – that the optimal solution is given by
for f(t) > 0,
for f(t) = 0,
otherwise,
f(t) = ψpI(δ2 −δ1) + d,
where ψ is the costate variable with dynamics
˙ψ = c −ψ(β(1 −2pI) −((1 −u)δ1 + uδ2)).
It can now be shown that for β/(δ2 −δ1) < c/d, the optimal solution is to initially
treat the entire population until some time t′ at which nobody should be treated. For β/(δ2−δ1) >
c/d, the optimal solution is u(t) = 0 for all t ∈[0, T]. This bang-bang solution with at most one
switch is very common in similar problems. Other works with this same kind of solution have
been studied in many different variations of this problem that consider efﬁciency of control 
or control over both δ and β simultaneously . Other models have also been considered
such as the SIR model with different incidence rates , or a four-state SIRD
model .
Although the bang-bang solution is common, it is possible to obtain other types of
solutions for different formulations of the optimal control problem. For example, it is shown
in , that for alternative problem formulations, the optimal solution may not be a
bang-bang controller for certain classes of cost functions. In , an SIR model with quadratic
control costs over both δ and β is considered. In this case, the optimal solution is again not
a bang-bang controller. A four-state SIRC model for which the optimal solution is again not a
bang-bang controller is considered in .
In the problem above, we have assumed that we are able to change the control signal
instantaneously. Other works consider the case in which the rate of the control signal (its time
derivative) can be controlled instead , , , . We omit the technical details of
these works as the methods are very similar to the example presented above. Interestingly, the
results from these works often admit bang-bang controllers with at most one switch as optimal
solutions as well. As a ﬁnal note we acknowledge that in different contexts one may be interested
in the problem of maximizing the impact of a spreading process (for instance a viral marketing
campaign) , rather than minimizing it.
Network models
As mentioned before, the population models are quite crude in general as they lump
an entire population’s state into just a few numbers. Thus, we now turn to optimal control of
networked models but note that, so far, very little work has been done in this realm. Three
relevant papers that consider this problem in the context of networks are , , . We
start our exposition by proposing an optimal control problem for SIS dynamics that has yet to
be solved.
Recall the SIS network dynamics with heterogeneous recovery and infection rates (9),
˙pi = −δi +
βijpj(1 −pi).
From Theorem 8 we know that a necessary and sufﬁcient condition for extinction is λmax(B −
D) ≤0. In the previous section, we utilized this result as a constraint to solve optimal allocation
problems. Instead, we are now interested in solving optimal control problems, where rather than
solving a one-time optimization to determine the curing rates δi, we allow them to vary over
Problem 14 (Optimal control of an SIS network) Given a linear cost of infection ci and
control di for all i ∈{1, . . . , N}, minimize
cipi(t) + diδi(t)
subject to the dynamics (14) and δi(t) ∈[δ, δ] for some 0 < δ < δ for all t ∈[0, T].
This, along with most of its variations, is currently an open problem. Variations include
problems similar to the optimal control problems for deterministic population models discussed
earlier: control over infection rates, non-instantaneous control, different objective functions, etc.
The only work we are aware of that has tackled this problem is , where the authors study
the linearization of (14) around the disease-free equilibrium. The authors are able to show for
the linear dynamics that the optimal solution is a bang-bang controller with at most one switch,
similar to many results obtained for the population models.
Although Problem 14 is still an open problem for the SIS dynamics, a closely related
problem has been successfully solved in the context of containing computer viruses ,
 . Here we present a simpler version of the problem originally posed in . Consider the
where as before pS
i are the fraction of a subpopulation that are susceptible and infected,
respectively. Then, pR
i is the fraction of individuals that are ‘removed’. This refers
to individuals that are immune from the infection, whether this means they were vaccinated or
recovered from the disease and are no longer susceptible to it. Additionally, ui is the control
that dictates the rate at which susceptible and infected individuals become removed.
Problem 15 (Optimal control of an SIR network for malware epidemics) Given a linear
cost of infection ci, control h1
i , and beneﬁt of recovery ℓi for all i ∈{1, . . . , N}, we
would like to minimize
subject to the dynamics (16) and ui(t) ∈[0, ui] for some ui > 0 for all t ∈[0, T].
The following result follows from Pontryagin’s maximum principle .
Theorem 16 (Optimal control of an SIR network for malware epidemics) There
τi ∈[0, T] for all i such that the optimal control is given by
Again, Theorem 16 is consistent with many other optimal control solutions for epidemics
in that the optimal solution is a bang-bang controller with at most one switch. Given the
recentness of these results, there are still lots of variations of this work that need to be studied.
Although the dynamics (16) considered here is very similar to the epidemic models we have
discussed throughout the article, it is not immediately applicable due to the term Riui. In the
context of patching, R is a state of nodes who have a ‘patch’ and are thus immune, and so they
can spread this patch to healthy and infected nodes. However, this concept does not translate
directly to general epidemics; a sick person cannot get better by interacting with healthy people.
We expect these types of problems to be solved for epidemics in the very near future.
In many of the problems we have discussed above, we have assumed that we have direct
control of the infection rate βij and the recovery rates δi. However, this simplistic scenario
assumes that we can control these parameters for the entire population instantaneously which
is unfeasible in the context of disease spreading. In an effort to address this oversimpliﬁcation,
there is a rising body of current work in which more realistic ‘control’ actions are explored. We
discuss these next.
Heuristic feedback policies
Here we brieﬂy review various models that are used to capture possible human behaviors
or other countermeasures employed to deter the spreading of a disease. Rather than explicitly
attempting to control the SIS dynamics as described above, the works we discuss here are
essentially extensions to the SIS model for which stability conditions are derived. The models
are created by assuming various actions people might take, and then the ‘closed-loop’ system
stability is analyzed. More speciﬁcally, rather than separately considering a model and control
strategies, the model and control strategies are co-developed to yield a sense of ‘closed-loop’
control model. For lack of better terminology, we refer to these as heuristic feedback policies.
More speciﬁcally, many works consider various feedback strategies that determine when
nodes or links should temporarily be removed , – . Closed-loop models are then
constructed for the various strategies whose stability properties can then be analyzed. These
strategies are generally based on some sort of perceived risk that individuals have of becoming
infected, causing them to either remove links to infected neighbors or completely remove
themselves from the network (for example, by staying home from work or becoming vaccinated).
We begin by looking at the simpler classical models, then later show how these can be extended
to network models.
Classical models
As mentioned above, these so called heuristic feedback policy solutions are all essentially
different epidemic models for which stability results are obtained. As an illustrative example,
we consider the work , where in addition to the susceptible state S and infected state I,
an additional protected state P is introduced. The protected state refers to individuals who have
decided to immunize themselves in one way or another, and are thus not immediately susceptible
to contracting the disease. The model is described as follows. Letting Yi be the number of
infected in-neighbors a susceptible node i has in an appropriate graph, node i transitions from
the susceptible state S to the infected state I with rate βYi. However, a node in the protected
state P transitions to the infected state with rate β0Yi where β0 < β captures the decreased
risk of infection due to being ‘protective’ or ‘alert’. A type of control is then to decide how
susceptible individuals transition to the protected state. Finally, as in the normal SIS model,
individuals that are infected naturally recover to the susceptible state with a natural recovery
rate δ. Figure 5 shows the interactions of this three-state SPIS model. The authors then consider
the extension of the SIS population dynamics (5) (by assuming a complete network topology
meaning all individuals are equally likely to affect one another) to include the protected state
˙pS = −βpIpS + δpI −pSf(pS, pI, pP) + pPg(pS, pI, pP),
˙pI = βpIpS −δpI,
˙pP = pSf(pS, pI, pP) −pPg(pS, pI, pP),
where f(·) and g(·) are functions that determine how susceptible individuals are protecting
themselves. Recall that pS corresponds to the fraction of individuals in a population that are
in the susceptible state with pI and pP deﬁned similarly for the infected and protected states,
respectively. As in the case of the deterministic SIS population dynamics (5), one of these
equations is redundant and can be removed by using pS + pI + pP = 1 because we assume
a constant population size. We refer to this as the three-state Susceptible-Protected-Infected-
Susceptible (SPIS) model.
The authors then explore different strategies for designing f and g, and analyze the
stability of the system for these choices. As mentioned above, we refer to this as a ‘heuristic
feedback policy’ because a speciﬁc control structure is already deﬁned and built into the model,
rather than the objective of the work to be designing the controller itself. More speciﬁcally, in
the example above, if we are free to choose the functions f(·) and g(·) arbitrarily, it is clear that
the best thing to do is simply set g(·) = 0 and have f(·) be very large. This means everybody
simply protects themselves very quickly, for which it is easy to imagine that the disease will die
out quickly as well. Instead, it is useful to explicitly model a cost for infection and/or control
as we did in the previous section. Next, we show how these models can be extended to network
Network models
Similar to the classical models, here we discuss models that are used to capture possible
human behaviors or other countermeasures employed to deter the spreading of a disease on
networks , . As before, many works consider various feedback strategies that determine
when nodes or links should temporarily be removed , – . Closed-loop models
are then constructed for the various strategies whose stability properties can then be analyzed.
These strategies are generally based on some sort of perceived risk that individuals have of
becoming infected, causing them to either remove links to infected neighbors or completely
remove themselves from the network (for example, by staying home or becoming vaccinated).
As an example, consider again the three-state SPIS model (18) presented in .
However, we are now interested in the network version of the population dynamics there. To do
this, we create a model very similar to the three-state SAIS model presented in where the
authors introduce an alert state A which is similar to the protected state P we consider. This
state captures the possibility of human behaviors and actions lowering the chance of contracting
a disease. For simplicity, we consider homogeneous parameters so the recovery and infection
rates are set the same at all nodes. The deterministic version of this model is then given by
i fi(pS, pI, pP),
i fi(pS, pI, pP) −β0pP
where fi(pS, pI, pP) is a function that determines how susceptible individuals are protecting
themselves. Conditions can then be derived for the parameters and the function f such that the
disease-free equilibrium is globally asymptotically stable . The authors in then treat
the design of this function f as an optimal information dissemination problem. However, as in
the population dynamics case, these are very structured methods of ‘control’ that ultimately get
built into the models.
A very large shortcoming of these types of solutions is that they are too speciﬁc. A
very speciﬁc model with a speciﬁc control structure is proposed and studied. Unfortunately, it is
often unclear what type of spreading process each model is good for describing, if any. In ,
Hethcote does a great job highlighting this fact that there are far too many slight variations of
existing models. We close this section with a small anecdote from the epilogue of , after
effectively proposing 105 different models, to make us really think which models are actually
interesting:
“In the book [sic], A Thousand and One Nights, Scheherezade had to entertain King
Shahriyar with a new story each evening in order to avoid being killed. If they were
mathematical biologists and she had only to present one new epidemiological model
each night to entertain him, then she could have survived each night for at least 270
years. Of course, the King would probably have become disenchanted by the “new”
models if they were only very slight variations on previous models and would have
killed Scheherezade. Similarly, referees (the Kings) might become disenchanted if the
papers which they receive contain models which are only slight variations on previous
models. Thus I suggest that we as modelers and mathematicians should be cautious and
not assume that every mathematical analysis of a slightly different model is interesting.”
We review this issue and other technical challenges in the following section.
Future Outlook
In the previous section we have provided a high level overview of the current state of
the art involving the control of epidemics. However, there are still substantial shortcomings of
the results presented that need to be taken account for to take full advantage of their proposed
solutions. Here we highlight several of the main research challenges, how they are currently
being addressed, and what still needs to be done.
1) All control methods we have discussed so far have been for deterministic models.
Ideally, we are interested in ultimately controlling the original stochastic epidemic models from
which the deterministic models are derived. Results like Theorems 4 and 5 help draw connections
between the two, but these have only been done for simple cases so far. Furthermore, while these
results help justify how using spectral control and optimization methods for deterministic models
translate to the original stochastic models, it is unclear how the optimal control solutions found
for deterministic models relate to the stochastic ones.
We are only aware of a few works that attempt to control epidemic processes on networks for the
original stochastic models. In , the authors consider the SIS model with a simple heuristic
control law where the curing rates δi for each node are proportional to the number of neighbors.
The authors are then able to show that on any graph with bounded degree, this policy can
achieve sublinear expected time to extinction with a budget proportional to the number of nodes
in the network. A drawback of the above method is that it does not take into account the current
state of the system. This means that nodes with no infected neighbors may be assigned high
curing rates. Instead, the authors in use a heuristic PageRank algorithm to allocate curing
resources given a ﬁxed budget, based on the initial condition of infected nodes. The authors are
then able to provide probabilistic upper bounds on the expected extinction time. More recently,
the work proposes an algorithm for which the expected time to extinction is sublinear
using only a sublinear budget (in the number of nodes) for graphs satisfying certain technical
conditions. In , the authors consider a similar problem for which various algorithms are
developed using a Markov decision process framework.
2) All control methods we have discussed so far have admitted centralized solutions.
This is a big problem since human contact networks can be massive in practice and it may not
be computationally possible to solve these problems in a centralized setting. In this direction,
distributed allocation and control strategies are an interesting alternative. Again, there are only
a few recent works that have looked at this problem , – . As more work in
optimization and control of epidemic processes is being done, we desire and expect distributed
versions of these algorithms to follow.
3) All problems and solutions discussed so far assume no uncertainties.
This is a very big issue in the context of epidemics. Throughout all the modeling, analysis,
and control solutions we have presented so far, we have assumed perfect knowledge of
everything including recovery rates, state information, and network structures. These are clear
oversimpliﬁcations since in practice we would be more than lucky to have any of these parameters
simply handed to us. A review of analysis and approximation techniques considering uncertainties
in the spreading parameters is provided in , which is a large ﬁeld of study in epidemiology.
In the context of control, far less work has been done for the case where the topology is
unknown. In , the authors use observed infection data of a discrete time SIS process to
estimate the network topology. Optimization and control methods can then be applied to the
estimated topology; unfortunately, it is unclear how well these solutions will perform on the
actual topology. Instead, a data-driven approach to optimally allocate resources has been recently
proposed in , where only empirical data about the spreading of a disease is available. In
this work, the authors assume that the spreading and recovery rates are unknown. Alternatively,
the authors assume that the responsible health agency has access to historical data describing
the evolution of the disease in a network during a relatively short period of time. In this context,
the authors in propose a robust optimization framework to allocate resources based on
historical data.
Another large issue related to assuming perfect knowledge is assuming that we are able to
set recovery and infection rates to whatever desired values we like. This is again a clear
oversimpliﬁcation and studies are needed into how various control solutions perform when these
rates cannot be set exactly.
The assumption of being able to observe exact state data is another big issue that has received
little to no attention in the context of controls. These do not apply to the spectral optimization or
heuristic feedback control methods, but are certainly important for the optimal control methods.
4) We require much more general epidemic models.
Although there has been a lot of work on modeling in addition to the SIS and SIR dynamics we
have mainly focused on throughout this article, there is still a lack of generalized models. More
speciﬁcally, a majority of works that study spreading processes begin with a single model with
a ﬁxed number of states and interactions. Many of these models are created by ﬁrst looking at
empirical data of a spreading process like AIDS or a computer virus , then determining
what type of model and how many states should be used to capture its behavior. Instead, few
works propose much more general models with arbitrary numbers of states or layers on which
the disease can spread , , . The further development, analysis, and control of these
generalized models can allow rapid prototyping of models for spreading processes that might not
even exist today, in addition to completely generalizing the myriad of speciﬁc models available
All models we have discussed in this article so far only consider the spreading of a single disease
or process. Extending existing models to capture multiple diseases that co-evolve in a network
has recently been gaining attention – . In general, these diseases are assumed to be
mutually exclusive, meaning an individual can only be infected with one type of infection at a
time. While it is discussed here in the context of disease and epidemics, these models are more
aptly used in studying belief propagation or product adoption. For instance the mutual exclusion
of infections is very relevant in competition in politics, such as Democrats vs Republicans,
or competition in a marketplace, such as iPhone vs Droid vs Galaxy. Here we brieﬂy present
a three-state two-infection SI1SI2S model on arbitrary networks studied in and further
analyzed in .
The model is described as follows. Let Y 1
i be the number of neighbors of node i infected by
the ﬁrst disease I1. A node i in the susceptible state S transitions to the infected state I1 with
i . Similarly, a node i in the susceptible state transitions to the infected state I2 with
i . Each node has its own recovery rate for each disease given by δ1
i . For example,
a node i in the infectious state I1 recovers to the susceptible state at rate δ1
i . Figure 6 shows the
interactions of this three-state SI1SI2S model. The deterministic version of this model is then
For simplicity, we have only presented this model assuming both infections evolve over the
same graph structure A. Instead, the works , provide analysis for these dynamics
over possibly different structures. A few recent works have studied the problem of controlling
multiple diseases in different scenarios – ; however, these works are still in their infancy
and there are still many open problems left to be solved.
All the works about epidemics on networks we have discussed in this article have assumed a
ﬁxed graph structure. However, it is easy to surmise that this may not be a good assumption
depending on the time-scale of a spreading process. For instance, in the context of diseases,
the network of contacts in a human population is constantly changing. Hence, a time-varying
network model might be more appropriate, albeit more challenging to analyze. There is still
very little work analyzing these types of time-varying models. Some recent works exist –
 that have begun tackling these problems and laying the foundation for future works in this
branch of epidemic research. As with optimal control, similar problems have been studied in
different contexts such as information dissemination in mobile networks , but far less has
been considered in the context of epidemics thus far.
In addition to the models we have presented throughout the article, it is worth mentioning that
many works present the same types of models from a game-theoretic perspective , ,
 – . This is another space in which there is not yet a signiﬁcant amount of study, but
some seminal works have shown its usefulness in modeling spreading processes, especially in
the context of control and optimization – .
Conclusions
This article has reviewed and analyzed some of the most popular models studied in
epidemiology. In particular, we have presented deterministic and stochastic models in the context
of both population and networked dynamics. We have described many results concerning the
optimization and control of epidemic dynamics, while also outlining a number of new avenues for
further exploration in this ﬁeld. Although the focus of this article was on disease and epidemics,
it should be emphasized that the same mathematical tools and results apply almost directly to
a vast number of other spreading processes including information propagating through a social
network, malware spreading in the World Wide Web, or viral marketing.
Despite the vast literature studying the problems discussed in this article, there are many
interesting control problems left to be solved, particularly those in the context of networked
dynamics. There is plenty of work left to be done to really harness the power of these results
and make a real societal impact; especially in understanding how to effectively control these
processes on complex networks. In this respect, control engineers truly have a lot to offer in this
reemerging ﬁeld of research.
References
 D. Bernoulli, “Essai d’une nouvelle analyse de la mortalit´e caus´ee par la petite v´erole
et des advantages de l´ınoculation pour la pr´evenir,” Mem. Math. Phys. Acad. Roy. Sci.,
Paris, pp. 1–45, 1760.
 K. Dietz and J. A. P. Heesterbeek, “Daniel Bernoulli’s epidemiological model revisited,”
Mathematical Biosciences, vol. 180, no. 1-2, pp. 1–21, 2002.
 R. Ross and H. P. Hudson, “An application to the theory of probabilities to the study of
a prior pathometry,” Proceedings of the Royal Society A, vol. 92, no. 638, pp. 204–230,
 ——, “An application to the theory of probabilities to the study of a prior pathometry.
part II,” Proceedings of the Royal Society A, vol. 93, no. 650, pp. 212–225, 1917.
 ——, “An application to the theory of probabilities to the study of a prior pathometry.
part III,” Proceedings of the Royal Society A, vol. 93, no. 650, pp. 225–240, 1917.
 W. O. Kermack and A. G. McKendrick, “A contribution to the mathematical theory of
epidemics,” Proceedings of the Royal Society A, vol. 115, no. 772, pp. 700–721, 1927.
 H. W. Hethcote, “The mathematics of infectious diseases,” SIAM Review, vol. 42, no. 4,
pp. 599–653, 2000.
 N. T. Bailey, The Mathematical Theory of Infectious Diseases and its Applications.
London: Grifﬁn, 1975.
 S. Boccaletti, V. Latora, Y. Moreno, M. Chavez, and D. U. Hwang, “Complex networks:
Structure and dynamics,” Physics Reports, vol. 424, no. 4, pp. 175–308, 2006.
 D. Easley and J. Kleinberg, Networks, Crowds, and Markets: Reasoning About a Highly
Connected World.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2010.
 M. E. J. Newman, Networks: An introduction.
Cambridge University Press, 2010.
 R. M. Anderson, R. M. May, and B. Anderson, Infectious Diseases of Humans: Dynamics
and Control.
Wiley, 1992, vol. 28.
 P. van den Driessche and J. Watmourgh, “Reproduction numbers and sub-threshold
endemic equilibria for compartmental models of disease transmission,” Mathematical
Biosciences, vol. 180, no. 1-2, pp. 29–48, 2002.
 S. Funk, E. Gilad, and V. A. A. Jansen, “Endemic disease, awareness, and local behavioural
response,” Journal of Theoretical Biology, vol. 264, no. 2, pp. 501–509, 2010.
 I. Z. Kiss, J. Cassell, M. Recker, and P. L. Simon, “The impact of information transmission
on epidemic outbreaks,” Mathematical Biosciences, vol. 225, no. 1, pp. 1–10, 2010.
 N. Perra, D. Balcan, B. Gonasalves, and A. Vespignani, “Towards a characterization of
behavior-disease models,” PLoS ONE, vol. 6, no. 8, p. e23084, Aug. 2011.
 P. Poletti, B. Caprile, M. Ajelli, A. Pugliese, and S. Merler, “Spontaneous behavioural
changes in response to epidemics,” Journal of Theoretical Biology, vol. 260, no. 1, pp.
31–40, 2009.
 D. Breda, O. Diekmann, W. F. de Graaf, A. Pugliese, and R. Vermiglio, “On the
formulation of epidemic models (an appraisal of Kermack and McKendrick),” Journal
of Biological Dynamics, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 103–117, 2012.
 M. M. Hikal, “Dynamic properties for a general SEIV epidemic model,” SIAM Review,
vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 26–36, 2014.
 B. A. Prakash, D. Chakrabarti, N. C. Valler, M. Faloutsos, and C. Faloutsos, “Threshold
conditions for arbitrary cascade models on arbitrary networks,” Knowledge and Information Systems, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 549–575, 2012.
 T. Britton, “Stochastic epidemic models: A survey,” Mathematical Biosciences, vol. 225,
no. 1, pp. 24–35, 2010.
 M. Garetto, W. Gong, and D. Towsley, “Modeling malware spreading dynamics,” in
INFOCOM Joint Conference of the IEEE Computer and Communications Societies, San
Francisco, CA, 2003, pp. 1869–1879.
 L. M. Sander, C. P. Warren, I. M. Sokolov, and J. Koopman, “Percolation on heterogeneous
networks as a model for epidemics,” Mathematical Biosciences, vol. 180, no. 1, pp. 293–
305, 2002.
 E. Kenah and J. C. Miller, “Epidemic percolation networks, epidemic outcomes, and interventions,” in Interdisciplinary Perspectives on Infectious Diseases.
Hindawi Publishing
Corporation, 2011, vol. 2011, p. 543520.
 D. Kempe, J. Kleinberg, and E. Tardos, “Maximizing the spread of inﬂuence through a
social network,” in ACM SIGKDD, 2003, pp. 137–146.
 J. Kleinberg, “Cascading behavior in networks: Algorithmic and economic issues,” in
Algorithmic Game Theory.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2007, pp.
 M. Lelarge, “Efﬁcient control of epidemics over random networks,” in Proceedings of the
11th International Joint Conference on Measurement and Modeling of Computer Systems,
Seattle, WA, 2009, pp. 1–9.
 O. Yagan and V. Gligor, “Analysis of complex contagions in random multiplex networks,”
Physical Review E, vol. 86, p. 036103, 2012.
 R. M. Anderson, Population Dynamics of Infectious Diseases.
Chapman and Hall, 1982.
 F. Brauer and C. Castillo-Chavez, Mathematical Models in Population Biology and
Epidemiology.
New York, NY: Springer, 2012.
 N. T. Bailey, The Mathematical Theory of Epidemics.
London: Grifﬁn, 1957.
 K. Dietz, “Epidemics and rumours: A survey,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society,
vol. 130, no. 4, pp. 505–528, 1967.
 A. Abakuks, “An optimal isolation policy for an epidemic,” Journal of Applied Probability,
vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 247–262, 1973.
 ——, “Optimal immunisation policies for epidemics,” Advances in Applied Probability,
vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 494–511, 1974.
 R. J. Kryscio and C. Lef´evre, “On the extinction of the SIS stochastic logistic epidemic,”
Journal of Applied Probability, pp. 685–694, 1989.
 P. Bremaud, Markov Chains. Gibbs Fields, Monte Carlo Simulation, and Queues.
York, NY: Springer, 1999.
 D. J. Daley and J. M. Gani, Epidemic Modelling: An Introduction. Cambridge University
Press, 1999.
 O. Diekmann and J. A. P. Heesterbeek, Mathematical Epidemiology of Infectious Diseases:
Model Building, Analysis and Interpretation.
New York, NY: Wiley, 2000.
 H. Andersson and T. Britton, Stochastic Epidemic Models and their Statistical Analysis.
New York, NY: Springer, 2000.
 M. J. Keeling and P. Rohani, Modeling Infectious Diseases in Humans and Animals.
Princeton University Press, 2007.
 P. Magal and S. Ruan, Structured Population Models in Biology and Epidemiology.
York, NY: Springer, 2008.
 P. V. Mieghem, Performance Analysis of Communications Networks and Systems.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2009.
 M. Draief and L. Massouli´e, Epidemics and Rumours in Complex Networks.
University Press, 2010.
 O. Diekmann, H. Heesterbeek, and T. Britton, Mathematical Tools for Understanding
Infectious Disease Dynamics.
Princeton University Press, 2012.
 G. H. Weiss and M. Dishon, “On the asymptotic behavior of the stochastic and
deterministic models of an epidemic,” Mathematical Biosciences, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 261–
265, 1971.
 H. W. Hethcote, “Qualitative analyses of communicable disease models,” Mathematical
Biosciences, vol. 28, no. 3-4, pp. 335–356, 1976.
 R. H. Norden, “On the distribution of the time to extinction in the stochastic logistic
population model,” Advances in Applied Probability, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 687–708, 1982.
 O. Diekmann, J. A. P. Heesterbeek, and J. A. J. Metz, “On the deﬁnition and the
computation of the basic reproduction ratio R0 in models for infectious diseases in
heterogeneous populations,” Journal of Mathematical Biology, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 365–382,
 K. Dietz, “The estimation of the basic reproduction number for infectious diseases,”
Statistical Methods in Medical Research, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 23–41, 1993.
 L. A. Meyers, “Contact network epidemiology: Bond percolation applied to infectious
disease prediction and control,” Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, vol. 44,
no. 1, pp. 63–86, 2007.
 M. E. J. Newman, “Spread of epidemic disease on networks,” Physical Review E, vol. 66,
p. 016128, 2002.
 K. Oles, E. Gudowska-Nowak, and A. Kleczkowski, “Efﬁcient control of epidemics
spreading on networks: Balance between treatment and recovery,” PLoS ONE, vol. 8,
no. 6, p. e63813, Jun. 2013.
 A. M. Masucci and A. Silva, “Information spreading on almost torus networks,” in IEEE
Conf. on Decision and Control, Florence, Italy, 2013, pp. 3273–3280.
 M. Barthelemy, A. Barrat, R. Pastor-Satorras, and A. Vespignani, “Dynamical patterns of
epidemic outbreaks in complex heterogeneous networks,” Journal of Theoretical Biology,
vol. 235, pp. 275–288, 2005.
 R. Pastor-Satorras and A. Vespignani, “Epidemic dynamics and endemic states in complex
networks,” Physical Review E, vol. 63, p. 066117, 2001.
 R. E. Kooij, P. Schumm, C. Scoglio, and M. Yousef, “A new metric for robustness with
respect to virus spread,” in Networking, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, L. Fratta,
H. Schulzrinne, Y. Takahashi, and O. Spaniol, Eds.
Springer Berlin, 2009, vol. 5550,
pp. 562–572.
 Y. Moreno, R. Pastor-Satorras, and A. Vespignani, “Epidemic outbreaks in complex
heterogeneous networks,” The European Physical Journal B, vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 521–529,
 M. Youssef, R. Kooij, and C. Scoglio, “Viral conductance: Quantifying the robustness of
networks with respect to spread of epidemics,” Journal of Computational Science, vol. 2,
no. 3, pp. 286–298, 2011.
 M. Youssef and C. Scoglio, “An individual-based approach to SIR epidemics in contact
networks,” Journal of Theoretical Biology, vol. 283, no. 1, pp. 136–144, 2011.
 R. Pastor-Satorras, C. Castellano, P. V. Mieghem, and A. Vespignani, “Epidemic processes
in complex networks,” arXiv:1408.2701, 2014.
 A. Ganesh, L. Massouli´e, and D. Towsley, “The effect of network topology on the spread
of epidemics,” in INFOCOM Joint Conference of the IEEE Computer and Communications
Societies, vol. 2, Miami, FL, 2005, pp. 1455–1466.
 Y. Hu, H. Chen, J. Lou, and J. Li, “Epidemic spreading in real networks: An eigenvalue
viewpoint,” in Proc. Symp. Reliable Distributed Systems, 2003, pp. 25–34.
 T. Mountford, J. Mourrat, D. Valesin, and Q. Yao, “Exponential extinction time of the
contact process on ﬁnite graphs,” arXiv:1203.2972, 2012.
 P. V. Mieghem, “Decay towards the overall-healthy state in SIS epidemics on networks,”
 
 ——, “Exact Markovian SIR and SIS epidemics on networks and an upper bound for the
epidemic threshold,” arXiv:1402.1731, 2014.
 P. V. Mieghem, F. D. Sahneh, and C. Scoglio, “An upper bound for the epidemic threshold
in exact Markovian SIR and SIS epidemics on networks,” in IEEE Conf. on Decision and
Control, Los Angeles, CA, 2014, pp. 6228–6233.
 C. Borgs, J. Chayes, A. Ganesh, and A. Saberi, “How to distribute antidote to control
epidemics,” Random Structures & Algorithms, vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 204–222, 2010.
 N. Berger, C. Borgs, J. T. Chayes, and A. Saberi, “On the spread of viruses on the
internet,” in ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, Vancouver, Canada, 2005,
pp. 301–310.
 R. Pastor-Satorras and A. Vespignani, “Epidemic spreading in scale-free networks,”
Physical Review Letters, vol. 86, no. 14, pp. 3200–3203, 2001.
 D. Chakrabarti, Y. Wang, C. Wang, J. Leskovec, and C. Faloutsos, “Epidemic thresholds
in real networks,” ACM Transactions on Information and System Security, vol. 10, no. 4,
pp. 1–26, 2008.
 P. V. Miegham, J. Omic, and R. Kooij, “Virus spread in networks,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 1–14, 2009.
 P. V. Mieghem, “The n-intertwined SIS epidemic network model,” Computing, vol. 93,
no. 2-4, pp. 147–169, 2011.
 C. Li, R. van de Bovenkamp, and P. V. Mieghem, “Susceptible-infected-susceptible model:
A comparison of n-intertwined and heterogeneous mean-ﬁeld approximations,” Physical
Review E, vol. 86, p. 026116, 2012.
 H. J. Ahn and B. Hassibi, “Global dynamics of epidemic spread over complex networks,”
in IEEE Conf. on Decision and Control, Florence, Italy, 2013, pp. 4579–4585.
 A. Lajmanovich and J. A. Yorke, “A deterministic model for gonorrhea in a nonhomogeneous population,” Mathematical Biosciences, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 221–236, 1976.
 A. Khanafer, T. Basar, and B. Gharesifard, “Stability properties of infected networks with
low curing rates,” in American Control Conference, Portland, OR, 2014, pp. 3579–3584.
 ——, “Stability properties of infection diffusion dynamics over directed networks,” in
IEEE Conf. on Decision and Control, Los Angeles, CA, 2014, pp. 6215–6220.
 E. Cator and P. V. Mieghem, “Second-order mean-ﬁeld susceptible-infected-susceptible
epidemic threshold,” Physical Review E, vol. 85, p. 056111, 2012.
 P. V. Mieghem and J. Omic, “In-homogeneous virus spread in networks,” arXiv:1306.2588,
 A. Fall, A. Iggidr, G. Sallet, and J.-J. Tewa, “Epidemiological models and Lyapunov
functions,” Mathematical Modelling of Natural Phenomena, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 62–68,
 F. D. Sahneh and C. Scoglio, “Epidemic spread in human networks,” in IEEE Conf. on
Decision and Control, Orlando, FL, 2011, pp. 3008–3013.
 C. Nowzari, V. M. Preciado, and G. J. Pappas, “Stability analysis of generalized epidemic
models over directed networks,” in IEEE Conf. on Decision and Control, Los Angeles,
CA, Dec. 2014, pp. 6197–6202.
 C. Nowzari, M. Ogura, V. M. Preciado, and G. J. Pappas, “A general class of spreading
processes with non-Markovian dynamics,” in IEEE Conf. on Decision and Control, Osaka,
Japan, Dec. 2015, submitted.
 V. M. Preciado and A. Jadbabaie, “Spectral analysis of virus spreading in random
geometric networks,” in IEEE Conf. on Decision and Control, Shanghai, China, 2009,
pp. 4802–4807.
 P. V. Mieghem, D. Stevanovic, F. Kuipers, C. Li, R. van de Bovenkamp, D. Liu, and
H. Wang, “Decreasing the spectral radius of a graph by link removals,” Physical Review
E, vol. 84, p. 016101, 2011.
 P. Holme and B. J. Kim, “Attack vulnerability of complex networks,” Physical Review E,
vol. 65, p. 056109, 2002.
 J. C. Miller and J. M. Hyman, “Effective vaccination strategies for realistic social
networks,” Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, vol. 386, no. 2, pp.
780–785, 2007.
 C. M. Schneider, T. Mihaljev, S. Havlin, and H. J. Herrmann, “Suppressing epidemics
with a limited amount of immunization units,” Physical Review E, vol. 84, p. 061911,
 D. H. Zanette and S. Risau-Gusman, “Infection spreading in a population with evolving
contacts,” Journal of Biological Physics, vol. 34, no. 1-2, pp. 135–148, 2008.
 S. Saha, A. Adiga, B. A. Prakash, and A. K. S. Vullikanti, “Approximation algorithms
for reducing the spectral radius to control epidemic spread,” arXiv:1501.06614, 2015.
 A. N. Bishop and I. Shames, “Link operations for slowing the spread of disease in complex
networks,” Europhysics Letters, vol. 95, no. 1, p. 18005, 2011.
 M. Zargham and V. M. Preciado, “Worst-case scenarios for greedy, centrality-based
network protection strategies,” in Conference on Information Sciences and Systems,
Princeton, NJ, 2014.
 E. Gourdin, J. Omic, and P. V. Mieghem, “Optimization of network protection against
virus spread,” in 8th International Workshop on the Design of Reliable Communication
Networks, 2011, pp. 86–93.
 B. A. Prakash, L. Adamic, T. Iwashnya, H. Tong, and C. Faloutsos, “Fractional immunization in networks,” in SIAM International Conference on Data Mining, Austin, TX,
2013, pp. 659–667.
 Y. Wan, S. Roy, and A. Saberi, “Network design problems for controlling virus spread,”
in IEEE Conf. on Decision and Control, New Orleans, LA, 2007, pp. 3925–3932.
 ——, “Designing spatially heterogeneous strategies for control of virus spread,” Systems
Biology, IET, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 184–201, 2008.
 V. M. Preciado, M. Zargham, C. Enyioha, A. Jadbabaie, and G. J. Pappas, “Optimal
vaccine allocation to control epidemic outbreaks in arbitrary networks,” in IEEE Conf. on
Decision and Control, Florence, Italy, 2013, pp. 7486–7491.
 V. M. Preciado and M. Zargham, “Trafﬁc optimization to control epidemic outbreaks
in metapopulation models,” in IEEE Global Conference on Signal and Information
Processing, Austin, TX, 2013.
 X. Zhai, L. Zheng, J. Wang, and C. W. Tan, “Optimization algorithms for epidemic
evolution in broadcast networks,” in IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking
Conference, Shanghai, China, 2013, pp. 1540–1545.
 V. M. Preciado, M. Zargham, C. Enyioha, A. Jadbabaie, and G. J. Pappas, “Optimal
resource allocation for network protection: A geometric programming approach,” IEEE
Transactions on Control of Network Systems, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 99–108, 2014.
 V. M. Preciado, M. Zargham, and D. Sun, “Trafﬁc control for network protection against
spreading processes,” in Conference on Information Sciences and Systems, Princeton, NJ,
 V. M. Preciado, F. D. Sahneh, and C. Scoglio, “A convex framework for optimal investment
on disease awareness in social networks,” in IEEE Global Conference on Signal and
Information Processing, Austin, TX, 2013.
 C. Nowzari, V. M. Preciado, and G. J. Pappas, “Optimal resource allocation in generalized
epidemic models,” IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems, 2015, submitted.
 A. Vijayshankar and S. Roy, “Cost of fairness in disease spread control,” in IEEE Conf.
on Decision and Control, Maui, HI, 2012, pp. 4930–4935.
 G. A. Forster and C. A. Gilligan, “Optimizing the control of disease infestations at the
landscape level,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America, vol. 104, no. 12, pp. 4984–4989, 2007.
 R. Morton and K. H. Wickwire, “On the optimal control of a deterministic epidemic,”
Advances in Applied Probability, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 622–635, 1974.
 S. Eshghi, M. Khouzani, S. Sarkar, and S. Venkatesh, “Optimal patching in clustered
epidemics of malware,” IEEE Transactions on Networking, 2015, to appear.
 K. H. Wickwire, “Optimal isolation policies for deterministic and stochastic epidemics,”
Mathematical Biosciences, vol. 26, no. 3-4, pp. 325–346, 1975.
 E. Hansen and T. Day, “Optimal control of epidemics with limited resources,” Journal of
Mathematical Biology, vol. 62, no. 3, pp. 423–451, 2011.
 G. Zaman, Y. H. Kang, and I. H. Jung, “Stability analysis and optimal vaccination of an
SIR epidemic model,” Biosystems, vol. 93, no. 3, pp. 240–249, 2008.
 H. Behncke, “Optimal control of deterministic epidemics,” Optimal Control Applications
and Methods, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 269–285, 2001.
 T. K. Kar and A. Batabyal, “Stability analysis and optimal control of an SIR epidemic
model with vaccination,” Biosystems, vol. 104, no. 2-3, pp. 127–135, 2011.
 M. H. R. Khouzani, S. S. Venkatesh, and S. Sarkar, “Market-based control of epidemics,”
in Allerton Conf. on Communications, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, 2011, pp.
 M. H. R. Khouzani, S. Sarkar, and E. Altman, “Dispatch then stop: Optimal dissemination
of security patches in mobile wireless networks,” in IEEE Conf. on Decision and Control,
Atlanta, GA, 2010, pp. 2354–2359.
 ——, “Optimal control of epidemic evolution,” in IEEE INFOCOM, Shanghai, China,
2011, pp. 1683–1691.
 D. Iacoviello and G. Liuzzi, “Optimal control for SIR epidemic model: A two treatments
strategy,” in 16th Mediterranean Conference on Control and Automation, Ajaccio, France,
Jun. 2008, pp. 842–847.
 D. Iacoviello and N. Stasio, “Optimal control for SIRC epidemic outbreak,” Computer
Methods and Programs in Biomedicine, vol. 110, no. 3, pp. 333–342, 2013.
 E. Verriest, F. Delmotte, and M. Egerstedt, “Control of epidemics by vaccination,” in
American Control Conference, Portland, OR, 2005, pp. 985–990.
 P. Chen, S. Cheng, and K. Chen, “Optimal control of epidemic information dissemination
over networks,” IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics, vol. 44, no. 12, pp. 2316–2328, 2014.
 A. Karnik and P. Dayama, “Optimal control of information epidemics,” in 4th International
Conference on Communication Systems and Networks, Bangalore, India, Jan. 2012, pp.
 M. Bloem, T. Alpcan, and T. Basar, “Optimal and robust epidemic response for multiple
networks,” Control Engineering Practice, vol. 17, pp. 525–533, 2009.
 A. Khanafer and T. Basar, “An optimal control problem over infected networks,” in
Proceedings of the International Conference of Control, Dynamic Systems, and Robotics,
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, 2014.
 F. H. Chen, “A susceptible-infected epidemic model with voluntary vaccinations,” Journal
of Mathematical Biology, vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 253–272, 2006.
 B. Buonomo, A. d’Onofrio, and D. Lacitignola, “Global stability of an SIR epidemic model
with information dependent vaccination,” Mathematical Biosciences, vol. 216, no. 1, pp.
9–16, 2008.
 J. O. Kephart and S. R. White, “Measuring and modeling computer virus prevalence,” in
IEEE Symposium on Research in Security and Privacy, Oakland, CA, 1993, pp. 2–15.
 I. B. Schwartz and L. B. Shaw, “Rewiring for adaption,” Physics, vol. 3, no. 17, 2010.
 H. Zhang, J. Zhang, P. Li, M. Small, and B. Wang, “Risk estimation of infectious diseases
determines the effectiveness of the control strategy,” Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena,
vol. 240, no. 11, pp. 943–948, 2011.
 G. Theodorakopoulos, J. Y. Le Boudec, and J. S. Baras, “Selﬁsh response to epidemic
propagation,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 363–376, 2013.
 I. Tomovski and L. Kocarev, “Simple algorithm for virus spreading control on complex
networks,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems, vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 763–771, 2012.
 S. Funk, E. Gilad, C. Watkins, and V. A. A. Jansen, “The spread of awareness and its
impact on epidemic outbreaks,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 16,
no. 106, 2009.
 S. Funk, M. Salathe, and V. A. A. Jansen, “Modelling the inﬂuence of human behaviour
on the spread of infectious diseases: a review,” Journal of The Royal Society Interface,
vol. 7, no. 50, pp. 1247–1256, 2010.
 Z. Ruan, M. Tang, and Z. Liu, “Epidemic spreading with information-driven vaccination,”
Physical Review E, vol. 86, p. 036117, 2012.
 Q. Wu, X. Fu, Z. Jin, and M. Small, “Inﬂuence of dynamic immunization on epidemic
spreading in networks,” Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, vol. 419,
no. 1, pp. 566–574, 2015.
 X. Peng, X. Xu, X. Fu, and T. Zhou, “Vaccination intervention on epidemic dynamics in
networks,” Physical Review E, vol. 87, p. 022813, 2013.
 C. Enyioha, V. M. Preciado, and G. J. Pappas, “Bio-inspired strategy for control of viral
spreading in networks,” in Proceedings of the 2nd ACM International Conference on High
Conﬁdence Networked Systems, New York, NY, 2013, pp. 33–40.
 F. D. Sahneh and C. M. Scoglio, “Optimal information dissemination in epidemic
networks,” in IEEE Conf. on Decision and Control, Maui, HI, 2012, pp. 1657–1662.
 H. W. Hethcote, “A thousand and one epidemic models,” in Frontiers in Mathematical
Biology, ser. Lecture Notes in Biomathematics, S. A. Levin, Ed.
New York: Springer,
1994, vol. 100, pp. 504–515.
 F. Chung, P. Horn, and A. Tsiatas, “Distributing antidote using PageRank vectors,” Internet
Mathematics, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 237–254, 2009.
 K. Drakopoulos, A. Ozdaglar, and J. N. Tsitsiklis, “An efﬁcient curing policy for epidemics
on graphs,” in IEEE Conf. on Decision and Control, Los Angeles, CA, 2014, pp. 4447–
 R. Sabbadin, N. Peyrard, and N. Forsell, “A framework and a mean-ﬁeld algorithm for
the local control of spatial processes,” International Journal of Approximate Reasoning,
vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 66–86, 2012.
 E. Ramirez-Llanos and S. Martinez, “A distributed algorithm for virus spread minimization,” in American Control Conference, Portland, OR, 2014, pp. 184–189.
 C. Enyioha, A. Jadbabaie, V. M. Preciado, and G. J. Pappas, “Distributed resource
allocation for epidemic control,” arXiv:1501.01701, 2015.
 N. J. Watkins, C. Nowzari, V. M. Preciado, and G. J. Pappas, “Distributed event-triggered
optimization with applications in epidemic control,” in IEEE Conf. on Decision and
Control, Osaka, Japan, Dec. 2015, submitted.
 L. Zager and G. Verghese, “Epidemic thresholds for infections in uncertain networks,”
Complexity, vol. 14, pp. 12–25, 2009.
 I. Tomovski and L. Kocarev, “Network topology inference from infection statistics,”
Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, vol. 436, no. 1, pp. 272–285, 2015.
 S. Han, V. M. Preciado, C. Nowzari, and G. J. Pappas, “Data-driven allocation of
vaccines for controlling epidemic outbreaks,” IEEE Transactions on Network Science and
Engineering, 2015, submitted.
 A. Vazquez, “Epidemic outbreaks on structured populations,” Journal of Theoretical
Biology, vol. 245, pp. 125–129, 2007.
 F. D. Sahneh, C. Scoglio, and P. V. Mieghem, “Generalized epidemic mean-ﬁeld model
for spreading processes over multilayer complex networks,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on
Networking, vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 1609–1620, Oct. 2013.
 M. E. J. Newman, “Threshold effects for two pathogens spreading on a network,” Physical
Review Letters, vol. 95, no. 10, p. 108701, 2005.
 W. Mei and F. Bullo, “Modeling and analysis of competitive propagation with social
conversion,” in IEEE Conf. on Decision and Control, Los Angeles, CA, 2014, pp. 6203–
 X. Wei, N. C. Valler, A. Prakash, I. Neamtiu, M. Faloutsos, and C. Faloutsos, “Competing
memes propagation on networks: A network science perspective,” IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 1049–1060, 2013.
 A. Stanoev, D. Trpevski, and L. Kocarev, “Modeling the spread of multiple concurrent
contagions on networks,” PLoS ONE, vol. 9, no. 6, p. e95669, 2014.
 X. Wei, N. Valler, B. A. Prakash, I. Neamtiu, M. Faloutsos, and C. Faloutsos, “Competing
memes propagation on networks: A case study of composite networks,” ACM SIGCOMM
Computer Communication Review, vol. 42, no. 5, pp. 5–12, 2012.
 A. Beutel, B. A. Prakash, R. Rosenfeld, and C. Faloutsos, “Interacting viruses in networks:
Can both survive?” in Proceedings of the 18th ACM SIGKDD International Conference
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, Beijing, China, 2012, pp. 426–434.
 B. A. Prakash, A. Beutel, R. Rosenfeld, and C. Faloutsos, “Winner takes all: Competing
viruses or ideas on fair-play networks,” in Proceedings of the 21st International Conference
on World Wide Web, Lyon, France, 2012, pp. 1037–1046.
 F. D. Sahneh and C. Scoglio, “Competitive epidemic spreading over arbitrary multilayer
networks,” Physical Review E, vol. 89, p. 062817, 2014.
 N. J. Watkins, C. Nowzari, V. M. Preciado, and G. J. Pappas, “Optimal resource allocation
for competing epidemics over arbitrary networks,” in American Control Conference,
Chicago, IL, Jul. 2015, to appear.
 G. Elena and Q. Zhu, “Optimal control of inﬂuenza epidemic model with virus mutations,”
in European Control Conference, Z¨urich, Switzerland, 2013, pp. 3125–3130.
 X. Chen and V. M. Preciado, “Optimal coinfection control of competitive epidemics in
multi-layer networks,” in IEEE Conf. on Decision and Control, Los Angeles, CA, 2014,
pp. 6209–6214.
 E. Hernandez-Vargas, P. Colaneri, R. Middleton, and F. Blanchini, “Discrete-time control
for switched positive systems with application to mitigating viral escape,” International
Journal of Robust and Nonlinear Control, vol. 21, no. 10, pp. 1093–1111, 2011.
 S. Xu, W. Lu, L. Xu, and Z. Zhan, “Adaptive epidemic dynamics in networks: Thresholds
and control,” ACM Transactions on Autonomous and Adaptive Systems, vol. 8, no. 4, 2014.
 M. Ogura and V. M. Preciado, “Disease spread over randomly switched large-scale
networks,” in American Control Conference, Chicago, IL, 2015, pp. 1782–1787.
 M. Sathiamoorthy, K. R. Moghadam, B. Krishnamachari, and F. Bai, “Helper node allocation strategies for content dissemination in intermittently connected mobile networks,” in
IEEE International Conference on Sensing, Communication, and Networking, Singapore,
2014, pp. 55–63.
 C. T. Bauch and D. J. D. Earn, “Vaccination and the theory of games,” Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, vol. 101, no. 36, pp.
13 391–13 394, 2004.
 A. Khanafer and T. Basar, “Information spread in networks: Control, games, and
equilibria,” in Information Theory and Applications Workshop (ITA), San Diego, CA,
2014, to appear.
 J. Omic, A. Orda, and P. V. Mieghem, “Protecting against network infections: A game
theoretic perspective,” in IEEE INFOCOM, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 2009, pp. 1485–1493.
 Y. Hayel, S. Trajanovski, E. Altman, H. Wang, and P. V. Mieghem, “Complete gametheoretic characterization of SIS epidemics protection strategies,” in IEEE Conf. on
Decision and Control, Los Angeles, CA, 2014, pp. 1179–1184.
 S. Trajanovski, Y. Hayel, E. Altman, H. Wang, and P. V. Mieghem, “Decentralized
protection strategies against SIS epidemics in networks,” arXiv:1409.1730, 2014.
 A. Fazeli and A. Jadbabaie, “Game theoretic analysis of a strategic model of competitive
contagion and product adoption in social networks,” in IEEE Conf. on Decision and
Control, Maui, HI, 2012, pp. 74–79.
 A. Fazeli, A. Ajorlou, and A. Jadbabaie, “Optimal budget allocation in social networks:
Quality or seeding?” in IEEE Conf. on Decision and Control, Los Angeles, CA, 2014,
pp. 4455–4460.
 N. T. J. Bailey, “Macro-modelling and prediction of epidemic spread at community level,”
Mathematical Modelling, vol. 7, no. 5-8, pp. 689–717, 1986.
 S. Boyd and L. Vandenberghe, Convex Optimization.
Cambridge University Press, 2004.
 S. Boyd, S. J. Kim, L. Vandenberghe, and A. Hassibi, “A tutorial on geometric programming,” Optimization and Engineering, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 67–127, 2007.
 P. V. Mieghem and R. van de Bovenkamp, “Accuracy criterion for the mean-ﬁeld approximation in Susceptible-Infected-Susceptible epidemics on networks,” Physical Review E,
 N. A. Ruhi and B. Hassibi, “SIRS epidemics on complex networks: Concurrence of exact
Markov chain and approximated models,” arXiv:1503.07576, 2015.
Recovery rate
Infection rate
Two-state Susceptible-Infected-Susceptible (SIS) model. An individual in the infected
state I transitions to the healthy or susceptible state S with some recovery rate and from the
susceptible state to the infected state with some infection rate.
Three-state Susceptible-Infected-Removed (SIR) model. An individual i in the
susceptible state S can transition to the infected state I with some infection rate βeff
the infected state I to the removed state R with some recovery rate δi.
Population dynamics of the two-state SIS model. These models assume a well-mixed
population, meaning that each individual in the population is equally likely to contract a disease
from anyone else in the population. An infected individual (red) naturally recovers at a rate δ > 0,
depicted by the red cross. A healthy individual (blue) if affected by each infected individual in
the population with rate β, depicted by the red arrows.
Network dynamics of the two-state SIS model. A node i has a natural recovery rate
δ, depicted by the red cross, at which it transitions from the infected state I to the susceptible
state S and is affected by each infected neighbor j with rate β, depicted by the red arrows.
fi(pS, pI, pP)
Three-state compartmental Susceptible-Protected-Infected-Susceptible (SPIS) model.
An individual i in the infected state I transitions to the healthy or susceptible state S with a
natural recovery rate δ. An individual in the susceptible state transitions to the protected state P
at a rate fi(pS, pI, pP) that depends on the entire network state and to the infected state at a
rate βYi proportional to the number of infected neighbors Yi that node i has. An individual in
the protected state transitions to the infected state at a rate β0Yi where β0 < β captures the
fact that this individual is in a less susceptible state than normal, for instance due to behavioral
changes or vaccination.
Three-state compartmental SI1SI2S model for two diseases. An individual i can be
in the healthy or susceptible state S, or infected by one of two possible infections, but not both
simultaneously. An individual in the ﬁrst infectious state I1 recovers to the susceptible state at a
natural recovery rate δ1
i . Similarly, an individual i in the second infectious state I2 recovers at a
natural recovery rate δ2
i . An individual in the susceptible state transitions to the infectious stateIk
at rate βk
for k ∈{1, 2}, where Y k
is the number of neighbors of i that are in infectious
state Ik. The parameter βk
i captures the effect that neighbors of node i has on it for infection Ik.
Graph Theory
A graph is a mathematical description of a given network. A graph consists of different
nodes, or vertices, and links between the nodes, or edges, that describe the interactions between
the nodes. In the context of epidemics, a the meaning of a single node depends on the granularity
of the considered model. For example, a node at the lowest level can represent a single person
and links to other nodes can represent the interactions this person has with others. On a much
higher level, a single node can represent an entire city of people, and links to other nodes can
represent the interactions this city has with others; for example, trafﬁc ﬂow between cities. See
“Meta-Population Models” for further details.
Formally, we deﬁne a directed graph G = (V, E) as a pair consisting of a set of N
vertices V and a set of edges E ⊂V × V . The adjacency matrix A ∈RN×N
of G satisﬁes
aij = 1 if and only if (vi, vj) ∈E. Edges are directed, meaning that they are traversable in one
direction only. The sets of in-neighbors and out-neighbors of v ∈V are respectively
N in(v) = {v′ ∈V | (v′, v) ∈E},
N out(v) = {v′ ∈V | (v, v′) ∈E}.
We say that a graph is undirected if for all aij = 1, it is also true that aji = 1. In this case the
set of in-neighbors and out-neighbors for each node are identical.
A directed path P, or in short path, is an ordered sequence of vertices such that any two
consecutive vertices in P form an edge in E. A graph G is strongly connected if for all vertices
v ∈V , there exists a path to all other vertices v′ ∈V .
Meta-Population Models
Throughout this article we often refer to individuals and discuss the state of all individuals
in a network. However, especially in the context of diseases spreading through populations, the
number of individuals N in a given network can be quite large. Instead of considering the
entire population of interest together, meta-population allow groups of individuals to be lumped
together into subpopulations under some assumptions.
Consider the heterogeneous network SIS dynamics (9)
˙pi = −δipi +
βjipj(1 −pi).
This was essentially introduced with pi referring to the probability that an individual i is infected
(see “Networked Mean-Field Approximations” for further details). This means an N-dimensional
system must be analyzed to properly study how this model evolves which can be difﬁcult if N
is very large.
Instead of studying the state of each individual in the population separately, we can
instead create M << N subpopulations to approximate the dynamics of the entire N dimensional
system. We can then keep track of the state of each subpopulation rather than the state of each
individual in the population. This was originally done and analyzed for M = 2 and turned out
to be easily extendable .
Let i ∈{1, . . . , M} denote the ith subpopulation with ni individuals, where each
individual from the original population with N people is assigned to exactly one subpopulation.
In other words, we have PM
j=1 nj = N. Note that the number of individuals in each subpopulation
do not need to be the same.
We now deﬁne the dynamics of the meta-population model assuming that each subpopulation i is well-mixed and have homogeneous recovery rates δ′
i. In other words, within each
subpopulation, each individual is assumed to have equal contact with everyone else. This is the
same way the deterministic SIS population dynamics (6) are derived; however, we have the extra
consideration that subpopulations can affect each other as well. The infection rate β′
ji captures
the effect that subpopulation j has on subpopulation i. Note that it is not required that β′
nor does it make sense to. Since subpopulations can have different numbers of people, it is
reasonable to think that one subpopulation i can affect another subpopulation j more than j can
affect i. Letting xi denote the fraction of individuals in subpopulation i that are infected, we can
then write the dynamics as
jixj(1 −xi).
This has now reduced the original N-dimensional system into an M-dimensional one.
Furthermore, it might often make more sense to consider a meta-population model instead of an
entire population one to begin with. To properly deﬁne the full network SIS dynamics (S1), we
require parameters that describe the natural recovery rates and interconnections of all individuals
within the population. Instead, it is much more reasonable to believe these parameters can be
estimated for entire groups of people and a reasonable meta-population model can be described
with the same level of granularity. Furthermore, state information in the meta-population model
can be estimated by looking at numbers of infected individuals in a given subpopulation compared
to the total numbers of individuals ni in this subpopulation. For example, a node i ∈{1, . . . , M}
at the lowest level of granularity simply recovers the full network SIS dynamics where each node
represents a single person and links to other nodes represents the interactions this person has
with others. On a much higher level, a single node can represent an entire city of people, and
links to other nodes can represent the interactions this city has with others; for example, trafﬁc
ﬂow between cities.
Geometric Programming
>0, where x1, . . . , xN > 0 denote N decision variables. In the context of
geometric programs, a monomial function h(x) is a real-valued function of the form h(x) =
2 . . . xaN
N with c0 > 0 and ai ∈R for all i ∈{1, . . . , N}. A posynomial function q(x) is
a real-valued function that is the sum of monomials, q(x) = PK
ck > 0 and ai,k ∈R for all i ∈{1, . . . , N} and k ∈{1, . . . , K}.
Before stating the deﬁnition of a geometric program, the following class of functions
will be useful.
Deﬁnition 17 A function f : RN →R is convex in log-scale if the function
F (x) = log f (exp x) ,
is convex in x (where exp x indicates component-wise exponentiation).
Remark 18 Note that posynomials (hence, also monomials) are convex in log-scale .
A geometric program (GP) is an optimization problem of the form
qi(x) ≤1, i = 1, . . . , m,
hi(x) = 1, i = 1, . . . , p,
where f is a funcion that is convex in log-scale, qi are posynomial functions, and hi are monomial
functions for i ∈{1, . . . , N}. A comprehensive treatment of GPs is provided in . A GP is
a quasiconvex optimization problem that can be transformed to a convex problem utilizing
a logarithmic change of variables yi = log xi, and a logarithmic transformation of the objective
and constraint functions. The GP in (S2) can then be written in the transformed coordinates by
Qi (y) ≤0, i = 1, . . . , m,
i y + log di = 0, i = 1, . . . , p,
where Qi (y)
log qi(exp y) and F (y)
log f (exp y). Also, given that hi (x)
N , we obtain the equality constraint above, where bi = (b1,i, . . . , bN,i).
Since f (x) is convex in log-scale, F (y) is a convex function. Furthermore, since qi
is a posynomial (and therefore convex in log-scale), Qi is also a convex function. This shows
that (S3) is a convex optimization problem in standard form and can be efﬁciently solved in
polynomial time .
Networked Mean-Field Approximations
The method of going from a stochastic model to a deterministic mean-ﬁeld approximation
is certainly not one that can be overlooked. The derivations of these approximations, their
accuracy, and what they can tell us about the original stochastic models is an entire area of
research all by itself.
We discuss brieﬂy here how one can go from the stochastic model (7) to the deterministic
one (8). Recall the stochastic model
with rate β P
with rate δ.
Given the entire state X(t) at some time t, we can write the probability of state i at a future
time t′ = t + ∆t for small ∆t by
P(Xi(t′) = 0|Xi(t) = 1, X(t)) = δ∆t + o(∆t),
P(Xi(t′) = 1|Xi(t) = 1, X(t)) = 1 −δ∆t + o(∆t),
P(Xi(t′) = 1|Xi(t) = 0, X(t)) = β
Xj(t)∆t + o(∆t),
P(Xi(t′) = 0|Xi(t) = 0, X(t)) = 1 −β
Xj(t)∆t + o(∆t).
As we take ∆t to 0 in these forward Kolmogorov equations, we can write the exact dynamics
of the expectation by
δ + (1 −Xi)β
= −E[Xi]δ + E
The complication now comes from the term E[XiXj] relating the covariance of the random
variables Xi and Xj with their independent probabilities. The mean-ﬁeld approximation (8) (and
similar ones for different variations of the stochastic model) are then obtained by assuming that
E[XiXj] = E[Xi]E[Xj] for all i ̸= j. In other words, we are assuming all the random variables
are independent.
However, this is clearly not true. This means that for any ﬁxed population with a stochastic
model, the deterministic approximations we study are just that; approximations. Naturally, this
begs the questions of how accurate they are in describing their stochastic counterparts.
Although we only consider an approximation of the expected values pi, it has actually
been shown that these are upper-bounds on the actual probabilities , , (this is
essentially done by showing that E[XiXj] ≥0 for all i ̸= j). Fortunately, this has very positive
implications on attempting to control the underlying stochastic process by using the deterministic
mean-ﬁeld model: By stabilizing the deterministic approximations, we can make claims like the
ones presented in Remark 7. More speciﬁcally, if we can ensure that the disease-free equilibrium
of the deterministic model is globally asymptotically stable, then the stochastic system will reach
the disease-free absorbing state in sublinear time (with respect to the size of the network) in
expectation.
In , the authors begin looking at how accurate the deterministic mean-ﬁeld
approximations are in describing the stochastic models, rather than just guaranteeing the upper
bound. This is still an open problem for arbitrary networks.
Furthermore, all works above only consider the SIS dynamics. Although the recent
work provides this type of analysis for a three-state SIRS model, rigorous analysis for
more complicated models in general are still unsolved problems.
Author Information
Cameron Nowzari received the Ph.D. in Engineering Sciences from the University of
California, San Diego in December 2010 and September 2013, respectively. He is currently
working as a Postdoctoral Research Associate at the University of Pennsylvania. He was a ﬁnalist
for the Best Student Paper Award at the 2011 American Control Conference and received the
2012 O. Hugo Schuck Best Paper Award in the Theory category. His current research interests
include dynamical systems and control, sensor networks, distributed coordination algorithms,
robotics, applied computational geometry, event- and self-triggered control, Markov processes,
network science, and spreading processes on networks.
Victor M. Preciado received the Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, in 2008. He is currently the Raj
and Neera Singh Assistant Professor of Electrical and Systems Engineering at the University
of Pennsylvania. He is a member of the Networked and Social Systems Engineering (NETS)
program and the Warren Center for Network and Data Sciences. His current research interests
include network science, dynamic systems, control theory, complexity, and convex optimization
with applications in social networks, technological infrastructure, and biological systems.
George J. Pappas received the Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
from the University of California, Berkeley, in December 1998. He is currently the Joseph Moore
Professor and Chair of Electrical and Systems Engineering at the University of Pennsylvania.
He also holds secondary appointments in Computer and Information Sciences, and Mechanical
Engineering and Applied Mechanics. He is a member of the GRASP Lab and the PRECISE
Center. He currently serves as the Deputy Dean for Research in the School of Engineering and
Applied Science. His current research interests include hybrid systems and control, embedded
control systems, cyberphysical systems, hierarchical and distributed control systems, networked
control systems, with applications to robotics, unmanned aerial vehicles, biomolecular networks,
and green buildings.
Modeling and Analysis of Epidemics
Classical models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Stochastic population models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Deterministic population models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Network models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Stochastic network models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Deterministic network models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Heterogeneous network models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Control of Epidemics
Spectral control and optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Optimal control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Classical models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Network models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Heuristic feedback policies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Classical models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Network models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Future Outlook
Conclusions