Using Context to Improve Predictive Modeling
of Customers in Personalization Applications
Cosimo Palmisano, Member, IEEE,
Alexander Tuzhilin, Member, IEEE, and
Michele Gorgoglione, Member, IEEE
Abstract—The idea that context is important when predicting customer behavior has been maintained by scholars in marketing and
data mining. However, no systematic study measuring how much the contextual information really matters in building customer models
in personalization applications has been done before. In this paper, we study how important the contextual information is when
predicting customer behavior and how to use it when building customer models. It is done by conducting an empirical study across a
wide range of experimental conditions. The experimental results show that context does matter when modeling the behavior of
individual customers and that it is possible to infer the context from the existing data with reasonable accuracy in certain cases. It is
also shown that significant performance improvements can be achieved if the context is “cleverly” modeled, as described in this paper.
These findings have significant implications for data miners and marketers. They show that contextual information does matter in
personalization and companies have different opportunities to both make context valuable for improving predictive performance of
customers’ behavior and decreasing the costs of gathering contextual information.
Index Terms—Personalization, context, data mining, user modeling, predictive modeling.
INTRODUCTION
HE director of personalization of one of the major
online retailing companies once received a nasty email from the CEO telling him that he should either fix
his personalization system or lose his job. The CEO’s
email was prompted by a customer’s complaint that the
company’s personalization system was making offensive
assumptions about the lifestyle of this customer and was
recommending inappropriate products to that person.
Upon a closer examination, it was discovered that the
customer once bought an item as a gift for his friend, and
the personalization system started recommending related
products to that customer making implicit assumptions
about his lifestyle, which upset that customer. This true
story is very symptomatic of problems pertaining to many
personalization systems that often infer customer behavior
from the registration and the purchasing information of
online customers without studying the contexts in which
these purchases are made. In the previous example, if the
system knew that the purchase was made in the context of
a gift, this transaction should have been discarded from
inferring that customer’s behavior, and the whole problem
contextual data, such as the intent of a purchase, is not
easy in many applications. For instance, it may not be
practical to ask the customer in the previous example
about the purpose of his purchase. Therefore, it is
necessary to demonstrate that this contextual information
indeed makes a significant difference in building better
customer models in marketing and e-commerce applications. In this paper, we address the question of whether
this additional contextual information matters, i.e., does it
lead to building better personalized models of customer
behavior, where by “better” we assume superior predictive performance. This problem is not trivial because it
entails a tradeoff between transaction homogeneity and
data sparsity: by providing contextual information, customer transactions pertaining to this particular context are
reduced, making fewer data points to fit the model, while
homogeneity of these transactions increases, making it
easier to predict more accurately customer behavior in
similar contexts. In data mining terms, this problem is
related to the well-known bias-variance tradeoff, i.e., given
contextual information, which effect dominates the other:
decreased bias due to the homogeneity of transactions
associated with the specified context or increased variance
due to insufficient data associated with this context.
Since obtaining contextual information can be very hard,
instead of acquiring this contextual information, one can try
to infer it from the existing uncontextual data. Therefore, we
also study the question of how easy it is to infer the contextual
information and how accurately it can be done. Finally, once
the contextual information is obtained, either through an
acquisition or an inference process, it should be made useful
for predicting customers’ behavior and studying when these
predictions are the most accurate. This is another topic
addressed in this paper. The research questions that we have
just described can be summarized as follows:
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING,
NOVEMBER 2008
. C. Palmisano is with Aizoon Consulting S.r.l, Turin, Italy.
E-mail: .
. A. Tuzhilin is with the Stern School of Business, New York University,
44 West 4th Street, Room 8-92, New York, NY 10012.
E-mail: .
. M. Gorgoglione is with the Dipartimento di Ingegneria Meccanica e
Gestionale (DIMEG), Polytechnic of Bari, Viale Japigia 182, 70126 Bari,
Italy. E-mail: .
Manuscript received 10 Sept. 2007; revised 28 Mar. 2008; accepted 18 Apr.
2008; published online 19 May 2008.
For information on obtaining reprints of this article, please send e-mail to:
 , and reference IEEECS Log Number TKDE-2007-09-0453.
Digital Object Identifier no. 10.1109/TKDE.2008.110.
1041-4347/08/$25.00  2008 IEEE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society
Does context matter for building better models
predicting customer behavior?
Is it necessary to acquire contextual information or it
is possible to infer it from the data?
How do we exploit the inferred contextual information for modeling customer behavior?
In this paper, we answer these questions empirically by
conducting an empirical study on two data sets across a
wide range of experimental conditions. To answer the first
question, we built two alternative customer models, one
including contextual information and the other one not, and
compared their predictive performances. To answer the
second question, we built two Bayesian models (Naı¨ve
Bayes and Bayesian net) having the dependent variable
specifying the contextual information and compared their
performance in inferring the context. For the third question,
we built three Bayesian “contextual” models (Naı¨ve Bayes,
Bayesian net, and Bayes net with latent contextual information) and compared them among themselves and with the
uncontextual one to show that contextual information can
be exploited for modeling customer behavior.
This study makes the following contributions to studying context in personalization applications. First, we
demonstrate that context indeed matters when predicting
customer behavior for individuals or small homogenous
groups of customers and gets diluted during the process of
aggregating customers’ data. Second, granularity of the
contextual information also matters: the more we know
about the context of a transaction, the better we can describe
the customer’s behavior based on the context. Third, it is
possible to infer fairly accurately the context for certain
levels of customer segmentation using best-of-breed predictive models, such as certain types of Bayesian networks
(BNs). Finally, if the context is not known from the external
sources, it can first be inferred from the uncontextual data,
as explained above, and then used for predicting customer’s
behavior. We show that the resulting model significantly
outperforms the basic uncontextual model but underperforms the models having the explicitly known context.
PRIOR WORK
The idea that the contextual information is important when
predicting customer behavior is not new and much
supporting evidence has been presented in the popular
press. Context has become a major issue in several
disciplines related to marketing and e-commerce. In
e-commerce, the importance of context emerged in the
market-space theory of business . The theory maintains
that value can be created for the customers in electronic
markets by three elements: content, context, and infrastructure, where context refers to how firms offer information or
content to the customers. The authors observed that the key
to delivering successful e-commerce solutions has shifted
from content to context. Further, according to Prahalad, “the
ability to reach out and touch customers anywhere at
anytime means that companies must deliver not just
competitive products but also unique, real-time customer
experiences shaped by customer context” .
New technologies, such as wireless Web, personal digital
assistants, interactive television, and so forth, have created
opportunities to target customers more effectively by
providing real-time personalized information. This strategy
is referred to as “contextual marketing” and is expected to
result in numerous competitive advantages to e-business
companies, such as loyal customers, cross selling and upselling opportunities, and so forth . The research
described in empirically investigates the influence of
contextual marketing on the perceived e-commerce outcomes of the online users and provides some initial
evidence of positive influence.
The importance of including contextual information in
recommendation systems has been demonstrated in ,
where the authors present a multidimensional approach
that can provide recommendations based on additional
contextual information besides the typical information on
users and items used in most applications. However,
Adomavicius et al. do not investigate the use of context
to build better predictive models of customers but focus
only on product recommendations. Moreover, Adomavicius et al. modeled context using the multidimensional
method, whereas in this paper, it is modeled using
contextual hierarchies, which constitutes a different method
of modeling context. The use of interest scores assigned to
topics has been applied to building contextual user profiles
in recommender systems .
Marketing researchers have maintained that the purchasing process is contingent upon the context in which the
transaction takes place since the same customer can adopt
different decision strategies and prefer different products or
brands depending on the context , . According to
Lilien et al. , “consumers vary in their decision-making
rules because of the usage situation, the use of the good or
service, and purchase situation.” Therefore, accurate predictions of consumer preferences should depend on the
degree to which we have incorporated the relevant
contextual information. In the marketing literature, context
has also been studied in the field of behavioral decision
theory. In , context is defined as a task complexity in the
brand choice strategy.
If the concepts of customer and transaction are broadened to embrace any user interacting with a company or
an application to get a service, then the importance of
knowing the context is recognized in other areas, such as
context-aware systems, Web searching, and Web services.
Context-aware systems are designed to exploit the contextual information available (e.g., where the user is and
who is with her) to better serve the user and to adapt to the
changes in the context , . Contextual information has
been proven to be helpful in information retrieval, although
most existing systems base their retrieval decision solely on
queries and document collections, whereas information
about search context is often ignored . The effectiveness
of a proactive retrieval system depends on the ability to
perform context-based retrieval, generating queries that
return context-relevant results , . In Web searching,
context is considered as the set of topics potentially related
to the search term. For instance, Lawrence describes
how contextual information can be used and proposes
several specialized domain-specific context-based search
engines. Integration of context into a Web services
composition is suggested by Maamar et al. .
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING,
NOVEMBER 2008
A critical issue when modeling customer behavior is
how to acquire the contextual information , . In
some circumstances, context is explicit, such as a person
informing a company that she is moving to another city.
Alternatively, the contextual information can also be
inferred from the data or the environment, such as a
change in location of the user detected by a mobile
telephone company. There are two main approaches to
inference: unsupervised and supervised learning. The
former learns associations between context and user data
without the explicit intervention of the user. The latter
requires the user intervention at some point to label the
context or define its certain characteristics. Usually, an
expert defines ontologies , recommendation queries ,
or designs a context-specific model, such as a BN, in order
to improve contextual inference .
Another issue related to this research is representation:
context can be represented using various modeling methods
including contextual graphs , conceptual maps ,
ontologies , , , , and hierarchical classifications
 , . Also, the question of how to represent context, once
it is inferred to model customers’ behavior, has not been
addressed before, except in where it was only tangentially
referred to and explored within recommender systems.
This paper is built on our previous work on contextual
profiling , . In particular, we have consolidated and
enhanced our prior studies of questions 1 and 2 from and
 , respectively. We also added question 3, expanded our
data analysis to an additional data set, and integrated studies
of questions 1 and 3 into a self-contained journal paper.
PROBLEM FORMULATION
In this section, we first explain what we mean by
“context,” then how we model customer behavior, and
finally, the methodology for comparing contextual and
uncontextual models.
What Is Context
Many definitions of context can be found in the literature
depending on the field of application, enabling technologies, and the available customer data. The Webster’s
dictionary defines context as “conditions or circumstances
which affect some thing.” In the data mining community,
context is defined in as those events that characterize the
life of a customer and can determine a change in his/her
preferences, status, and value for a company. Examples of
context include a new job, the birth of a son, marriage,
divorce, and retirement. In the context-aware systems
literature, context was initially defined as the location of
the user, the identity of people near the user, the objects
around, and the changes in these elements . Other
factors have been added to the previous definition. For
instance, Brown et al. includes the date, the season, and
the temperature. Ryan et al. add the physical and
conceptual statuses of interest for a user. Dey et al. 
include the user’s emotional status and broaden the
definition to any information that can characterize and is
relevant to the interaction between a user and an application. Some associate the context with the user , ,
while others emphasize how context relates to the application , . According to Prahalad , context has
temporal (when to deliver), spatial (where), and technological (how) dimensions. Context is usually referred to the
present situation, but sometimes the history of past is
considered as well .
In this paper, context is defined as the intent of a purchase
made by a customer in an e-commerce application.
Different purchasing intents may lead to different types of
behavior. For example, the same customer may buy from
the same online account different products for different
reasons: a book for improving her personal work skills, a
book as a gift, or an electronic device for her hobby. In
general, the context in which a customer performs a
transaction is defined with a set of contextual attributes K
that can have a complicated structure reflecting the complex
nature of this information. Each contextual attribute K in K
is defined by a set of q attributes K ¼ ðK1; . . . ; KqÞ having a
hierarchical structure. The values taken by attribute Kq define
finer (more granular) levels, while that of K1 define coarser
(less granular) levels of contextual knowledge.
For example, Fig. 1a presents a three-level hierarchy for
the contextual attribute K specifying the intent of a
purchasing transaction in an e-retailer application, considered in this paper. The root (coarsest level) of the hierarchy
for K is defined by attribute K1 ¼ fPersonal; Giftg, which
labels each customer purchase as personal or as a gift. At
the next, finer level of the hierarchy, “Personal” value of
attribute K1 is further split into a more detailed personal
context: personal purchase made for the work-related or
other purposes. Similarly, the Gift value for K1 can be split
into a gift for a partner or a friend and a gift for parents
or others. Thus, the K2 level is K2 ¼ fPersonalWork;
PersonalOther; GiftPartner = FriendGift Parent = Otherg.
Finally, attribute K2 can be split into level 3 of the hierarchy
shown in Fig. 1a.
PALMISANO ET AL.: USING CONTEXT TO IMPROVE PREDICTIVE MODELING OF CUSTOMERS IN PERSONALIZATION APPLICATIONS
Fig. 1. Contextual information hierarchical structure: (a) e-retailer data set and (b) food data set.
Customer Modeling
Let C be the customer base represented by N customers.
Each customer Ci is defined by the set of m demographic
attributes A ¼ fA1; A2; . . . ; Amg, and a set of r transactions
TransðCiÞ ¼ fTRi1; TRi2; . . . ; TRirg, where each transaction
TRij performed by customer Ci is defined by a set of
transactional attributes T ¼ fT1; T2; . . . ; Tpg. In addition, we
also have contextual information K associated with each
transaction TRir of the form described in Section 3.1.
Fig. 2 presents a fragment of the customer table containing
demographic, transactional, and contextual information
about the customer Ci. For example, customer Ci can be
defined by demographic attributes A¼fIDuser; Name;
Age; Incomeg, by five transactions TransðCiÞ ¼ fTR1; TR2;
TR3; TR4; TR5g, each transaction defined by the transactional attributes:
T ¼ fProductID; StoreID; Price; TransactionTimeg;
and by the contextual attribute K ¼ ðK1; K2; K3Þ describing
the context (e.g., “the intent”) of each purchase,1 as explained
in Section 3.1 and shown in Fig. 1. Context hierarchy K in
Fig. 2 specifies only one contextual attribute (note that
K1; . . . ; Kq describe levels in this attribute). In general,
however, we support multiple contextual attributes. Finally,
the customer base C can be partitioned into several segments
 by computing h summary statistics Si ¼ fSi1; Si2; . . . ;
Sihg for customer Ci over the transactions TransðCiÞ ¼
fTRi1; TRi2; . . . ; TRikig made by that customer using various
statistical aggregation and moment functions, such as mean,
average, maximum, minimum, variance, and other statistical
functions. For instance, for the transactions made by the
customers in the previous example, the statistics can be Si ¼
fAverage time spentg or Siþ1 ¼ fAverage priceg. This means,
among other things, that each customer Ci has a unique
summary statistics vector Si and that a customer is
represented with a unique point in the space of these
summary statistics. After generating such a data point per
customer in the h-dimensional space of statistics fS1; S2; . . . ;
Shg, customers can be clustered into groups (segments) in
that space using the clustering techniques described in .
Given segment p, of k customers C1; . . . ; Ck, and their
respective demographic Ai ¼ fAi1; Ai2; . . . ; Aimg and transactional data TransðCiÞ ¼ fTRi1; TRi2; . . . ; TRikig for customers i in p, we want to build a single predictive model M on
this segment of customers p:
Y ¼ f ðX1; X2; . . . ; XpÞ;
where dependent variable Y is one of the transactional
attributes Tj, and independent variables X1; X2; . . . ; Xp are
all the transactional and demographic variables, except
variable Tj, i.e., they form the set T [ A  Tj. The
performance of model M can be measured using some
fitness function f mapping the data of this group of
customers p into reals, i.e., fðpÞ 2 R. For example,
model M can be a decision tree built on data p of
customers C1; . . . ; Ck, for the purpose of predicting
Tj variable “time of purchase” using all the transactional
and demographic variables, except variable Tj as independent variables. The fitness function f of model M can be its
predictive accuracy on the out-of-sample data or computed
using 10-fold cross validation. The predictive models of
type (1) do not assume any contextual information since the
contextual variable K is not a part of these models.
Therefore, we call the models of this type uncontextual. We
define contextual counterparts of predictive models (1),
where the model takes the following form:
Y ¼ fKq¼aðX1; X2; . . . ; XpÞ;
X1; X2; . . . ; Xp; Kq
where the two models (2a) and (2b) constitute two different
ways of creating a contextual model. Model (2a) indicates
that only transactions associated with a particular value of
the context attribute Kq ¼  are used for building the
model. In this case, the contextual information is used as a
label for filtering customer transactions and then dropped.
For example, if model (2a) is built for the computer science
faculty from University X, where K1 ¼ ‘‘Gift’’, this means
that only the gift-related transactions made by the CS faculty
are used for building the model. In model (2b), the generic
contextual attribute Kq is considered as an independent
variable, such as the demographic and transactional
attributes X1; X2; . . . ; Xp. This means that it is used as one
of the attributes for predicting Y . Because of the hierarchical
structure of the set of attributes K, the number of contextual
models can vary depending on how fine the contextual
knowledge is, i.e., at which level of the hierarchy value q is
defined in K.
One interesting question when building contextual
models is where to place purchasing transactions of
customer C1 when she bought a gift for customer C2:
should such a transaction be associated with the purchasing
history of customer C1 or C2? In this paper, we associate
such purchases with customer C1 and not C2 for the
following reasons. First, these purchases reflect perceptions
of customer C1 about what customer C2 needs, not the real
traits and needs of customer C2. Second, even though the
user may want to interpret expectations and preferences of
another individual, it would be very unusual to model
behavior of a person by observing the behavior of another
individual. Third, when building a model for customer C1,
the demographical and transactional data used in this
behavioral model are those related to customer C1. One way
to handle this problem of gifts is to define an appropriate
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING,
NOVEMBER 2008
1. We considered only one such contextual attribute to avoid clutter and
to make Fig. 2 more manageable. As we pointed out in Section 3.1, there can
be more than one contextual attribute in an application.
Fig. 2. Demographic, transactional, and contextual information about the
customers and their transactions.
context of gifts and purchases for others and treat such
purchasing behavior in these contexts. This provides for
extra flexibility because we can treat such purchasing
transactions differently in different contexts.
For answering the first research question (Does context
matter?), a comparison between performance results of
predictive models is performed for the uncontextual (1) and
the contextual (2a) models across a wide range of experimental conditions.
The inference problem (Is it feasible to infer context?) can
be specified by replacing the dependent variable Y in (1)
with the context variable K as
Kq ¼ f ðX1; X2; . . . ; XpÞ;
KHier ¼ f ðX1; X2; . . . ; XpÞ:
In models (3a) and (3b), the dependent variable is the
contextual information. In (3a), one contextual attribute is
inferred at a time. For instance, for the coarsest degree of
contextual knowledge, each transaction is labeled with K1,
and for the finest degree with K3. In model (3b), the aim is
to evaluate how the model can infer Kq given the whole
hierarchy of context, rather than a single level of contextual
knowledge (each transaction is labeled with q contextual
attributes K1; K2; . . . ; Kq). For model (3a), f is a predictive
function learned via different types of machine learning
methods while for model (3b) the predictive function f is
defined as a BN . We have studied whether inferring
Kq, given the whole hierarchy, is better than inferring one
degree at a time.
For the third question (How do we exploit context?), we
used the following contextual models:
X1; X2; . . . ; Xp; Kq
X1; X2; . . . ; XpjKq
Given the set of customer transactions represented by
demographical, transactional, and contextual attributes, the
aim is to predict the behavior of the customer. In model (4a),
the contextual attribute Kq is used as an independent
variable together with attributes X1; X2; . . . ; Xp. In (4b), Kq
is modeled as a variable statistically dependent on variables
X1; X2; . . . ; Xp. We used the Naı¨ve Bayes method to model
function f in (4a) and a BN to model f in (4b).
In Section 5, we compare performances of the uncontextual model (1), the two contextual models (4a) and (4b), and
the following latent model:
Y ¼ fKq ðX1; X2; . . . ; XpÞ:
In Fig. 3, the structures of models (3a) and (3b) and
(4a)-(4c) are presented as directed acyclic graphs ; each
graph describes the dependencies of the attributes for each
specific predictive model. Models (4b) and (4c) are defined
with the same BN in Fig. 3 (rightmost BN); but model (4b)
uses the given contextual information while model (4c)
infers the unknown contextual information.
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
To answer the research questions 1-3 stated in Section 1, we
have conducted experiments across the following different
experimental conditions:
data sets,
degree of contextual information,
granularity of customer segments,
types of predictive models,
types of dependent variables used in these models,
types of performance measures.
We describe each of these experimental conditions in detail
in the rest of this section.
The experiments have been conducted using two customer
data sets: a gourmet food data set and an e-retailer data set.
We describe each data set below.
E-retailer data set. Since contextually rich “industrialstrength” data required in our studies was not readily
available, we decided to collect such data on our own as
follows: First, a special-purpose browser was developed to help
users navigate a well-known e-commerce retail portal and
purchase products on its site. This browser was made
available to a group of students. While navigation was real,
purchasing was simulated (no real money was spent). The
usercouldvisitanypageoftheportalanduseallthebrowsing
and navigational activities except the actual purchase
function. Once a product was selected to be purchased, the
PALMISANO ET AL.: USING CONTEXT TO IMPROVE PREDICTIVE MODELING OF CUSTOMERS IN PERSONALIZATION APPLICATIONS
Fig. 3. Graphical representation of the predictive models.
browser recorded the selected item, the purchasing price, and
other useful characteristics of the transaction. The browser
was directly linked to a data set, where all the customer
information about browsing and purchasing activities on the
portal was automatically recorded. The contextual information
(intent of the purchase) was collected at the beginning of each
browsing session. The user was asked to specify whether the
purchase would be intended for personal purposes or as a gift,
for which specific personal purpose, and for whom the gift
was intended. The transactional data were collected by the
file logs and by using clickstream techniques. No restrictions
were imposed on the participants either in terms of the
products they could purchase or the amount of money to
spend. They were only recommended to buy on the order of
50 items. The data were preprocessed by excluding the
students who made less than 40 transactions and eliminating
the students who had any kind of misleading or abnormal
behavior such as buying 40 products in a short time range or
buying 40 times the same product. In order to discourage
misleading behavior, a reward system was established that
encouraged “normal and reasonable” purchasing activities.
The resulting number of students having at least 40 transactions and showing “normal” browsing behavior was 556, and
thetotalnumberofpurchasingtransactionsforthesestudents
was 31,925. For each customer (student), the following
demographic data were collected: age, previous studies,
marital status, composition of the family, place of living,
hobbies, and whether the student owned a car. The transactional data included item purchased, price, day, time, session
duration, number of clicks per connection, and the time
elapsed for the web page. Fig. 4a reports the set of attributes
X1; X2; . . . ; Xp used for building predictive models. Table 1a
provides the average number of transactions for e-retailer
data set across different levels of customer segmentation and
degree of contextual information.2
Gourmet food data set. The second data set used in the
experiments is a data set of customer purchases of gourmet
food collected online by a European food distributor. The
original data set included purchases made by customers in
2004 and 2005, with 7,800 transactions performed by
250 customers (only few customers bought the food online;
most still preferred real stores). The data set schema of
demographic and transactional attributes is presented in
Fig. 4b. Note that contextual attributes are not included in
Fig. 4b because the contextual information was not always
available but often hidden in the data. The products
available online are purchased for both making gifts in
special events and for the personal use by customers located
in regions not covered by the distribution channels. In few
cases, the intent of making a gift was explicitly expressed in
a note attached by the customer at the end of the
transaction. Considering the small size of the data set and
the lack of explicit contextual information, the gourmet food
data set was preprocessed in two steps: 1) labeling each
transaction with a reliable context and 2) artificial enhancement of the original data set to increase its size. In the first
step, a triple check identification process was applied: the
mismatch between the billing and the mailing address, the
time window in which the transaction was performed
(Christmas, Easter, and other special events and holidays),
and the presence of a greeting note (the data set contained a
special field where the customers could place their
instructions pertaining to the delivery, greeting notes, and
so forth). The combination of those three elements has been
used for selecting the contextual information. For example,
when the billing address of a transaction was in a region
different from the delivery address, the transaction was
labeled as “gift.” If the time window was in a special event
period and/or the customer noted explicitly that the
purchase was for a specific kind of gift, the gift transaction
was labeled with finer degree of contextual knowledge. This
check process was used to manually label data with
contextual information. In order to make the contextual
knowledge finer and building a hierarchical structure, the
“gift” transactions were associated with a particular event.
The following labels were used:
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING,
NOVEMBER 2008
2. “Whole DB” specifies transactions for the whole customer base and
“Single” specifies the average number for a single customer. Other columns
in Table 1a, such as Cluster10 and Cluster100, will be explained below.
Fig. 4. Attributes of the data sets used in our study: (a) e-retailer attributes and (b) gourmet food attributes.3
3. The Id_Product transactional attribute refers to the four different
products sold in the gourmet food data set.
Christmas: gift transactions made between 1 December
and 6 January (37 days per year).
Easter: gift transactions made Three weeks before the
Easter day (21 days per year).
No_event: gift transactions made in other periods of
The hierarchical contextual structure for this data set is
represented in Fig. 1b.
The data set was enlarged by 1) adding new artificially
generated transactions per customer that preserve the
distributions of all the transactional attributes based on
the actual “real-world” transactions and 2) augmenting the
number of customers by using a set of customers registered
for the newsletter service (we used demographic information of the “transactionless” customers from the newsletter,
even if they did not make any online purchases). The
customers’ transactional histories were built by clustering
the active customers using demographic profiles and then
matching the profiles of “transactionless” customers with
these clusters. Further, a 10-time resampling with 30 percent
degree of noise in each transactional attribute was used.4
The final size was 368 customers, 79,070 transactions, and
214 transactions per customer on average. Table 1b reports
average number of transactions for different customer
segmentation levels.
Degree of Contextual Information
The contextual information Kq is structured in a threelevel hierarchy in both data sets from a coarse ðK ¼
‘‘personal’’; K ¼ ‘‘gift’’Þ to a finer degree of knowledge.
Fig. 5 summarizes the value of K for each level of context
in each data set, based on Figs. 1a and 1b.
Granularity of Customer Segments
The behavioral models can be built for different groups of
customers (unit of analysis) depending on how finely the
customer base is partitioned. As one progresses from the
aggregate to the individual level of granularity, the groups
of customers become increasingly more homogenous,
assuming good clustering methods are used, thus making
predictions potentially more accurate . However,
individual models run into the data sparsity problem.
Thus, experimental analysis is crucial for studying under
which conditions the knowledge of context dominates the
sparsity effect. The following levels of analysis were applied
in the experiments:
Whole customer base. One model is built to predict the
behavior of the whole customer base.
Cluster10. One predictive model is built for each one
of 10 macrosegments. The segments were generated
by applying the Farthest First clustering method5 to
the customer base, where each customer is defined
by a vector of summary statistics attributes.
Cluster100. The units of analysis are 100 microsegments. Both the summary statistics and the clustering algorithms are the same as in the Cluster10 case.
Single customer. A predictive model of customer
behavior is applied to the transactions made by each
single customer.
Types of Predictive Algorithms
For the first and second research questions (Does context
matter? Can we infer it?), four types of Weka classifiers were
used for building predictive models: Naı¨ve Bayes, J48
(a version of a decision tree), PART (an association rule
classifier), and JRIP (a rule-based classifier) . They were
selected because they are both popular classification methods and computationally fast: computation time is crucial
because 220,704 models were generated in our experiments.
For the third research question (How do we exploit
context?), probabilistic classification algorithms were used,
in particular Naı¨ve Bayes and BNs. A BN algorithm was
also used to evaluate the performance of the hierarchical
context inference model. The performance of the algorithms was carried out by using the 10-fold crossvalidation method.
Dependent Variables
The following dependent variables Y have been chosen in
our experiments. In the e-retailer case, the model predicts
1) whether a customer or a group of customers will make
a purchase or not, 2) the day of the week a customer will
perform a transaction, regardless of whether the session
ends with a purchase or not, and 3) in which store a
transaction will be made.
In the gourmet food data set, the model predicts 1) which
of the four different types of products will be purchased by
the customer, 2) the total number of items in the shopping
cart, and 3) if the customer will perform the transaction
with a discount.
For the second research question (Can we infer context?),
this experimental condition was not applied because the
dependent variable is the context attribute itself.
Performance Measures
We used two performance measures in our experiments.
The first is the predictive accuracy computed as the ratio
between the number of correctly classified instances and the
total number of classified instances. The second is the area
under the ROC curve (AUC), which takes into account class
distribution and the cost of errors . Further, if Cluster100
PALMISANO ET AL.: USING CONTEXT TO IMPROVE PREDICTIVE MODELING OF CUSTOMERS IN PERSONALIZATION APPLICATIONS
4. We have selected 30 percent degree of noise because it provided the
best compromise between preserving the distribution of transactional
attributes and reducing the number of identical transactions. We selected
the 10-time resampling ratio because we wanted to have at least
10 transactions per customer for each context, and this was the minimally
sufficient number for us to achieve this goal.
5. We selected the Farthest First clustering algorithm because, as shown
in , it provided better performance for similar types of problems
compared to other popular clustering methods, including the K-means.
Average Number of Transactions for (a) E-Retailer and (b) Food
Data Sets for Levels of Context and Customer Segmentation
is the unit of analysis, the experiment would end up with
100 predictive accuracy measures and 100 AUC measures,
for each experimental setting. Since the aim of the research
is to compare the performance of the uncontextual and
contextual models, it is necessary to compare the distributions of performance measures obtained by applying the
models in each experimental condition and see if there are
statistically significant differences between them. For each
of the three research questions, a different type of statistical
test has been applied and a different null hypothesis has
been set up. These tests will be described in Section 5.
Does Context Matter?
The aim of this study is to experimentally demonstrate that
customer behavior changes when the intent of purchase
changes by a comparative analysis of context-dependent
and context-independent customer models in different
experimental settings. Given the number of experimental
settings (three degrees of contextual information, four
customer granularities, two data sets, four classifiers, three
dependent variables, two performance measures), the total
number of generated models was more than 182,000 and the
number of tables reporting the performance comparison
results is 480, which constitutes a challenging problem to
present. To give a “flavor” of the results, Fig. 6 presents
three graphs generated by plotting the values of the AUC
measure for the JRIP classifier and dependent variable
Purchase for the e-retailer data set for different degrees of
contextual information. The graphs are presented in the
order of progressively more refined contextual information,
from Fig. 6a corresponding to the coarsest level ðK1Þ to
Fig. 6c corresponding to the finest ðK3Þ, and different
customer granularities on the x-axis. The points for Cluster10
and Cluster100 represent the performance averages taken
over segment distributions. The graphs show that for these
particular experimental settings the predictive performance
improves from the aggregate to the single case, except in one
case (K3 ¼ ‘‘gift to the partner’’, third graph, second level of
granularity). Moreover, all the contextual models show a
better predictive performance compared to the uncontextual, except for two cases (Cluster10 in Fig. 6c) where the
difference is very small. The performance differences
between uncontextual and contextual models also increase
for finer degrees of contextual information. All these
differences are statistically significant ðp < 0:01Þ, except for
the PersonalOther context at Cluster10 in Fig. 6b. Similar
charts can be plotted for all other 479 cases mentioned
above. It turns out that the same type of behavior has been
observed for these charts as in Fig. 6 across other classifiers
(J48, PART, Naı¨ve Bayes), dependent variables (weekday,
store), and performance measures (predictive accuracy).
Although for these other charts the curves are not always
monotonic, the predictive performance of the contextual
models is usually higher than that of the uncontextual
model for the finest level of customer granularity and the
degree of contextual information. Instead of plotting
individual graphs, a more concise representation can be
obtained by computing the average values of performance
for the two main experimental settings: degree of context
and customer granularity. The averages are taken over the
four predictive models, the three dependent variables, and
the two performance measure distributions. However, the
two performance measures vary in the ranges, namely, 
and [0.5, 1] for predictive accuracy and AUC, respectively. A
reasonable way to compare each contextual model (2a) to
the uncontextual (1) is by computing their relative performance differences:
Diff ¼ ðPerfcon  PerfuncÞ=Perfunc;
taken as averages over some experimental settings, where
con refers to the contextual model and unc to the uncontextual model. A positive value of Diff means that the
contextual model outperforms the uncontextual, and the
negative—otherwise. Tables 2a and 2b report the values of (5)
computed as the average over four classifiers and two
performance measures for each data set. Since there are many
more pluses than minuses, Tables 2a and 2b demonstrate that
the contextual models outperform the uncontextual in most
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING,
NOVEMBER 2008
Fig. 6. Example of performance (ROC area) comparisons of JRIP predictive models for different levels of contextual information for the e-retailer
data set: (a) first degree of contextual knowledge, (b) second degree, and (c) third degree.
Fig. 5. Values taken by each contextual attribute per each DB.
of the experimental settings. The crucial results from Table 2
are summarized in Figs. 7a and 7b, where positive values of
Diff are computed separately from the negative values and
only the absolute values are plotted, thus differentiating
between the cases in which the contextual models outperform the uncontextual ones ðctx > uncÞ and vice versa
ðctx < uncÞ. In Figs. 7a and 7b, the results are averaged over
the four predictive models, the three dependent variables,
and the two performance measures. In Fig. 7a, the results are
represented per customer granularity while in Fig. 7b per
degree of context knowledge. In particular, Fig. 7a demonstrates that in most cases a finer segmentation of the customer
base leads to higher performance when a contextual model is
used instead of uncontextual. In fact, the individual models
of customers significantly outperform all other cases,
achieving 11 percent performance improvement for the
finest degree of contextual information. The small decrease
in performance when the unit of analysis moves from the
whole set of customers (WholeDB) to 10 segments of
customers (Cluster10) is due to the fact that the segments
are still quite large and not homogenous enough to assure
better predictive performance. The homogeneity starts
leveraging the effect of data sparsity when clusters are
smaller and more homogeneous, as in Cluster100. Fig. 7b
presents the comparison between contextual and uncontextual models with respect to the degrees of contextual
information, but this time the customer granularity assumption has been relaxed. Fig. 7b shows that the finer the context,
the more it matters. Moreover, this is also true across most of
the cases of customer granularity. Results similar to the
e-retailer data set were obtained for the gourmet food data
set. We present in Figs. 8a and 8b the outcomes of the analyses
similar to Fig. 7.
Since the comparisons entail comparing the averages of
two distributions of model performance results across
different clusters, a test of statistical significance needs to
be performed. The null hypothesis is that there is no
difference between the two averages, i.e., the performance
of the uncontextual model is equal to that of the contextual
models. Because the expectation is that context matters, the
test is directional . Since the two models are built for the
same unit of analysis (single customer, segment, whole set
PALMISANO ET AL.: USING CONTEXT TO IMPROVE PREDICTIVE MODELING OF CUSTOMERS IN PERSONALIZATION APPLICATIONS
Average Performance for the (a) E-Retailer and (b) Food Data Sets
Fig. 7. E-retailer DB: improvement in performance per (a) customer
granularity and (b) degree of context.
Fig. 8. Food DB: improvement in performance per (a) customer
granularity and (b) degree of context.
of customers), the two samples are related. The distribution
is not normal and a Wilcoxon test was used for testing
the null hypothesis. Since reporting the statistical significance of each comparison would be impossible because of
the large number of them (1,152 only for the e-retailer data
set), Fig. 9 presents a summary of these comparisons by
reporting the percentage of comparisons with a statistical
significance higher than 95 percent. The cases in which
the contextual models significantly outperform the
uncontextual (solid line) are plotted separately from the
cases where the uncontextual dominate the contextual
models (dashed lines). The values in Figs. 9a and 9b, for
the e-retailer and gourmet food cases, respectively, are
computed as follows: for each degree of customer granularity, the number of significant comparisons is divided by
the overall number of comparisons.
The results related to the first research question can be
summarized as follows.
5.1.1 Knowing the Context Matters for the Personalized
(One-to-One) Models
In the case of models built for a single customer, the
predictive performance of contextual models is almost
always higher than that of the uncontextual model, as
Figs. 7 and 8 demonstrate. The percentage of cases in which
the difference in performance is negative and statistically
significant is around 5 percent for the e-retailer and
20 percent for the food data sets, whereas for the positive
and statistically significant case, it is around 75 percent for
both data sets, as shown in Fig. 9. Moreover, Figs. 7 and 8
show that the averaged gain in performance obtainable by a
personalized contextual versus uncontextual model is
higher than 10 percent for the e-retailer data set and is
about 4 percent for the food data set. This effect gets blurred
when we move from the one-to-one to the WholeDB case,
because contextual information of individual customers
gets lost when we aggregate them into large segments.
5.1.2 The Degree of Contextual Information Matters
Higher values of performance gain can be observed moving
to finer degrees of contextual information in Fig. 7b. The
gain ranges from 3.5 percent (when K1 takes two values) to
8 percent (when K3 takes six values) in the e-retailer data
set, in those settings when the contextual models dominate
the uncontextual. The performance decreases when the
uncontextual model dominates the contextual. However,
the loss is moderate, from 1.63 percent to 2.75 percent in
absolute terms. The results for the food data set are
consistent with the e-retailer data set even if the level of
performance is lower: there is 1 percent decay in performance moving to more granular units of analysis, and also
the performance improvement moving to finer degrees of
contextual information is not relevant. Still the gap in
performance between contextual and uncontextual models
is statistically significant. This result can be interpreted in
terms of the tradeoff between data sparsity and homogeneity. By providing contextual information, customer
transactions pertaining to a particular context are reduced
making fewer data points fit the model, while the
homogeneity of these transactions increases, making the
prediction of customer behavior in similar contexts more
accurate. The homogeneity induced by the additional
contextual information tends to dominate the effect of data
sparsity in the one-to-one case. This effect is quantitatively
explained in Table 1 (see Section 4.1). The table shows that,
as the contextual information becomes finer, the number of
transactions selected to learn the predictive model is
reduced, but the transactions used in the particular context
become more homogeneous, thus providing for better
predictive performance of the resulting model.
Can We Infer Context?
The aim is to experimentally demonstrate that it is possible
to infer the context in which a transaction took place by
comparing the analysis of customers’ models in different
experimental settings, where the dependent variable is a
context attribute, such as a purchase being made for a
personal purpose or as a gift. Fig. 10 shows the results for
the contextual inference problem obtained by applying
models (3a) and (3b) to the e-retailer data set. In Fig. 10a, the
performance measure is the predictive accuracy and in
Fig. 10b the AUC. The lines labeled as context1, context2, and
context3 are the results achieved applying model (3a) for
each degree of context ðK1; K2; K3Þ. The solid line with
empty circles (labeled as Hier BN) represents performance of
model (3b) learned by the BN in Fig. 3. Each line is plotted
per degree of customer granularity (x-axis). In both Figs. 10a
and 10b, the Hier BN model (3b) clearly outperforms each
one of the individual contextual models (3a). In particular,
the accuracy reaches the maximum value of 90 percent and
the AUC of 100 percent when the unit of analysis is
Cluster10. This demonstrates that inferring the context Kq
using the whole hierarchy of contextual information in our
experiments provides better results than inferring one
context level Ki at a time. Moreover, inferring only a single
level does not provide any improvement when the degree of
contextual information increases. For instance in Fig. 10a,
the inference performance for the coarsest degree of context
is higher than for finer levels e-retailer data set and (b) food data set.
and context3). In terms of statistical significance, we have
evaluated two different aspects: the difference in performance between each of the four lines of the graph, and the
difference in performance of each point of the Hier BN line.
With the Friedman test (nonparametric repeated measure
ANOVA) , we have tested the null hypothesis that the
performance of each of the four lines of the graphs is the
same. The results are always statistically significant for the
accuracy with p < 0:001 at least. For the AUC, the difference
between the Hier BN and each of the remaining models is
statistically significant ðp < 0:0001Þ, while the difference in
performance between each model (3a) is not. The results
support the conclusion stated above.
To evaluate the statistical significance of the difference
in performance of each point of the Hier BN model (e.g., in
Fig. 10a, the difference between the 90 percent accuracy in
Cluster10 and the 80 percent in WholeDB), we have used the
Kruskal-Wallis nonparametric method . The null hypothesis is that the performance obtained by (3b) is the same for
each unit of analysis. The differences are always statistically
significant with p < 0:001 at least.
In Fig. 11, the same inference performance is plotted for
the food data set. In this case, model (3a) outperforms
model (3b). However, there is no performance improvement when inferring finer degrees of context by model (3a),
being the lines very close to each other and the differences
in performance not statistically significant. It is quite
evident that for the gourmet food data set the results are
influenced by the preprocessing performed to grow the
gourmet food data set. In fact, the fact that the contextual
information was manually introduced according to the
principles described in Section 4.1 may constitute a reason
why inferring one level of context is easier in the gourmet
food data set with respect to the e-retailer data set where
contextual data were provided by the customer, not
introduced artificially. This is a possible explanation of that
the model that infers one context level Ki at a time (3a)
performs worse than the model that infers the context Kq
using the whole hierarchy of contextual information (3b) in
the e-retailer data set, but it is the contrary in the gourmet
food case. Fig. 10 can be explained in terms of the
heterogeneity versus lack of data tradeoff. As the cluster
size decreases, the homogeneity of customers in these
clusters increases, assuming that clusters are formed using
good clustering methods. This increase in customer heterogeneity should lead to better predictive performance
assuming there is enough data to build meaningful predictive models in cases of only few customers and a single
customer. If there is enough data to build good predictive
models all the way for the single customer case, the
performance increases monotonically, as the Hier BN line
in Fig. 11 clearly attests. If there is not enough data to build
good predictive models for small segments and for the
single customer case, the performance will drop at the end
and there will be a peak in performance, as the Hier BN line
in Fig. 10 shows. Again, this is the consequence of the
customer homogeneity versus not having enough data
phenomenon. However, there is also a third case when
clustering algorithms produce segments of poor quality and
the predictive models on these segments perform poorly, as
line Context1 in Fig. 10b (and some others) attest. Note that
the performance improves for Context1 in Fig. 10b for the
single customer case when clustering becomes immaterial.
In summary, we demonstrated in this section that the
context can be inferred with good levels of accuracy
assuming that “smart” inference methods are used for this
purpose. By “smart,” we mean that appropriate predictive
models combined with the appropriate levels of customer
segmentation should be used along with the right performance measures to predict the contextual information, as
Figs. 10 and 11 demonstrate. Moreover, given sufficient
data, the whole contextual hierarchy can be better inferred
than individual contextual variables, as Fig. 10 shows.
How Do We Exploit Context?
The main goal is to provide the best experimental
conditions in which contextual information can be utilized
for predicting users’ behavior. This is important because the
contextual knowledge should improve such predictions,
which makes it necessary to identify the best possible
conditions. This issue can be analyzed in two ways: 1) once
you know the context, how can it be exploited in the best
possible manner and 2) if you do not know context, how can
it be inferred and then used to improve model performance.
We explore these two questions below.
How to utilize existing contextual information. To this aim,
two context-dependent customer models (shown on the
right in Fig. 3) have been compared to the uncontextual
model in different experimental settings. The first model is
the standard Naı¨ve Bayes model (4a), where the context is
captured with an independent attribute Kq. The second
contextual model is a BN (4b), where the contextual
information is modeled as a variable Kq in the middle
layer of the network, as shown in Fig. 3. The performance of
each of the contextual models (4a) and (4b) is compared
with the performance of the basic uncontextual model (1)
across various experimental setting using the Diff measure
defined by (5). Figs. 12a and 12b show the differences in
performance between contextual and uncontextual models
for the e-retailer and gourmet food data sets, respectively.
The length of the black column is the average difference in
PALMISANO ET AL.: USING CONTEXT TO IMPROVE PREDICTIVE MODELING OF CUSTOMERS IN PERSONALIZATION APPLICATIONS
Fig. 10. E-retailer DB: Performance of contextual inference models for
the (a) accuracy and (b) ROC measures.
Fig. 11. Food DB: Performance of contextual inference models for the
(a) accuracy and (b) ROC measures.
performance Diff between the naı¨ve (Naı¨ve Bayes) contextual model (4a) and the uncontextual model (1) taken
across various experimental settings, such as types of
dependent variables used in these models and types of
performance measures. The gray column is the average
difference Diff between the Bayesian contextual model (4b)
and the uncontextual model (1). The white column is the
average difference Diff between the naı¨ve contextual model
(4a) and the Bayesian contextual model (4b). As Fig. 12a
shows, the Bayesian model (4b) is always better than the
naı¨ve model (4a), except when the unit of analysis is a single
customer. Each column is plotted for each level of market
granularity (vertical axis) ranging from the whole customer
base (WholeDB) to the individual models of customers
(Single). For example, in the e-retailer data set, when the unit
of analysis is Cluster100 the Bayesian contextual model
(gray column) is almost 5 percent better than the uncontextual. As Fig. 12a demonstrates, the naı¨ve contextual (4a) and
the Bayesian contextual (4b) models always outperform the
uncontextual model (1) for the e-retailer data set. Moreover,
these performance differences are statistically significant.
The null hypothesis is that the performance of each model is
the same [(4a) versus (1) and (4b) versus (1)]. The
differences are statistically significant with p < 0:001 for
both the naı¨ve and Bayesian models and for all the levels of
market granularity. For the gourmet food data set in
Fig. 12b, the performance differences between the
Bayesian (4b) and the uncontextual (1) models (the gray
bars in Fig. 12b) are also statistically significant (at least
p < 0:001) but not for the naı¨ve case ðp > 0:05Þ. The
variation in the relative performance of the two contextual
models (shown by the white column in Fig. 10a) ranges
from 3.8 percent to þ0.5 percent and can be explained as
follows: The Bayesian model is “data hungry,” meaning that
in order to leverage the contextual heterogeneity and
improve the predictive performance, a certain amount of
data is needed per unit of analysis. Therefore, the Single
customer level is suboptimal (not enough data), as well as
the WholeDB level (the context gets lost). Thus, the biggest
performance difference is in between these two extremes.
For e-retailer data, the best market granularity level is
Cluster10. For the gourmet food data set, the performance
difference between (4a) and (4b) is even bigger (the white
column is far to the left of the y-axis) and statistically even
more significant. Note that the Diff measure reaches the
peak at Cluster100 (29.7 percent), rather than Cluster10, as
in the e-retailer case.
The results pertaining to the first question (Does context
matter?) can be summarized as follows:
There is a significant improvement in the predictive performance when the contextual information is modeled as a hidden
variable (in a BN) versus using it as an independent variable (in
an NB model). This conclusion is in line with the result
reported in that a BN can outperform the Naı¨ve Bayes
approach given the same set of attributes.
Limited data cannot leverage the heterogeneity effect. There is
a specific degree of customer granularity, which improves
the predictive performance depending on the inner characteristics of the data set. Given that the Bayesian contextual
approach outperforms the naı¨ve contextual model, one
needs to determine the best degree of customer granularity.
In both data sets, there is statistical evidence that the
solution is in the middle of the customer granularity scale. It
means that even if the firm is able to work on each single
customer, not necessarily the best performance results will
be obtained because of the variance bias problem and the
complexity of the BN that needs more data compared to the
naı¨ve approach. In each unit of analysis, there is contextual
heterogeneity, but in some cases, there is not enough data to
let the model learn from the limited available data. In the
e-retailer data set, there is an average of 40 transactions per
customer that rises to 200 for Cluster100. In this case,
the best market granularity level is Cluster10 since for
Cluster100 there is not enough data to capture the contextual
heterogeneity, whereas heterogeneity is too high for the
whole data set. In the food data set, the results are similar;
but the best unit of analysis is Cluster100 rather than
Cluster10 because of the size of the data set: the average
number of transactions for Cluster100 is about 700, which is
enough to capture the context effect while keeping heterogeneity “under control.”
How to utilize inferred contextual information. As was
argued in Section 5.2, if done properly, the contextual
information can be successfully inferred. In this section, we
show that this inference can provide for better predictions
of customer behavior. To do this, we use the latent BN
model (4c) (that is also shown in Fig. 3 as the rightmost
diagram) that represents the unknown contextual information with the latent variable Kq and compare its performance with the performances of the uncontextual model (1)
and the contextual BN model (4b). In other words, we do
this comparison for a BN model across the three levels of
context: no context [model (1)], full context [model (4b)],
and latent context [model (4c)]. The uncontextual model (1)
is defined with the NB model constituting a simple case of a
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING,
NOVEMBER 2008
Fig. 12. Difference in performance of contextual and uncontextual models per customer granularity for the (a) e-retailer and (b) food data sets.
BN, while models (4b) and (4c) are defined with the same
BN in Fig. 3; but (4b) uses available contextual information,
whereas model (4c) infers it instead. The performance of
models (4b) and (4c) is compared with that of the basic
uncontextual model (1) across various experimental settings
using the Diff measure defined by (5).
Figs. 13a and 13b show the results for the e-retailer and
gourmet food data sets, respectively. The length of the
black column is the average difference in performance Diff
between the Bayesian contextual model (4b) and the
uncontextual model (1) taken for various experimental
settings, such as types of dependent variables used in
these models and types of performance measures. The
gray column is the average difference Diff between the
latent (4c) and the uncontextual (1) models. Each column is
plotted for each level of market granularity (vertical axis)
ranging from the whole customer base to the individual
level. For example, in the e-retailer data set, when the unit
of analysis is Cluster100 the latent model (gray column) is
almost 1 percent better than the uncontextual. As Fig. 13a
demonstrates, the Bayesian contextual (4b) and the latent
(4c) models always outperform the uncontextual model (1)
for both data sets. The differences are statistically significant except in the single user unit of analysis (e-retailer data
set) where the latent model has a small negative performance. To show this, we formulated the null hypothesis:
the performance of each model is the same [(4b) versus (1)
and (4c) versus (1)]. The performance differences are
statistically significant (with p < 0:001) for all comparisons
and levels of market granularity, except for the previous
case. As expected, the latent models in all the experimental
conditions are worse than the Bayesian contextual model
where the context is explicitly known and those differences
in performance are statistically significant (at least
p < 0:001). From all this, we conclude that the latent model
(4c), inferring the context, outperforms the uncontextual
model (1) but is dominated by the similar contextual
model (4b). This means that even without explicit knowledge of context, we can still infer the context and use it for
better predicting customer behavior, although the performance is lower (from 3 percent to 10 percent in the eretailer and from 7 percent to 22 percent in the food data
set) than when explicit knowledge of context is available.
The results reported in this section have significant
implications for marketers and data miners. They demonstrate that nothing beats explicit contextual knowledge; but
if acquiring this knowledge is expensive, the second best
alternative is to try to infer and use it appropriately.
CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have addressed three questions: 1) does
context matter when building customers’ behavioral models, 2) to which extent is it possible to infer the contextual
information from the data, and 3) how do we use the
contextual information for modeling user behavior.
For the first research question, we conclude that, first,
context matters in the case of modeling the behavior of
individual customers, i.e., knowing the context in which a
customer makes the purchase improves the ability to
predict that customer’s behavior. Second, the degree of
contextual information also matters: the more we know
about the context of a transaction, the better we can predict
the customer’s behavior. Third, the effect of contextual
information gets diluted during the process of aggregating
customers’ data. Context does matter for individual
customers but does not significantly matter when predicting the behavior of the whole customer base. Also, the
contextual effects are stronger for the finest levels of
customer segmentation. All these results can be interpreted
in terms of the tradeoff between data sparsity and customer
homogeneity. By providing contextual information, customer transactions pertaining to this particular context are
reduced, making fewer data points to fit the context-specific
model, while homogeneity of these transactions increases,
making it easier to predict more accurately customer
behavior in similar contexts. As shown in Section 5, the
number of transactions available to the model to learn the
predictive function can drop from more than 5,000 to less
than 10 (in the e-retailed data set and finest contextual
degree), but the gain in the predictive performance can
increase from 6 percent to 10 percent, witnessing the
increase in the homogeneity of the customer’s behavior.
For the second question (can we infer contextual information?), we conclude that it is possible to do this for specific
levels of customer segmentation using the best-of-breed
predictive methods. These “specific segmentation levels”
depend on several parameters discussed in this paper and
are dictated by the optimal amounts of pooled contextual
customer data necessary to make these inferences. As our
results show, the BN approach captures inner dependencies
between the attributes of the model and the underlying
context, leading to good predictions and contextual inferences. For example, a BN (shown in Fig. 3) inferred the
purchasing context with 90 percent to 100 percent performance rate in the e-retailer data set, as demonstrated in
Fig. 10, thus making it unnecessary to explicitly collect
PALMISANO ET AL.: USING CONTEXT TO IMPROVE PREDICTIVE MODELING OF CUSTOMERS IN PERSONALIZATION APPLICATIONS
Fig. 13. Difference in performance of latent and Bayesian contextual models per customer granularity for (a) e-retailer and (b) food data sets.
contextual information in those cases. This inference needs
to be done for the right level of customer segmentation since
both inference and predictive performances peak at a certain
level of customer segmentation. The contextual inference
process is reliable only if the analyst can properly select a
good model (such as a certain type of a BN for our case) and
identify a proper segmentation level.
For the third research question (how do we utilize the
contextual information?), we conclude that, first, knowing
context is not enough and that exploiting it in the best
possible way is also very important. For example, incorporating the context into a BN produces better prediction
results than simply using it as a part of NB. Dropping the
independence condition between the contextual information and some of the independent variables of the model
can be a useful solution for improving predictions. Second,
there is a significant predictive performance improvement
when the contextual information is modeled as a latent
variable in a “smart” way. This demonstrates that if the
contextual information cannot be acquired from external
sources, it can still be used as a latent variable and
contribute to the overall improvement of predicting
customers’ behavior. This result has important practical
implications for marketers and data miners dealing with
e-commerce applications since acquiring contextual information can be costly. Third, there is a specific customer
segmentation level that maximizes predictive performance,
as shown in Figs. 12 and 13, which depends on the inner
characteristics of the data set.
The results cannot be generalized to every data set and to
all industry sectors, but they can be generalized to a
relevant number of e-commerce applications, especially to
the “high-frequency” applications where customers transact frequently and in the contexts defined by certain
hierarchical taxonomies. The customer behavior is very
likely to change in different contexts and we tried to
understand these changes better in this study. Moreover,
several e-commerce applications are already structured to
capture the intent of a customer’s purchase by explicitly
asking the user whether he/she is going to make a gift. In
these cases, this research results should turn out to be
interesting for managers. The caveat for firms and managers is that caring about context is not enough: they have
to carefully consider in which conditions the contextual
information gathered is going to be used and for which
marketing decisions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This paper is based on the preliminary research published
in and .