Transmission of Ebola Viruses: What We Know and What We Do
Michael T. Osterholm,a Kristine A. Moore,a Nicholas S. Kelley,a Lisa M. Brosseau,b Gary Wong,c Frederick A. Murphy,d
Clarence J. Peters,d James W. LeDuc,d Phillip K. Russell,e Michel Van Herp,f Jimmy Kapetshi,g Jean-Jacques T. Muyembe,g
Benoit Kebela Ilunga,h James E. Strong,c Allen Grolla,c Anja Wolz,f Brima Kargbo,i David K. Kargbo,i Pierre Formenty,j
David Avram Sanders,k Gary P. Kobingerc
Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USAa; Division of Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USAb; National Laboratory for Zoonotic Diseases and Special Pathogens, Public Health Agency of Canada, Winnipeg,
Canadac; The Galveston National Laboratory, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USAd; Sabin Vaccine Institute, Washington, DC, USAe; Medical
Department Unit, Médecins sans Frontières, Brussels, Belgiumf; Institut National de Recherche Biomédicale, Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congog; Ministry of
Health, Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congoh; Ministry of Health and Sanitation, Freetown, Sierra Leonei; Department of Epidemic and Pandemic Alert and
Response, World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerlandj; Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, Lafayette, Indiana, USAk
Available evidence demonstrates that direct patient contact and contact with infectious body ﬂuids are the primary modes for Ebola virus transmission, but this is based on a limited number of studies. Key areas requiring further
study include (i) the role of aerosol transmission (either via large droplets or small particles in the vicinity of source patients), (ii) the role of environmental contamination and fomite transmission, (iii) the degree to which minimally or mildly
ill persons transmit infection, (iv) how long clinically relevant infectiousness persists, (v) the role that “superspreading
events” may play in driving transmission dynamics, (vi) whether strain differences or repeated serial passage in outbreak
settings can impact virus transmission, and (vii) what role sylvatic or domestic animals could play in outbreak propagation, particularly during major epidemics such as the 2013–2015 West Africa situation. In this review, we address what we
know and what we do not know about Ebola virus transmission. We also hypothesize that Ebola viruses have the potential
to be respiratory pathogens with primary respiratory spread.
PAST EBOLA OUTBREAKS
etween the ﬁrst recognized outbreak of Ebola virus disease
(EVD) in 1976 and the onset of the 2013–2015 Ebola epidemic
in West Africa, 24 outbreaks of EVD involving approximately
2,400 reported cases had been recognized by the World Health
Organization (WHO) (1). One additional outbreak involving 69
cases occurred in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC)
between July and October 2014 (2). To date, ﬁve species of Ebola
viruses have been identiﬁed; four from Africa (Zaire, Sudan,
Bundibugyo, and Tai Forest) and one from the Philippines (Reston) (1, 3, 4). Most pre-2013 outbreaks were caused by Zaire Ebola
virus (EBOV) (14 outbreaks) or Sudan virus (SUDV) (7 outbreaks); Bundibugyo virus (BDBV) caused two outbreaks, and Tai
Forest virus (TAFV) was identiﬁed in a single case from Côte
d’Ivoire (1). Outbreaks caused by Reston virus (RESTV) have occurred in nonhuman primates and pigs, with associated asymptomatic human infections (5).
Only seven outbreaks involved more than 100 reported
cases. The maximum number of generations of human-tohuman transmission for these outbreaks is unknown but is
likely relatively low. One report estimated 15 generations of
viral transmission during a 1976 SUDV outbreak (284 cases),
which was the most that were identiﬁed (6). Investigators recorded four generations of spread during the EBOV outbreak
in Kikwit, DRC (315 cases) (7).
Many experts have concluded that the extensive transmission documented in the 2013–2015 West Africa epidemic is due
to societal factors (poverty, urban density, population migration patterns, and poor health care and public health infrastructure) rather than unique biological characteristics of the
agent (8, 9). Limited data are available, however, regarding
virus genomics (affecting phenotype/pathotype), patient viral
loads, and certain epidemiological features for this unique
EBOV strain. Furthermore, information about Ebola virus
transmission in humans remains incomplete, given the relatively small number of outbreak investigations and cases recognized before 2013; as a result, additional questions remain
(10). In this review, we explore what we know—and what we do
not know—about Ebola virus transmission.
WHAT WE KNOW ABOUT EBOLA VIRUS TRANSMISSION IN
Past outbreaks provide opportunities to examine human-tohuman transmission of Ebola viruses. Spread within hospitals
has been documented repeatedly, and outbreak ampliﬁcation
has occurred in health care settings for both EBOV and SUDV
(6, 7, 11). Early outbreak investigations demonstrated the importance of parenteral transmission via nonsterile needles, although this has not been noted more recently (6, 11). In addition, investigators have shown that health care workers are at
particularly high risk (6, 7, 11, 12). Use of barrier protection
Published 19 February 2015
Citation Osterholm MT, Moore KA, Kelley NS, Brosseau LM, Wong G, Murphy FA, Peters
CJ, LeDuc JW, Russell PK, Van Herp M, Kapetshi J, Muyembe J-JT, Ilunga BK, Strong JE,
Grolla A, Wolz A, Kargbo B, Kargbo DK, Formenty P, Sanders DA, Kobinger GP. 2015.
Transmission of Ebola viruses: what we know and what we do not know. mBio 6(2):
e00137-15. doi:10.1128/mBio.00137-15.
Editor Michael J. Imperiale, University of Michigan
Copyright © 2015 Osterholm et al. This is an open-access article distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported
license, which permits unrestricted noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction
in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
Address correspondence to Michael T. Osterholm, .
OPINION/HYPOTHESIS
March/April 2015
mbio.asm.org
and surgical masks apparently was adequate to halt most nosocomial transmission during past outbreaks of EBOV and
SUDV (6, 7, 11, 13–15). In one outbreak of SUDV, however, 14
(64%) of 22 health care workers became infected after barrier
precautions were established; this led to reinforcement of infection control practices (16).
Three reports (the ﬁrst two involving SUDV and the third
involving EBOV) examined the risk of illness among household contacts by history of direct physical contact with a primary case (Table 1) (17–19). In the ﬁrst report, infection did
not occur in any of 23 familial contacts who had been in the
same room but did not have direct contact with the primary
case; the authors therefore postulated that the virus is not easily
transmitted by the airborne route (17). In the second study,
investigators found that direct contact with body ﬂuids of ill
patients conferred the greatest risk; however, sleeping in the
same hut and sleeping on the same mat were independent risk
factors, suggesting that other modes of transmission played a
role (18). In the third study, the authors indicated that while
they found no evidence of “small-particle aerosol transmission,” based on conﬁdence limits of their ﬁndings, they estimated the upper limit of risk in their study for this mode of
transmission was no more than 4% (19).
In a fourth report involving an outbreak of EBOV, investigators identiﬁed 55 patients out of 316 outbreak-associated cases
who had no reported source of exposure during initial investigation. They obtained further information directly from four survivors and via surrogates for 40 deceased patients (20). Of 23 for
whom exposure to a suspected EVD case was subsequently identiﬁed, 19 had visited the primary case before becoming ill; 14 had
merely touched the case (without apparent body ﬂuid exposure),
and ﬁve reported no physical contact or body ﬂuid exposure. The
authors stated that touch alone may result in transmission and
postulated that “large droplets, aerosolized particles, or fomites”
may have explained the mode of transmission for the ﬁve without
reported physical contact.
Available data indicate that direct physical contact and exposure to infected body ﬂuids are the primary modes of Ebola
virus transmission. In support of this, Ebola virus has been
cultured from saliva, breast milk, urine, and semen of infected
patients; in addition, viral RNA (identiﬁed by reverse
transcription-PCR [RT-PCR]) has been found in stool, tears,
and sweat and in rectal, conjunctival, vaginal, and skin swabs
(21–25). Because copious amounts of virus can be found in
skin (by direct visualization and immunohistochemistry staining), and sweat may contain the virus, touching an infected
person may result in transmission (26, 27). Infected persons
can shed virus for prolonged periods of time after infection
(several weeks to months). The virus has been cultured from
semen up to 82 days after illness onset (25), but sexual transmission has not been documented (28).
Fomite transmission apparently can occur, but the role of fomites also appears to be relatively small, based on limited epidemiological data. In support of fomite transmission, studies demonstrate that ﬁloviruses can survive on solid surfaces and in
liquids for several days to several weeks (29–31). One ﬁeld study
analyzed 31 environmental samples obtained from an Ebola isolation ward during an SUDV outbreak; all were negative by RT-
PCR and culture, but two control samples (taken from a bloodstained glove and an intravenous insertion site) were positive for
viral RNA by RT-PCR (21). This study did not demonstrate signiﬁcant environmental contamination; however, sampling took
place after routine cleaning of the ward, methods used had not
been validated for environmental sampling, and the ﬁndings are
not generalizable to situations where greater environmental contamination is present. For example, environmental sampling in
2014 at the Ebola treatment center in Kailahun, Sierra Leone,
demonstrated multiple positive samples by RT-PCR. Samples
were collected early in the morning before daily cleaning and disinfection, and many were taken from surfaces that were not visibly
bloody or soiled. Interestingly, the outer surfaces of three out of 16
masks worn by health care workers were RT-PCR positive; they
were not visibly bloody or soiled (J. Strong, unpublished data).
Identiﬁcation of viral RNA on masks suggests either the presence of
aerosols in the patient-care environment or cross-contamination of
the masks (such as when workers doffed personal protective equipment [PPE]). Finding viral RNA in the environment, however,
does not necessarily indicate that viable infectious viral particles
are present.
Since the overwhelming majority of EVD cases have resulted
from prior contact with a symptomatic Ebola patient, public
health authorities have concluded that transmission does not occur from persons who are incubating disease but not yet symptomatic. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) testing of
close contacts of clinical cases found that contacts can develop
asymptomatic infection (demonstrated by IgM and IgG responses) and they harbor very low levels of circulating virus, suggesting that infected persons without symptoms are not very infectious and, therefore, are unlikely to transmit to others (32).
This is probably also true for persons in the presymptomatic phase
of illness. Investigators have noted, however, that mildly ill patients who are early in the clinical course can transmit infection
(19). Similarly, many secondary cases in past outbreaks had ongoing exposure to a primary household case, so it is not possible to
determine when transmission actually occurred. Finally, for at
least one secondary case, identiﬁed during an EBOV outbreak, the
TABLE 1 Risk of illness among household contacts by history of direct
physical contact with a primary case
Study and contact
Development of EVD
No. who became
ill (% of total ill)
No. who were not ill
(% of total not ill)
Dowell et al. (19)
Direct contact
No direct contact
Baron et al. (17)
Direct contact
No direct contact
Francesconi et al. (18)
Direct contact
No direct contact
Direct contact
No direct contact
a Contact status unknown.
b The patient had probable fomite exposure, i.e., used a blanket that the primary case
had used before death.
Osterholm et al.
mbio.asm.org
March/April 2015
only recognized potential source of exposure was transmission
from an asymptomatic person 2 days before that person became ill
(11), but such reports are exceedingly rare in the available literature. Even though mildly ill persons can possibly transmit the
virus, review of available data suggests that, if this occurs, it is an
infrequent event and not of substantial epidemiological importance.
Several additional observations are germane to understanding
human-to-human Ebola virus transmission. First, the amount of
virus in the blood increases substantially over the course of illness;
this likely inﬂuences the degree of viral shedding, which, in turn,
inﬂuences patient infectiousness over time (18, 19, 33). Second,
patients in the late stages of disease who are at their most infectious and who are experiencing severe diarrhea, vomiting, bleeding, or coughing may be more likely to shed infectious virus with
aerosol particles of various sizes, given the presence of virus in
various body ﬂuids. Third, investigators have raised the possibility
of “superspreading events.” In one report, a single SUDV case
apparently transmitted the virus to 10 family members; additional
details regarding this case are not available (34). Investigation of
an EBOV outbreak found that one case was an apparent source for
38 secondary cases and another was a source for 21 secondary
cases; both had gastrointestinal hemorrhaging, and exposures
most likely occurred during primary-case burials (7). In Sierra
Leone, more than 300 cases were linked to the burial of a patient
who died in May 2014 (35). Fourth, the infectious dose for Ebola
viruses in humans appears to be extremely low, with 10 or fewer
viral particles being sufﬁcient for infection (36). This may be particularly important for health care workers when dofﬁng contaminated PPE, since without meticulous care during dofﬁng, health
care workers may come into contact with small numbers of viral
particles.
Limited information regarding transmission is available for the
current West Africa epidemic. One dramatic feature is the large
number of infected health care workers (37). The WHO has postulated that inadequate training in specialty care, shortages of
medical staff, shortages of PPE, improper use of PPE, and misdiagnosis of EVD have contributed to this occurrence. The exact
transmission mechanism remains unknown for two American
nurses who acquired infection while caring for a patient in Dallas,
TX, and for a nurse in Madrid, Spain, who cared for a returning
missionary (38, 39). For the Dallas patient, aerosol-generating
procedures (such as intubation) were performed before his death,
but it is not clear if these contributed to transmission to the health
care workers.
EBOLA VIRUS TRANSMISSION AT THE HUMAN-ANIMAL
Ebola viruses can infect a number of animal species, most notably
nonhuman primates. In 1994, an Ebola outbreak occurred among
chimpanzees in the Tai National Park, Côte d’Ivoire (40). An
ethologist was infected with TAFV while conducting a necropsy
on a wild chimpanzee that had been found dead; she was wearing
“household gloves” but no mask or gown (41).
Between 2001 and 2003, several human outbreaks of EBOV
occurred in Gabon and the neighboring Republic of the Congo.
These outbreaks began with index cases handling infected wild
animal carcasses, including gorillas, chimpanzees, duikers (small
antelopes), and possibly monkeys (42, 43). Investigation of a 2007
EBOV outbreak suggested that fruit bats migrating up the Lulua
River in the DRC were the source; before illness onset, the index
case had bought freshly killed bats for food (44). Since Ebola IgG
antibodies and viral RNA have been detected in bats, researchers
believe that fruit bats may be a primary natural reservoir for Ebola
viruses (45).
Several outbreaks of RESTV occurred between 1989 and 1996
in captive monkeys in the Philippines or imported from the Philippines into the United States or Italy (3, 46, 47). During the ﬁrst
outbreak, four U.S. animal workers seroconverted to positivity for
RESTV; none developed symptoms. One likely became infected
during necropsy on a monkey. For the remaining three, investigators suggested that direct contact with infected monkeys was the
most likely route; conjunctival exposure and inhalation were considered possible routes. A WHO report published in 2009 indicated that an additional ﬁve monkey handlers in the Philippines
tested positive for IgG antibodies to RESTV; none recalled a signiﬁcant illness (48).
In 2008, RESTV was isolated from pigs in the Philippines (by
RT-PCR and viral isolation). At the time, an increase in mortality
was occurring on swine farms; the pigs were infected with porcine
reproductive and respiratory syndrome (PRRS) virus, and some
had evidence of coinfection with RESTV (5). Six workers in contact with infected pigs had RESTV IgG antibodies, supporting past
infection, which suggests that pigs can transmit RESTV to humans. The most likely routes of transmission from pigs to humans
include direct contact with body ﬂuids of infected animals and
possibly respiratory transmission (48). Coinfection of pigs with
PRRS, which causes respiratory disease, may have facilitated respiratory transmission of RESTV (49).
Serologic evidence suggests that dogs can be naturally infected
with Ebola viruses. During one outbreak, investigators found an
EBOV IgG seroprevalence rate of 31.8% by ELISA testing among
dogs from African villages with both infected animal carcasses and
human EVD cases (50). Ebola-like illness has not been reported in
dogs, EBOV has not been isolated from dogs, and the validity of
the ELISA has been questioned; therefore, the signiﬁcance of this
ﬁnding, particularly with regard to transmission to humans, remains unknown.
ANIMAL TRANSMISSION STUDIES
Several experimental studies have examined animal-to-animal
Ebola virus transmission in various animal species. One study
involving EBOV-inoculated rhesus monkeys and controls found
that two of three control monkeys caged in the same room developed Ebola disease 10 and 11 days after the inoculated animals had
died; the control monkeys were housed approximately 3 m from
the inoculated monkeys (51). The authors postulated the control
monkeys became infected through aerosol, oral, or conjunctival
exposure to virus-laden droplets. The pattern of pulmonary antigen staining on pathology specimens suggested aerosol infection.
Alternatively, transmission could have occurred through certain
behaviors of caged nonhuman primates (such as spitting and
throwing feces) (52) or through routine animal husbandry. In
another study, six piglets were infected with EBOV and then
housed with four caged macaques (53). The piglets and macaques
were separated by a wire barrier 20 cm in front of the monkey
cages. All macaques developed infection. Transmission could
have resulted from inhalation of aerosols, inoculation of mucous
membranes by droplets, or droplets landing in the cages with subsequent fomite transmission; animal workers took care to avoid
Opinion/Hypothesis
March/April 2015
mbio.asm.org
cross-contamination of the cages during husbandry practices, but
this remains a possibility (53). In a third study, two monkeys infected with EBOV intramuscularly were placed next to two noninfected monkeys—both were in open-barred cages without protective barriers. At 6 days postinoculation, infected monkeys had
high titers of virus in blood, but testing of oral, nasal, and rectal
swabs did not yield infectious virus. The infected monkeys did not
transmit virus to uninfected monkeys (54).
Other studies have examined the role of mucosal or inhalational exposures in transmission. In one, researchers inoculated rhesus monkeys with EBOV orally, conjunctivally, or by
intramuscular inoculation (one positive-control monkey)
(55). Three of four monkeys exposed by the oral route, four of
four monkeys exposed by the conjunctival route, and the
positive-control monkey became infected with EBOV and died.
In another, six rhesus monkeys were randomly assigned to one
of three groups of two animals each: low inhaled dose, high
inhaled dose, and noninfectious aerosol (control group). All
EBOV-exposed monkeys developed a rapidly fatal illness (56).
Investigators have shown that pigs develop a severe respiratory
illness following mucosal inoculation with EBOV and can shed
large quantities of virus from the oronasal mucosa (57). In
these studies, the inoculum was suspended in a uniform carrier
and delivered directly to the animals for a certain period of
time in a controlled environment; therefore, this information
is not necessarily applicable to human-to-human transmission
under real-world conditions.
KEY PATHOLOGY FINDINGS IN HUMANS AND NONHUMAN
Clinical pathology studies of EVD in humans are limited because
of biosafety concerns and lack of medical infrastructure in areas
with Ebola outbreaks. To date, autopsies have been performed
for only about 30 cases of ﬁlovirus infection; Ebola outbreaks in
1976 (SUDV) and 1995 (EBOV) remain the primary sources of
information (27, 58, 59). Pathology data demonstrate that
Ebola viruses can infect numerous cell types (primarily macrophages and dendritic, endothelial, and Kupffer cells) and tissues (notably liver, spleen, kidneys, lymph nodes, testes, gastrointestinal mucosa, and skin). Ebola virus is not known to
cause pneumonitis in humans, although congestion, focal
intra-alveolar edema, diffuse alveolar damage, and hemorrhage can occur in the lungs. Viral inclusions can be found
within alveolar macrophages, and free viral particles can be
seen within alveolar spaces (59).
Pathology ﬁndings in nonhuman primates are consistent with
data from human autopsies. Of particular interest are studies involving virus inoculation by aerosol challenge. One study demonstrated that monkeys infected with EBOV by the aerosol route
developed a rapidly fatal Ebola-like illness and on necropsy had
mild to moderate, patchy interstitial pneumonia with a bronchocentric pattern (56). Severe lymphoid depletion, necrosis, vasculitis, thrombosis, and hemorrhage were noted in tracheobronchial lymph nodes. Large amounts of viral antigen were present in
secretions on mucosal surfaces of the airways, oropharynx, and
nose. Another EBOV aerosol challenge study involving rhesus
macaques demonstrated signiﬁcant primary infection of lymphoid tissues in the upper and lower respiratory tract, which is
generally not noted in primates inoculated by other routes (60). A
study involving probable aerosol transmission of EBOV from piglets to cynomolgus macaques showed interstitial pneumonia and
focal areas of alveolar hemorrhage and edema in the macaques.
Viral antigen was detected in alveolar and septal macrophages,
pneumocytes, and pulmonary, bronchiolar, and tracheal epithelial cells (53). In another study, eight guinea pigs were exposed to
an aerosol containing a guinea pig-adapted EBOV strain; all developed a lethal interstitial pneumonia that was distinct from pulmonary pathology observed in guinea pigs challenged subcutaneously (61). Another study showed that guinea pigs inoculated
intranasally had extensive lung pathology and EBOV antigen in
the trachea, suggesting that guinea pigs challenged intranasally
were more infectious for naive cage mates than animals inoculated
intraperitoneally (62).
GENOMICS OF EBOLA VIRUS
Since initial isolation of Ebola viruses in 1976, the glycoprotein
gene has remained stable enough to be useful for diagnostics and
phylogenetic analysis (63). Before the West Africa epidemic,
GenBank included 48 completed genomic sequences covering the
ﬁve Ebola viruses (64). Eighty-one additional genomic sequences
have been added since the 2013–2015 epidemic in West Africa
began (65). Seventy-eight are from Sierra Leone (65) and three are from Guinea (64). Data from these sequences suggest that the current outbreak can be traced to two
distinct introductions from Guinea into Sierra Leone, the Guinea
outbreak was the result of a single zoonotic event, and this EBOV
strain represents a unique clade (64, 65). Two phylodynamic analyses of the Sierra Leone data using several different models suggest
that superspreading events (as evidenced by high variance in
transmission rates in the best-ﬁtting models) are occurring and
driving transmission (66, 67).
THE COMPLEXITIES OF AEROSOLS AND DROPLETS: A
CHANGING PARADIGM
Public health ofﬁcials generally consider disease transmission of
infectious agents to fall into three categories—contact transmission (direct and indirect), droplet transmission, and airborne
transmission; the deﬁnition of each follows (68). Direct contact
transmission occurs when pathogens are transferred from one infected person to another person without a contaminated intermediate object or person. Indirect contact transmission involves the
transfer of an infectious agent through a contaminated intermediate object or person. Droplet transmission involves respiratory
droplets carrying infectious pathogens that travel directly from
the respiratory tract of the infectious individual to susceptible mucosal surfaces of the recipient, generally over short distances. Airborne transmission occurs by dissemination of either airborne
droplet nuclei or small particles in the respirable size range containing infectious agents that remain infective over time and distance. In further understanding the complexities of disease transmission, two other terms should be considered. The ﬁrst is aerosol
transmission, which involves inhalation of infectious aerosols suspended in the air either near a person or at a distance and can
involve aerosol particles of various sizes that either land on mucosal surfaces, such as the nose and mouth, or are inspired deeper
into the respiratory tract (69). Both traditional models of droplet
transmission and airborne transmission can ﬁt under the broader
category of aerosol transmission. Aerosols can be generated from
the respiratory tract, via forceful emission of body ﬂuids such as
Osterholm et al.
mbio.asm.org
March/April 2015
vomitus or diarrhea, or from aerosol-generating procedures. This
leads to the last concept, which is respiratory transmission. Respiratory transmission is limited to generation of aerosols (either
droplet or small-particle aerosols) from the respiratory tract (e.g.,
nasal passages, trachea, or lungs) that then enter the airspace and,
to use the traditional model, cause infection by droplet or airborne
Breathing, talking, coughing, and sneezing generate particles
suspended in air (aerosols), which range in diameter from less
than 1 m to greater than 100 m. These particles traditionally
have been divided into two categories: droplet and airborne.
Droplets have been thought to range from 5 m to 100 m in
diameter, to travel no more than a few feet, and to be projected
onto surfaces, skin, or mucous membranes. Airborne particles
(often referred to as “droplet nuclei”) have been thought to be less
than 5 m, to remain suspended in the air for a period of time, and
to transmit infection by inhalation only at some distance from the
source patient. In the traditional infection control paradigm,
transmission via particles can only occur in two ways: (i) by
large droplets directly impacting skin or mucous membranes
and (ii) by inhalation of small airborne particles at a distance
from the source. Larger particles also may settle on objects,
allowing fomite transmission. This paradigm fails to recognize
that infectious aerosols include suspended particles in a wide
range of particle sizes (small to large droplets) that are easily
inhaled by someone standing near the point of generation.
Thus, aerosol inhalation can occur both near and far from an
infectious source. Distinguishing transmission from droplet
impact on skin or mucous membranes, direct body ﬂuid contact, or inhalation of small-particle aerosols near the source is
not possible without more detailed and careful exposure assessment during epidemiological investigations. Larger particles can be deposited in the nasal passages, pharynx, and upper
regions of the lungs, while smaller particles are more likely to
be deposited in the alveoli.
We now know that aerosols contain particles of various sizes
and that the traditional model of droplet versus airborne spread is
an oversimpliﬁcation of a complex process (70, 71). For example,
coughing was thought to produce primarily large droplet-sized
particles (68). Recent data suggest, however, that most particles
produced during coughing are under 1 m and that cough aerosols are multiphased and capable of extended suspension of inhalable particles both near and far from a source (72, 73). These
ﬁndings are consistent with a review on particle size, which found
that droplets involving respiratory pathogens are a heterogeneous
mix of large and small particles (74). A similar paradigm may be
applied to generation of aerosols outside the respiratory tract,
such as aerosols generated through medical procedures or forceful
episodes of vomiting or diarrhea. For example, vomiting associated with enteric norovirus infection can result in emission of
infectious aerosols that result in transmission (75). In real-world
environments, a number of factors impact the likelihood of aerosol transmission, such as the length of time particles reside in the
air, the length of time particles remain infectious once expelled,
variations in particle size and density, and issues such as ambient
temperature and humidity.
In 2004, Roy and Milton proposed classifying aerosol transmission of respiratory pathogens as obligate, preferential, or opportunistic, based on the ability of the agent to be transmitted
through small-particle aerosols (76). According to this system,
Mycobacterium tuberculosis is transmitted primarily through
small-particle aerosols and thus involves obligate aerosol transmission. Pathogens with preferential aerosol transmission include
agents such as varicella zoster virus that can be transmitted in
multiple ways but are transmitted primarily by small-particle
aerosols. Pathogens with opportunistic aerosol transmission include those that are transmitted primarily by other routes but can
be transmitted by small-particle aerosols under certain conditions; as noted above, norovirus is an example. Ebola virus may
also ﬁt into this category, since infectious aerosols (either large or
small droplet), which could result in transmission, may be generated and emitted during the course of disease.
WHAT WE NEED TO LEARN ABOUT EBOLA VIRUSES
The number of past outbreaks and associated epidemiological
studies carefully examining transmission patterns is small; therefore, conclusions about transmission are based on relatively limited data sets. Furthermore, inferences from past studies have been
based on retrospective reconstructions of chains of transmission,
and exposure histories were often obtained from surrogates in
situations where cases could not be interviewed; as a result, an
inherent recall bias exists for most of the available epidemiological
studies. Because of limitations in the current data, the role of aerosol transmission remains unclear. Transmission potentially occurs via virus-laden aerosols generated through forceful emission
of body ﬂuids during vomiting, diarrhea, or coughing (particularly if hemorrhaging is involved). In support of this, investigators
created Ebola-containing aerosols and, on the basis of decay rates,
estimated that EBOV can survive in aerosols for approximately
100 min and RESTV can survive for approximately 160 min (at
50% to 55% relative humidity and 22  3°C) (31). In addition,
available studies have not been able to effectively tease out exposure via fomites from exposure via direct contact or body ﬂuid
contact; therefore, the epidemiological signiﬁcance of fomite
transmission also is unknown. Further studies are needed to better
deﬁne the potential roles for aerosol and fomite transmission in
spreading disease.
To date, investigators have assumed that EBOV strains are similar with regard to infectivity, pathogenicity, and virulence. Past
experience, however, may not necessarily predict future Ebola virus behavior. Also, we know that the West Africa EBOV strain
represents a unique clade (64), and its full phenotypic range has
not been elucidated. For example, quantitative RT-PCR testing in
2014 of blood specimens from 41 Sierra Leone patients and 23
patients from a concurrent EBOV outbreak in the DRC, which
involved a different EBOV strain, showed signiﬁcantly lower CT
(cycle threshold) values (indicating higher viral loads) for the Sierra Leone patients (mean CT, 22.44  0.90) than for the DRC
patients (mean CT, 30.08  1.23; P  0.0001 by an unpaired
two-tailed t test). The CT value is the cycle number at which the
ﬂuorescence generated within a reaction crosses a predetermined
threshold and is inversely correlated to the amount of target nucleic acid in the sample. The same protocols, reagents, and equipment were used for both sets of specimens, and the time from
illness onset to specimen collection did not differ for the two
groups. These ﬁndings suggest that some patients infected with
the West Africa EBOV strain (Makona) have higher viral loads,
which could contribute to transmission and result in more superspreading events (G. Kobinger, unpublished data). Furthermore,
limited information is available about Ebola virus evolution dur-
Opinion/Hypothesis
March/April 2015
mbio.asm.org
ing serial passage over time, since past outbreaks have involved
relatively few generations of spread. The West Africa epidemic
involves many generations of spread, the impact of which remains
Several other issues important to transmission and outbreak
propagation deserve mention. First, in explosive situations
such as the current epidemic, we do not know the potential role
of superspreading events. Such events may often be explained
by epidemiological or behavioral factors such as association
with ritual burials; however, other possible explanations deserve further investigation. It could be, as suggested by phylodynamic modeling, that superspreading events have played an
important role in transmission dynamics in West Africa. Second, limited data are available on environmental survival of
Ebola viruses. Third, we know that in the vast majority of cases,
infected persons do not transmit the virus in the absence of
symptoms, likely because of low viral shedding; however, additional data are needed to further reﬁne the onset of infectiousness. Fourth, we know that the virus can be shed for several months following recovery, but the epidemiological
signiﬁcance of this remains unknown. Finally, in such a large
epidemic as the one in West Africa, we do not know if transmission is ampliﬁed by sylvatic or domestic animal populations at the human-animal interface.
RESPIRATORY TRANSMISSION OF EBOLA VIRUSES: A
HYPOTHESIS
It is very likely that at least some degree of Ebola virus transmission currently occurs via infectious aerosols generated from the
gastrointestinal tract, the respiratory tract, or medical procedures,
although this has been difﬁcult to deﬁnitively demonstrate or rule
out, since those exposed to infectious aerosols also are most likely
to be in close proximity to and in direct contact with an infected
case. To date, investigators have not identiﬁed respiratory spread
(either via large droplets or small-particle aerosols) of Ebola viruses among humans. This could be because such transmission
does not occur or because such transmission has not been recognized, since the number of studies that have carefully examined
transmission patterns is small.
Despite the lack of supportive epidemiological data, a key additional question to ask is whether primary pulmonary infections
and respiratory transmission of Ebola viruses could be a potential
scenario for the future. A fair amount of evidence suggests that
such transmission could be possible, even without dramatic evolution or genetic changes in Ebola viruses (although viral evolution over time could enhance this possibility). First, Ebola viruses
can be isolated from saliva, and viral particles have been identiﬁed
in pulmonary alveoli on human autopsies, suggesting that infectious aerosols could be emitted from the respiratory tract. Second,
Ebola viruses can infect several cell types found in the respiratory
tract, including macrophages and epithelial cells (77). Third,
cough can be a symptom of EVD, and coughing is known to generate aerosols, although prevalence of reported cough is variable
in case series (ranging from “rare” to 49%) (2, 6, 78). Fourth,
animal studies indicate that EBOV can be transmitted through
aerosols and that respiratory infection with pneumonitis can occur following this route of inoculation. Fifth, experience with
RESTV suggests that respiratory transmission of that species can
occur between animals and possibly from animals to humans.
Finally, people can generate and emit aerosols with particles of
various sizes, including ﬁne particles, which could enter the lower
respiratory tract and infect susceptible cells; Ebola virus is in the
respirable range (800 to 1,000 nm).
If aerosols containing Ebola virus were to enter the lungs of
uninfected individuals, it is possible that primary pulmonary infections could occur (as shown in animal studies), which could
then result in active viral shedding from the respiratory tract, thus
potentially setting up a cycle of ongoing respiratory transmission
in humans (79), similar to what occurs during outbreaks of pneumonic plague. Investigators of a nosocomial outbreak of Lassa
fever virus, another African hemorrhagic fever virus that is usually
spread via contact with rodents (especially rodent urine), postulated that transmission may have occurred through the respiratory route (80, 81). Similarly, investigators of a nosocomial cluster
of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever, a vector-borne infection
that occurs in Eastern Europe and Africa, identiﬁed probable
aerosol transmission due to aerosol-generating medical procedures (82). Experts in bioterrorism have long been concerned that
hemorrhagic fever viruses, particularly ﬁloviruses (Ebola virus
and Marburg virus), could be used as potential agents of bioterrorism, with an aerosol being the most likely form of dissemination (83, 84). This concern has been grounded in uncertainty concerning the potential for aerosol transmission of such viruses. A
strain of Marburg virus was weaponized by the Soviet Union,
highlighting this risk (58).
Leading public health agencies have stated that airborne transmission (i.e., transmission via small-particle aerosols traveling
over time and distance) of Ebola viruses is unlikely to occur in the
future because this would require speciﬁc genotypic changes in the
virus (85, 86). We agree this is an improbable (although not impossible) scenario; however, with phenotypic changes in the virus,
aerosol transmission (and possibly respiratory transmission if primary pulmonary infections were to occur) involving droplets of
various sizes from cases in relatively close proximity to uninfected
persons remains plausible. The West Africa Ebola epidemic surprised even the most astute infectious disease experts in the global
public health community; we should not assume that Ebola viruses are not capable of surprising us again at some point in the
AUTHOR NOTE
Added 7 April 2015. Some readers have expressed concern that a
conﬂict of interest may exist for this manuscript because the Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy (CIDRAP) receives
support from 3M, a prominent manufacturer of surgical masks
and respirators. While the mBio journal has informed us that no
conﬂict of interest exists from the journal’s perspective, this note is
intended to address the perceived conﬂict of interest by making two
key points. First, the support that CIDRAP receives from 3M is unrestricted support that comes via the University of Minnesota Foundation; it is similar to a number of other programs at the University
that are gifted by 3M as a general supporter of the University. We do
not have any requirements of any kind from 3M for this support,
includingnorequirementforeditorialinputorreviewbythemofany
publication, document, or product generated by CIDRAP employees. Second, in the manuscript we do not address any recommendations regarding respiratory protection for the prevention of Ebola
virus transmission; we merely offer the scientiﬁc basis for existing
infection control recommendations from the US Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC). Our only reference to the use of
Osterholm et al.
mbio.asm.org
March/April 2015
surgical masks is to summarize all available published literature related to outbreak control, particularly with regard to reducing the
exposure risk for healthcare workers. To omit this information
would have left an important gap in the contextual framework for
understanding Ebola virus transmission, which is the subject of
the manuscript. In summary, any concerns regarding a perceived
conﬂict of interest are just that and do not represent any real issue
with regard to the spirit in which this manuscript was written.