BARANIUK et al.: MODEL-BASED COMPRESSIVE SENSING
Model-Based Compressive Sensing
Richard G. Baraniuk, Fellow, IEEE, Volkan Cevher, Member, IEEE,
Marco F. Duarte, Member, IEEE, and Chinmay Hegde, Student Member, IEEE
Abstract—Compressive sensing (CS) is an alternative to
Shannon/Nyquist sampling for the acquisition of sparse or compressible signals that can be well approximated by just K ≪N
elements from an N-dimensional basis. Instead of taking periodic
samples, CS measures inner products with M < N random
vectors and then recovers the signal via a sparsity-seeking
optimization or greedy algorithm. Standard CS dictates that
robust signal recovery is possible from M = O (K log(N/K))
measurements. It is possible to substantially decrease M without
sacriﬁcing robustness by leveraging more realistic signal models
that go beyond simple sparsity and compressibility by including
structural dependencies between the values and locations of the
signal coefﬁcients. This paper introduces a model-based CS theory that parallels the conventional theory and provides concrete
guidelines on how to create model-based recovery algorithms with
provable performance guarantees. A highlight is the introduction
of a new class of structured compressible signals along with a
new sufﬁcient condition for robust structured compressible signal
recovery that we dub the restricted ampliﬁcation property, which
is the natural counterpart to the restricted isometry property
of conventional CS. Two examples integrate two relevant signal
models — wavelet trees and block sparsity — into two stateof-the-art CS recovery algorithms and prove that they offer
robust recovery from just M = O (K) measurements. Extensive
numerical simulations demonstrate the validity and applicability
of our new theory and algorithms.
Index Terms—Compressive sensing, sparsity, signal model,
union of subspaces, wavelet tree, block sparsity
I. INTRODUCTION
E ARE in the midst of a digital revolution that is
enabling the development and deployment of new
sensors and sensing systems with ever increasing ﬁdelity and
resolution. The theoretical foundation is the Shannon/Nyquist
sampling theorem, which states that a signal’s information is
preserved if it is uniformly sampled at a rate at least two
times faster than its Fourier bandwidth. Unfortunately, in many
important and emerging applications, the resulting Nyquist rate
Manuscript received August 26, 2008; revised July 2, 2009. The authors are
listed alphabetically. This work was supported by grants NSF CCF-0431150,
CCF-0728867, CNS-0435425, and CNS-0520280, DARPA/ONR N66001-
08-1-2065, ONR N00014-07-1-0936, N00014-08-1-1067, N00014-08-1-1112,
and N00014-08-1-1066, AFOSR FA9550-07-1-0301, ARO MURI W911NF-
07-1-0185, and the Texas Instruments Leadership University Program, and
was completed while M. F. Duarte was a Ph.D. student at Rice University.
The material in this paper was presented in part at the SIAM Conference
on Imaging Science, San Diego, CA, June 2008, and at the Conference on
Information Sciences and Systems (CISS), Baltimore, MD, March 2009.
R. G. Baraniuk, V. Cevher, and C. Hegde are with Rice University,
Houston, TX 77005 USA (e-mail: ; ; ).
V. Cevher is also with Ecole Polytechnique F´ed´erale de Laussane, Laussane,
Switzerland (e-mail: ).
M. F. Duarte is with Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544 USA (email: ).
can be so high that we end up with too many samples and
must compress in order to store or transmit them. In other
applications the cost of signal acquisition is prohibitive, either
because of a high cost per sample, or because state-of-the-art
samplers cannot achieve the high sampling rates required by
Shannon/Nyquist. Examples include radar imaging and exotic
imaging modalities outside visible wavelengths.
Transform compression systems reduce the effective dimensionality of an N-dimensional signal x by re-representing
it in terms of a sparse or compressible set of coefﬁcients α in
a basis expansion x = Ψα, with Ψ an N ×N basis matrix. By
sparse we mean that only K ≪N of the coefﬁcients α are
nonzero and need to be stored or transmitted. By compressible
we mean that the coefﬁcients α, when sorted, decay rapidly
enough to zero that α can be well-approximated as K-sparse.
The sparsity and compressibility properties are pervasive in
many signal classes of interest. For example, smooth signals
and images are compressible in the Fourier basis, while
piecewise smooth signals and images are compressible in a
wavelet basis ; the JPEG and JPEG2000 standards are
examples of practical transform compression systems based
on these bases.
Compressive sensing (CS) provides an alternative to
Shannon/Nyquist sampling when the signal under acquisition
is known to be sparse or compressible . In CS, we
measure not periodic signal samples but rather inner products
with M ≪N measurement vectors. In matrix notation, the
measurements y = Φx = ΦΨα, where the rows of the
M × N matrix Φ contain the measurement vectors. While
the matrix ΦΨ is rank deﬁcient, and hence loses information
in general, it can be shown to preserve the information in
sparse and compressible signals if it satisﬁes the so-called
restricted isometry property (RIP) . Intriguingly, a large
class of random matrices have the RIP with high probability.
To recover the signal from the compressive measurements y,
we search for the sparsest coefﬁcient vector α that agrees
with the measurements. To date, research in CS has focused
primarily on reducing both the number of measurements M
(as a function of N and K) and on increasing the robustness
and reducing the computational complexity of the recovery
algorithm. Today’s state-of-the-art CS systems can robustly
recover K-sparse and compressible signals from just M =
O (K log(N/K)) noisy measurements using polynomial-time
optimization solvers or greedy algorithms.
While this represents signiﬁcant progress from Nyquistrate sampling, our contention in this paper is that it is possible
to do even better by more fully leveraging concepts from
state-of-the-art signal compression and processing algorithms.
BARANIUK et al.: MODEL-BASED COMPRESSIVE SENSING
In many such algorithms, the key ingredient is a more realistic structured sparsity model that goes beyond simple
sparsity by codifying the inter-dependency structure among
the signal coefﬁcients α.1 For instance, modern wavelet image
coders exploit not only the fact that most of the wavelet
coefﬁcients of a natural image are small but also the fact
that the values and locations of the large coefﬁcients have
a particular structure. Coding the coefﬁcients according to a
structured sparsity model enables these algorithms to compress
images close to the maximum amount possible – signiﬁcantly
better than a na¨ıve coder that just processes each large coefﬁcient independently. We have previously developed a new
CS recovery algorithm that promotes structure in the sparse
representation by tailoring the recovered signal according to
a sparsity-promoting probabilistic model, such as an Ising
graphical model . Such probabilistic models favor certain
conﬁgurations for the magnitudes and indices of the signiﬁcant
coefﬁcients of the signal.
In this paper, we expand on this concept by introducing a model-based CS theory that parallels the conventional
theory and provides concrete guidelines on how to create
structured signal recovery algorithms with provable performance guarantees. By reducing the number of degrees of
freedom of a sparse/compressible signal by permitting only
certain conﬁgurations of the large and zero/small coefﬁcients,
structured sparsity models provide two immediate beneﬁts to
CS. First, they enable us to reduce, in some cases signiﬁcantly,
the number of measurements M required to stably recover a
signal. Second, during signal recovery, they enable us to better
differentiate true signal information from recovery artifacts,
which leads to a more robust recovery.
To precisely quantify the beneﬁts of model-based CS,
we introduce and study several new theoretical concepts that
could be of more general interest. We begin with structured
sparsity models for K-sparse signals and make precise how
the structure reduces the number of potential sparse signal
supports in α. Then using the model-based restricted isometry
property from , we prove that such structured sparse
signals can be robustly recovered from noisy compressive
measurements. Moreover, we quantify the required number of
measurements M and show that for some structured sparsity
models M is independent of N. These results unify and generalize the limited related work to date on structured sparsity
models for strictly sparse signals . We then introduce the
notion of a structured compressible signal, whose coefﬁcients
α are no longer strictly sparse but have a structured powerlaw decay. To establish that structured compressible signals
can be robustly recovered from compressive measurements, we
generalize the standard RIP to a new restricted ampliﬁcation
property (RAmP). Using the RAmP, we show that the required
number of measurements M for recovery of structured com-
1Obviously, sparsity and compressibility correspond to simple signal models where each coefﬁcient is treated independently; for example in a sparse
model, the fact that the coefﬁcient αi is large has no bearing on the size of
any αj, j ̸= i. We will reserve the use of the term “model” for situations
where we are enforcing structured dependencies between the values and the
locations of the coefﬁcients αi.
pressible signals is independent of N.
To take practical advantage of this new theory, we demonstrate how to integrate structured sparsity models into two
state-of-the-art CS recovery algorithms, CoSaMP and
iterative hard thresholding (IHT) . The key modiﬁcation is surprisingly simple: we merely replace the nonlinear
sparse approximation step in these greedy algorithms with a
structured sparse approximation. Thanks to our new theory,
both new model-based recovery algorithms have provable
robustness guarantees for both structured sparse and structured
compressible signals.
To validate our theory and algorithms and demonstrate
their general applicability and utility, we present two speciﬁc
instances of model-based CS and conduct a range of simulation experiments. The ﬁrst structured sparsity model accounts
for the fact that the large wavelet coefﬁcients of piecewise
smooth signals and images tend to live on a rooted, connected
tree structure . Using the fact that the number of such
trees is much smaller than
, the number of K-sparse
signal supports in N dimensions, we prove that a tree-based
CoSaMP algorithm needs only M = O (K) measurements
to robustly recover tree-sparse and tree-compressible signals.
This provides a signiﬁcant reduction against the standard CS
requirement M = O (K log(N/K)) as the signal length N
increases. Figure 1 indicates the potential performance gains
on a tree-compressible, piecewise smooth signal.
The second structured sparsity model accounts for the
fact that the large coefﬁcients of many sparse signals cluster together . Such a so-called block sparse model is
equivalent to a joint sparsity model for an ensemble of J,
length-N signals , where the supports of the signals’
large coefﬁcients are shared across the ensemble. Using the
fact that the number of clustered supports is much smaller
, we prove that a block-based CoSaMP algorithm
needs only M
 JK + K log( N
measurements to
robustly recover block-sparse and block-compressible signals.
In contrast, standard CS requires M = O (JK log(N/K));
block sparsity reduces the dependence of M on the signal
length N, particularly for large block sizes J.
Our new theory and methods relate to a small body of
previous work aimed at integrating structured sparsity into
CS. Several groups have developed structured sparse signal
recovery algorithms ; however, their approaches
have either been ad hoc or focused on a single structured
sparsity model. Most previous work on unions of subspaces
 has focused exclusively on strictly sparse signals and
has considered neither compressibility nor feasible recovery
algorithms. A related CS modeling framework for structured
sparse and compressible signals collects the N samples
of a signal into D groups, D ≤N, and allows signals
where K out of D groups have nonzero coefﬁcients. This
framework is immediately applicable to block-sparse signals
and signal ensembles with common sparse supports. While
 provides recovery algorithms, measurement bounds, and
recovery guarantees similar to those provided in Section VI,
our proposed framework has the ability to focus on arbitrary
BARANIUK et al.: MODEL-BASED COMPRESSIVE SENSING
(a) test signal
(b) CoSaMP
(c) ℓ1-norm min.
(d) model-based recovery
(RMSE = 1.123)
(RMSE = 0.751)
(RMSE = 0.037)
Example performance of structured signal recovery. (a) Piecewise smooth HeaviSine test signal of length N = 1024. This signal is compressible under
a connected wavelet tree model. Signal recovered from M = 80 random Gaussian measurements using (b) the iterative recovery algorithm CoSaMP, (c) standard
ℓ1-norm minimization via linear programming, and (d) the wavelet tree-based CoSaMP algorithm from Section V. In all ﬁgures, root mean-squared error (RMSE)
values are normalized with respect to the ℓ2 norm of the signal.
subsets of the
groups that yield more elaborate structures,
such as connected subtrees for wavelet coefﬁcients. To the
best of our knowledge, our general algorithmic framework for
model-based recovery, the concept of a model-compressible
signal, and the associated RAmP are new to the literature.
This paper is organized as follows. A review of the CS
theory in Section II lays out the foundational concepts that
we extend to the model-based case in subsequent sections.
Section III develops the concept of structured sparse signals
and introduces the concept of structured compressible signals.
We also quantify how structured sparsity models improve the
measurement and recovery process by exploiting the modelbased RIP for structured sparse signals and by introducing the
RAmP for structured compressible signals. Section IV indicates how to tune CoSaMP to incorporate structured sparsity
models and establishes its robustness properties for structured
sparse and structured compressible signals; the modiﬁcations
to the IHT algorithm are very similar, so we defer them to
an appendix to reduce redundancy. Sections V and VI then
specialize our theory to the special cases of wavelet tree and
block sparse signal models, respectively, and report on a series
of numerical experiments that validate our theoretical claims.
We conclude with a discussion in Section VII. To make the
paper more readable, all proofs are relegated to a series of
appendices.
II. BACKGROUND ON COMPRESSIVE SENSING
A. Sparse and compressible signals
Given a basis {ψi}N
i=1, we can represent every signal x ∈
RN in terms of N coefﬁcients {αi}N
i=1 as x = PN
stacking the ψi as columns into the N × N matrix Ψ, we
can write succinctly that x = Ψα. In the sequel, we will
assume without loss of generality that the signal x is sparse
or compressible in the canonical domain so that the sparsity
basis Ψ is the identity and α = x.
A signal x is K-sparse if only K ≪N entries of x
are nonzero. We call the set of indices corresponding to the
nonzero entries the support of x and denote it by supp(x).
The set of all K-sparse signals is the union of the
, Kdimensional subspaces aligned with the coordinate axes in RN.
We denote this union of subspaces by ΣK.
Many natural and manmade signals are not strictly sparse,
but can be approximated as such; we call such signals compressible. Consider a signal x whose coefﬁcients, when sorted
in order of decreasing magnitude, decay according to the
i = 1, . . . , N,
where I indexes the sorted coefﬁcients. Thanks to the rapid
decay of their coefﬁcients, such signals are well-approximated
by K-sparse signals. Let xK ∈ΣK represent the best Kterm approximation of x, which is obtained by keeping just
the ﬁrst K terms in xI(i) from (1). Denote the error of this
approximation in the ℓp norm as
σK(x)p := min
¯x∈ΣK ∥x −¯x∥p = ∥x −xK∥p,
where the ℓp norm of the vector x is deﬁned as ∥x∥p =
i=1 |xi|p1/p
for 0 < p < ∞. Then, for r < p, we have
σK(x)p ≤(rs)−1/p GK−s,
p. That is, when measured in the ℓp norm,
the signal’s best approximation error has a power-law decay
with exponent s as K increases. In the sequel we let p = 2,
yielding s = 1/r −1/2, and we dub a signal that obeys (3)
an s-compressible signal.
The approximation of compressible signals by sparse
signals is the basis of transform coding as is used in algorithms
like JPEG and JPEG2000 . In this framework, we acquire
the full N-sample signal x; compute the complete set of
transform coefﬁcients α via α = Ψ−1x; locate the K largest
coefﬁcients and discard the (N −K) smallest coefﬁcients; and
encode the K values and locations of the largest coefﬁcients.
While a widely accepted standard, this sample-then-compress
framework suffers from three inherent inefﬁciencies. First, we
must start with a potentially large number of samples N even
if the ultimate desired K is small. Second, the encoder must
compute all of the N transform coefﬁcients α, even though it
will discard all but K of them. Third, the encoder faces the
overhead of encoding the locations of the large coefﬁcients.
BARANIUK et al.: MODEL-BASED COMPRESSIVE SENSING
B. Compressive measurements and the restricted isometry
Compressive sensing (CS) integrates the signal acquisition and compression steps into a single process . In
CS we do not acquire x directly but rather acquire M < N
linear measurements y = Φx using an M × N measurement
matrix Φ. We then recover x by exploiting its sparsity or
compressibility. Our goal is to push M as close as possible to
K in order to perform as much signal “compression” during
acquisition as possible.
In order to recover a good estimate of x (the K largest
xi’s, for example) from the M compressive measurements, the
measurement matrix Φ should satisfy the restricted isometry
property (RIP) .
Deﬁnition 1: An M × N matrix Φ has the K-restricted
isometry property (K-RIP) with constant δK if, for all x ∈
(1 −δK)∥x∥2
2 ≤(1 + δK)∥x∥2
In words, the K-RIP ensures that all submatrices of Φ of
size M × K are close to an isometry, and therefore distance
(and information) preserving. Practical recovery algorithms
typically require that Φ have a slightly stronger 2K-RIP, 3K-
RIP, or higher-order RIP in order to preserve distances between
K-sparse vectors (which are 2K-sparse in general), three-way
sums of K-sparse vectors (which are 3K-sparse in general),
and other higher-order structures.
While checking whether a measurement matrix Φ satisﬁes
the K-RIP is an NP-Complete problem in general ,
random matrices whose entries are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) Gaussian, Rademacher (±1), or more
generally subgaussian2 work with high probability provided
M = O (K log(N/K)). These random matrices also have
a so-called universality property in that, for any choice of
orthonormal basis matrix Ψ, ΦΨ has the K-RIP with high
probability. This is useful when the signal is sparse not in the
canonical domain but in basis Ψ. A random Φ corresponds
to an intriguing data acquisition protocol in which each
measurement yj is a randomly weighted linear combination
of the entries of x.
C. Recovery algorithms
Since there are inﬁnitely many signal coefﬁcient vectors
x′ that produce the same set of compressive measurements
y = Φx, to recover the “right” signal we exploit our a priori
knowledge of its sparsity or compressibility. For example, we
could seek the sparsest x that agrees with the measurements
bx = arg min
x′ ∥x′∥0 s.t. y = Φx′,
2A random variable X is called subgaussian if there exists c > 0 such
≤ec2t2/2 for all t ∈R. Examples include the Gaussian,
Bernoulli, and Rademacher random variables, as well as any bounded random
variable. 
where the ℓ0 “norm” of a vector counts its number of nonzero
entries. While this optimization can recover a K-sparse signal
from just M = 2K compressive measurements, it is unfortunately a combinatorial, NP-hard problem ; furthermore,
the recovery is not stable in the presence of noise .
Practical, stable recovery algorithms rely on the RIP
(and therefore require at least M = O (K log(N/K)) measurements); they can be grouped into two camps. The ﬁrst
approach convexiﬁes the ℓ0 “norm” minimization (5) to the
ℓ1-norm minimization
bx = arg min
x′ ∥x′∥1 s.t. y = Φx′.
This corresponds to a linear program that can be solved in
polynomial time . Adaptations to deal with additive noise
in y or x include basis pursuit with denoising (BPDN) ,
complexity-based regularization , and the Dantzig Selector .
The second approach ﬁnds the sparsest x agreeing with
the measurements y through an iterative, greedy search. Algorithms such as matching pursuit, orthogonal matching pursuit
 , StOMP , iterative hard thresholding (IHT) ,
CoSaMP , and Subspace Pursuit (SP) all revolve
around a best L-term approximation for the estimated signal,
with L varying for each algorithm; typically L is O (K).
D. Performance bounds on signal recovery
= O (K log(N/K)) compressive measurements, a number of different CS signal recovery algorithms, including all of the ℓ1-norm minimization techniques mentioned
above and the CoSaMP, SP, and IHT iterative techniques,
offer provably stable signal recovery with performance close
to optimal K-term approximation (recall (3)) . For
a random Φ, all results hold with high probability.
For a noise-free, K-sparse signal, these algorithms offer
perfect recovery, meaning that the signal bx recovered from the
compressive measurements y = Φx is exactly bx = x.
For a K-sparse signal x whose measurements are corrupted by noise n of bounded norm (that is, we measure
y = Φx + n) the mean-squared error of the signal bx is
∥x −bx∥2 ≤C∥n∥2,
with C a small constant.
For an s-compressible signal x whose measurements are
corrupted by noise n of bounded norm, the mean-squared error
of the recovered signal bx is
∥x−bx∥2 ≤C1∥x−xK∥2+C2
∥x−xK∥1+C3∥n∥2. (8)
Using (3) we can simplify this expression to
∥x −bx∥2 ≤C1GK−s
s −1/2 + C3∥n∥2.
For the recovery algorithm (6), we obtain a bound very similar
to (8), albeit with the ℓ2-norm error component removed .
BARANIUK et al.: MODEL-BASED COMPRESSIVE SENSING
III. STRUCTURED SPARSITY AND COMPRESSIBILITY
While many natural and manmade signals and images
can be described to ﬁrst-order as sparse or compressible, the
support of their large coefﬁcients often has an underlying interdependency structure. This phenomenon has received only
limited attention by the CS community to date .
In this section, we introduce a model-based theory of CS
that captures such structure. A model reduces the degrees of
freedom of a sparse/compressible signal by permitting only
certain conﬁgurations of supports for the large coefﬁcient.
As we will show, this allows us to reduce, in some cases
signiﬁcantly, the number of compressive measurements M
required to stably recover a signal.
A. Structured sparse signals
Recall from Section II-A that a K-sparse signal vector
x lives in ΣK ⊂RN, which is a union of
of dimension K. Other than its K-sparsity, there are no
further constraints on the support or values of its coefﬁcients.
A structured sparsity model endows the K-sparse signal x
with additional structure that allows certain K-dimensional
subspaces in ΣK and disallows others .
To state a formal deﬁnition of a structured sparsity model,
let x|Ωrepresent the entries of x corresponding to the set of
indices Ω⊆{1, . . . , N}, and let ΩC denote the complement
of the set Ω.
Deﬁnition 2: A structured sparsity model MK is deﬁned
as the union of mK canonical K-dimensional subspaces
Xm, s.t. Xm := {x : x|Ωm ∈RK, x|ΩC
where {Ω1, . . . , ΩmK} is the set containing all allowed supports, with |Ωm| = K for each m = 1, . . . , mK, and each
subspace Xm contains all signals x with supp(x) ⊆Ωm.
Signals from MK are called K-structured sparse. Clearly,
MK ⊆ΣK and contains mK ≤
subspaces.
In Sections V and VI below we consider two concrete
structured sparsity models. The ﬁrst model accounts for the
fact that the large wavelet coefﬁcients of piecewise smooth
signals and images tend to live on a rooted, connected tree
structure . The second model accounts for the fact that
the large coefﬁcients of sparse signals often cluster together
into blocks .
B. Model-based RIP
If we know that the signal x being acquired is Kstructured sparse, then we can relax the RIP constraint on the
CS measurement matrix Φ and still achieve stable recovery
from the compressive measurements y = Φx .
Deﬁnition 3:
 An M × N matrix Φ has the MKrestricted isometry property (MK-RIP) with constant δMK if,
for all x ∈MK, we have
(1 −δMK)∥x∥2
2 ≤(1 + δMK)∥x∥2
Blumensath and Davies have quantiﬁed the number of
measurements M necessary for a random CS matrix to have
the MK-RIP with a given probability.
Theorem 1: Let MK be the union of mK subspaces
of K-dimensions in RN. Then, for any t > 0 and any
ln(2mK) + K ln
where c is a positive constant, an M × N i.i.d. subgaussian
random matrix has the MK-RIP with constant δMK with
probability at least 1 −e−t.
This bound can be used to recover the conventional CS
result by substituting mK =
≈(Ne/K)K. Similarly,
as the number of subspaces mK that arise from the structure
imposed can be signiﬁcantly smaller than the standard
number of rows needed for a random matrix to have the MK-
RIP can be signiﬁcantly lower than the number of rows needed
for the standard RIP. The MK-RIP property is sufﬁcient for
robust recovery of structured sparse signals, as we show below
in Section IV-B.
C. Structured compressible signals
Just as compressible signals are “nearly K-sparse” and
thus live close to the union of subspaces ΣK in RN, structured
compressible signals are “nearly K-structured sparse” and live
close to the restricted union of subspaces MK. In this section,
we make this new concept rigorous. Recall from (3) that we
deﬁned compressible signals in terms of the decay of their
K-term approximation error.
The ℓ2 error incurred by approximating x ∈RN by the
best structured sparse approximation in MK is given by
¯x∈MK ∥x −¯x∥2.
We deﬁne MB(x, K) as the algorithm that obtains the best
K-term structured sparse approximation of x in the union of
subspaces MK:
M(x, K) = arg min
¯x∈MK ∥x −¯x∥2.
This implies that ∥x −M(x, K)∥2 = σMK(x). The decay of
this approximation error deﬁnes the structured compressibility
of a signal.
Deﬁnition 4: The set of s-structured compressible signals is deﬁned as
x ∈RN : σMK(x) ≤GK−s, 1 ≤K ≤N, G < ∞
Deﬁne |x|Ms as the smallest value of G for which this
condition holds for x and s.
We say that x ∈Ms is an s-structured compressible
signal under the structured sparsity model MK. These approximation classes have been characterized for certain structured
BARANIUK et al.: MODEL-BASED COMPRESSIVE SENSING
sparsity models; see Section V for an example. We will
select the value of s for which the distance between the
approximation errors σMK(x) and the corresponding bounds
GK−1/s is minimal.
D. Nested model approximations and residual subspaces
In conventional CS, the same requirement (RIP) is a
sufﬁcient condition for the stable recovery of both sparse
and compressible signals. In model-based recovery, however,
the class of structured compressible signals is much larger
than that of structured sparse signals, since the union of
subspaces deﬁned by structured sparse signals does not contain
all canonical K-dimensional subspaces.
To address this difference, we introduce some additional
tools to develop a sufﬁcient condition for the stable recovery
of structured compressible signals. We will pay particular attention to structured sparsity models MK that generate nested
approximations, since they are more amenable to analysis and
computation.
Deﬁnition 5: A
structured
{M1, M2, . . .} has the nested approximation property (NAP)
if supp(M(x, K)) ⊂supp(M(x, K′)) for all K < K′ and for
all x ∈RN.
In words, a structured sparsity model generates nested
approximations if the support of the best K′-term structured
sparse approximation contains the support of the best K-term
structured sparse approximation for all K < K′. An important
example of a NAP-generating structured sparse model is the
standard compressible signal model of (3).
When a structured sparsity model obeys the NAP, the
support of the difference between the best jK-term structured
sparse approximation and the best (j + 1)K-term structured
sparse approximation of a signal can be shown to lie in a
small union of subspaces, thanks to the structure enforced by
the model. This structure is captured by the set of subspaces
that are included in each subsequent approximation, as deﬁned
Deﬁnition 6: The jth set of residual subspaces of size
K is deﬁned as Rj,K(M) = {u ∈RN : u = M(x, jK) −
M(x, (j −1)K) for some x ∈RN}, for j = 1, . . . , ⌈N/K⌉.
Under the NAP, each structured compressible signal x
can be partitioned into its best K-term structured sparse
approximation xT1, the additional components present in the
best 2K-term structured sparse approximation xT2, and so on,
with x = P⌈N/K⌉
xTj and xTj ∈Rj,K(M) for each j. Each
signal partition xTj is a K-sparse signal, and thus Rj,K(M)
is a union of subspaces of dimension K. We will denote by
Rj the number of subspaces that compose Rj,K(M) and omit
the dependence on M in the sequel for brevity.
Intuitively, the norms of the partitions ∥xTj∥2 decay as
j increases for signals that are structured compressible. As
the next subsection shows, this observation is instrumental in
relaxing the isometry restrictions on the measurement matrix Φ
and bounding the recovery error for s-structured compressible
signals when the model obeys the NAP.
E. The restricted ampliﬁcation property (RAmP)
For exactly K-structured sparse signals, we discussed in
Section III-B that the number of compressive measurements
M required for a random matrix to have the MK-RIP is determined by the number of canonical subspaces mK via (11).
Unfortunately, such structured sparse concepts and results do
not immediately extend to structured compressible signals.
Thus, we develop a generalization of the MK-RIP that we
will use to quantify the stability of recovery for structured
compressible signals.
One way to analyze the robustness of compressible signal
recovery in conventional CS is to consider the tail of the signal
outside its K-term approximation as contributing additional
“noise” to the measurements of size ∥Φ(x −xK)∥2 . Consequently, the conventional K-sparse recovery
performance result can be applied with the augmented noise
n + Φ(x −xK).
This technique can also be used to quantify the robustness
of structured compressible signal recovery. The key quantity
we must control is the ampliﬁcation of the structured sparse
approximation residual through Φ. The following property is
a new generalization of the RIP and model-based RIP.
Deﬁnition 7: A matrix Φ has the (ǫK, r)-restricted ampliﬁcation property (RAmP) for the residual subspaces Rj,K
of model M if
2 ≤(1 + ǫK)j2r∥u∥2
for any u ∈Rj,K for each 1 ≤j ≤⌈N/K⌉.
The regularity parameter r > 0 caps the growth rate of
the ampliﬁcation of u ∈Rj,K as a function of j. Its value can
be chosen so that the growth in ampliﬁcation with j balances
the decay of the norm in each residual subspace Rj,K with j.
We can quantify the number of compressive measurements M required for a random measurement matrix Φ to
have the RAmP with high probability; we prove the following
in Appendix A.
Theorem 2: Let Φ be an M × N matrix with i.i.d.
subgaussian entries and let the set of residual subspaces Rj,K
of the structured sparsity model M contain Rj subspaces of
dimension K for each 1 ≤j ≤⌈N/K⌉. If
2K + 4 ln RjN
 jr√1 + ǫK −1
then the matrix Φ has the (ǫK, r)-RAmP with probability 1 −
The order of the bound of Theorem 2 is lower than
O (K log(N/K)) as long as the number of subspaces Rj
grows slower than N K.
BARANIUK et al.: MODEL-BASED COMPRESSIVE SENSING
Armed with the RaMP, we can state the following result,
which will provide robustness for the recovery of structured
compressible signals; see Appendix B for the proof.
Theorem 3: Let x ∈Ms be an s-structured compressible
signal under a structured sparsity model M that obeys the
NAP. If Φ has the (ǫK, r)-RAmP and r = s−1, then we have
∥Φ(x −M(x, K))∥2 ≤Cs
1 + ǫKK−s ln
where Cs is a constant that depends only on s.
IV. MODEL-BASED SIGNAL RECOVERY ALGORITHMS
To take practical advantage of our new theory for modelbased CS, we demonstrate how to integrate structured sparsity models into two state-of-the-art CS recovery algorithms,
CoSaMP (in this section) and iterative hard thresholding
(IHT) (in Appendix C to avoid repetition). The key
modiﬁcation is simple: we merely replace the best K-term
sparse approximation step in these greedy algorithms with a
best K-term structured sparse approximation. Since at each
iteration we need only search over the mK subspaces of MK
rather than
subspaces of ΣK, fewer measurements will
be required for the same degree of robust signal recovery. Or,
alternatively, using the same number of measurements, more
accurate recovery can be achieved.
After presenting the modiﬁed CoSaMP algorithm, we
prove robustness guarantees for both structured sparse and
structured compressible signals. To this end, we must deﬁne
an enlarged union of subspaces that includes sums of elements
in the structured sparsity model.
Deﬁnition 8: The B-order sum for the set MK, with
B > 1 an integer, is deﬁned as
x(r), with x(r) ∈MK
Deﬁne MB(x, K) as the algorithm that obtains the best
approximation of x in the enlarged union of subspaces MB
MB(x, K) = arg min
We note that M(x, K) = M1(x, K). Note also that for many
structured sparsity models, we will have MB
and so the algorithm M(x, BK) will provide a strictly better
approximation than MB(x, K).
A. Model-based CoSaMP
We choose to modify the CoSaMP algorithm for
two reasons. First, it has robust recovery guarantees that are
on par with the best convex optimization-based approaches.
Second, it has a simple iterative, greedy structure based on
a best BK-term approximation (with B a small integer) that
is easily modiﬁed to incorporate a best BK-term structured
sparse approximation MB(K, x). These properties also make
the IHT and SP algorithms amenable to modiﬁcation; see
Appendix C for details on IHT. Pseudocode for the modiﬁed
CoSaMP algorithm is given in Algorithm 1, where A† denotes
the Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse of A.
B. Performance of structured sparse signal recovery
We now study the performance of model-based CoSaMP
signal recovery on structured sparse and structured compressible signals. A robustness guarantee for noisy measurements
of structured sparse signals can be obtained using the modelbased RIP (10). Our performance guarantee for structured
sparse signal recovery will require that the measurement
matrix Φ be a near-isometry for all subspaces in MB
K for some
B > 1. This requirement is a direct generalization of the 2K-
RIP, 3K-RIP, and higher-order RIPs from the conventional CS
theory. The following theorem is proven in Appendix D.
Theorem 4: Let x ∈MK and let y = Φx + n be a set
of noisy CS measurements. If Φ has an M4
K-RIP constant of
K ≤0.1, then the signal estimate bxi obtained from iteration
i of the model-based CoSaMP algorithm satisﬁes
∥x −bxi∥2 ≤2−i∥x∥2 + 15∥n∥2.
This guarantee matches that of the CoSaMP algorithm [11,
Theorem 4.1]; however, our guarantee is only for structured
sparse signals rather than for all sparse signals.
C. Performance of structured compressible signal recovery
Using the new tools introduced in Section III, we can
provide a robustness guarantee for noisy measurements of
structured compressible signals, using the RAmP as a condition on the measurement matrix Φ.
Theorem 5: Let x ∈Ms be an s-structured compressible
signal from a structured sparsity model M that obeys the NAP,
and let y = Φx + n be a set of noisy CS measurements. If Φ
has the M4
K-RIP with δM4
K ≤0.1 and the (ǫK, r)-RAmP
with ǫK ≤0.1 and r = s −1, then the signal estimate
bxi obtained from iteration i of the model-based CoSaMP
algorithm satisﬁes
2−i∥x∥2 + 35∥n∥2
+35Cs|x|MsK−s(1 + ln⌈N/K⌉). (14)
Proof sketch. To prove the theorem, we ﬁrst bound the optimal
structured sparse recovery error for an s-structured compressible signal x ∈Ms when the matrix Φ has the (ǫK, r)-RAmP
with r ≤s −1 (see Theorem 3). Then, using Theorem 4, we
can easily prove the result by following the analogous proof
The standard CoSaMP algorithm also features a similar
guarantee for structured compressible signals, with the constant changing from 35 to 20.
BARANIUK et al.: MODEL-BASED COMPRESSIVE SENSING
Algorithm 1 Model-based CoSaMP
Inputs: CS matrix Φ, measurements y, structured sparse approximation algorithm M
Output: K-sparse approximation bx to true signal x
bx0 = 0 , d = y; i = 0
{initialize}
while halting criterion false do
1. i ←i + 1
2. e ←ΦT d
{form signal residual estimate}
3. Ω←supp(M2(e, K))
{prune residual estimate according to structure}
4. T ←Ω∪supp(bxi−1)
{merge supports}
5. b|T ←Φ†
T y, b|T C
{form signal estimate}
6. bxi ←M(b, K)
{prune signal estimate according to structure}
7. d ←y −Φbxi
{update measurement residual}
return bx ←bxi
D. Robustness to model mismatch
We now analyze the robustness of model-based CS recovery to model mismatch, which occurs when the signal being
recovered from compressive measurements does not conform
exactly to the structured sparsity model used in the recovery
algorithm.
We begin with optimistic results for signals that are
“close” to matching the recovery structured sparsity model.
First consider a signal x that is not K-structured sparse as
the recovery algorithm assumes but rather (K + κ)-structured
sparse for some small integer κ. This signal can be decomposed into xK, the signal’s K-term structured sparse
approximation, and x −xK, the error of this approximation.
For κ ≤K, we have that x −xK ∈R2,K. If the matrix Φ
has the (ǫK, r)-RAmP, then it follows than
∥Φ(x −xK)∥2 ≤2r√1 + ǫK∥x −xK∥2.
Using equations (13) and (15), we obtain the following guarantee for the ith iteration of model-based CoSaMP:
∥x −bxi∥2 ≤2−i∥x∥2 + 16 · 2r√1 + ǫK∥x −xK∥2 + 15∥n∥2.
By noting that ∥x−xK∥2 is small, we obtain a guarantee that
is close to (13).
Second, consider a signal x that is not s-structured
compressible as the recovery algorithm assumes but rather
(s −ǫ)-structured compressible. The following bound can be
obtained under the conditions of Theorem 5 by modifying the
argument in Appendix B:
2−i∥x∥2 + 35
+Cs|x|MsK−s
As ǫ becomes smaller, the factor
approaches
log⌈N/K⌉, matching (14). In summary, as long as the deviations from the structured sparse and structured compressible
classes are small, our model-based recovery guarantees still
apply within a small bounded constant factor.
We end with an intuitive worst-case result for signals that
are arbitrarily far away from structured sparse or structured
compressible. Consider such an arbitrary x ∈RN and compute
its nested structured sparse approximations xjK = M(x, jK),
= 1, . . . , ⌈N/K⌉. If x is not structured compressible,
then the structured sparse approximation error σjK(x) is not
guaranteed to decay as j decreases. Additionally, the number
of residual subspaces Rj,K could be as large as
is, the jth difference between subsequent structured sparse
approximations xTj = xjK −x(j−1)K might lie in any arbitrary K-dimensional subspace. This worst case is equivalent
to setting r = 0 and Rj =
in Theorem 2. It is easy to see
that the resulting condition on the number of measurements M
matches that of the standard RIP for CS. Hence, if we inﬂate
the number of measurements to M = O (K log(N/K)) (the
usual number for conventional CS), the performance of modelbased CoSaMP recovery on an arbitrary signal x follows the
distortion of the best K-term structured sparse approximation
error of x within a bounded constant factor.
E. Computational complexity of model-based recovery
The computational complexity of a structured signal
recovery algorithm differs from that of a standard algorithm by
two factors. The ﬁrst factor is the reduction in the number of
measurements M necessary for recovery: since most current
recovery algorithms have a computational complexity that
is linear in the number of measurements, any reduction in
M reduces the total complexity. The second factor is the
cost of the structured sparse approximation. The K-term
approximation used in most current recovery algorithms can
be implemented with a simple sorting operation (O (N log N)
complexity, in general). Ideally, the structured sparsity model
should support a similarly efﬁcient approximation algorithm.
To validate our theory and algorithms and demonstrate
their general applicability and utility, we now present two
speciﬁc instances of model-based CS and conduct a range of
simulation experiments.
BARANIUK et al.: MODEL-BASED COMPRESSIVE SENSING
V. EXAMPLE: WAVELET TREE MODEL
Wavelet decompositions have found wide application in
the analysis, processing, and compression of smooth and
piecewise smooth signals because these signals are K-sparse
and compressible, respectively . Moreover, the wavelet
coefﬁcients can be naturally organized into a tree structure,
and for many kinds of natural and manmade signals the
largest coefﬁcients cluster along the branches of this tree. This
motivates a connected tree model for the wavelet coefﬁcients
While CS recovery for wavelet-sparse signals has been
considered previously , the resulting algorithms integrated the tree constraint in an ad-hoc fashion. Furthermore,
the algorithms provide no recovery guarantees or bounds on
the necessary number of compressive measurements.
A. Tree-sparse signals
We ﬁrst describe tree sparsity in the context of sparse
wavelet decompositions. We focus on one-dimensional signals
and binary wavelet trees, but all of our results extend directly
to d-dimensional signals and 2d-ary wavelet trees.
Consider a signal x of length N = 2I, for an integer
value of I. The wavelet representation of x is given by
where ν is the scaling function and ψi,j is the wavelet function
at scale i and offset j. The wavelet transform consists of the
scaling coefﬁcient v0 and wavelet coefﬁcients wi,j at scale i,
0 ≤i ≤I −1, and position j, 0 ≤j ≤2i −1. In terms
of our earlier matrix notation, x has the representation x =
Ψα, where Ψ is a matrix containing the scaling and wavelet
functions as columns, and α = [v0 w0,0 w1,0 w1,1 w2,0 . . .]T
is the vector of scaling and wavelet coefﬁcients. We are, of
course, interested in sparse and compressible α.
The nested supports of the wavelets at different scales
create a parent/child relationship between wavelet coefﬁcients
at different scales. We say that wi−1,⌊j/2⌋is the parent of wi,j
and that wi+1,2j and wi+1,2j+1 are the children of wi,j. These
relationships can be expressed graphically by the wavelet
coefﬁcient tree in Figure 2.
Wavelet functions act as local discontinuity detectors,
and using the nested support property of wavelets at different
scales, it is straightforward to see that a signal discontinuity
will give rise to a chain of large wavelet coefﬁcients along a
branch of the wavelet tree from a leaf to the root. Moreover,
smooth signal regions will give rise to regions of small wavelet
coefﬁcients. This “connected tree” property has been wellexploited in a number of wavelet-based processing and compression algorithms. In this section, we
will specialize the theory developed in Sections III and IV to
a connected tree model T .
Binary wavelet tree for a one-dimensional signal. The squares denote
the large wavelet coefﬁcients that arise from the discontinuities in the piecewise
smooth signal drawn below; the support of the large coefﬁcients forms a rooted,
connected tree.
A set of wavelet coefﬁcients Ωforms a connected subtree if, whenever a coefﬁcient wi,j ∈Ω, then its parent
wi−1,⌈j/2⌉∈Ωas well. Each such set Ωdeﬁnes a subspace
of signals whose support is contained in Ω; that is, all
wavelet coefﬁcients outside Ωare zero. In this way, we deﬁne
the structured sparsity model TK as the union of all Kdimensional subspaces corresponding to supports Ωthat form
connected subtrees.
Deﬁnition 9: Deﬁne the set of K-tree sparse signals as
x = v0ν +
wi,jψi,j : w|ΩC = 0,
|Ω| = K, Ωforms a connected subtree
To quantify the number of subspaces in TK, it sufﬁces
to count the number of distinct connected subtrees of size K
in a binary tree of size N. We prove the following result in
Appendix E.
Proposition 1: The number of subspaces in TK obeys
for K ≥log2 N and TK ≤
K+1 for K <
To simplify the presentation in the sequel, we will simply use
the weaker bound TK ≤(2e)K
K+1 for all values of K and N.
B. Tree-based approximation
To implement tree-based signal recovery, we seek an
efﬁcient algorithm T(x, K) to solve the optimal approximation
K = arg min
¯x∈TK ∥x −¯x∥2.
Fortuitously, an efﬁcient solver exists, called the condensing
sort and select algorithm (CSSA) . Recall that subtree
approximation coincides with standard K-term approximation
(and hence can be solved by simply sorting the wavelet
coefﬁcients) when the wavelet coefﬁcients are monotonically
nonincreasing along the tree branches out from the root. The
CSSA solves (16) in the case of general wavelet coefﬁcient
BARANIUK et al.: MODEL-BASED COMPRESSIVE SENSING
values by condensing the nonmonotonic segments of the tree
branches using an iterative sort-and-average routine during a
greedy search through the nodes. For each node in the tree, the
algorithm calculates the average wavelet coefﬁcient magnitude
for each subtree rooted at that node, and records the largest
average among all the subtrees as the energy for that node.
The CSSA then searches for the unselected node with the
largest energy and adds the subtree corresponding to the node’s
energy to the estimated support as a supernode: a single node
that provides a condensed representation of the corresponding
subtree . Condensing a large coefﬁcient far down the tree
accounts for the potentially large cost (in terms of the total
budget of tree nodes K) of growing the tree to that point.
Since the ﬁrst step of the CSSA involves sorting all
of the wavelet coefﬁcients, overall it requires O (N log N)
computations. However, once the CSSA grows the optimal
tree of size K, it is trivial to determine the optimal trees of
size < K and computationally efﬁcient to grow the optimal
trees of size > K .
The constrained optimization (16) can be rewritten as an
unconstrained problem by introducing the Lagrange multiplier
¯x∈¯T ∥x −¯x∥2
2 + λ(∥¯α∥0 −K),
where T = ∪N
n=1Tn and ¯α are the wavelet coefﬁcients of
¯x. Except for the inconsequential λK term, this optimization
coincides with Donoho’s complexity penalized sum of squares
 , which can be solved in only O (N) computations using
coarse-to-ﬁne dynamic programming on the tree. Its primary
shortcoming is the nonobvious relationship between the tuning
parameter λ and and the resulting size K of the optimal
connected subtree.
C. Tree-compressible signals
Specializing Deﬁnition 2 from Section III-C to T , we
make the following deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 10: Deﬁne the set of s-tree compressible signals as
{x ∈RN : ∥x −T(x, K)∥2 ≤GK−s,
1 ≤K ≤N, G < ∞}.
Furthermore, deﬁne |x|Ts as the smallest value of G for which
this condition holds for x and s.
Tree approximation classes contain signals whose wavelet
coefﬁcients have a loose (and possibly interrupted) decay
from coarse to ﬁne scales. These classes have been wellcharacterized for wavelet-sparse signals and are intrinsically linked with the Besov spaces Bs
q(Lp( )). Besov
spaces contain functions of one or more continuous variables
that have (roughly speaking) s derivatives in Lp( ); the
parameter q provides ﬁner distinctions of smoothness. When
a Besov space signal xa ∈Bs
p(Lp( )) with s > 1/p−1/2
is sampled uniformly and converted to a length-N vector x,
its wavelet coefﬁcients belong to the tree approximation space
|xN|Ts ≍∥xa∥Lp( ) + ∥xa∥Bsq(Lp( )),
where “≍” denotes an equivalent norm. The same result holds
if s = 1/p −1/2 and q ≤p.
D. Stable tree-based recovery from compressive measurements
For tree-sparse signals, by applying Theorem 1 and
Proposition 1, we ﬁnd that a subgaussian random matrix has
the TK-RIP property with constant δTK and probability 1−e−t
if the number of measurements obeys
Thus, the number of measurements necessary for stable recovery of tree-sparse signals is linear in K, without the
dependence on N present in conventional non-model-based
CS recovery.
For tree-compressible signals, we must quantify the number of subspaces Rj in each residual set Rj,K for the approximation class. We can then apply the theory of Section IV-C
with Proposition 1 to calculate the smallest allowable M via
Theorem 5.
Proposition 2: The number of K-dimensional subspaces
that comprise Rj,K obeys
(2e)K(2j+1)
(Kj + K + 1)(Kj + 1).
Using Proposition 2 and Theorem 5, we obtain the following
condition for the matrix Φ to have the RAmP, which is proved
in Appendix F.
Proposition 3: Let Φ be an M × N matrix with i.i.d.
subgaussian entries. If
10K + 2 ln
K(K+1)(2K+1) + t
 √1 + ǫK −1
then the matrix Φ has the (ǫK, s)-RAmP for the structured
sparsity model T and all s > 0.5 with probability 1 −e−t.
Both cases give a simpliﬁed bound on the number of
measurements required as M = O (K), which is a substantial
improvement over the M = O (K log(N/K)) required by
conventional CS recovery methods. Thus, when Φ satisﬁes
Proposition 3, we have the guarantee (14) for sampled Besov
space signals from Bs
q(Lp( )).
E. Experiments
We now present the results of a number of numerical
experiments that illustrate the effectiveness of a tree-based
recovery algorithm. Our consistent observation is that explicit
incorporation of the structured sparsity model in the recovery
BARANIUK et al.: MODEL-BASED COMPRESSIVE SENSING
process signiﬁcantly improves the quality of recovery for
a given number of measurements. In addition, model-based
recovery remains stable when the inputs are no longer treesparse, but rather are tree-compressible and/or corrupted with
differing levels of noise. We employ the Daubechies-6 wavelet
basis for sparsity, and recover the signal using model-based
CoSaMP (Algorithm 1) with a CSSA-based structured sparse
approximation step in all experiments.
We ﬁrst study one-dimensional signals that match the
connected wavelet-tree model described above. Among such
signals is the class of piecewise smooth functions, which are
commonly encountered in analysis and practice.
Figure 1 illustrates the results of recovering the treecompressible HeaviSine signal of length N = 1024 from
M = 80 noise-free random Gaussian measurements using
CoSaMP, ℓ1-norm minimization using the l1_eq solver from
the ℓ1-Magic toolbox,3 and our tree-based recovery algorithm.
It is clear that the number of measurements (M = 80) is
far fewer than the minimum number required by CoSaMP
and ℓ1-norm minimization to accurately recover the signal.
In contrast, tree-based recovery using K = 26 is accurate and
uses fewer iterations to converge than conventional CoSaMP.
Moreover, the normalized magnitude of the squared error for
tree-based recovery is equal to 0.037, which is remarkably
close to the error between the noise-free signal and its best
K-term tree-approximation (0.036).
Figure 3(a) illustrates the results of a Monte Carlo simulation study on the impact of the number of measurements M
on the performance of model-based and conventional recovery
for a class of tree-sparse piecewise polynomial signals. Each
data point was obtained by measuring the normalized recovery
error of 500 sample trials. Each sample trial was conducted
by generating a new piecewise polynomial signal of length
= 1024 with ﬁve polynomial pieces of cubic degree
and randomly placed discontinuities, computing its best Kterm tree-approximation using the CSSA, and then measuring
the resulting signal using a matrix with i.i.d. Gaussian entries. Model-based recovery attains near-perfect recovery at
M = 3K measurements, while CoSaMP only matches this
performance at M = 5K.
For the same class of signals, we empirically compared
the recovery times of our proposed algorithm with those of the
standard approach (CoSaMP). Experiments were conducted
on a Sun workstation with a 1.8GHz AMD Opteron dualcore processor and 2GB memory running UNIX, using nonoptimized Matlab code and a function-handle based implementation of the random projection operator Φ. As is evident
from Figure 3(b), wavelet tree-based recovery is in general
slower than CoSaMP. This is due to the fact that the CSSA
step in the iterative procedure is more computationally demanding than simple K−term approximation. Nevertheless,
the highest beneﬁts of model-based CS recovery are obtained
around M = 3K; in this regime, the runtimes of the two
approaches are comparable, with tree-based recovery requiring
3 
Model−based recovery
Fig. 4. Required overmeasuring factor M/K to achieve a target recovery error
∥x −bx∥2 ≤2.5σTK (x) as a function of the signal length N for standard and
model-based recovery of piecewise smooth signals. While standard recovery
requires M to increase logarithmically with N, the required M is essentially
constant for model-based recovery.
fewer iterations and yielding much smaller recovery error than
standard recovery.
Figure 4 shows the growth of the overmeasuring factor
M/K with the signal length N for conventional CS and
model-based recovery. We generated 50 sample piecewise
cubic signals and numerically computed the minimum number
of measurements M required for the recovery error ∥x−bx∥2 ≤
2.5σTK(x), the best tree-approximation error, for every sample
signal. The ﬁgure shows that while doubling the signal length
increases the number of measurements required by standard
recovery by K, the number of measurements required by
model-based recovery is constant for all N. These experimental results verify the theoretical performance described in
Proposition 3.
Further, we demonstrate that model-based recovery performs stably in the presence of measurement noise. We
generated sample piecewise polynomial signals as above,
computed their best K-term tree-approximations, computed
M measurements of each approximation, and ﬁnally added
Gaussian noise of variance σ to each measurement, so that
the expected variance E[∥n∥2] = σ
M. We emphasize that
this noise model implies that the energy of the noise added
will be larger as M increases. Then, we recovered the signals
using CoSaMP and model-based recovery and measured the
recovery error in each case. For comparison purposes, we also
tested the recovery performance of a ℓ1-norm minimization
algorithm that accounts for the presence of noise, which
has been implemented as the l1_qc solver in the ℓ1-Magic
toolbox. First, we determined the lowest value of M for which
the respective algorithms provided near-perfect recovery in the
absence of noise in the measurements. This corresponds to
M = 3.5K for model-based recovery, M = 5K for CoSaMP,
and M = 4.5K for ℓ1-norm minimization. Next, we generated 200 sample tree-structured signals, computed M noisy
measurements, recovered the signal using the given algorithm
BARANIUK et al.: MODEL-BASED COMPRESSIVE SENSING
Average normalized error magnitude
Model−based recovery
Average runtime (seconds)
Model−based recovery
Performance of CoSaMP vs. wavelet tree-based recovery on a class of tree-sparse signals. (a) Average normalized recovery error and (b) average runtime
for each recovery algorithm as a function of the overmeasuring factor M/K. The number of measurements M for which the wavelet tree-based algorithm obtains
near-perfect recovery is much smaller than that required by CoSaMP. The penalty paid for this improvement is a modest increase in the runtime.
CoSaMP (M = 5K)
Maximum normalized recovery error
Robustness to measurement noise for standard and wavelet tree-based
CS recovery algorithms. We plot the maximum normalized recovery error over
200 sample trials as a function of the expected signal-to-noise ratio. The linear
growth demonstrates that model-based recovery possesses the same robustness
to noise as CoSaMP and ℓ1-norm minimization.
and recorded the recovery error. Figure 5 illustrates the growth
in maximum normalized recovery error (over the 200 sample
trials) as a function of the expected measurement signal-tonoise ratio for the tree algorithms. We observe similar stability
curves for all three algorithms, while noting that model-based
recovery offers this kind of stability using signiﬁcantly fewer
measurements.
Finally, we turn to two-dimensional images and a wavelet
quadtree model. The connected wavelet-tree model has proven
useful for compressing natural images ; thus, our algorithm provides a simple and provably efﬁcient method for
recovering a wide variety of natural images from compressive
measurements. An example of recovery performance is given
in Figure 6. The test image (Peppers) is of size N = 128 ×
128 = 16384 pixels, and we computed M = 5000 random
Gaussian measurements. Model-based recovery again offers
higher performance than standard signal recovery algorithms
like CoSaMP, both in terms of recovery mean-squared error
and visual quality.
(a) Peppers
(b) CoSaMP
(c) model-based rec.
(RMSE = 22.8)
(RMSE = 11.1)
Example performance of standard and model-based recovery on
images. (a) N = 128 × 128 = 16384-pixel Peppers test image. Image
recovery from M = 5000 compressive measurements using (b) conventional
CoSaMP and (c) our wavelet tree-based algorithm.
VI. EXAMPLE: BLOCK-SPARSE SIGNALS AND SIGNAL
In a block-sparse signal, the locations of the signiﬁcant coefﬁcients cluster in blocks under a speciﬁc sorting
order. Block-sparse signals have been previously studied in
CS applications, including DNA microarrays and magnetoencephalography . An equivalent problem arises in CS
for signal ensembles, such as sensor networks and MIMO
communication . In this case, several signals share
a common coefﬁcient support set. For example, when a
frequency-sparse acoustic signal is recorded by an array of
microphones, then all of the recorded signals contain the same
Fourier frequencies but with different amplitudes and delays.
Such a signal ensemble can be re-shaped as a single vector by
concatenation, and then the coefﬁcients can be rearranged so
that the concatenated vector exhibits block sparsity.
It has been shown that the block-sparse structure enables
signal recovery from a reduced number of CS measurements,
both for the single signal case and the signal ensemble case , through the use of specially tailored recovery
algorithms. However, the robustness guarantees for the algorithms either are restricted to exactly sparse signals
and noiseless measurements, do not have explicit bounds on
the number of necessary measurements, or are asymptotic
in nature. An optimization-based algorithm introduced in 
BARANIUK et al.: MODEL-BASED COMPRESSIVE SENSING
provides similar recovery guarantees to those obtained by the
algorithm we present in this chapter; thus, our method can
be interpreted as a greedy-based counterpart to that provided
In this section, we formulate the block sparsity model as
a union of subspaces and pose an approximation algorithm
on this union of subspaces. The approximation algorithm is
used to implement block-based signal recovery. We also deﬁne
the corresponding class of block-compressible signals and
quantify the number of measurements necessary for robust
A. Block-sparse signals
Consider a class S of signal vectors x ∈RJN, with J
and N integers. This signal can be reshaped into a J × N
matrix X, and we use both notations interchangeably in the
sequel. We will restrict entire columns of X to be part of the
support of the signal as a group. That is, signals X in a blocksparse model have entire columns as zeros or nonzeros. The
measure of sparsity for X is its number of nonzero columns.
More formally, we make the following deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 11: Deﬁne the set of K-block sparse
signals as
{X = [x1 . . . xN] ∈RJ×N such that
xn = 0 for n /∈Ω, Ω⊆{1, . . . , N}, |Ω| = K}.
It is important to note that a K-block sparse signal has
sparsity KJ, which is dependent on the size of the block J.
We can extend this formulation to ensembles of J, length-
N signals with common support. Denote this signal ensemble
by {ex1, . . . , exJ}, with exj ∈RN, 1 ≤j ≤J. We formulate
a matrix representation e
X of the ensemble that features the
signal exj in its jth row: e
X = [ex1 . . . exJ]T . The matrix e
features the same structure as the matrix X obtained from a
block-sparse signal; thus, the matrix e
X can be converted into
a block-sparse vector ex that represents the signal ensemble.
B. Block-based approximation
To pose the block-based approximation algorithm, we
need to deﬁne the mixed norm of a matrix.
Deﬁnition 12: The (p, q) mixed norm of the matrix X =
[x1 x2 . . . xN] is deﬁned as
∥X∥(p,q) =
When q = 0, ∥X∥(p,0) simply counts the number of nonzero
columns in X.
We immediately ﬁnd that ∥X∥(p,p) = ∥x∥p, with x the
vectorization of X. Intuitively, we pose the algorithm S(X, K)
to obtain the best block-based approximation of the signal X
as follows:
X∈RJ×N ∥X −e
X∥(2,2) s.t. ∥e
X∥(2,0) ≤K.
It is easy to show that to obtain the approximation, it sufﬁces
to perform column-wise hard thresholding: let ρ be the Kth
largest ℓ2-norm among the columns of X. Then our approximation algorithm is S(X, K) = XS
K,1 . . . xS
∥xn∥2 < ρ,
for each 1 ≤n ≤N. Alternatively, a recursive approximation
algorithm can be obtained by sorting the columns of X by their
ℓ2 norms, and then selecting the columns with largest norms.
The complexity of this sorting process is O (NJ + N log N).
C. Block-compressible signals
The approximation class under the block-compressible
model corresponds to signals with blocks whose ℓ2 norm has
a power-law decay rate.
Deﬁnition 13: We deﬁne the set of s-block compressible
signals as
{X = [x1 . . . xN] ∈RJ×N such that
∥xI(i)∥2 ≤Gi−s−1/2, 1 ≤i ≤N, S < ∞},
where I indexes the sorted column norms.
We say that X is an s-block compressible signal if X ∈Ss.
For such signals, we have ∥X −XK∥(2,2) = σSK(x) ≤
G1K−s, and ∥X −XK∥(2,1) ≤G2K1/2−s. Note that the
block-compressible model does not impart a structure to the
decay of the signal coefﬁcients, so that the sets Rj,K are equal
for all values of j; due to this property, the (δSK, s)-RAmP
is implied by the SK-RIP. Taking this into account, we can
derive the following result from , which is proven similarly
to Theorem 4.
Theorem 6: Let x be a signal from the structured sparsity
model S, and let y
= Φx + n be a set of noisy CS
measurements. If Φ has the S4
K-RIP with δS4
K ≤0.1, then
the estimate obtained from iteration i of block-based CoSaMP,
using the approximation algorithm (18), satisﬁes
2−i∥x∥2 + 20
K∥(2,1) + ∥n∥2
Thus, the algorithm provides a recovered signal of similar
quality to approximations of X by a small number of nonzero
columns. When the signal x is K-block sparse, we have that
K∥(2,2) = ||X −XS
K∥(2,1) = 0, obtaining the same
result as Theorem 4, save for a constant factor.
BARANIUK et al.: MODEL-BASED COMPRESSIVE SENSING
D. Stable block-based recovery from compressive measurements
Since Theorem 6 poses the same requirement on the
measurement matrix Φ for sparse and compressible signals, the
same number of measurements M is required to provide performance guarantees for block-sparse and block-compressible
signals. The class SK contains S
subspaces of
dimension JK. Thus, a subgaussian random matrix has the
SK-RIP property with constant δSK and probability 1 −e−t
if the number of measurements obeys
K + J ln 12
To compare with the standard CS measurement bound, the
number of measurements required for robust recovery scales
= O (JK + K log(N/K)), which is a substantial
improvement over the M = O (JK log(N/K)) that would
be required by conventional CS recovery methods. When the
size of the block J is larger than log(N/K), then this term
becomes O (KJ); that is, it is linear on the total sparsity of
the block-sparse signal.
We note in passing that the bound on the number of
measurements (19) assumes a dense subgaussian measurement
matrix, while the measurement matrices used in have
a block-diagonal structure. To obtain measurements from an
M × JN dense matrix in a distributed setting, it sufﬁces to
partition the matrix into J pieces of size M ×N and calculate
the CS measurements at each sensor with the corresponding
matrix; these individual measurements are then summed to
obtain the complete measurement vector. For large J, (19)
implies that the total number of measurements required for
recovery of the signal ensemble is lower than the bound for the
case where each signal recovery is performed independently
for each signal (M = O (JK log(N/K))).
E. Experiments
We conducted several numerical experiments comparing
model-based recovery to CoSaMP in the context of blocksparse signals. We employ the model-based CoSaMP recovery
of Algorithm 1 with the block-based approximation algorithm (18) in all cases. For brevity, we exclude a thorough
comparison of our model-based algorithm with ℓ1-norm minimization and defer it to future work. In practice, we observed
that our algorithm performs several times faster than convex
optimization-based procedures.
Figure 7 illustrates an N = 4096 signal that exhibits
block sparsity, and its recovered version from M = 960
measurements using CoSaMP and model-based recovery. The
block size J = 64 and there were K = 6 active blocks in
the signal. We observe the clear advantage of using the blocksparsity model in signal recovery.
We now consider block-compressible signals. An example recovery is illustrated in Figure 8. In this case, the ℓ2norms of the blocks decay according to a power law, as
described above. Again, the number of measurements is far
below the minimum number required to guarantee stable recovery through conventional CS recovery. However, enforcing
the structured sparsity model in the approximation process
results in a solution that is very close to the best 5-block
approximation of the signal.
Figure 9(a) indicates the decay in recovery error as
a function of the numbers of measurements for CoSaMP
and model-based recovery. We generated sample block-sparse
signals as follows: we randomly selected a set of K blocks,
each of size J, and endow them with coefﬁcients that follow
an i.i.d. Gaussian distribution. Each sample point in the curves
is generated by performing 200 trials of the corresponding
algorithm. As in the connected wavelet-tree case, we observe
clear gains using model-based recovery, particularly for lowmeasurement regimes; CoSaMP matches model-based recovery only for M ≥5K.
Figure 9(b) compares the recovery times of the two
approaches. For this particular model, we observe that our
proposed approach is in general much faster than CoSaMP.
This is because of two reasons: a) the block-based approximation step involves sorting fewer coefﬁcients, and thus is
faster than K−term approximation; b) block-based recovery
requires fewer iterations to converge to the true solution.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have aimed to demonstrate that there are
signiﬁcant performance gains to be made by exploiting more
realistic and richer signal models beyond the simplistic sparse
and compressible models that dominate the CS literature.
Building on the unions of subspaces results of and the proof
machinery of , we have taken some ﬁrst steps towards
what promises to be a general theory for model-based CS
by introducing the notion of a structured compressible signal
and the associated restricted ampliﬁcation property (RAmP)
condition it imposes on the measurement matrix Φ. Our
analysis poses the nested approximation property (NAP) as a
sufﬁcient condition that is satisﬁed by many structured sparsity
For the volumes of natural and manmade signals and
images that are wavelet-sparse or compressible, our treebased CoSaMP and IHT algorithms offer performance that
signiﬁcantly exceeds today’s state-of-the-art while requiring
only M = O (K) rather than M = O (K log(N/K)) random
measurements. For block-sparse signals and signal ensembles
with common sparse support, our block-based CoSaMP and
IHT algorithms offer not only excellent performance but also
require just M = O (JK) measurements, where JK is the
signal sparsity. Furthermore, block-based recovery can recover
signal ensembles using fewer measurements than the number
required when each signal is recovered independently; we have
shown such advantages using real-world data from environmental sensor networks . Additional structured sparsity
models have been developed using our general framework
in and ; we have also released a Matlab toolbox
BARANIUK et al.: MODEL-BASED COMPRESSIVE SENSING
(a) original block-sparse signal
(b) CoSaMP
(c) model-based recovery
(RMSE = 0.723)
(RMSE = 0.015)
Example performance of structured signal recovery for a block-sparse signal. (a) Example block-sparse signal of length N = 4096
with K = 6 nonzero blocks of size J = 64. Recovered signal from M = 960 measurements using (b) conventional CoSaMP recovery and (c)
block-based recovery. Standard recovery not only recovers spurious nonzeros, but also attenuates the magnitude of the actual nonzero entries.
(a) signal
(b) best 5-block approximation
(c) CoSaMP
(d) model-based recovery
(RMSE = 0.116)
(RMSE = 0.711)
(RMSE = 0.195)
Example performance of structured signal recovery for block-compressible signals. (a) Example block-compressible signal, length
N = 1024. (b) Best block-based approximation with K = 5 blocks. Recovered signal from M = 200 measurements using both (c)
conventional CoSaMP recovery and (d) block-based recovery. Standard recovery not only recovers spurious signiﬁcant entries, but also attenuates
the magnitude of the actual signiﬁcant entries
Average normalized error magnitude
Model−based recovery
Average runtime (seconds)
Model−based recovery
Performance of CoSaMP vs. block-based recovery on a class of block-sparse signals. (a) Average normalized recovery error and (b)
average runtime for each recovery algorithm as a function of the overmeasuring factor M/K. CoSaMP does not match the performance of the
block-based algorithm until M = 5K. Furthermore, the block-based algorithm has faster convergence time than CoSaMP.
containing the corresponding model-based CS recovery algorithms, available at 
There are many avenues for future work on model-based
CS. We have only considered the recovery of signals from
models that can be geometrically described as a union of
subspaces; possible extensions include other, more complex
geometries such as high-dimensional polytopes and nonlinear
manifolds. We also expect that the core of our proposed
algorithms — a structured sparse approximation step — can
be integrated into other iterative algorithms, such as relaxed
ℓ1-norm minimization methods. Furthermore, our framework
will beneﬁt from the formulation of new structured sparsity
models that are endowed with efﬁcient structured sparse
approximation algorithms.
APPENDIX A
PROOF OF THEOREM 2
To prove this theorem, we will study the distribution of
the maximum singular value of a submatrix ΦT of a matrix
with i.i.d. Gaussian entries Φ corresponding to the columns
indexed by T . From this we obtain the probability that RAmP
does not hold for a ﬁxed support T . We will then evaluate
the same probability for all supports T of elements of Rj,K,
where the desired bound on the ampliﬁcation is dependent on
BARANIUK et al.: MODEL-BASED COMPRESSIVE SENSING
the value of j. This gives us the probability that the RAmP
does not hold for a given residual subspace set Rj,K. We ﬁx
the probability of failure on each of these sets; we then obtain
probability that the matrix Φ does not have the RAmP using a
union bound. We end by obtaining conditions on the number
of rows M of Φ to obtain a desired probability of failure.
We begin from the following concentration of measure for
the largest singular value of a M ×K submatrix ΦT , |T | = K,
of an M × N matrix Φ with i.i.d. subgaussian entries that are
properly normalized :
σmax(ΦT ) > 1 +
≤e−Mτ 2/2.
For large enough M, β ≪1; thus we ignore this small
constant in the sequel. By letting τ = jr√1 + ǫK −1 −
(with the appropriate value of j for T ), we obtain
 σmax(ΦT ) > jr√1 + ǫK
jr√1+ǫK−1−√
We use a union bound over all possible Rj supports for u ∈
Rj,K to obtain the probability that Φ ampliﬁes the norm of
some u by more than jr√1 + ǫK:
∥u∥2 for some u ∈Rj,K
M(jr√1+ǫK−1)−
Bound the right hand side by a constant µ; this requires
M(jr√1+ǫK−1)−
for each j. We use another union bound among the residual
subspaces Rj.K to measure the probability that the RAmP
does not hold:
1 + ǫK, u ∈Rj,K, 1 ≤j ≤⌈N/K⌉
To bound this probability by e−t, we need µ =
plugging this into (20), we obtain
M(jr√1+ǫK−1)−
for each j. Simplifying, we obtain that for Φ to posess the
RAmP with probability 1 −e−t, the following must hold for
jr√1 + ǫK −1
Since (√a+
b)2 ≤2a+2b for a, b > 0, then the hypothesis
(12) implies (21), proving the theorem.
APPENDIX B
PROOF OF THEOREM 3
In this proof, we denote M(x, K) = xK for brevity. To
bound ∥Φ(x −xK)∥2, we write x as
xTj = xjK −x(j−1)K, j = 2, . . . , ⌈N/K⌉
is the difference between the best jK structured sparse approximation and the best (j−1)K structured sparse approximation.
Additionally, each piece xTj ∈Rj,K. Therefore, since Φ
satisﬁes the (ǫK, s −1)-RAmP, we obtain
∥Φ(x −xK)∥2
1 + ǫKjs−1∥xTj∥2.
Since x ∈Ms, the norm of each piece can be bounded as
∥xjK −x(j−1)K∥2
∥x −x(j−1)K∥2 + ∥x −xjK∥2
|x|MsK−s  (j −1)−s + j−s
Applying this bound in (22), we obtain
∥Φ(x −xK)∥2
js−1∥xTj∥2,
(j −1)s + js−1
j(1 −1/j)s + 1
It is easy to show, using Euler-Maclaurin summations, that
j−1 ≤ln⌈N/K⌉; we then obtain
∥Φ(x −xK)∥2 ≤(2s + 1)
1 + ǫKK−s ln
which proves the theorem.
APPENDIX C
MODEL-BASED ITERATIVE HARD THRESHOLDING
Our proposed model-based iterative hard thresholding
(IHT) is given in Algorithm 2. For this algorithm, Theorems 4,
BARANIUK et al.: MODEL-BASED COMPRESSIVE SENSING
(a) original
(c) model-based IHT
(RMSE = 0.627)
(RMSE = 0.080)
Example performance of model-based IHT. (a) Piecewise
smooth HeaviSine test signal, length N = 1024. Signal recovered
from M = 80 measurements using both (b) standard and (c) modelbased IHT recovery. Root mean-squared error (RMSE) values are
normalized with respect to the ℓ2 norm of the signal.
5, and 6 can be proven with only a few modiﬁcations: Φ must
have the M3
K-RIP with δM3
K ≤0.1, and the constant factor
in the bound changes from 15 to 4 in Theorem 4, from 35 to
10 in Theorem 5, and from 20 to 5 in Theorem 6.
To illustrate the performance of the algorithm, we repeat
the HeaviSine experiment from Figure 1. Recall that N =
1024, and M = 80 for this example. The advantages of using
our tree-structured sparse approximation step (instead of mere
hard thresholding) are evident from Figure 10. In practice, we
have observed that our model-based algorithm converges in
fewer steps than IHT and yields much more accurate results
in terms of recovery error.
APPENDIX D
PROOF OF THEOREM 4
The proof of this theorem is identical to that of the
CoSaMP algorithm in [11, Section 4.6], and requires a set
of six lemmas. The sequence of Lemmas 1–6 below are
modiﬁcations of the lemmas in that are restricted to
the structured sparsity model. Lemma 4 does not need any
changes from , so we state it without proof. The proof of
Lemmas 3–6 use the properties in Lemmas 1 and 2, which are
simple to prove.
Lemma 1: Suppose Φ has M-RIP with constant δM. Let
Ωbe a support corresponding to a subspace in M. Then we
have the following handy bounds.
1 + δM∥u∥2,
(1 + δM)∥u∥2,
(1 −δM)∥u∥2,
Lemma 2: Suppose Φ has M2
K-RIP with constant δM2
Let Ωbe a support corresponding to a subspace in MK, and
let x ∈MK. Then ∥ΦT
ΩΦx|ΩC∥2 ≤δM2
We begin the proof of Theorem 4 by ﬁxing an iteration
i ≥1 of model-based CoSaMP. We write bx = bxi−1 for the
signal estimate at the beginning of the ith iteration. Deﬁne the
signal residual s = x −bx, which implies that s ∈M2
note that we can write r = y −Φbx = Φ(x−bx)+n = Φs+n.
Lemma 3: (Identiﬁcation) The set Ω= supp(M2(e, K)),
where e = ΦT r, identiﬁes a subspace in M2
K, and obeys
∥s|ΩC∥2 ≤0.2223∥s∥2 + 2.34∥n∥2.
Proof of Lemma 3: Deﬁne the set Π = supp(s). Let
eΩ= M2(e, K) be the structured sparse approximation to e
with support Ω, and similarly let eΠ be the approximation to
e with support Π. Each approximation is equal to e for the
coefﬁcients in the support, and zero elsewhere. Since Ωis the
support of the best approximation in M2
K, we must have:
(e[n] −eΩ[n])2
(e[n] −eΠ[n])2,
where Ω\ Π denotes the set difference of Ωand Π. These
signals are in M4
K (since they arise as the difference of two
elements from M2
K); therefore, we can apply the M4
constants and Lemmas 1 and 2 to provide the following bounds
on both sides (see for details):
K)∥s|ΩC∥2 −δM2
Combining (22) and (23), we obtain
K)∥s∥2 + 2
The argument is completed by noting that δM2
Lemma 4: (Support Merger) Let Ωbe a set of at most
2K indices. Then the set Λ = Ω∪supp(bx) contains at most
3K indices, and ∥x|ΛC∥2 ≤∥s|ΩC∥2.
Lemma 5: (Estimation) Let Λ be a support corresponding
to a subspace in M3
K, and deﬁne the least squares signal
estimate b by b|T = Φ†
T y, b|T C = 0. Then
∥x −b∥2 ≤1.112∥x|ΛC∥2 + 1.06∥n∥2.
BARANIUK et al.: MODEL-BASED COMPRESSIVE SENSING
Algorithm 2 Model-based Iterative Hard Thresholding
Inputs: CS matrix Φ, measurements y, structured sparse approximation algorithm MK
Output: K-sparse approximation bx to true signal x
bx0 = 0 , d = y; i = 0
{initialize}
while halting criterion false do
1. i ←i + 1
2. b ←bxi−1 + ΦT d
{form signal estimate}
3. bxi ←M(b, K)
{prune residual estimate according to structure}
4. d ←y −Φbxi
{update measurement residual}
return bx ←bxi
Proof of Lemma 5: It can be shown that
∥x −b∥2 ≤∥x|ΛC∥2 + ∥(ΦT
ΛΦx|ΠC∥2 + ∥Φ†
Since Λ is a support corresponding to a subspace in M3
x ∈MK, we use Lemmas 1 and 2 to obtain
∥x|ΛC∥2 + ∥ΦT
Finally, note that δM3
Lemma 6: (Pruning) The pruned approximation bxi =
M(b, K) is such that
∥x −bxi∥2 ≤2∥x −b∥2.
Proof of Lemma 6: Since bxi is the best approximation in MK
to b, and x ∈MK, we obtain
∥x −bxi∥2 ≤∥x −b∥2 + ∥b −bxi∥2 ≤2∥x −b∥2.
We use these lemmas in reverse sequence for the inequalities below:
2(1.112∥x|ΛC∥2 + 1.06∥n∥2),
2.224∥s|ΩC∥2 + 2.12∥n∥2,
2.224(0.2223∥s∥2 + 2.34∥n∥2) + 2.12∥n∥2,
0.5∥s∥2 + 7.5∥n∥2,
0.5∥x −bxi−1∥2 + 7.5∥n∥2.
From the recursion on bxi, we obtain ∥x −bxi∥2 ≤2−i∥x∥2 +
15∥n∥2. This completes the proof of Theorem 4.
APPENDIX E
PROOF OF PROPOSITION 1
When K < log2 N, the number of subtrees of size K of
a binary tree of size N is the Catalan number 
using Stirling’s approximation. When K > log2 N, we partition this count of subtrees into the numbers of subtrees tK,h
of size K and height h, to obtain
h=⌊log2 K⌋+1
We obtain the following asymptotic identity from [49, page
h2 (2πm)4 −3(2πm)2
h2 (2πm)4 −3(2πm)2
We now simplify the formula slightly: we seek a bound
for the sum term (which we denote by βh for brevity):
h2 (2πm)4 −3(2πm)2
h2 (2πm)4e−K(2πm)2
Let mmax =
2K , the value of m for which the term inside
the sum (25) is maximum; this is not necessarily an integer.
h2 (2πm)4e−K(2πm)2
h2 (2πm)4e−K(2πm)2
m≥⌈mmax⌉+1
h2 (2πm)4e−K(2πm)2
h2 (2πx)4e−K(2πx)2
h2 (2πm)4e−K(2πm)2
h2 (2πx)4e−K(2πx)2
BARANIUK et al.: MODEL-BASED COMPRESSIVE SENSING
where the second inequality comes from the fact that the series
in the sum is strictly increasing for m ≤⌊mmax⌋and strictly
decreasing for m > ⌈mmax⌉. One of the terms in the sum can
be added to one of the integrals. If we have that
(2π ⌊mmax⌋)4e−K(2π⌊mmax⌋)2
< (2π ⌈mmax⌉)4e−K(2π⌈mmax⌉)2
then we can obtain
h2 (2πx)4e−K(2πx)2
h2 (2π ⌈mmax⌉)4e−K(2π⌈mmax⌉)2
h2 (2πx)4e−K(2πx)2
When the opposite of (26) is true, we have that
h2 (2πx)4e−K(2πx)2
h2 (2π ⌊mmax⌋)4e−K(2π⌊mmax⌋)2
h2 (2πx)4e−K(2πx)2
Since the term in the sum reaches its maximum for mmax, we
will have in all three cases that
h2 (2πx)4e−K(2πx)2
We perform a change of variables u = 2πx and deﬁne σ =
2K to obtain
σ2 u4e−u2/2σ2dx + 8h2
2πσ u4e−u2/2σ2dx + 8h2
Using the formula for the fourth central moment of a Gaussian
distribution: Z ∞
2πσ u4e−u2/2σ2dx = 3σ4,
Thus, (24) simpliﬁes to
Correspondingly, TK,N becomes
h=⌊log2 K⌋+1
h=⌊log2 K⌋+1
h=⌊log2 K⌋+1
It is easy to show, using Euler-Maclaurin summations, that
we then obtain
e2⌊log2 K⌋
Ke2⌊log2 K⌋≤4K+4
This proves the proposition.
APPENDIX F
PROOF OF PROPOSITION 3
We wish to ﬁnd the value of the bound (12) for
the subspace count given in
max1≤j≤⌈N/K⌉Mj, where
 jr√1 + ǫK −1
(2e)K(2j+1)N
K(Kj + 1)(Kj + K + 1) + 2t
We separate the terms that are linear on K and j, and obtain
 jr√1 + ǫK −1
K(3 + 4 ln 2) + 8Kj(1 + ln 2)
K(Kj + 1)(Kj + K + 1) + 2t
 js−0.5√1 + ǫK −j−0.52
8K(1 + ln 2) + K(3 + 4 ln 2)
K(Kj + 1)(Kj + K + 1) + 2t
The sequence {Mj}⌈N
is a decreasing sequence, since the
denominators are decreasing sequences whenever s > 0.5. We
 √1 + ǫK −1
K(11 + 12 ln 2)
K(K + 1)(2K + 1) + 2t
This completes the proof of Proposition 3.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Petros Boufounos, Mark Davenport, Yonina Eldar, Moshe Mishali, and Robert Nowak for helpful discussions.
BARANIUK et al.: MODEL-BASED COMPRESSIVE SENSING