Jasper: An End-to-End Convolutional Neural Acoustic Model
Jason Li1, Vitaly Lavrukhin1, Boris Ginsburg1, Ryan Leary1, Oleksii Kuchaiev1,
Jonathan M. Cohen1, Huyen Nguyen1, Ravi Teja Gadde2
1NVIDIA, Santa Clara, USA
2New York University, New York, USA
{jasoli,vlavrukhin,bginsburg,rleary,okuchaiev,jocohen,chipn}@nvidia.com, 
In this paper we report state-of-the-art results on LibriSpeech
among end-to-end speech recognition models without any external training data.
Our model, Jasper, uses only 1D convolutions, batch normalization, ReLU, dropout, and residual
connections. To improve training, we further introduce a new
layer-wise optimizer called NovoGrad. Through experiments,
we demonstrate that the proposed deep architecture performs as
well or better than more complex choices. Our deepest Jasper
variant uses 54 convolutional layers. With this architecture, we
achieve 2.95% WER using a beam-search decoder with an external neural language model and 3.86% WER with a greedy
decoder on LibriSpeech test-clean. We also report competitive
results on Wall Street Journal and the Hub5’00 conversational
evaluation datasets.
Index Terms:
speech recognition, convolutional networks,
time-delay neural networks
1. Introduction
Conventional automatic speech recognition (ASR) systems typically consist of several independently learned components:
an acoustic model to predict context-dependent sub-phoneme
states (senones) from audio, a graph structure to map senones
to phonemes, and a pronunciation model to map phonemes
to words. Hybrid systems combine hidden Markov models to
model state dependencies with neural networks to predict states
 . Newer approaches such as end-to-end (E2E) systems reduce the overall complexity of the ﬁnal system.
Our research builds on prior work that has explored using
time-delay neural networks (TDNN), other forms of convolutional neural networks, and Connectionist Temporal Classiﬁcation (CTC) loss . We took inspiration from wav2letter
 , which uses 1D-convolution layers. Liptchinsky et al. 
improved wav2letter by increasing the model depth to 19 convolutional layers and adding Gated Linear Units (GLU) ,
weight normalization and dropout.
By building a deeper and larger capacity network, we aim
to demonstrate that we can match or outperform non end-toend models on the LibriSpeech and 2000hr Fisher+Switchboard
tasks. Like wav2letter, our architecture, Jasper, uses a stack of
1D-convolution layers, but with ReLU and batch normalization
 . We ﬁnd that ReLU and batch normalization outperform
other activation and normalization schemes that we tested for
convolutional ASR. As a result, Jasper’s architecture contains
only 1D convolution, batch normalization, ReLU, and dropout
layers – operators highly optimized for training and inference
2 Work was conducted while the author was at NVIDIA
It is possible to increase the capacity of the Jasper model by
stacking these operations. Our largest version uses 54 convolutional layers (333M parameters), while our smaller model uses
34 (201M parameters). We use residual connections to enable
this level of depth. We investigate a number of residual options
and propose a new residual connection topology we call Dense
Residual (DR).
Integrating our best acoustic model with a Transformer-XL
 language model allows us to obtain new state-of-the-art
(SOTA) results on LibriSpeech test-clean of 2.95% WER
and SOTA results among end-to-end models1 on LibriSpeech
test-other. We show competitive results on Wall Street Journal (WSJ), and 2000hr Fisher+Switchboard (F+S). Using only
greedy decoding without a language model we achieve 3.86%
WER on LibriSpeech test-clean.
This paper makes the following contributions:
1. We present a computationally efﬁcient end-to-end convolutional neural network acoustic model.
2. We show ReLU and batch norm outperform other combinations for regularization and normalization, and residual connections are necessary for training to converge.
3. We introduce NovoGrad, a variant of the Adam optimizer with a smaller memory footprint.
4. We improve the SOTA WER on LibriSpeech test-clean.
2. Jasper Architecture
Jasper is a family of end-to-end ASR models that replace acoustic and pronunciation models with a convolutional neural network. Jasper uses mel-ﬁlterbank features calculated from 20ms
windows with a 10ms overlap, and outputs a probability distribution over characters per frame2. Jasper has a block architecture: a Jasper BxR model has B blocks, each with R subblocks. Each sub-block applies the following operations: a 1Dconvolution, batch norm, ReLU, and dropout. All sub-blocks in
a block have the same number of output channels.
Each block input is connected directly into the last subblock via a residual connection.
The residual connection is
ﬁrst projected through a 1x1 convolution to account for different numbers of input and output channels, then through a batch
norm layer. The output of this batch norm layer is added to the
output of the batch norm layer in the last sub-block. The result of this sum is passed through the activation function and
dropout to produce the output of the current block.
1We follow Hadian et.
al’s deﬁnition of end-to-end : “ﬂatstart training of a single DNN in one stage without using any previously trained models, forced alignments, or building state-tying decision trees.”
2We use 40 features for WSJ and 64 for LibriSpeech and F+S.
 
Figure 1: Jasper BxR model: B - number of blocks, R - number
of sub-blocks.
The sub-block architecture of Jasper was designed to facilitate fast GPU inference. Each sub-block can be fused into a
single GPU kernel: dropout is not used at inference-time and is
eliminated, batch norm can be fused with the preceding convolution, ReLU clamps the result, and residual summation can be
treated as a modiﬁed bias term in this fused operation.
All Jasper models have four additional convolutional
blocks: one pre-processing and three post-processing. See Figure 1 and Table 1 for details.
Table 1: Jasper 10x5: 10 blocks, each consisting of 5 1Dconvolutional sub-blocks, plus 4 additional blocks.
dilation=2
# graphemes
We also build a variant of Jasper, Jasper Dense Residual
(DR). Jasper DR follows DenseNet and DenseRNet ,
but instead of having dense connections within a block, the output of a convolution block is added to the inputs of all the following blocks. While DenseNet and DenseRNet concatenates
the outputs of different layers, Jasper DR adds them in the same
way that residuals are added in ResNet. As explained below, we
ﬁnd addition to be as effective as concatenation.
Figure 2: Jasper Dense Residual
2.1. Normalization and Activation
In our study, we evaluate performance of models with:
• 3 types of normalization: batch norm , weight norm
 , and layer norm 
• 3 types of rectiﬁed linear units: ReLU, clipped ReLU
(cReLU), and leaky ReLU (lReLU)
• 2 types of gated units: gated linear units (GLU) , and
gated activation units (GAU) 
All experiment results are shown in Table 2. We ﬁrst experimented with a smaller Jasper5x33 model to pick the top 3 settings before training on larger Jasper models. We found that
layer norm with GAU performed the best on the smaller model.
Layer norm with ReLU and batch norm with ReLU came second and third in our tests. Using these 3, we conducted further
experiments on a larger Jasper10x4. For larger models, we noticed that batch norm with ReLU outperformed other choices.
Thus, leading us to decide on batch normalization and ReLU
for our architecture.
During batching, all sequences are padded to match the
longest sequence. These padded values caused issues when using layer norm. We applied a sequence mask to exclude padding
values from the mean and variance calculation. Further, we
computed mean and variance over both the time dimension and
channels similar to the sequence-wise normalization proposed
by Laurent et al. . In addition to masking layer norm, we
additionally applied masking prior to the convolution operation,
and masking the mean and variance calculations in batch norm.
These results are shown in Table 3. Interestingly, we found that
while masking before convolution gives a lower WER, using
masks for both convolutions and batch norm results in worse
performance.
3 Jasper 5x3 models contain one block of each B1 to B5.
As a ﬁnal note, we found that training with weight norm
was very unstable leading to exploding activations.
Table 2: Normalization and Activation: Greedy WER, LibriSpeech after 50 epochs
Normalization
Activation
Jasper 5x3
Batch Norm
Layer Norm
Weight Norm
Jasper 10x4
Batch Norm
Layer Norm
Table 3: Sequence Masking: Greedy WER, LibriSpeech for
Jasper 10x4 after 50 epochs
Jasper DR 10x4
Jasper DR 10x4
Jasper DR 10x4
Jasper DR 10x4
Conv+BN Mask
2.2. Residual Connections
For models deeper than Jasper 5x3, we observe consistently
that residual connections are necessary for training to converge.
In addition to the simple residual and dense residual model
described above, we investigated DenseNet and DenseR-
Net variants of Jasper. Both connect the outputs of each
sub-block to the inputs of following sub-blocks within a block.
DenseRNet, similar to Dense Residual, connects the output of
each block to the input of all following blocks. DenseNet and
DenseRNet combine residual connections using concatenation
whereas Residual and Dense Residual use addition. We found
that Dense Residual and DenseRNet perform similarly with
each performing better on speciﬁc subsets of LibriSpeech. We
decided to use Dense Residual for subsequent experiments. The
main reason is that due to concatenation, the growth factor for
DenseNet and DenseRNet requires tuning for deeper models
whereas Dense Residual does not have a growth factor.
2.3. Language Model
A language model (LM) is a probability distribution over arbitrary symbol sequences P(w1, ..., wn) such that more likely
sequences are assigned higher probabilities. LMs are frequently
used to condition beam search. During decoding, candidates are
evaluated using both acoustic scores and LM scores. Traditional
N-gram LMs have been augmented with neural LMs in recent
work .
Table 4: Residual Connections: Greedy WER, LibriSpeech for
Jasper 10x3 after 400 epochs. All models sized to have roughly
the same parameter count.
#params, M
Dense Residual
We experiment with statistical N-gram language models
 and neural Transformer-XL models. Our best results
use acoustic and word-level N-gram language models to generate a candidate list using beam search with a width of 2048.
Next, an external Transformer-XL LM rescores the ﬁnal list.
All LMs were trained on datasets independently from acoustic
models. We show results with the neural LM in our Results
section. We observed a strong correlation between the quality
of the neural LM (measured by perplexity) and WER as shown
in Figure 3.
Figure 3: LM perplexity vs WER. LibriSpeech dev-other. Varying perplexity is achieved by taking earlier or later snapshots
during training.
2.4. NovoGrad
For training, we use either Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD)
with momentum or our own NovoGrad, an optimizer similar
to Adam , except that its second moments are computed
per layer instead of per weight. Compared to Adam, it reduces
memory consumption and we ﬁnd it to be more numerically
At each step t, NovoGrad computes the stochastic gradient gl
t following the regular forward-backward pass. Then the
second-order moment vl
t is computed for each layer l similar to
ND-Adam :
t = β2 · vl
t−1 + (1 −β2) · ||gl
The second-order moment vl
t is used to re-scale gradients gl
before calculating the ﬁrst-order moment ml
t = β1 · ml
Table 5: LibriSpeech, WER (%)
test-clean
test-other
CAPIO (single) 
pFSMN-Chain 
DeepSpeech2 
Deep bLSTM w/ attention 
wav2letter++ 
LAS + SpecAugment 4 
Jasper DR 10x5
Jasper DR 10x5
Jasper DR 10x5
Transformer-XL
Jasper DR 10x5 + Time/Freq Masks 4
Transformer-XL
If L2-regularization is used, a weight decay d · wt is added to
the re-scaled gradient (as in AdamW ):
t = β1 · ml
Finally, new weights are computed using the learning rate αt:
wt+1 = wt −αt · mt
Using NovoGrad instead of SGD with momentum, we decreased the WER on dev-clean LibriSpeech from 4.00% to
3.64%, a relative improvement of 9% for Jasper DR 10x5. For
more details and experiment results with NovoGrad, see .
3. Results
We evaluate Jasper across a number of datasets in various domains.
In all experiments, we use dropout and
weight decay as regularization.
At training time, we use
3-fold speed perturbation with ﬁxed +/-10% for LibriSpeech.
For WSJ and Hub5’00, we use a random speed
perturbation factor between [-10%, 10%] as each utterance
is fed into the model.
All models have been trained on
NVIDIA DGX-1 in mixed precision using OpenSeq2Seq
 . Pretrained models and training conﬁgurations are available from “ 
3.1. Read Speech
We evaluated the performance of Jasper on two read speech
datasets: LibriSpeech and Wall Street Journal (WSJ). For LibriSpeech, we trained Jasper DR 10x5 using our NovoGrad optimizer for 400 epochs. We achieve SOTA performance on the
test-clean subset and SOTA among end-to-end speech recognition models on test-other.
We trained a smaller Jasper 10x3 model using the SGD
with momentum optimizer for 400 epochs on a combined
WSJ dataset (80 hours): LDC93S6A (WSJ0) and LDC94S13A
(WSJ1). The results are provided in Table 6.
3.2. Conversational Speech
We also evaluate the Jasper model’s performance on a conversational English corpus. The Hub5 Year 2000 (Hub5’00) evaluation (LDC2002S09, LDC2002T43) is widely used in academia.
4We include the latest SOTA which was achieved by Park et al. 
after our initial submission. We add results for Jasper with time and
frequency masks similar to SpecAugment. We use 1 continuous time
mask of size T ∼U(0, 99) time steps, and 1 continuous frequency
mask of size F ∼U(0, 26) frequency bands.
Table 6: WSJ End-to-End Models, WER (%)
seq2seq + deep conv 
wav2letter++ 
wav2letter++ 
E2E LF-MMI 
Jasper 10x3
Jasper 10x3
Jasper 10x3
Transformer-XL
It is divided into two subsets: Switchboard (SWB) and Callhome (CHM). The training data for both the acoustic and
language models consisted of the 2000hr Fisher+Switchboard
training data (LDC2004S13,
LDC2005S13,
LDC97S62).
Jasper DR 10x5 was trained using SGD with momentum for
50 epochs. We compare to other models trained using the same
data and report Hub5’00 results in Table 7.
Table 7: Hub5’00, WER (%)
LF-MMI 
Attention Seq2Seq 
RNN-T 
Char E2E LF-MMI 
Phone E2E LF-MMI 
CTC + Gram-CTC
Jasper DR 10x5
Jasper DR 10x5
Transformer-XL
We obtain good results for SWB. However, there is work to
be done to improve WER on harder tasks such as CHM.
4. Conclusions
We have presented a new family of neural architectures for endto-end speech recognition. Inspired by wav2letter’s convolutional approach, we build a deep and scalable model, which
requires a well-designed residual topology, effective regularization, and a strong optimizer. As our architecture studies demonstrated, a combination of standard components leads to SOTA
results on LibriSpeech and competitive results on other benchmarks. Our Jasper architecture is highly efﬁcient for training
and inference, and serves as a good baseline approach on top of
which to explore more sophisticated regularization, data augmentation, loss functions, language models, and optimization
strategies. We are interested to see if our approach can continue
to scale to deeper models and larger datasets.
5. References
 A. Waibel, T. Hanazawa, G. Hinton, K. Shirano, and K. Lang, “A
time-delay neural network architecture for isolated word recognition,” IEEE Trans. on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing,
 Y. Bengio, R. De Mori, G. Flammia, and R. Kompe, “Global optimization of a neural network-hidden markov model hybrid,” IEEE
Transactions on Neural Networks, 3(2), 252259, 1992.
 A. Graves and J. Schmidhuber, “Framewise phoneme classiﬁcation with bidirectional lstm and other neural network architectures,” Neural Networks, vol. 18, pp. 602–610, 2005.
 G. Hinton et al., “Deep neural networks for acoustic modeling in
speech recognition,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 2012.
 A. Graves, S. Fern´andez, F. Gomez, and J. Schmidhuber, “Connectionist temporal classiﬁcation:
labelling unsegmented sequence data with recurrent neural networks,” in Proceedings of
the 23rd international conference on Machine learning.
2006, pp. 369–376.
 Y. Zhang et al., “Towards end-to-end speech recognition with
deep convolutional neural networks,” in Interspeech 2016, 2016,
pp. 410–414.
 R. Collobert, C. Puhrsch, and G. Synnaeve, “Wav2letter: an endto-end convnet-based speech recognition system,” arXiv preprint
 
 V. Liptchinsky,
G. Synnaeve,
and R. Collobert,
“Letterbased speech recognition with gated convnets,” arXiv preprint
 
 Y. N. Dauphin, A. Fan, M. Auli, and D. Grangier, “Language
modeling with gated convolutional networks,” in Proceedings of
the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning - Volume
70, ser. ICML’17.
JMLR.org, 2017, pp. 933–941.
 T. Salimans and D. P. Kingma, “Weight normalization:
simple reparameterization to accelerate training of deep neural
networks,”
in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 29, D. D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, U. V. Luxburg, I. Guyon,
and R. Garnett, Eds.
Curran Associates, Inc., 2016, pp.
 S. Ioffe and C. Szegedy, “Batch normalization: Accelerating deep
network training by reducing internal covariate shift,” CoRR, vol.
abs/1502.03167, 2015.
 Z. Dai et al.,
“Transformer-xl:
Language modeling with
longer-term dependency,” CoRR, vol. abs/1901.02860, 2018.
 V. Panayotov, G. Chen, D. Povey, and S. Khudanpur, “Librispeech: an asr corpus based on public domain audio books,” in
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2015 IEEE
International Conference on.
IEEE, 2015, pp. 5206–5210.
 H. Hadian, H. Sameti, D. Povey, and S. Khudanpur, “End-to-end
speech recognition using lattice-free mmi,” in Proc. Interspeech
2018, 2018, pp. 12–16.
 D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam:
A method for stochastic
optimization,” CoRR, vol. abs/1412.6980, 2014.
 G. Huang, Z. Liu, L. van der Maaten, and K. Q. Weinberger,
“Densely connected convolutional networks,” arXiv preprint
 
 J. Tang, Y. Song, L. Dai, and I. McLoughlin, “Acoustic modeling
with densely connected residual network for multichannel speech
recognition,” in Proc. Interspeech 2018, 2018, pp. 1783–1787.
 J. L. Ba, J. R. Kiros, and G. E. Hinton, “Layer normalization,”
CoRR, vol. abs/1607.06450, 2016.
 A. van den Oord et al.,
“Conditional image generation
with pixelcnn decoders,” in Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 29, D. D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, U. V. Luxburg,
I. Guyon, and R. Garnett, Eds.
Curran Associates, Inc., 2016,
pp. 4790–4798.
 C. Laurent, G. Pereyra, P. Brakel, Y. Zhang, and Y. Bengio, “Batch
normalized recurrent neural networks,” in 2016 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), March 2016, pp. 2657–2661.
 A. Zeyer, K. Irie, R. Schlter, and H. Ney, “Improved training
of end-to-end attention models for speech recognition,” in Proc.
Interspeech 2018, 2018, pp. 7–11.
 D. Povey et al., “Semi-orthogonal low-rank matrix factorization
for deep neural networks,” in Interspeech, 2018.
 K. J. Han, A. Chandrashekaran, J. Kim, and I. R. Lane, “The
CAPIO 2017 conversational speech recognition system,” CoRR,
vol. abs/1801.00059, 2018.
 K. Heaﬁeld, “Kenlm: Faster and smaller language model queries,”
in Proceedings of the sixth workshop on statistical machine translation.
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2011, pp.
 X. Yang,
and X. Zhou,
“A novel pyramidal-fsmn
architecture with lattice-free MMI for speech recognition,”
CoRR, vol. abs/1810.11352, 2018.
 D. Amodei et al.,
“Deep speech 2:
End-to-end speech
recognition in english and mandarin,” in Proceedings of the
33rd International Conference on International Conference on
Machine Learning - Volume 48, ser. ICML’16.
JMLR.org, 2016,
pp. 173–182.
 N. Zeghidour et al., “Fully convolutional speech recognition,”
CoRR, vol. abs/1812.06864, 2018.
 D. S. Park et al., “SpecAugment: A Simple Data Augmentation
Method for Automatic Speech Recognition,” arXiv e-prints, 2019.
 Z. Zhang, L. Ma, Z. Li, and C. Wu, “Normalized directionpreserving adam,” arXiv e-prints arXiv:1709.04546, 2017.
 I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “Decoupled weight decay regularization,” in International Conference on Learning Representations,
 B. Ginsburg et al., “Stochastic Gradient Methods with Layerwise Adaptive Moments for Training of Deep Networks,” arXiv
e-prints, 2019.
 K. Tom, P. Vijayaditya, P. Daniel, and K. Sanjeev, “Audio augmentation for speech recognition,” Interspeech 2015, 2015.
 P. Micikevicius et al., “Mixed precision training,” arXiv preprint
 
 O. Kuchaiev et al., “Openseq2seq: extensible toolkit for distributed and mixed precision training of sequence-to-sequence
models,” , 2018.
 Y. Zhang, W. Chan, and N. Jaitly, “Very deep convolutional networks for end-to-end speech recognition,” in Acoustics, Speech
and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2017 IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE, 2017.
 C. Weng et al., “Improving attention based sequence-to-sequence
models for end-to-end english conversational speech recognition,”
in Proc. Interspeech 2018, 2018, pp. 761–765.
 E. Battenberg et al., “Exploring neural transducers for end-to-end
speech recognition,” in 2017 IEEE Automatic Speech Recognition
and Understanding Workshop (ASRU), Dec 2017, pp. 206–213.