SUPERCONDUCTOR PATENTS---------------
Four groups join battle
Washington
THE US Patent Office is now wrestling
with competing claims to patents on hightemperature superconductivity from four
different research groups at IBM,
AT&T, the University of Houston and the
US Navy. The patent office says there is a
conflict over priority in the four claims to
have discovered useable versions of the
copper oxide superconductors. If the
patents office can resolve the conflict, its
decision could be a boon for the organization whose claim succeeds.
The conflict, legally called an 'interference' proceeding, has arisen because the
patent applications by the four are similar,
overlapping, and were filed at almost the
same time. The parties to the dispute have
each filed a string of patent applications
for both the lanthanum copper oxide
materials discovered in 1986 by Nobel
prizewinners Georg Bednorz and· Alex
Miiller, of IBM Zurich, and the yttriumbased copper oxides discovered by Paul
Chu of the University of Houston and
Maw-Kuen Wu of Alabama University in
January 1987. It is widely believed that the
yttrium compounds will have more
general commercial application than the
lanthanum materials.
The US Patent Office will have to decide
not only whether patent applications for
the lanthanum oxide superconductors can
be extended to cover the yttrium compounds, but also whether applications
based on mixed-phase materials of
unknown crystal structure are valid (as in
the case of Chu's first patent application
for yttrium copper oxide material).
Information about patent applications
for the superconductor materials began to
come to light last summer, in Europe and
Japan, where by law applications are
made public 18 months after submission
(or after the earliest priority date
claimed). US patents are not published
until granted, but several of the European
and Japanese patent applications include
priority claims for US patents and so disclose US filing dates.
The application from the US Naval
Research Laboratory has not previously
been known of, having been filed only in
the United States. At the applications
stage, even cases of interference are not
publicized by the US patent office, but
Cynthia Stevens, an IBM spokeswoman
on patents, confirms the identity of the
four competing applicants.
Japanese patent applications are notable by their absence in the dispute, in
contrast with the common fear in the
United States thatJapan will be the first to
exploit the commercial applications of the
high-temperature superconductors. One
explanation may be that the early patent
applications by University of Tokyo
NATURE · VOL 338 · 2 MARCH 1989
researchers are narrowly drawn and cover
only the lanthanum oxides .
Japan's Ministry of International Trade
and Industry (MITI), which has filed
broad applications worldwide covering
the yttrium oxides, may claim interference
at a later stage, according to Christopher
Year of the British Technology Group
who is monitoring patent applications for
the new materials. But MITI filed after
the US groups in January 1987 and does
not seem to have a strong position.
Japan's real strength lies in patent
applications for devices made from the
new materials and processes for making
the superconductors into wires and thin
films. Japanese companies, in particular
Sumitomo Electric Corporation, have
filed hundreds of such applications in
Japan and many have been combined into
broad patent applications in Europe,
where Japanese interests have filed most
applications. According to Year's latest
figures, Japan has filed 80 applications in
Europe compared with 28 for the United
States, 5 for West Germany, 4 for Britain,
3 for France and 1 each for the Soviet
Union and Hungary.
The only patent so far granted has been
awarded by the US Patent Office to John
B. Vander Sande and Gregory J. Yurek at
the Masssachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) for a process that combines
the new ceramic materials with silver to
make a more malleable material . But
soon after the award was announced,
Sumitomo filed a claim for interference
with a similar patent application it had
filed within a day of the MIT researchers,
according to Year. Such claims of interference can be expected to multiply
dramatically in the near future.
Patent interference cases in the United
States can take years to resolve. One
example is the battle over patent applications for the gas discharge laser, which
took 28 years. The dispute over patent
rights on high-temperature superconductor materials may become such a case
because of the large number of parties
involved. But a long legal battle could
work to the eventual winner's advantage.
If, as many experts predict, commercial
applications of the new materials will not
be feasible for at least a decade and
because, in the United States, the life of a
patent begins only after it is issued, the
group to which the patent is eventually
granted may enjoy licence fees for longer
than if its claim had never been challenged.
David Swinbanks
• On page 49 of this issue, the recently
developed 'electron' superconductors show
behaviour similar to the more established
'hole' superconductors.
NEWS IN BRIEF-------
Personal communication
THE Union of Scientists and Inventors' Societies of the USSR has established a special
"international commission for relations with
former compatriots", aimed at establishing
links with Soviet scientists and engineers now
working in the West. Such people have hitherto been regarded as ungrateful renegades,
who have accepted the benefits of a Soviet
education and then decamped to the capitalists.
The new commission, however, considers
them a potential channel for establishing
closer cooperation between Soviet science and
the West. Interviewed by Sotsialisticheskaya
Industriya, commission member Academician Yurii Gulyaev suggested a whole range of
ways in which the emigres could help Soviet
science, from taking Soviet graduate students
into their laboratories for a year or two to
organizing joint research groups. Many countries, Gulyaev said, gained considerably by
working with their emigre scientists in this
way- Hungary especially. "We have been
accustomed to working only through official
channels" ... but personal contacts and informallinks are sometimes more effective." V. R.
Three per cent is six
BRITISH universities will receive a 3 per cent
increase in government grants for recurrent
expenditure in 1989-90. The minister for
higher education, Robert Jackson, announced
that £1,680 million will be distributed to the
universities in the next academic year, an
increaseof6percentfrom 1988-89, but much
of the increase included in the government
figures is accounted for by costs for restructuring and agreed pay awards for previous
years. The universities' vice-chancellors say
the 3 per cent increase is too small, and have
asked for an increase of 5 per cent. Jackson
also said the universities should plan for an
increase in 1990-91 of 4 per cent in cash terms
and increases of 3 per cent in the following
two years.
Chip complex destroyed
INDIA's microelectronics industry has been
shaken by a fire that almost totally destroyed
the $100-million semiconductor complex in
Chandigarh, the country's only facility for
producing silicon chips for civilian needs.
Sabotage has not been ruled out as the cause
of the fire, which burnt down the entire
complex, leaving only some design documents and the administration block. Mr
Virendra Mohan, chief of the facility, has
resigned after acknowledging moral responsibility for the accident. There are now fears
that many of the nearly 200 engineers working
at the Chandigarh complex and who are now
out of work may migrate to the West.
India's semiconductor needs will now have
to be met by imports or by setting up a new
facility that will not be ready before 1992.