Simultaneous Truth and Performance Level Estimation
(STAPLE): An Algorithm for the Validation of Image
Segmentation
Simon K. Warfield*[Member, IEEE], Kelly H. Zou, and William M. Wells[Member, IEEE]
* S. K. Warfield is with Harvard Medical School and the Department of Radiology of Brigham and
Women’s Hospital, 75 Francis St, Boston, MA 02115 USA. He is also with the Department of
Radiology at Children’s Hospital, Boston, and with the Computer Science and Artificial
Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA (email: ).
K. H. Zou is with Harvard Medical School and the Department of Radiology of Brigham and
Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA 02115 USA.
W M. Wells is with Harvard Medical School and the Department of Radiology at Brigham and
Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA 02115 USA. He is also with the Computer Science and Artificial
Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA.
Characterizing the performance of image segmentation approaches has been a persistent challenge.
Performance analysis is important since segmentation algorithms often have limited accuracy and
precision. Interactive drawing of the desired segmentation by human raters has often been the only
acceptable approach, and yet suffers from intra-rater and inter-rater variability. Automated
algorithms have been sought in order to remove the variability introduced by raters, but such
algorithms must be assessed to ensure they are suitable for the task.
The performance of raters (human or algorithmic) generating segmentations of medical images
has been difficult to quantify because of the difficulty of obtaining or estimating a known true
segmentation for clinical data. Although physical and digital phantoms can be constructed for
which ground truth is known or readily estimated, such phantoms do not fully reflect clinical
images due to the difficulty of constructing phantoms which reproduce the full range of imaging
characteristics and normal and pathological anatomical variability observed in clinical data.
Comparison to a collection of segmentations by raters is an attractive alternative since it can be
carried out directly on the relevant clinical imaging data. However, the most appropriate measure
or set of measures with which to compare such segmentations has not been clarified and several
measures are used in practice.
We present here an expectation-maximization algorithm for simultaneous truth and performance
level estimation (STAPLE). The algorithm considers a collection of segmentations and computes a
probabilistic estimate of the true segmentation and a measure of the performance level represented
by each segmentation. The source of each segmentation in the collection may be an appropriately
trained human rater or raters, or may be an automated segmentation algorithm. The probabilistic
Correspondence to: Simon K. Warfield.
This work was supported in part by the Whitaker Foundation, in part by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) under Grant R21
MH67054, Grant R01 LM007861, Grant P41 RR13218, Grant P01 CA67165, Grant R01 AG19513, Grant R01 CA86879, Grant R01
NS35142, Grant R33 CA99015, and Grant R21 CA89449, and in part by an award from the Center for Integration of Medicine and
Innovative Technology. The Associate Editor responsible for coordinating the review of this paper and recommending its publication
was M. A. Viergever.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2005 November 14.
 
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. 2004 July ; 23(7): 903–921. doi:10.1109/TMI.2004.828354.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
estimate of the true segmentation is formed by estimating an optimal combination of the
segmentations, weighting each segmentation depending upon the estimated performance level, and
incorporating a prior model for the spatial distribution of structures being segmented as well as
spatial homogeneity constraints. STAPLE is straightforward to apply to clinical imaging data, it
readily enables assessment of the performance of an automated image segmentation algorithm,
and enables direct comparison of human rater and algorithm performance.
Index Terms
Accuracy; classifier fusion; expectation-maximization; gold standard; ground truth; Markov
random field; precision; segmentation; sensitivity; specificity; STAPLE; validation
I. Introduction
MEDICAL image segmentation has long been recognized as a difficult problem. Many
interactive and automated algorithms have been proposed, and in practice approaches
specifically tuned to the important characteristics of the application are often successful.
When selecting, designing, or optimizing particular algorithms for a segmentation task, the
performance characteristics of the algorithms must be assessed.
Characterizing the performance of image segmentation approaches has also been a persistent
challenge. Quantitative performance analysis is important since segmentation algorithms
often have limited accuracy and precision. Interactive drawing of the desired segmentation
by domain experts has often been the only acceptable approach, and yet suffers from
intraexpert and inter-expert variability and is time consuming and expensive to carry out.
Automated algorithms have been sought in order to remove the variability introduced by
experts, but automated algorithms must be assessed to ensure they are suitable for the task.
Measurement tools are often characterized by assessment of their accuracy and precision.
The accuracy of a human or an algorithm in creating a segmentation is the degree to which
the segmentation corresponds to the true segmentation, and so the assessment of accuracy of
a segmentation requires a reference standard, representing the true segmentation, against
which it may be compared. Precision is determined by the reproducibility of the
segmentations obtained repeatedly from the same image . The precision may be assessed
without comparison to a reference standard. High accuracy and high precision are both
desirable properties.
An ideal reference standard for image segmentation would be known to high accuracy and
would reflect the characteristics of segmentation problems encountered in practice. There is
a tradeoff between the accuracy and realism of the reference standard. As the accuracy of
the reference standard segmentation increases, the degree to which the reference standard
reflects segmentation problems encountered in practice tends to decrease. The accuracy of
segmentations of medical images has been difficult to quantify in the absence of an accepted
reference standard for clinical imaging data.
Synthetic images can be constructed with known true segmentation (high accuracy) but
typically lack characteristics encountered in practice. Phantoms can be built and imaged,
which increases the realism of the model by incorporating the imaging system
characteristics, but also reduces the fidelity with which the true segmentation is known.
Although such physical and digital phantoms , have an important role to play in
quantifying algorithm performance, such phantoms do not fully reflect clinical images due
to the difficulty of constructing phantoms that reproduce the full range of imaging
characteristics (such as partial volume artifact, intensity in-homogeneity artifact and noise).
Warfield et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2005 November 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
In addition, such phantoms typically cannot reproduce both the normal and pathological
anatomical variability observed in clinical data. Therefore, alternative approaches have an
important role, as it is not necessarily possible to generalize performance measurements on a
phantom to the results expected in practice.
Cadavers provide a more realistic model of anatomy, but the true segmentation can only be
estimated, and such models differ from in vivo data , . Patient data provides the most
realistic model for a given application task, but is the most difficult for which to identify a
reference standard.
A common alternative to phantom studies has been to carry out behavioral comparisons: an
automated algorithm is compared to the segmentations generated by a group of experts, and
if the algorithm generates segmentations sufficiently similar to the experts, it is considered
to be an acceptable substitute for the experts. In addition to acceptable accuracy, good
automated segmentation algorithms also typically require less time to apply and have better
precision than interactive segmentation by an expert.
The most appropriate way to carry out the comparison of a segmentation to a group of
expert segmentations is so far unclear. A number of metrics have been proposed to compare
segmentations. Simply measuring the volume of segmented structures has often been used
 , . Two segmentation methods may be compared by assessing the limits of agreement
 of volume estimates derived from the segmentations. However, volume estimates may be
quite similar when the segmented structures are located differently, have different shapes or
have different boundaries and so alternative measures have been sought .
Other measures used in practice include measures of spatial overlap, such as the Dice and
Jaccard Similarity Coefficients , . For example, spatial overlap has been used to
compare manual segmentations with segmentations obtained through nonrigid registration
 . Furthermore, measures inspired by information theory have been applied , . In
many applications, assessment of boundary differences is useful and the Hausdorff measure
and modifications have been used for this . Agreement measures for comparing different
experts, such as the kappa statistic, have also been explored .
A reference standard has sometimes been formed by taking a combination of expert
segmentations. For example, a voting rule as often used in practice selects all voxels where
some majority of experts agree the structure to be segmented is present , . This
simple approach unfortunately does not provide guidance as to how many experts should
agree before the structure is considered to be present. Furthermore vote counting strategies
treat each voter equally without regard to potential variability in quality or performance
amongst the voters, and does not allow for a priori information regarding the structure being
segmented to be incorporated. In the case of binary segmentations, a majority vote is at least
unique in the case of an odd number of voters. However, in the case of multicategory
segmentations, the category with the most votes may not be unique and may not reflect the
overall preferred choice of the voters. Preferential voting strategies, operating on votes or
class probabilities, have been examined in the context of classifier fusion . Examples
include the Borda count for preferential vote ordering, class probability combining
strategies (the Product Rule and the Sum Rule which can be used to express the Min Rule,
the Max Rule, the Median Rule and the Majority Vote Rule as described by ), and
strategies which assume each classifier has expertise in a subset of the decision domain
 – . Similar issues in combining decisions from multiple raters or studies arise in
content-based collaborative filtering and in meta-analysis of diagnostic tests , .
Estimating performance in the presence of an imperfect or limited reference standard has
Warfield et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2005 November 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
also been explored , . The most appropriate vote ordering or decision combining
strategy remains unclear.
We present here a new algorithm, simultaneous truth and performance level estimation
(STAPLE), which takes a collection of segmentations of an image, and computes
simultaneously a probabilistic estimate of the true segmentation and a measure of the
performance level represented by each segmentation. The source of each segmentation in the
collection may be an appropriately trained human rater or raters, or it may be an automated
segmentation algorithm. Our algorithm is formulated as an instance of the expectationmaximization (EM) algorithm , and builds upon our earlier work , . In the
formulation of our algorithm described here, the expert segmentation decision at each voxel
is directly observable, the hidden true segmentation is a binary variable for each voxel, and
the performance level, or quality, achieved by each segmentation is represented by
sensitivity and specificity parameters. We also describe a generalization of the algorithm to
unordered multicategory labels, suitable for when the hidden true segmentation at each
voxel is one of an unordered finite set of labels.
The complete data consists of the segmentation decisions at each voxel, which are known,
and the true segmentation, which is not known. If we did know the true segmentation, it
would be straightforward to estimate the performance parameters by maximum-likelihood
(ML) estimation. Since the complete data is not available, the complete data log likelihood
cannot be constructed and instead must be estimated. Doing so requires evaluating the
conditional probability density of the hidden true segmentation given the segmentation
decisions and a previous estimate of the performance level of each segmentation generator.
The expectation of the complete data log likelihood with respect to this density is then
calculated, and from this estimate of the complete data log likehood, the performance
parameters are found by ML estimation (or maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimation when a
prior distribution for the parameters is considered). We iterate this sequence of estimation of
the conditional probability of the true segmentation and performance parameters until
convergence is reached. Convergence to a local maximum is guaranteed. Since we obtain
both an estimate of the true segmentation and performance parameters from a collection of
segmentations and a prior model, the algorithm is straightforward to apply to clinical
imaging data. The algorithm enables the assessment of the performance of an automated
image segmentation algorithm, and provides a simple method for direct comparison of
human and algorithm performance.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we describe the STAPLE algorithm. We
describe how STAPLE can be appropriately initialized both when there is no or limited prior
information and when rich prior information is available. We describe how convergence of
the estimation scheme is detected. In Section III, we describe the application of the STAPLE
algorithm to digital phantoms where the true segmentation is known by construction and
investigate the characterization of segmentations by synthetic raters with predefined
sensitivities and specificities. We demonstrate that STAPLE accurately estimates the
performance level parameters and the true segmentation. We demonstrate the use of
STAPLE with data from several clinical applications in order to compare with previously
reported validation measures and to illustrate how the algorithm may be used in practice.
The computational complexity and the run time of the algorithm are reported, and indicate
the algorithm converges rapidly in practical applications.
II. Method
We describe in this section an EM algorithm for estimating the hidden true segmentation
and performance level parameters from a collection of segmentations and a prior model.
Warfield et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2005 November 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
A. Description of STAPLE Algorithm
Consider an image of N voxels, and the task of segmenting a structure in that image by
indicating the presence or absence of the structure at each voxel. Let p = (p1, p2,…pR)T be a
column vector of R elements, with each element a sensitivity parameter characterising one
of R segmentations, and q = (q1, q2,…qR)T be a column vector of R elements, with each
element a specificity parameter characterising the performance of one of R segmentations.
Let D be an N × R matrix describing the binary decisions made for each segmentation at
each voxel of the image. Let T be an indicator vector of N elements, representing the hidden
binary true segmentation, where for each voxel the structure of interest is recorded as
present (1) or absent (0). Let the complete data be (D, T) and let the probability mass
function of the complete data be f (D, T|p, q).
Our goal is to estimate the performance level parameters of the experts characterized by
parameters (p, q) which maximize the complete data log likelihood function
If we knew the true segmentation, we could construct a 2 × 2 conditional probability table,
by comparing the decision Dij of segmentation j (for j = 1,…, R) as to the presence or
absence of a structure at voxel i with the true segmentation. Recall the definition of
sensitivity and specificity, where pj represent the “true positive fraction” or sensitivity
(relative frequency of Dij = 1 when Ti = 1),
and qj represent the “true negative fraction” or specificity (relative frequency of Dij = 0
when Ti = 0)
The parameters pj, qj ∈ are assumed to be characteristic of the rater, and may be equal
for different raters but in general are not. We assume that the segmentation decisions are all
conditionally independent given the true segmentation and the performance level
parameters, that is (Dij|Ti, pj, qj) ⊥ (Dij′|Ti, pj′, qj′), ∀j ≠ j′. This model expresses the
assumption that the raters derive their segmentations of the same image independently from
one another and that the quality of the result of the segmentation is captured by the
sensitivity and specificity parameters.
Implicit in this model is the notion that the experts have been trained to interpret the images
in a similar way, the segmentation decisions may differ due to random or systematic rater
differences, and that a probabilistic estimate of the true segmentation can be formulated as
an optimal combination of the observed decisions and a prior model.
We now present the version of the EM algorithm that we have developed for this problem
which enables us to estimate the solution of (1). Detailed descriptions of the EM algorithm
and generalizations are available , and our exposition closely follows those sources.
The essence of the EM algorithm is the observation that certain ML estimation problems
would be considerably simplified if some missing data were available, and this is the case
for our problem. The observable data, the segmentation decisions at each voxel, is regarded
as being incomplete and is regarded as an observable function of the complete data. Here,
Warfield et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2005 November 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
the complete data is the segmentation decisions D augmented with the true segmentation of
each voxel T. This true segmentation T is called the missing or hidden data, and is
unobservable. Let
be the unknown parameters characterizing performance of segmentation j and
the complete set of unknown parameters for the R segmentations that we wish to identify.
Let f (D, T | θ) denote the probability mass function of the random vector corresponding to
the complete data. We write the complete data log likelihood function as
The EM algorithm approaches the problem of maximizing the incomplete data log
likelihood equation
by proceeding iteratively with estimation and maximization of the complete data log
likelihood function. As the complete data log likelihood function is not observable, it is
replaced by its conditional expectation given the observable data D using the current
estimate of θ. Computing the conditional expectation of the complete data log likelihood
function is referred to as the E-step, and identifying the parameters that maximize this
function is referred to as the M-step.
In more detail, let θ(0) be some initial value for θ. Then, on the first iteration, the E-step
requires the calculation of
The M-step requires the maximization of Q(θ|θ(0)) over the parameter space of θ. That is,
we choose θ(1) such that
for all θ. The E-step and M-step are then repeated as above where at each iteration k, the
current estimate θ(k) and the observed segmentation decisions D are used to calculate the
conditional expectation of the complete data log likelihood function, and then the estimate
of θ(k+1) is found by maximization of Q(θ|θ(k)). The E- and M-steps are iterated until
convergence. It has been shown that the incomplete data log likelihood function is not
decreased after an EM iteration, and so local convergence is guaranteed when the likelihood
function has an upper bound.
Warfield et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2005 November 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
The key requirements necessary to carry out the EM algorithm are to have a specification of
the complete data, and to have the conditional probability density of the complete data given
the observed data. We describe below how the E-step and M-step are formulated for our
estimation problem.
The performance parameters at iteration k that maximize the conditional expectation of the
log likelihood function are given by
Hence, on expressing θ(k) as (p(k), q(k))
and so we have
where (p(k), q(k)) is the estimate of the expert performance level parameters at iteration k,
and the last follows under the assumption that T is independent of the performance level
parameters so that f (T, p, q) = f (T) f (p, q).
B. E-Step: Estimation of the Conditional Expectation of the Complete Data Log Likelihood
In this section, the estimator for the unobserved true segmentation is derived. We first derive
an expression for the conditional probability density function of the true segmentation given
the expert decisions (observed segmentations) and the previous estimate of the performance
parameters
such that at each voxel i we have
Warfield et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2005 November 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Where f (Ti) is the prior probability of Ti, and the conditional independence of the
segmentations allows us to write the joint probability as a product of rater-specific
probabilities. A voxelwise independence assumption has been made here, and in Section II-
E it is shown how voxelwise dependence can be efficiently modeled.
Since the true segmentation is treated as a binary random variable, the conditional
probability f (Ti = 0|Di, p(k−1), q(k−1)) is simply 1 − f (Ti = 1|Di, p(k−1), q(k−1)). We store for
each voxel the estimate of the probability that the true segmentation at each voxel is Ti = 1.
Section II-D describes a generalization to segmentations with unordered multicategory
Now consider (13) for Ti = 1 and Ti = 0, respectively. Factoring over the raters and using the
definition of pj and qj, we can write
where j:Dij = 1 denotes the set of indexes for which the decision of rater j at voxel i (i.e., Dij)
has the value 1.
With these expressions, we can now write a compact expression for the conditional
probability of the true segmentation at each voxel. Using the notation common for EM
algorithms, we refer to this as the weight variable
The weight
indicates the probability of the true segmentation at voxel i being equal to
one. It is a normalized product of the prior probability of Ti = 1, the sensitivity of each of the
experts that decided the true segmentation was one and (1—sensitivity) of each of the
experts that decided the true segmentation was zero.
In order to complete the E-step, we require an expression for the conditional expectation of
the complete data log likelihood function. This is dramatically simplified when we consider
only the terms necessary for finding the parameters that maximize the function, and this is
derived in the next section.
Warfield et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2005 November 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
C. M-Step: Estimation of the Performance Parameters by Maximization
Given the estimated weight variables
, which represent the conditional probabilities of
the true segmentation, we can find the values of the expert performance level parameters
that maximize the conditional expectation of the complete data log likelihood function.
Considering (12), and noting that since In
is free of (p, q) it follows that
so for each expert j
A necessary condition at a maximum of the above with respect to parameter pj is that the
first derivative equal zero. Differentiating Q (θ|θ(k)) with respect to parameter pj and
equating to 0, yields (similarly for qj)
We can interpret the weight estimate
as the strength of belief in the underlying true
segmentation being equal to 1. In the case of perfect knowledge about the true segmentation,
the estimator of sensitivity given by (18) corresponds to the usual
definition of sensitivity as the true positive fraction. When the true segmentation estimate is
a continuous parameter, i.e.,
as here, the estimator can be interpreted as the
ratio of the jth expert true positive detections to the total amount of structure Ti = 1 voxels
believed to be in the data, with each voxel detection weighted by the strength of belief in Ti
Warfield et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2005 November 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
= 1. Similarly, the specificity estimator of (19) is a natural formulation of an estimator for
the specificity given a degree of belief in the underlying Ti = 0 state.
Summary: STAPLE estimates the performance parameters, and a probabilistic estimate of
the true segmentation, by iterated estimation. The first step of each iteration is estimation of
the conditional probability of the true segmentation given the expert decisions and previous
performance parameter estimates as given by (16), and the second step is updated estimation
of the performance parameters given by (18) and (19).
D. An Extension to Unordered Multicategory Labels
In this section, we provide a generalization of the estimation strategy to the case when the
truth is a label from a finite set of unordered categories. For example, consider a brain
magnetic resonance image (MRI) tissue segmentation application where we are interested to
identify the true label as one of white matter, gray matter, or cerebrospinal fluid. Rather than
being restricted to two labels only, here we allow T to take on one of L labels where Ti ∈
{0,1,…, L − 1} and similarly the segmentation decisions may also be one of these L labels,
Dij ∈ {0,1,…, L − 1}, and D is an N × R matrix describing the decisions made for each
segmentation at each voxel of the image. In this case, we characterize each rater
performance by θj, an L × L matrix of parameters where the element of the matrix
characterizes the probability rater j will decide label s′ is present when the true label is s.
The perfect rater would have a performance matrix with 1 on the diagonal and 0 in each offdiagonal element, that is the rater performance matrix would be an identity matrix.
In order to evaluate the conditional expectation of the complete data log likelihood for this
case, we need to compute the conditional probability that the true label at voxel i is s given
the set of segmentations and the previous estimate of the performance characteristics.
Similarly to the binary case, we find that
With this conditional probability, we can evaluate the expectation of the complete data log
likelihood function, with the goal of identifying the performance parameters by ML
estimation. Considering each rater separately, we find the new parameter estimates
Noting the constraint that each row of the rater parameter matrix must sum to one to be a
probability mass function
Warfield et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2005 November 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
we can find the parameters that maximize the above expression by formulating the
constrained optimization problem
Therefore, we find
and on substituting the constraint from (22) we have
Note that when the number of possible labels is two (L = 2), this estimator for unordered
multicategory labels simplifies to the same expression as was derived above for the binary
E. A Model for Estimation of Spatially Correlated Structures
One mechanism to capture the spatial variation of a structure of interest is to provide a
spatially varying probability for f (Ti = 1) to reflect prior information about the spatial
distribution of the Ti. For example, when assessing brain segmentations of white matter, a
probabilistic atlas of the distribution of white matter derived from a large group of subjects
can provide the prior true segmentation probabilities at each voxel – . However, a
probabilistic atlas is not available for all structures of interest. An alternative is to model the
local spatial correlation and homogeneity of the structure.
The estimate of the posterior probability of Ti obtained from (13) is correct under the
assumption that the true segmentation has no spatial correlation—that is, at any given voxel
the probability of the true segmentation is independent of the true segmentation of the
neighboring or adjacent voxels. In practical applications it is often the case that the true
segmentation has an underlying spatial homogeneity.
A second mechanism for incorporating spatial homogeneity is to introduce a Markov
random field (MRF) model. This allows milder assumptions than the strong voxelwise
independence assumption used above. Constructing a fully general probability model on
random fields such as T is a daunting prospect due to the huge size of such a model—just
representing full covariation statistics would be difficult. A useful compromise that partially
Warfield et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2005 November 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
relaxes the independence assumption is the MRF model, in which the conditional
dependence of a given voxel on all of the others is equal to its conditional dependence on the
voxels in a local neighborhood.
Beginning with the Ising models of ferromagnetism, these models have frequently been
used to model phenomena that exhibit spatial coherence, including medical image
segmentation problems – .
While the estimators which use MRF models are usually more complex to implement, exact
estimates may be obtained in reasonable (polynomial) time , and efficient
approximation schemes are also available , .
The Hammersley-Clifford theorem establishes a one to one correspondence between
MRFs and probability models written in Gibbs form, as follows:
This is the stationary Gibbs form, where Z and τ are constants and E is called the energy
function. Selecting E(T) as above, we can factor this standard form into a term depending
solely on the single site voxel prior and a term depending on pairwise interactions
The above natural model allows us to incorporate a model for spatial homogeneity of the
true segmentation in our estimation scheme. One approach to MRF estimation that has low
computational complexity and which is applicable here, is the mean field approximation. An
extensive investigation of this has been reported by Elfadel and it has been used to
impose a spatial homogeneity constraint for image segmentation , and for motion
estimation from images . The mean field approximation has been used for constrained
surface reconstruction, and its use has been motivated by the fact that it is the minimum
variance Bayes estimator of the true field .
The mean value of the estimated true segmentation at iteration k , (18), and (19).
In our experiments with binary true segmentations, we have investigated an alternative MRF
representation which has twin virtues. First, it computes an exact solution to the MAP
estimate of the true segmentation, and second, it is very computationally efficient. With this
method a single estimate of the true segmentation incorporating the MRF is obtained
following convergence of the EM iteration scheme described above.
We can express the prior probability of the field T by taking (26), omitting the constants,
and letting V(Ti, Tj) = βmn(TmTn + (1 − Tm)(1 − Tn)), so that we have
where βmn = 0 for voxels that are not neighbors.
Let the voxels in the neighborhood of voxel i be denoted by ∂i, note as above the
neighborhood dependence of the true segmentation is independent of the single site prior
probability and recall Ti ∈ {0, 1}.
The true segmentation Ti, ∀i will be estimated by maximizing the posterior probability
Warfield et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2005 November 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Taking the logarithm of this expression for the posterior probability and assuming a pairwise
interaction neighborhood structure leads to
where a term in (29) not depending on Ti has been ignored in (30) as it does not alter the
estimate of the true segmentation, and βmn is an interaction weight between voxels m and n
that encodes the strength of the prior probability of true segmentations. If βmn > 0 then
voxels m and n are neighbors, and βmm = 0 ∀m. If βmn = 0, ∀m, n, then we have the first
model presented above with no neighborhood interaction prior probability. The nonzero
interaction weight is often chosen as βmn = β, ∀ m, n, in a given neighborhood, or an
appropriately scaled modification of this depending on the distance between voxels along
each coordinate axis, and acts such that as β grows larger, the estimated true segmentation is
smoother and more spatially homogeneous.
This particular MRF model is attractive because it enables us to capture the intuitive notion
of a spatially correlated true segmentation, and also because it has been shown by Greig et
al. that it can be solved exactly with an efficient network flow algorithm. Greig et al.
demonstrated the equivalence between exact MAP estimation with the above binary MRF
model and a maximum flow-minimum cut network flow problem. Since efficient
(polynomial in number of edges and vertices) algorithms for the minimum cut problem are
known, this equivalence enables a rapid estimation of the true segmentation Ti ∀i to be
found by solving
Warfield et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2005 November 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
The equivalent network flow problem consists of N + 2 vertices, with a source s and a sink t
and the N voxels of the image. For each voxel with λi > 0 there is a directed edge (s, i) from
source s to voxel i with capacity csi = λi, and for each voxel with λi < 0 there is a directed
edge (i, t) from voxel i to sink t with capacity cit = −λi. There is an undirected edge between
pairs of voxels m, n with capacity cmn =βmn. A cut of this network is a partitioning of the
vertices into two groups, B = s ∪ i:Ti = 1 and W = t ∪ i: Ti = 0 consisting of edges with a
vertex in B and a vertex in W. The capacity of the cut is C(T), the sum of the capacities of
the edges of the cut. A minimum cut is a cut of smallest capacity. Greig et al. showed
that the minimum cut of this network is equivalent to the exact MAP solution of the binary
MRF problem, since
differs from (31) only by the sign and a term that does not depend upon T. Therefore, the
minimum cut network is also the MAP MRF solution.
When the minimum cut of this network is found all the voxels for which Ti = 0 are on the
sink side of the minimum cut and all the voxels for which Ti = 1 are on the other side. Our
implementation uses the Edmonds-Karp maximum flow-minimum cut algorithm with
the multiresolution solution strategy suggested by Greig et al. .
This model allows us to proscribe a spatially correlated true segmentation in our estimation
framework, and creates a more locally homogeneous true segmentation estimate. A recent
extension of this maximum flow-minimum cut strategy removing the restriction to binary
labels has been described . Thus, to model local spatial homogeneity of the true
segmentation for multicategory data, a MRF model can be used and both the mean field
approximation and maximum flow-minimum cut exact solver are suitable .
F. Initialization Strategy and Detection of Convergence
The STAPLE algorithm requires specification of some model parameters, and may be
initialized with either performance level parameters or a probabilistic true segmentation. We
describe suitable strategies for initialization and for detection of convergence of the
estimation process below.
1) Initialization: STAPLE is most conveniently initialized by providing starting estimates for
the sensitivity and specificity parameters. In the absence of other information regarding the
relative quality of the experts or the true segmentation, initializing the sensitivity and
specificity parameters to the same value and equal across all raters is recommended. This is
equivalent up to a scaling factor to forming an initial estimate through a voting rule (such as
assigning initial probabilities of voxels based on the frequency of selection by experts). In
our experience with synthetic data and clinical experiments, successful estimation results
Warfield et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2005 November 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
were obtained by initializing all of the sensitivity and specificity parameters to the same
values, with values close to but not equal to 1: for example, selecting
An alternative strategy for initialization, useful when such information is available, is to
provide an initial true segmentation estimate. An interesting strategy for certain problems is
to use a probabilistic atlas to provide an initial true segmentation. For example, one may use
a probabilistic atlas of the brain , to provide an initial true segmentation estimate
for the tissues of the brain.
We have used the estimated true segmentation from the voxel-wise independent STAPLE to
initialize the STAPLE algorithm when incorporating an MRF prior.
2) Convergence: The EM algorithm is guaranteed to converge to a local optimum. Detecting
convergence of EM algorithms has been a topic of study, as have strategies for accelerating
convergence . STAPLE estimates both performance parameters and the true
segmentation, and convergence may be detected by monitoring these. A simple and good
measure of convergence is the rate of change of the sum of the true segmentation
probability, obtained by summing the estimated weight at each voxel
at each iteration k. We have found that iterating until Sk − Sk−1 = 0 using double precision
IEEE arithmetic is both accurate and fast. In the case of L unordered multicategory labels
and large three-dimensional (3-D) volumes, we have found it convenient to use a relative
convergence based on the change in the normalized trace of the estimated expert
performance parameters. We iterate until the normalized trace changes by less than some
small amount, for example ε = 1 × 10−7, where the normalized trace is given by
Our experience has been that STAPLE convergence generally occurred in less than 20
iterations in several clinical segmentation validation problems.
3) Model Parameters: Selection of different global or spatially varying prior probability f (Ti
= 1) may alter the local maxima to which the algorithm converges. This is illustrated below
in experiments with synthetic data.
A spatially varying prior f (Ti = 1) is suitable for those structures for which a probabilistic
atlas is available. In addition, we are interested in structures for which such an atlas is not
available, and we have used a single global prior γ = f (Ti = 1) ∀ i. The prior γ encodes
information we have before seeing the segmentation decisions, regarding the relative
probability of the structure we wish to segment in the data. In practice, this information may
not be readily available, and we have found it convenient to estimate γ from the
segmentations themselves as the sample mean of the relative proportion of the label in the
segmentations
In the case of multicategory labels, we have
Warfield et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2005 November 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
where δ(.,.) is the Kronecker delta which takes the value 1 when Dij and s are equal and 0
otherwise.
Similarly, when modeling a spatially homogeneous true segmentation with our MRF model,
an interaction strength βmn and neighborhood structure must be specified. This may depend
strongly upon the nature of the structure, segmentations and noise pattern of the
segmentations under consideration. In our experiments with synthetic data and strong
uncorrelated random noise in the segmentations and a strongly homogeneous true
segmentation, we found βmn = β = 2.5 gave satisfactory results.
III. Results
We carried out experiments applying STAPLE to digital phantoms where the true
segmentation is known by construction and investigated the characterization of
segmentations by synthetic experts with predefined sensitivities and specificities. As
described below, we found that STAPLE accurately estimates the performance level
parameters and the true segmentation. We applied STAPLE to segmentations from several
clinical applications to demonstrate the value of the approach in practice, and to compare to
a previously reported validation measure. We assessed repeated segmentations by a single
expert for the task of identifying the prostate peripheral zone from magnetic resonance
images. We compared the STAPLE assessment of the segmentations to a measure of spatial
overlap. A brain phantom was used to compare STAPLE to a voting rule. Synthetic
segmentations and segmentations by medical students were evaluated.
The capacity of STAPLE to accurately estimate the true segmentation, even in the presence
of a majority of raters generating correlated errors, was demonstrated. The quantitative
assessment of segmentations of tissues from MRI of a newborn infant was carried out in
order to demonstrate the use of STAPLE with 3-D volumetric unordered multicategory data.
Empirical timing experiments were also carried out to demonstrate the practicality of the
estimation scheme. In all of our experiments, the hardware platform for the assessment of
execution time was a Dell Precision 650n workstation running Red Hat Linux 8.0, with the
implementation executing on a 3-GHz Intel Xeon CPU.
A. Digital Phantom Experiments
1) Estimation From Noisy Segmentations With Specified Segmentation and Performance
Parameters: Fig. 1 illustrates STAPLE estimation from digital phantoms drawn from
randomly generated segmentations with specified sensitivity and specificity rates and
specified true segmentation. The true segmentation was set to be a square image, 256 × 256
voxels, with the leftmost 128 columns having value 0 and the rightmost 128 columns having
value 1. The prior probability of the foreground class is f (Ti = 1) = 0.5. R = 10
segmentations were generated by randomly sampling the specified true segmentation with
(pj, qj) = (0.95, 0.90). This generated ten random segmentations simulating experts with
identical sensitivity and specificity rates. STAPLE required 0.18 s wallclock time to
estimate the true segmentation and expert parameters, and the estimates closely matched
those specified. Estimated sensitivity over the experts was = 0.950 104 ± 0.001 201 (mean
± standard deviation) and sensitivity q = 0.900 035 ± 0.001685. The estimated true
segmentation closely matched the specified true segmentation, with the foreground structure
being exactly estimated from raters with a detection error rate of 5% and with (7/32 768)
Warfield et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2005 November 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
false positives in a region with a detection error rate of 10%. The incorporation of an MRF
prior model with four-connected neighborhood structure and an interaction strength β = 2.5
resulted in a STAPLE estimate converging exactly to the known true segmentation. The
MRF model was applied to estimate the true segmentation by solving (33) once only, using
the estimated true segmentation probabilities obtained from iterating STAPLE without an
MRF model to convergence, and required 3.5 s to compute the exact MAP solution. The
false positives that occur without the MRF prior are indicated with circles in Fig. l(e) to
enhance their visibility, as they are single isolated pixels which are difficult to see in the
reproduction of the figure, and to illustrate that there are no false positives in Fig. l(f).
Fig. 2 examines the application of STAPLE to noisy segmentations from unequal quality
experts. Segmentations were generated from R = 3 synthetic experts with parameters
specified as (p1, q1) = (0.95, 0.95), (p2, q2) = (0.95, 0.90), and (p3, q3) = (0.90, 0.90). Only
three observations of segmentations by these experts were generated, leading to a small and
noisy set of data from which STAPLE was used to estimate the performance parameters and
the true segmentation. STAPLE was executed to convergence, requiring 0.22 s wallclock
time. Comparisons were made with and without a spatial homogeneity prior modeled with
an MRF prior assuming four-nearest-neighbor pairwise interaction cliques and a
homogeneous interaction strength β = 2.5. The MRF model was applied to estimate the true
segmentation by solving (33) once only, using the estimated true segmentation probabilities
obtained from iterating STAPLE without an MRF model to convergence and required 53 s
to compute the exact MAP solution. The increased run time is due to the greater amount of
heterogeneity in the initial STAPLE estimate.
The results indicate the estimated T found by STAPLE with the MRF prior exactly matches
the specified true segmentation used for the simulations, whereas without this constraint the
estimated T is somewhat noisier. In both cases, the estimated performance level parameters
were almost identical to the specified values of the parameters.
2) Influence of Prior Probability: Fig. 3 illustrates synthetic segmentations which differ by
structural errors rather than random noise. The true segmentation was specified, as were
synthetic expert segmentations, each having equal volume but different spatial location.
STAPLE was initialized with
and required 0.38 s to converge. The
STAPLE true segmentation estimate is shown for different prior assumptions. The prior
models information available before the data is seen. Three prior models are shown, first
assuming global/(Ti = 1) = 0.12 which closely matches the segmentations, with f (Ti = 1) =
0.5 which corresponds to a prior belief that half of the field of view should be the
foreground class, and with automatic estimation of the global prior using (35). As can be
seen, the estimated true segmentation can be influenced by the global prior probability.
In the case of assuming f (Ti = 1) = 0.12, the estimated true segmentation exactly matches
the specified true segmentation and one of the experts was identified as generating exactly
the true segmentation (p = q = 1.0), and the other two were estimated to have a sensitivity of
0.88 and a specificity of 0.99 reflecting the erroneous shift in these two segmentations. This
result was also obtained with automatic estimation of the prior.
In the case of assuming f (Ti = 1) = 0.5, the estimated true segmentation equals the union of
each of the three segmentations (which still does not occupy 50% of the image) and each of
the experts was identified as having (pj, qj) = (0.66, 1.0), j = 1,2,3. This reflects the fact that
the segmentations are not in agreement with the assumed global prior. If this was discovered
in the application of STAPLE to a clinical validation problem it would indicate either the
need to re-evaluate the global prior assumption or the need for improved training of the
experts generating the segmentations.
Warfield et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2005 November 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
B. Brain Phantom Experiments
Consider estimation of a true segmentation and performance parameters from segmentations
generated by two groups of raters, M of whom have significant expertise, and N of whom
have limited expertise. We can consider two important cases: where M > N and where M <
N. If we have M > N then the errors of the inexperienced raters do not exert significant
influence and are overcome by the correct information from the more experienced raters,
whereas by comparison, if M < N then there is the possibility that the inexperienced raters
may influence the estimation scheme to overcome the more experienced raters.
In the case, M < N, if the inexperienced raters make random errors, then as indicated by Fig.
2, accurate estimation can still be achieved. Similarly, if they make uncorrelated structural
errors then, as for random errors, accurate estimation is possible. However, if they make
correlated structural errors the impact of the errors could be significant. Without further
external information, it is not possible to discriminate between the two groups, and to decide
which constitutes the expert raters and which the inexperienced raters. For example, in a
majority voting scheme, the inexperienced raters would collect the most votes for the
regions with correlated errors and hence a wrong segmentation estimate would result.
External information is incorporated in the STAPLE estimate through the prior probability
for the structure being segmented, and through the initialization. It is also straightforward to
introduce a prior probability density for the rater parameters, enabling expert raters to be
distinguished from inexperienced raters via parameters of such a prior distribution.
We carried out an experiment to investigate the performance of the STAPLE algorithm
when presented with M = 1 and N = 3 raters, where the task is brain cortical gray matter
segmentation. We used a brain phantom created from a high-resolution high signal-to-noise
ratio brain MRI scan, for which a consensus segmentation of the cortical gray matter was
available. The segmentation was made by automatic segmentation and consensus correction
of errors by experts . We used the consensus segmentation to represent an exact ideal
“expert” segmentation that we want STAPLE to identify, and we deleted all cortex labels
from half of the rows of the exact segmentation and triplicated this in order to represent poor
raters generating approximately half of the correct labeling of the cortex, and incorrectly
labeling the other half of the cortex as background. Triplicating this data ensures that the
inexperienced rater segmentations have correlated errors.
We ran the STAPLE algorithm on these four segmentations, to convergence, stopping when
the change in normalized trace was less than 1 × 10−6, and evaluated the effect of different
initialization. We provided a range of different initial values for the sensitivity and
specificity of each of the four input segmentations, setting the “expert” segmentation to have
high initial sensitivity and specificity
and then varying the initial
parameter assignments of the other three raters (all equal) over the range of 0.05 to 0.95 in
steps of 0.05, and automatic estimation of all other parameters with a uniform spatial prior
for the cortex and background.
We found STAPLE identified one of two different estimated true segmentations, depending
on the initialization. The first closely matched the exact segmentation, and the second
closely matched the inexperienced rater segmentations. If the initialization indicated the
“expert” segmentation was superior to the three inexperienced raters
it converged to match the experienced rater, and if the
inexperienced raters were initialized outside this range (for example, close in performance to
the “expert”), it converged to the estimate close to that of the inexperienced raters. The
phantom, consensus segmentation, STAPLE estimate of the true segmentation and voting
rule estimate are illustrated in Fig. 4.
Warfield et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2005 November 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Since the parameter estimates are obtained by maximizing the conditional expectation of the
complete data log likelihood function, Q(θ|θ(k)) some insight into the convergence behavior
of STAPLE in this setting can be drawn by comparing the estimate of Q(θ|θ(k)) to the true
complete data log likelihood function that can be calculated when the exact true
segmentation is known. The estimate Q(θ|θ(k)) evolves until the iteration converges, and so
in Fig. 5 the estimated function is shown as estimated at each of the two points where the
algorithm converges. Shown in this figure is only the part of the estimated function that is
necessary to find the sensitivity or the specificity parameters for one of the input
segmentations at a time, as this depends on only one variable and is, therefore, simple to
graphically represent. Such estimated functions are shown for both for the experienced rater
and the inexperienced raters, together with the corresponding function from the exact
complete data log likelihood. Fig. 5 shows that when the initialization indicates the
experienced rater is superior to the inexperienced raters, the estimated complete data log
likelihood exactly matches the true complete data log likelihood at convergence, and that if
the initialization indicates all raters are equal then the estimated complete data log likelihood
indicates all raters have equal sensitivity and that the experienced rater segmentation
corresponds to an oversegmentation, with worse specificity, as compared to the estimated
true segmentation. Hence, in the presence of a majority of raters generating repeated
structural errors, appropriate initialization or further external information through prior
distributions on rater parameters or the spatial distribution of the true segmentation may be
used to ensure STAPLE converges to the correct true segmentation estimate.
Straightforward vote counting cannot overcome the presence of a majority of raters
generating repeated structural errors. It is expected that this situation is atypical, and
represents a worst case for estimation of the true segmentation, and can be corrected by
improved training or algorithmic modifications to alter the behavior of the raters.
C. Illustration of Clinical Validation Applications
1) Comparison of STAPLE With Voting: Three medical students carried out interactive
segmentation of the cortical gray matter of a single slice of a brain phantom . Upon
review and visual comparison of the segmentations, it was found that over most of the
cortex the segmentations were quite similar to the exact segmentation but in one region the
students had all made a misjudgement and incorrectly labeled one region as cortical gray
matter when it should be labeled white matter. We know that this is a misinterpretation on
the part of the students since the region has signal intensity characteristics different from
cortical gray matter and our prior knowledge of anatomy indicates the cortex does not
extend through this region. The consensus segmentation correctly labels this region and we
used this consensus segmentation to represent a perfect expert. We estimated the true
segmentation from the expert and three medical student segmentations, by both vote
counting and by STAPLE. Table I quantifies the difference in performance estimates for this
region between a vote counting estimate and the STAPLE algorithm. The region is shown in
Fig. 6 together with the exact segmentation, an image showing the frequency of selection of
each voxel as cortex by the medical students, an image showing the frequency of selection
of each voxel when combining the medical students and exact segmentation and the
STAPLE estimate of the true segmentation. The figure illustrates that the students
incorrectly label some of the white matter as cortical gray matter, and that when vote
counting is used to estimate the true segmentation the frequent wrong selection overrules the
expert. This does not occur with the STAPLE estimate. The color coding of the frequency of
selection is as shown in Fig. 7.
2) Segmentation of Prostate Peripheral Zone: Fig. 7 illustrates STAPLE applied to the
analysis of five segmentations by one expert of the peripheral zone of a prostate as seen in a
conventional MRI scan (T2w acquisition, 0.468750 × 0.468750 × 3.0 mm3). The goal of the
Warfield et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2005 November 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
operator was to segment the prostate peripheral zone to enable radiation dose planning in
support of brachytherapy . The STAPLE algorithm ran to convergence in 0.48 s of
wallclock time.
For comparison with the STAPLE estimate of the true segmentation, an image color coded
by probability of selection of each voxel is also presented. The colors range from blue to red
corresponding to probability of selection ranging from 0 to 1 as indicated by the color bar in
Fig. 7(b). It is interesting to consider a voting rule scheme and to compare that with the
STAPLE result. One voting rule is to estimate the true segmentation by taking all voxels
where a majority of the segmentations indicated the foreground was present. We achieved a
similar binarization of the STAPLE probabilistic true segmentation estimate, by
thresholding at Wi = 0.5, which gives a ML estimate of the binary true segmentation. An
alternative is to apply the MAP estimation using the binary MRF model of (33) which also
provides a binary estimate of the true segmentation. We found that the binarized STAPLE
true segmentation estimate cannot be obtained with a simple voting rule estimate from the
segmentations. In order to obtain the binarized STAPLE result directly from the manual
segmentation, it would be necessary to identify all the voxels indicated as prostate peripheral
zone by at least three of the five segmentations, and then all the voxels indicated by two of
the high-quality segmentations but not those voxels indicated by only two of the lower
quality segmentations. Without knowledge of the relative quality of the segmentations such
a weighted combination cannot be constructed. Thus, the true segmentation estimate
depends crucially upon the relative quality of the segmentations that is discovered by the
STAPLE algorithm. The STAPLE result cannot be generated by a simple voting rule such as
selecting voxels indicated by three out of five segmentations.
3) Comparison of STAPLE With Dice Similarity Coefficient: The performance level
estimates for segmentation of the prostate peripheral zone are recorded in Table II. In order
to enable comparison of these estimates with the Dice Similarity Coefficient (DSC) , a
popular measure of spatial overlap defined as DSC ≡ (2|A ∩ B|/|A| + |B|) where |A| is the
area of region A, |B| is the area of region B, we formed a binary estimate of the true
segmentation by thresholding at Wi = 0.5. We then computed the DSC between each of the
individual segmentations and the binarized STAPLE true segmentation. Comparing
segmentations 2 and 4, we observe the DSC is similar, approximately 0.95 in each case.
However, the STAPLE performance parameter estimates indicate the two segmentations
achieve this DSC differently—for example, segmentation 2 has higher sensitivity than
segmentation 4, but lower specificity. This indicates that despite the similar DSC values,
segmentation 2 is an over-estimate of the peripheral zone, and segmentation 4 is an underestimate of the peripheral zone.
4) Assessment of an Automated Segmentation Algorithm: Fig. 8 illustrates STAPLE applied
to the analysis of expert segmentations of a brain tumor , . The hidden true
segmentation was estimated from three expert segmentations, requiring 0.15 s to compute.
The segmentation generated by the program was then assessed by evaluating the sensitivity
and specificity estimators of (18) and (19) with regard to this estimated true segmentation.
The predictive value for tumor segmentation was also calculated. It is defined as PV(s) =
Pr(Ti = s|Dij = s), ∀s ∈ 0, 1, …, L − 1, the posterior probability that the structure s is present
when the rater says it is present, and is easily computed with the STAPLE estimate of the
rater performance parameters. This assessment indicates the program is generating
segmentations similar to that of the raters, with higher sensitivity and predictive value than
one of the raters, but with lower sensitivity and lower predictive value than the two other
raters. This provides feedback indicating in what way the algorithm or algorithm parameters
need to be modified to improve the performance of the algorithm.
Warfield et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2005 November 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
D. Assessment of Supervised Tissue Classification of the Neonate Brain
The assessment of tissue types, including cortical gray matter, subcortical gray matter,
myelinated white matter, unmyelinated white matter, and cerebrospinal fluid, from
volumetric MRI of newborn infants – has been useful in understanding and
characterising normal brain development and the processes of maturation , and the
impact of injury upon brain development , .
We evaluated the impact of repeated selection of tissue type prototypes upon the
classification of an MRI of a newborn infant at term equivalent age. A single operator
repeatedly selected sample voxels from the image in order to carry out nonparametric
estimation of the class-conditional probability density functions, which are then used to
carry out segmentation as previously described . We selected a 3-D volumetric MRI
scan of the brain of a newborn infant which contained significant signal intensity artifact.
We evaluated the amount of variability due to operator selection of training points in this
particularly challenging scan, as the operator repeated the segmentation attempting to best
identify each of background, extracranial tissue (such as skin, muscle, etc.), cortical gray
matter, subcortical gray matter, myelinated white matter, unmyelinated white matter and
cerebrospinal fluid as in , , . These different tissues are distinguished by subtle
signal intensity changes apparent from joint analysis of Tlw, PDw, and T2w MRI. They also
appear with unequal proportions and some are more difficult to identify than others (for
example, myelinated white matter is more difficult to identify than cerebrospinal fluid).
Table III illustrates the assessment of neonate tissue classification, assessing the
identification of each type of tissue using predictive value (posterior probability). The mean
predictive value is a simple measure with which to rank the segmentations based on overall
We also assessed the computational requirements of the STAPLE algorithm. The E-step of
(20) is linear in the number of voxels N, linear in the number of raters R and linear in the
number of labels L. The M-step of (24) is linear in the number of voxels TV, linear in the
number of raters R and quadratic in the number of labels L. The total number of iterations to
convergence depends on the degree of agreement between the input segmentations. Fig. 9
illustrates the average computation time per iteration as a function of the number of raters.
This analysis illustrates the application of STAPLE to the assessment of 3-D unordered
multicategory segmentations. The STAPLE algorithm ran to convergence in 300 s,
computing on the eight segmentations of the dataset of 256 × 256 × 110 voxels, with each
voxel assigned one of seven labels. The algorithm is computationally efficient and provides
valuable information that enables the ranking of the different segmentations. This may be
used for selecting between different segmentations, or for adjusting objectively the
parameters of enhancement or segmentation algorithms.
IV. Discussion and Conclusion
We have presented an algorithm for taking a collection of both binary and unordered
multicategory segmentations and simultaneously constructing an estimate of the hidden true
segmentation and an estimate of the performance level of each segmentation generator. This
can be used to characterize any type of segmentation generator, including new segmentation
algorithms or human operators, by direct comparison to the estimated true segmentation.
When prior information regarding the expected anatomy is available, such as from a
statistical anatomical atlas, STAPLE provides estimates of performance parameters
accounting for this external standard reference. This enables the assessment of the accuracy
of the segmentation generators. When such information is not available, STAPLE provides
Warfield et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2005 November 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
estimates of performance parameters with respect to a weighted combination of the input
segmentations and the appropriate weighting is computed automatically. This enables the
assessment of the precision of the segmentation generators. STAPLE adds new information
regarding the difference between human and algorithm performance beyond what is
available from previously reported spatial overlap measures such as the DSC, and generates
a plausible “true” segmentation estimate from clinical data where alternative methods of
obtaining ground truth estimates are often extremely difficult or unattractive to use.
We carried out experiments with a known true segmentation and raters of prespecified
sensitivity and specificity, and demonstrated that STAPLE is able to correctly estimate the
true segmentation and the performance parameters from observations of the segmentations.
Sensitivity and specificity parameters depend on the relative proportion of the structure
being segmented in the image, and it is useful to report the positive predictive value and
negative predictive value as these account for the relative proportion of the foreground and
background. The predictive values (posterior probabilities) can be derived from the
sensitivity and specificity parameters and the proportion of foreground and background in
each image. We compared a brain phantom for which the true segmentation is known to the
STAPLE estimate of the true segmentation, derived from both synthetic segmentations with
specified performance characteristics, and segmentations carried out by medical students.
We demonstrated that STAPLE can identify the correct segmentation even when a majority
of segmentations contain repeated errors, unlike a majority vote rule. We also demonstrated
how to estimate performance parameters when the segmentations consist of unordered
multicategory labels. We empirically verified the runtime performance of the algorithm and
found it is rapid and easily applied in practice.
We applied STAPLE to illustrative clinically motivated segmentation problems, including
the assessment of repeated segmentations of the prostate peripheral zone for brachytherapy
radiation dose planning, the assessment of an algorithm for brain tumor segmentation and
the analysis of 3-D multicategory unordered labeling of tissue type from MRI of a newborn
infant. We compared the STAPLE analysis to commonly used alternative measures. We
found the method computationally efficient and straightforward to apply in practice. We
found the STAPLE estimated true segmentation cannot be replicated with simple voting
rules, and that the performance parameters are important indicators of how segmentations
differ, which aid in the interpretation of segmentation quality compared to standard
measures such as the DSC.
We have described the STAPLE algorithm with several types of spatial constraints,
including none at all, a statistical atlas of prior probabilities for the distribution of the
structure of interest, and with MRF models for spatial homogeneity.
Recently the application of the STAPLE algorithm to the evaluation of tumor
segmentations was described . The mean and standard deviation of sensitivity and
specificity parameters, as estimated by STAPLE, were used to compare a rapid interactive
level-set based segmentation algorithm to hand contouring by raters for tumor segmentation.
Another application of the STAPLE algorithm has been to identify an optimal
combination of image processing algorithms for intracranial cavity segmentation of brain
The STAPLE algorithm and generalizations have also been applied to the evaluation of
segmentations derived from nonrigid registration , . In that work, comparisons were
made between a majority vote rule, pairwise binary and unordered multicategory label
estimates of the hidden true segmentation and performance. The advantage of the STAPLE
estimation scheme over a majority vote rule was again demonstrated.
Warfield et al.
IEEE Trans Med Imaging. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2005 November 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
A. Future Work
The representation we have chosen for our segmentations involves individual labeling of
each voxel. This is particularly flexible and well suited to segmentations of structures of
unknown topology, as is often the case when dealing with abnormal tissues. It may be
interesting to consider a generalization of this to segmentations represented by enclosed
surfaces, such as is often found in segmentations achieved by deformable models or by level
set methods. In segmentations obtained with such surface-oriented techniques, the region of
the surface boundary typically has the highest variability and is of most interest for the
performance assessment. If it is the case that the interior of a region is easy to segment and
the boundary is most variable, the STAPLE estimated true segmentation will reflect this and
the performance level estimates will reflect the variability of the algorithms or raters in the
region of the boundary.
Our algorithm estimates performance parameters and true segmentation probabilities, from
which the posterior probability of the correct label being present when a segmentation
indicates that label is present can be computed. Techniques for estimating bounds upon
parameters estimated in the EM algorithm have been developed ([32, Chapter 4]] and it
would be valuable to apply those techniques here also.
We have considered estimation of the true segmentation and performance parameters for an
entire scene, and in specified regions of interest. In some applications it may be desirable to
assess performance in subregions, for example, when high accuracy is required in some
regions and lower accuracy may be tolerated in other regions. Analysis of this can be
achieved by defining a region of interest and executing STAPLE only on this region of
interest. Note also that the estimated sensitivity and specificity will depend upon the size of
the region of interest, whereas the posterior probabilities (predictive values) will not.
Our model assumes the expert segmentations are conditionally independent. The notion is
that the segmentations are achieved independently but with each rater having the same true
segmentation goal in mind. If different raters differ in their conception of the ideal true
segmentation which they are attempting to express in their decisions Dij, this bias can be
discovered and quantified with the STAPLE algorithm. Running STAPLE on repeated
observations of a single raters’ segmentations enables the estimation of the rater-specific
true segmentation with the random variation of the rater removed. However, rater specific
bias, such as structural errors, may remain. This could potentially be addressed by
calibrating the rater through segmentation of a phantom, by standardizing the segmentation
protocol or by supervised training of the rater. Alternatively, repeating this process for
several raters, each with a potentially different bias, allows a spatial model for how raters
differ to be constructed. Running STAPLE with the per-rater estimated true segmentations
as input would then allow the estimation of the overall “true” segmentation—this effectively
treats the bias of each rater as a perturbation away from the true segmentation that is to be
recovered. Further investigation of this would be valuable.
Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge the contributions of the experts and students who generated the segmentations
of the clinical data.