Psychonomic Bulletin & Review
2000, 7 (1), 1-25
Explicitly modeling the
effects of aging on response time
ROGERRATCUFF
Northwestern University, Evanston, IUinois
DANIEL SPIELER
Stanford University, Stanford, California
GAIL McKOON
Northwestern University, Evanston, lUinois
Research into the effects of aging on response time has focused on Brinley plots. Brinley plots are
constructed by plotting mean response times for older subjects against those for young subjects for a
set of experimental conditions. The typical result is a straight line with a slope greater than 1and a negative intercept. This linear function has been interpreted as showing that aging leads to a general slowing of cognitive processes. Inthis article, we show that the slope of the Brinley plot is actually a measure of the relative standard deviations of older versus young subjects' response times; it is not a
measure of general slowing. Weexamine current models of the effects of aging on mean response time
and show how they might be reinterpreted. Wealso show how a more comprehensive model, Ratcliffs
diffusion model , can account for Brinley plot regularities and, at the same time, provide an account of accuracy rates, the shapes of response time distributions, and the relative speeds of error and
correct response times, aspects of the data about which models designed to account for Brinley plots
are mute. Weconclude by endorsing a research approach that applies explicit models to response time
data in aging in order to use the parameters of the model to interpret the effects of aging.
As people age, their response times in cognitive tasks
slow. The degree to which their responses slow is often
graphed as a Brinley plot . A Brinley plot is constructed either by
computing the mean response times for older subjects and
young subjects separately for each condition of an experiment and then plotting the means against each other or by
plotting the mean response times for individual subjects
against each other, with the fastest older subject's mean response time plotted against the fastest young subject's
mean response time, the next fastest older subject's mean
response time against the next fastest young subject's mean
response time, and so on. Either way they are constructed,
Brinleyplotsshowa striking regularity:Across a wide range
ofresponse times and types of experiments, the function is
alwaysapproximately a straight line with a slope ofaround
1.5(ranging from I to 3.0). In other words, response times
for older subjects can be predicted from response times for
young subjects by a simple linear transformation.
The traditional avenue to interpretation and understanding ofthe Brinley regularity is to take the linear function
This research was supported by National Institute of Mental Health
Grant HD MH44640 and National Institute for Deafness and other
Communication Disorders Grant ROI-DCO1240. Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to R. Ratcliff, Department of
Psychology, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208 (e-mail:
 ).
as the central datum to be explained, and efforts are directed toward understanding how response time and cognition in general change with age, We review two models
of this type: a linear model proposed by Cerelia 
and the information loss model proposed by Myerson,
Hale, Wagstaff, Poon, and Smith . Both models instantiate the effect ofaging on response time as a general
slowing effect: All the components ofprocessing in an experimental task are assumed to be slower for older people
than for young people, by the constant factor that is the
slope of the Brinley plot.
Although it has been argued recently that the regularities in Brinley plots .(ttleir linearity and the similarity of
the values oftheir slopes) provide only weak constraints on
possible models ofthe effects of aging on response time
 , the Brinley plot still serves
as a benchmark, in that experimental data are expected to
exhibit linear Brinley functions and theories ofcognitive
processing are expected to produce them.
In this article, we present a new insight into Brinley
plots. Wepoint out that Brinley plots are quantile-quantile
plots (Q-Q plots), which are well studied in statistics and for which there is a substantial body
oftheory. Looking at Brinley plots as Q-Q plots leads to
a new interpretation of their linearity and their slope. In
brief, the value of the slope is determined by the ratio of
Copyright 2000 Psychonomic Society, Inc.
RATCLIFF, SPIELER, AND McKOON
the standard deviation ofolder subjects' response times to
the standard deviation ofyoung subjects' response times.
The slope cannot be interpreted as a general slowing factor. The feature of a Brinley plot that captures the fact that
older subjects are typically slower than young subjects is
the function's intercept.
Reinterpretation ofthe Brinley plot requires a new approach to modeling. The key finding that a model must
explain is not that older subjects are slowed by a constant
factor, relative to young subjects, but rather that the distribution ofresponse times for older subjects is wider. We
argue that, in order to accomplish this, a model must identify the component processes that are involved in a cognitive task and then show how one or another of those processes can be affected by aging in such a way as to produce
the appropriate distributions ofresponse times. In the later
sections ofthis article, we use simulations to illustrate how
one model, Ratcliff's diffusion model for simple twochoice decisions , can do
this. An important conclusion that follows from the simulations is that Brinley plots provide only weak constraints on theory. Any theory that appropriately scales the
difficulty of an experimental task onto response times
 will produce a Brinley plot
with appropriate characteristics. A much fuller consideration of response time data-including, for example,
accuracy rates, error response times, and the shapes of
response time distributions-will be needed to constrain
We begin below with an explanation ofQ-Q theory and
how it applies to Brinley plots. Then we review the earlier
models and their
reinterpretations in terms ofQ-Q theory. Last, we illustrate the variety of ways in which the diffusion model, a
model that identifies components ofprocessing, can simulate Brinley plot data.
QUANTILE-QUANTILE PLOTS
There is one major mystery about Brinley plots: Why
are they almost always linear? There also is a second
puzzling regularity, that the intercept ofthe Brinley plot
is negative when the slope of the Brinley plot is greater
than 1 and the larger the slope, the more negative is the
intercept. The theory ofQ-Q plots provides a framework
for understanding these regularities. Consider the distributions of mean response times from the conditions of an
experiment, one distribution of condition means for
older subjects and one for young subjects. What Q-Q theory shows is that when the condition means for the older
and the young subjects are plotted against each other, the
slope ofthe function is the ratio ofthe standard deviations
of the distributions, and when the distributions have the
same shape, the function is automatically linear. Also,
from the Q-Q analysis, it is to be expected that the intercept is negative and becomes more negative as the slope
increases. Thus, the issue of explaining the shape of the
Brinley plot is translated into an issue of explaining the
shapes of the distributions of mean response times. It is
the shapes ofthese distributions that should be the target
of models of processing: If a model produces similarly
shaped distributions of response times for older and
younger subjects across conditions, the model will automatically produce linear Brinley plots.
Linear Brinley Plots
Brinley plots are most often constructed by plotting
the mean response time for older subjects in each condition ofan experiment against the mean response time for
young subjects in each condition. The plot then has as
many points as there are conditions in the experiment
(conditions in an experiment may be different values of
word frequency, stimulus onset asynchrony, list length,
study time, stimulus discriminability, etc.). The values of
mean response times form a distribution across conditions, one distribution for older subjects' means and one
for young subjects' means.
Given that the mean for an experimental condition is a
point from a distribution ofmeans, each mean is actually
a quantile of the distribution. The quantiles of a distribution are the points that divide the total frequency in the
distribution into parts. For example, the median point divides the distribution into halves (.5 quantiles), the three
quartile points divide the distribution into quarters (.25
quantiles), and so on. A Q-Q plot simply plots the quantile points ofone distribution against the quantile points of
another distribution. So, for example, the score at the .1
quantile for one distribution is plotted against the score
at the .1 quantile for the other distribution, and so on. The
means plotted on a Brinley function are quantiles for the
distributions ofcondition means in the experiment, and so
a Brinley plot is a specific instance of a Q-Q plot.
If the distributions on which a Q-Q plot is based are
normal, the Q-Q plot is a straight line. The slope of the
Q-Q plot is the ratio of the standard deviations of the
distributions, and the intercept is a function ofthe means
ofthe two distributions and their standard deviations. To
understand why this is so, consider, first, two normal distributions, each with a mean of0 and a standard deviation
of 1; that is, each is the standard normal distribution.
Plotting quantiles from these two distributions against
each other [e.g., 10%, Q(.l)= -1.28; 20%, Q(.2)= -0.84;
30%, Q(.3) = -0.52; etc.] gives a straight line [in standard z tables, this would correspond to Q(a) = z(a)]. If
the response time scores ofolder and young subjects come
from normal distributions, their quantiles are the quantiles
ofthe standardN(O,I) normal [e.g., Q(.I) = -1.28] multiplied by the standard deviation oftheir distribution (o;
for the older subjects and <Jy for the young subjects) and
added to the mean oftheir distribution (Po and Py' respectively). The quantiles in our response time setting represent different levels ofdifficulty ofthe experimental task
(x), and so the transformations from the quantiles for the
standard normal to the older subjects' distribution is Q 0 =
O"oX + /10' and the transformation to the young subjects'
distribution is Qy = O"yX + /1y. Eliminating difficulty x,
we obtain a straight line with slope = 0"0/O"y and intercept =
/10 - /1yO"o /O"y. The full equation for a point on the Q-Q
(Brinley) plot is
Qo = (O"o/O"y)Qy + /10 - /1yO"o/O"y·
These results and the equation hold ifthe two distributions from which the Q-Q plots are derived are not normal but, rather, logistic, Cauchy, gamma (with a fixed
"number" parameter), exponential, Weibull (with fixed
exponent), uniform, or ex-Gaussian .These distributions all have the form that
their quantiles can be derived from the standard form by
multiplying by a constant and adding a constant. Thomas
and Ross provide a detailed discussion of the
properties that give rise to linearity for these distributions,
and Chambers et al. provide a more introductory discussion ofQ-Q plots, along with a list ofthe
properties ofQ-Q plots for several ofthese distributions.
The important point is that, if the Q-Q plot for a set of
conditions in an experiment is produced from two distributions with approximately the same shape, the slope is
the ratio of the standard deviation of the two distributions (as long as the range ofthe points on the plot is significantly greater than the variability in each point; see
the Appendix). In other words, any model that produces
distributions ofolder and young subjects' mean response
times so that the distributions have the same shape will
automatically produce a linear Q-Q (Brinley) plot with
a slope equal to the ratio of the standard deviations.
The equation does not hold if the distribution of older
subjects' means is more positively skewed than the distribution of younger subjects' means (e.g., an exponential
for the older subjects and a normal for young subjects)that is, more positively skewed than would be obtained
from two different members of the same distribution
family (e.g., two exponentials with different means). In
this case, the Q-Q plot is positively accelerated (e.g., an
exponential plotted against a normal distribution). That
is, the function is U-shaped, with the left and right tails
of the function lying above a straight line through the
central part of the function. This shape has occasionally
been obtained empirically . Even though
the equation does not hold, the slope of the straight line
fitted to the function turns out, in many cases, to be the
ratio ofstandard deviations, as in Equation 1.
All of the points just made about the relationship between Q-Q plots and Brinley plots also hold ifthe Brinley plot is constructed, not by plotting the mean response
times ofolder versus young subjects for each condition of
an experiment, but by plotting means for individual older
and young subjects against each other.
AGING AND RESPONSE TIME
The important point, that the slope ofa Brinley plot is
the ratio of standard deviations of older and young response times, is a fundamental reinterpretation of the
Brinley plot: It means that the slope of the Brinley plot
shows nothing about slowing ofolder subjects relative to
young subjects. What the slope does show is that there is
greater variability across conditions in the mean response
times ofolder subjects than in the mean response times of
young subjects. Older subjects are typically slower than
young subjects, but it is the intercept, which is a function
ofmean response times and their standard deviations, that
shows the slowing.
Figure 1 illustrates this interpretation of the Brinley
plot. The top left panel shows two normal distributions
ofresponse times, one for young subjects with a mean of
600 and a standard deviation of 100 [N(600, 100)] and one
for older subjects with a mean of700 and a standard deviation of 150 [N(700, 150)]. These distributions give typical response times for older versus young subjects. Plotting randomly generated scores from these distributions
in a Brinley plot (i.e., a Q-Q plot) shows the typical 1.5
slope that has been interpreted as showing a general slowing. But the slope actually represents the ratio ofthe standard deviations of the two distributions (150/1 00). The
right-hand panels show the same slope obtained from two
distributions in which the older subjects are, on average,
faster than the young subjects. The distribution for young
subjects is N(600,100), and the distribution for older subjects is N(500,150). The slope is still 1.5, but the older
subjects are faster. The points made by these example distributions apply whether the response times are taken to
be the response times of individual subjects or the mean
response times for experimental conditions.
Figure 2 illustrates the point mentioned above, that the
slope of the Brinley plot is still the ratio of standard deviations even when the response times are sampled randomly from nonnormal distributions. The top row ofpanels shows the Brinley plots, the second row shows the
distributions for young subjects, and the third row shows
the distributions for older subjects. The three distributions have quite different shapes, and yet, in each case,
the ratio of the older to young standard deviations is
within 1% of the value of the Brinley slope.
The Relation Between a
Brinley Plot's Slope and Its Intercept
Another regularity that has emerged in the Brinley
plot literature is that, when the slopes and intercepts of
the Brinley plots from many experiments are plotted
against each other, the result is a straight line, as is shown
in Figure 3. Cerella and Faust, Balota, Spieler, and Ferraro provided tables of the Brinley intercepts and slopes from a
number of experiments. The intercepts varied between
+214 msec and - 693 msec, and the slopes varied between
0.96 and 2.63. We plotted each experiment's intercept
RATCLIFF, SPIELER, AND McKOON
0.0 L;:::=--r---r--r-==~::::;..J
200 400 600 aoo 1000
0'2 =150=1.5
400 500 600 700 aoo
0.0 L;:::::""'---r-~::;===;J
200400 600 a001000
Q-Q or Brinley Plot
0'2 =150=1.5
400 500 600 700 aoo
N(600,100) means
11=600,cr=100
Figure 1. Examples oftbe translation from distributions of mean response times across subjects to Brinley or
quantile-quantile (Q--Q) plots.
against its slope to produce the
straight-line function with an intercept of 572 msec and
a slope of -441 msec that is shown in Figure 3.
The fact that this function is a straight line follows directly from the Q-Q analysis, under several reasonable
assumptions about how aging might affect response times.
To show this, we begin with normal distributions ofolder
and young subjects' response times and examine a variety
of possible relations between the two distributions (the
distributions could be either distributions of condition
means or distributions of individual subjects' means).
We fixed the young subjects' distribution to have a mean
of600 msec and a standard deviation of 100 msec, varied
the older subjects' mean from 600 to 750 msec, as is shown
in Table 1, and varied the older subjects' standard deviation from 100 to 250 msec, as is shown in the first column
ofthe table. Then, for each pair ofyoung and older standard deviations, we computed the slope ofthe Brinley plot
(from Equation 1), and from each pair ofyoung and older
standard deviations and each pair of young and older
means, we computed the intercept of the Brinley plot
(again, from Equation 1). The resulting Brinley slopes and
intercepts are shown in the table.
Before proceeding, two things are worth pointing out
about the values in Table 1. First, as the slope ofthe Brinley plot increases, the intercept decreases, just as in Figure 3. Also, the intercept is mostly negative when the slope
is greater than 1. Only a relatively large mean response
time, coupled with a relatively small standard deviation for
the older subjects, produces a positive intercept.
The main question is whether the values in Table 1
produce the linear function in Figure 3. We show that they
do, in three cases that span a range of reasonable assumptions about how older subjects' response times vary
with respect to young subjects'. In each case, the value of
the slope is negative, and the intercept is positive. (The
values in the table can also be used to evaluate other assumptions about how older subjects' response times vary
against young subjects' response times.)
For the first example, we assume that older and young
subjects have the same mean, 600 msec, and that only the
standard deviation for older subjects varies, from 100 to
250 msec. The resulting Brinley slopes are given in the
second row ofthe table, and the Brinley intercepts in the
third row.Plotting these slopes and intercepts against each
other gives a straight line with a slope of -600 msec and
an intercept of 600 msec.
Second, we assume that both the mean for the older
subjects' distribution and their standard deviation increase
relative to the young subjects, and for purposes of illustration, we assume that they increase by the same amount,
30 msec, beginning from a standard deviation of 100 msec
and a mean of600 msec. The resulting Brinley slopes are
again the values in the second column of the table, and
the Brinley intercepts are the values on the diagonal from
top left to bottom right. Plotting these slopes and inter-
AGING AND RESPONSE TIME
Exponential
Slope=1.57
SO ratio=1.57
intercept=-125
Slope=1.48
so ratio=1.48
intercept=-180
Slope=1.48
so ratio=1.48
intercept=-149
Response Time (ms)
Response Time (ms)
Response Time (ms)
Response Time (ms)
Response Time (ms)
Response Time (ms)
Figure 2. Simulated shapes of Brinley (Q-Q) plots derived from exponential, normal, and uniform distributions
of mean response times across subjects. The distributions in the bottom row have larger mean and larger standard deviation (1.5 times larger) than the distributions in the middle row. The Brinley functions plot the distributions in the middle row on the x-axis and the distributions in the bottom row on the y-axis.
cepts against each other, the function is a straight line with
a slope of - 500 msec and an intercept of 500 msec.
Third, we assume that the mean for older subjects is
larger than the mean for young subjects by a constant
amount (90 msec larger for purposes of illustration) and
that the older subjects' standard deviation varies from 100
to 250 msec. The Brinley slopes are again the values in
the second column ofthe table, and the Brinley intercepts
are the values in the "690" column ofthe table. The plot of
these slopes and intercepts is again a straight line, with
a slope of -466 msec and an intercept of597 msec (very
near the values for the line in Figure 3).
These three cases illustrate three ways older subjects'
response times might vary relative to young subjects' response times. In each case, the plot ofthe intercepts ofthe
Brinley plot versus the slopes ofthe Brinley plot gives a
negative slope and a positive intercept, with the third case
being very close to the observed values in Figure 3. Thus,
RATCLIFF, SPIELER, AND McKOON
~--- Slope =-441ms
Intercept =572ms
Slope of Brinley Plot
Figure 3. Plots ofintercepts versus slopes ofBrinley plots for 39 experiments
from Cerelia and Faust, Balota, Spieler, and Ferraro .
from the Q-Q analysis, it follows that any reasonable assumption about how older and young response times differ will produce the observed relationship between the
slopes and intercepts of the Brinley plots from different
experiments.
Brinley plots are Q-Q plots, and this fact gives us insight into multiple aspects of the plots.
1. Brinley plots are linear, because the distribution of
mean response times across experimental conditions for
older subjects has about the same shape as the distribution ofmeans across conditions for young subjects. If, as
has sometimes been found, the Brinley function is slightly
accelerated upward, the distribution of older subjects'
means has greater skew (i.e., an extra large number ofslow
response times) than does the distribution ofyoung subjects'means.
2. The slope ofa Brinley plot is greater than 1,because
older subjects' mean response times have greater variability than young subjects' means, not because of general
3. The intercept of a Brinley plot is negative, because
ofthe relative placements ofthe means and standard deviations ofthe older and young subjects' distributions of
mean responsetimes; older subjects' means are larger than
younger subjects' means, but not by too much, relative to
their standard deviations.
Slopes and Intercepts of Brinley Plots
for Normal Distributions of Response Time
Standard Deviation
in Response Times
for Simulated Older
Subjects (msec)
Brinley Plot
Mean Response Time for
Simulated Older Subjects (msec)
Note-Mean response time for young subjects is 600 msec; standard deviation in response time for young subjects is 100 msec.
AGING AND RESPONSE TIME
where f(x) is some transformation ofdifficulty, the same
transformation for older and young subjects, and where
older and young subjects differ only in parameters a and
b. The top left panel of Figure 4 shows response time as
a linear function of difficulty. For response time as an
exponential function ofdifficulty-for example, RT = a
exp(x/c) + b-the scaling functions show the same general pattern (Figure 4, bottom left panel), and the same derivations as those for the linear model carry through (because elimination ofthe term exp(x /c) from the versions
ofthis equation for young and older subjects gives Equation 3). Thus, the form ofthe function relating difficulty
to response time does not have to be linear; rather, it has
to be ofthe formf(x), where x is difficulty, so that when
f(x) is eliminated from the equations for young and older
subjects' response times, the resulting relationship between young and older subjects' response times is linear.
The expressions for the slope and intercept for Cerelia's
 model and our generalizations (Equation 3) look
very much like those for a Q-Q plot (Equation I); a and
b in Equation I correspond to o and u, respectively, in
Equation 3. The Q-Q analysis is more general than Cerel-
Ia's model and accommodates nonlinear Brinley functions. Here, we show how to relate the Q-Q analysis and
Cerelia's model by using three different examples. First,
suppose that the conditions ofan experiment are equally
Cerelia, 1994, Figure I). Figure 4 (top left panel) shows
mean response time plotted against difficulty for four
values ofa, represented by the lines labeled "I ,""2," "3,"
and "4," with the intercept (b) the same for the four functions. Like Cerelia's function, this generalization gives
the Brinley pattern, because response time is a linear
function of task difficulty:
RT = ax + b,
where x represents difficulty and b represents the 1100r on
response time. Then, RTo = aox + bo' and RTy = ayx +
by, and with simple algebra to eliminate x,
RTo=(ao/ay)RTy +bo - byao/ay.
In other words, response time for older subjects is a linear
function of response time for young subjects (a Brinley
plot), with a slope of «J«, and an intercept of bo by(ao/a y). In the top left panel of Figure 4, a group of
young subjects might produce, for example, the line
marked with 2s for response time as task difficulty increased. The line for a group of older subjects would be
higher-for example, the line marked with 3s (the lines
have the same intercept, b, but if different intercepts
were assumed, the analysis would carry through in the
same way with the same qualitative conclusions).
The findings just outlined for the assumption of a linear relationship between difficulty and response time
generalize to other functions that scale difficulty into response time:
4. The slopes and intercepts of Brinley functions are
negatively correlated (as is shown in Figure 3), because
when the standard deviation of older subjects' means increases relative to the standard deviation ofthe young subjects' means, the slope of the Brinley plot increases and
the intercept decreases (irrespective ofwhether the older
subjects' means increase along with their standard deviation), since the ratio ofstandard deviations appears in both
the slope and the intercept of Equation 1.
A strong argument has been made in the literature about
the lack of a need to model task performance in order to
understand the effects of aging on processing time. The
argument goes as follows: Because Brinley functions show
that the effect ofaging is a general and linear slowing and
because this slowing appears across a range oftasks, from
tasks that can be performed very quickly to tasks that are
very slow, hypotheses about the reason for general slowing are all that are needed to explain the effects ofaging.
However, the analysis in terms of Q-Q plots provides
a different way ofviewing the Brinley plot regularitiesnamely, that they arise from a larger spread in the distribution ofmean response times for older subjects than for
young subjects. This pattern could occur for many reasons
(e.g., older subjects may adopt more conservative response
criteria, or the information they extract from a stimulus
may be of lower quality than that for young subjects),
which we illustrate in the next sections ofthis article, and
the reasons could be different in different tasks. Distinguishing among the different explanations for the larger
spread of older subjects' distributions will require examination not just ofthe mean response times plotted in
Brinley functions, but also ofother aspects ofthe response
time data, such as accuracy, error response times, and the
shapes of response time distributions.
MODELS FOR THE EFFECTS OF
AGING ON MEAN RESPONSE TIMES
Most of the theoretical work in aging and response
time has focused on the general slowing hypothesis, the
idea that the aging effect is a general slowing effect. The
assumption has been that the Brinley plot shows this slowing, with the slope ofthe plot giving the factor by which
older subjects slow, relative to young subjects. However,
the Q-Q reinterpretation ofthe Brinleyplot slope indicates
that the aging effect is not a general slowing effect as measured by the slope of the Brinley function. The models
can be reinterpreted to be consistent with the Q-Q analysis, but at the expense oflosing their general slowing account of aging.
Cerelia's Linear Model
Cerelia proposed that response times for older
subjects (RT0)are a linear function ofresponse times for
young subjects (RTy ) that is, RT0 = a RTy + b. We describe his proposal in the slightly generalized form in
which response time is a function oftask difficulty (as in
RT = af(x) + b,
RATCLIFF, SPIELER, AND McKOON
Myerson et al.
 model
More Difficult
Less Difficult
Number of Stages
Exponential
Separation
More Difficult
Less Difficult
Drift Rate
Figure 4. Plots of mean response time against number of stages of difficulty or drift rate for four response
time models: A linear model ; the Myerson, Hale, Wagstaff, Poon, and Smith information loss model; an exponential model; and the diffusion model .
spaced as a function of difficulty. Then, for CerelIa's
model, with a linear transformation from difficulty to response time, response times for older and young subjects
will both have uniform distributions (e.g., the rightmost
panels ofthe middle and bottom rows ofthe panels in Figure 2), and the Brinley function will be linear (as in the
top row, rightmost panel ofFigure 2). For the Q-Q analysis, with the distributions ofresponse time uniform (both
having the same shape), the Q-Q (Brinley) plot will be
linear, with a slope that is the ratio of the standard deviations of the distributions. Second, suppose that the relationship between the difficulty ofthe conditions ofan experiment and response time is exponential (e.g., RT = a
exp (x /c) + b, leftmost panels in the middle and bottom
rows of Figure 2) rather than linear and that conditions
are equally spaced as a function of difficulty. Then, the
Brinley plot from a CerelIa-type model will be linear, but
with a greater density ofpoints in the bottom left corner
ofthe function than in the top right corner (Figure 2, top
row, leftmost panel). For the Q-Q analysis, the distributions of response times would be exponential (leftmost
panels of the middle and bottom rows in Figure 2), and
the slope ofthe Q-Q function would be the ratio of their
standard deviations. Third, the distributions of response
times across conditions could have a nonuniform distribution with a linear relationship between difficulty and response time. This could arise if the range of difficulty is
not sampled uniformly-for example, the .1, .2, .4, and
.8 quantiles in the range of difficulty might be sampled,
rather than there being uniform sampling. This would lead
to a distribution of points with more points from easy
conditions than from difficult conditions. Then, the distributions of condition means might look like the distributions shown in the leftmost panels of the middle and
bottom rows in Figure 2, and the resulting Brinley plot
would be like that in the top row, leftmost panel. This example would be indistinguishable (in Brinley plot analyses) from the case in which the mapping from difficulty to
response time was exponential (the second point above).
In sum, for any reasonable ways of sampling, values from
the difficulty dimension (with distributions for older and
younger subjects from the same families) will lead to response times that are consistent with CerelIa's model.
However,there is one limitation: If the function relating
difficulty to response time is not the same for older and
young subjects-that is, if the response times for older
subjects come from a different kind of distribution than
the young subjects' response times (e.g., older subjects'
from an exponential distribution and young subjects'
from a uniform distribution)-Brinley plots will be accelerated upward (ifthe old distribution is more skewed
than the young distribution), and CerelIa's linear
model will not fit the data. The Q-Q analysis, on the
other hand, is still consistent with an upward accelerated
Myerson et al.'s Information Loss Model
Myerson et al.'s model describes performance
on cognitive tasks as resulting from a series of processing stages, where the stages are not further specified, so
that the model can apply across a variety of tasks. Total
response time is assumed to be the sum of the processing times for each stage, RT = LTk , and the time for each
stage k is inversely related to the amount of information
available at that stage: Tk = D/ Ik , where D is a constant.
The information at stage k is Ik = 1(1 - p) ', where I and
p are constants, p determining the amount of information lost at each stage. This model is called an information loss model, because Ik decreases as the number of
stages increases. With the assumption that aging principally affects the parameter p, this model approximates
linear Brinley plots well (the model produces approximately a power function), at least as well as the linear
model .
The top right panel of Figure 4 shows mean response
time as a function of number of stages in the model for
four values ofp. Just as with the linear and exponential
functions, the effect ofaging is a scaling effect: Increasing the number ofprocessing stages required by a task increases response time more for older subjects than it does
foryoung subjects,because the valueofp is larger for older
For Myerson et al.'s model, if either a uniform
or a nonuniform distribution ofvalues ofdifficulty were
selected in an experiment, the distribution of mean response times across conditions for older subjects would
be slightly more skewed than that for young subjects, and
the Brinley (Q-Q) plot would be accelerated upward
slightly. The slope ofthe linear approximation to this function would be nearly the same as the ratio ofstandard deviations of the distributions. Data with this nonlinear
function would be interpreted as different shaped distributions across conditions or subjects for young and older
subjects in a Q-Q analysis.
A third model, similar to Myerson et al.'s , should
be mentioned, and that is Cerelia's neural network.
The idea is that cognitive tasks are performed by neural
networks. It is similar to Myerson et al.'s in that processing
AGING AND RESPONSE TIME
in a task is assumed to be composed ofa series of stages.
The stages are abstract and not tied to the specific task
being performed. Aging produces breaks in the links
(stages) of the network, and these breaks require the creation ofnew links (stages), which results in longer neural
pathways among the nodes in the network. These longer
pathways lead to longer response times. The probability of
breaking a link is assumed to be an exponential function
of age. With auxiliary assumptions, this model can.account
for several different patterns of the data showing aging
effects on response times. An analysis similar to that for
the Myerson et al. model can be carried out to relate this
model to Q-Q plots.
The CerelIa and the Myerson et al. models translate (scale) task difficulty into response times for
young and older subjects. The models can be reinterpreted into Q-Q plot terms, and for CerelIa's model, the
mathematical equation relating response times for older
and young subjects can even be mapped directly onto the
Q-Q equation. But the reinterpretation is a radical one:
The original idea of the models, that aging is a general
slowing reflected in the slope ofthe Brinley plot, has to be
given up and replaced with the understanding that what
the slope actually shows is that older subjects differ from
young subjects in terms ofthe standard deviations oftheir
response time distributions across conditions.
SCALING ISSUES
Scaling is at the heart ofthe issue ofhow subjects slow
with age. The linear, exponential, and stage models illustrated in Figure 4, all general slowing models, show
scaling: Response times for older subjects are scaled as
a function oftask difficulty, so that each next level ofdifficulty (or number ofstages) slows them more than it does
the response times for young subjects. In other words, the
young subjects follow one function (e.g., the" I" function), and older subjects follow another function (e.g., the
"3" function).
However, so farwe have not considered a critical aspect ofperformaoce: interactions between speed and accuracy, and how speed-accuracy criteria might differ between older and young subjects. If speed-accuracy
criteria do differ between older and young subjects, the
increasing differences in response times as a function of
task difficulty might be due to older subjects' setting more
conservative criteria. Consider what young subjects typically do when faced with moving from an experimental
condition of less difficulty to one of greater difficulty:
They slow their responses but they do not slow them
enough to maintain their same level ofaccuracy; instead,
they allow their accuracy to decrease. Older subjects might
try not to allow their accuracy to decrease and, in doing
so, might slow more than the young subjects. This idea,
that older subjects sacrifice speed for gains in accuracy,
has been suggested frequently . In fact,
for some tasks, older adults may make fewer errors than
young adults . What we stress here is
that the ability to trade speed for accuracy might explain
why the difference in response times between two conditions is greater for older than for young subjects; according to this explanation, increasing task difficulty
does not affect older subjects more than young subjects in
any way other than in the accuracy criteria they set.
The scaling that results from speed versus accuracy
instructions was demonstrated in an experiment by Ratcliffand Rouder , using young subjects. Subjects were asked to judge whether squares presented on a PC screen were bright or dark. The squares
were made up of 64 X 64 pixels-some pixels black,
some white, and some a neutral gray-and the bright
squares had more white pixels than did the dark squares.
Hard conditions were those in which the numbers of
white and black pixels were about the same; easy conditions were those in which there were many more pixels of
one kind than ofthe other. When subjects were instructed
to respond as fast as possible, overall, their correct response times averaged about 350 msec, and the difference
between hard and easy conditions averaged less than
50 msec. But when they were instructed to respond as accurately as possible, their correct response times averaged
about 700 msec, and the difference between hard and easy
conditions averaged about 200 msec. In other words,
when response times were fast overall, the difference between conditions was dramatically smaller than when response times were slow overall. What is important to appreciate is that this scaling is not related to the scaling by
difficulty that is shown for the linear, exponential, and
stage models in Figure 4. For the subjects in Ratcliff and
Rouder's experiment, the difficulty ofthe bright/
dark decision was not greater at short response times than
at longer ones; rather, the reason that the difference between easy and hard conditions was larger at long than at
short response times was the scaling of response times
onto different points on a speed-accuracy tradeoff function. We could plot a Brinley function for the young subjects' response times in the accuracy conditions against
their response times in the speed conditions; the slope
would be 2.82 and the intercept would be -282 msec,
exactly in the range oftypical Brinley values for older versus young subjects, but the slope would have nothing to
do with differences in difficulty. Experiment I were
only about 5%. This means that small differences in accuracy between older and young subjects cannot be taken
to mean that there are no speed-accuracy criterion differences between them.) This exercise shows that differences in speed-accuracy criteria settings could be largely
responsible for the typical Brinley plots of older versus
young subjects' response times.
The Ratcliffand Rouder data also illustrate another important point about response times-namely, the
nonlinearity of response time differences . At relatively short response times, the variance in
response times is small, and the differences among experimental conditions are small. Differences among conditions are smallest when response time approaches floor,
where the floor for a given task and an individual subject
is the fastest response time at which accuracy begins to
rise above chance in response signal paradigms . At longer response times, both the variance
and the differences among experimental conditions become larger.
The points just elaborated show the complexity involved
in response time scaling. Greater differences among experimental conditions for older than for young subjects
may be due to speed-accuracy tradeoffdifferences, to the
greater effect ofdifficulty on older subjects' responses, or
to some mixture ofthese. Also, there might be other factors, such as older and young subjects' operating at different levels ofdifficulty on the difficulty-response time
function, differences in encoding and response output
times, increased variability in processing, or differences
in the likelihood of subjects' rejecting the first decision
on some proportion oftrials and engaging in a second decision process. Current models like Cerelia's and
Myerson et al.'s offer no way to sort out the different factors. There is no way, for example, to use the models to evaluate the possibility of speed-accuracy tradeoffs. What is needed is a model that elucidates the various
possibilities. We believe that any such model will necessarily be a model the lays out the components ofprocessing in the tasks to which it is applied. In the next section,
we show how the diffusion model accomplishes these
THE DIFFUSION MODEL
Ratcliff's diffusion model 
is designed to account for response time and accuracy in
experimental paradigms in which subjects are asked to
make two-choice decisions. The heart of the model is a
decision process in which two components of processing are separated: The information from the stimulus is
separated from the response criteria according to which a
decision is made. The model has been successful in dealing with data from a range of experimental paradigms
but has not yet been applied to the effects ofaging on response time. Here, we show how this could be done.
The diffusion model assumes that decisions are made
by a noisy process that accumulates information over time
toward one of two response criteria (or boundaries; see
Figure 5, top panel). When one ofthe criteria is reached, a
response is initiated. The mean rate ofaccumulation ofinformation is called the drift rate, and it is determined by
the quality ofthe information driving the decision process.
AGING AND RESPONSE TIME
Correct RT distribution
a,..----------:-----l....,...--~----=::::====;==--response
~....:....----=-___=======---v+2~
Figure 5. Top panel: An illustration of the diffusion model showing sample paths from a discrete approximation (i.e., small steps instead of a continuous process), The dotted lines represent the case in which criteria are moved close to the starting point so that the three paths terminate at the points marked T. Bottom panel: An illustration of scaling in the diffusion model,
with two different boundary positions (a) and a2) and three different drift rates (v, v + d, and
For example, in recognition memory, a weII-remembered
item would have a large value ofdrift rate. In a visual perception task, an item that was easy to see would have a
larger drift rate than an item that was not so easy to see.
As is shown in Figure 5, top panel, there is variability
around the mean as information is accumulated. The figure shows three processes, each with the same (positive)
drift rate. Variability causes one ofthem to reach the upper
boundary quickly, one to reach the upper boundary more
slowly, and the third to reach the lower boundary in error.
If the boundaries were moved nearer the starting point
(the dotted horizontal lines), the processes would terminate at the points marked T-that is, two of them would
end in errors. Moving the boundary positions is the way
the model accounts for speed-accuracy tradeoffs: The
closer the boundaries to the starting point, the faster are
responses, and the more likely are errors. The model produces accurate quantitative predictions for mean response
times for correct responses and error responses and for
the probabilities ofcorrect and error responses. The model
RATCLIFF, SPIELER, AND McKOON
Drift Rate
Drift Rate
Old drift rates
Young drift rates
For Several Subjects in Each Group
~Old boundary
Old and Young
drift rates
For Several Subjects in Each Group
.•1111··························1······················
Figure 6. Examples of how normal distributions of drift rate for older and young subjects map into skewed
distributions of response time, with greater standard deviations for older than for young subjects.
also automatically and accurately generates positively
skewed response time distributions .
In the past, response time models had considerable difficulty in dealing with the relative speeds of correct versus error responses. Empirically, response times for errors
are sometimes longer than response times for correct responses, sometimes shorter, and sometimes the relationship between error and correct response times varies for
an individual subject across the conditions of an experiment . The diffusion model can account for these varying patterns. Errors slower than correct responses are caused by the drift rate's varying not
only within a trial (as is shown in Figure 5, top panel), but
also across trials. In other words, it is assumed that ostensibly equivalent stimuli are not always encoded equally
well from one trial to another. Without across-trial variability, the model (like any random walk or diffusion
model with constant mean drift rate across trials) predicts
that error response times are the same as correct response
times. For error responses faster than correct responses,
the diffusion model assumes variability across trials in the
starting point . With these two sources of variability, the crossover patterns of error versus correct response times that appear in some data are exactly predicted
by the model (errors faster than correct responses when
accuracy is high, errors slower than correct responses
when accuracy is low). Currently, no other model is capable ofproducing these patterns of results .
The diffusion model is meant to apply to two-choice
decisions that are relatively fast and composed ofa singlestage decision process-that is, to many tasks that we
perform in real life many times an hour. This can be contrasted with multiple-stage decision processes that might
be involved in, for example, reasoning tasks, card sorting
tasks, and so forth; for such tasks, other modeling techniques are available . As a
rule of thumb, we would not want to apply the diffusion
model to experiments in which mean response times are
much longer than 1-1.5 sec (although this is a rough
guideline, rather than an absolute rule). With a multistage
decision process, the diffusion process could be assumed
to be the decision process used in each of the individual
The parameters of the diffusion model correspond to
the components of the decision process as follows: The
starting point of the accumulation of evidence is z, the
upper boundary is a, and the lower boundary is set to O. For
the simulations described in this article, the boundaries
were assumed to be symmetric about the starting point,
and so, Z = a /2. The amount of variability in the mean
drift rate across trials is assumed to be normally distributed, with a standard deviation of 1},and the amount of
variability in starting point is assumed to have a uniform
distribution, with a standard deviation ofsz. For each different stimulus condition in an experiment, it is assumed
that the rate ofaccumulation ofevidence is different, and
so, there is a different value ofdrift, v, for each condition.
Finally, there is a parameter Ter that represents the nondecisional components ofresponse time. Within trial variability, s was kept constant in all the simulations, because
AGING AND RESPONSE TIME
Slopes and Intercepts of Brinley Plots From Diffusion Model Simulations
Parameter (a)
Parameter (a)
Parameter (a)
Drift Rate (v)
Drift Rate (v)
Drift Rate (v)
Intercept (s)
Note-The other parameters of the diffusion model were z = a / 2, 1) = .12, Ter = 0.3 sec, and s = .1.
it is a scale parameter for the diffusion process (i.e., if it
were doubled, other parameters could be multiplied or
divided by two to produce exactly the same fits of the
model to the data).
The components of the model that are the most likely
candidates for explaining age-related differences in response times are drift rate, boundary position, and Ter•
Older subjects might extract less information from the
stimulus, and so, their drift rates might be lowerthan those
for young subjects. They might also set boundary positions wider to make accurate performance more likely.Or
they might be slower in the nondecisional components
of processing. Across-trial variability might also differ
between young and old, and this would have only a small
effect on correct response times but would have a large
effect on error response times. However,because error response times are rarely included in reports of response
time data, we did not investigate the possible interactions
ofacross-trial variability and aging in the simulations conducted for this article.
Illustrations of Scaling and the Diffusion Model
The diffusion model can produce the linear slope and
negative intercept of a typical Brinley plot under any of
a variety of possible assumptions about differences in
processing between older and young subjects. We begin
by illustrating this point with two examples.
First, we illustrate what happens in the diffusion model
when older subjects are operating over a different part of
the response time-difficulty function than young subjects.
In other words, an increase in difficulty from one condition to another hurts performance for older subjects more
than for young subjects, because the task is, overall, more
difficult for the older subjects. Figure 5 (bottom panel)
showshowdifficulty,which corresponds to drift rate, maps
to response time. As difficulty increases from one condition to a second condition, older subjects' drift rates might
move from v + A to v, and young subjects' drift rates
from v + 2A to v + A(i.e., the same difference Ain difficulty). The change in response times for older subjects
(b2 , with boundary position a,) would be much greater
than the change for young subjects (b l , with boundary
position a,). The same point is illustrated in the bottom
right panel of Figure 4: Older subjects might move from
a drift rate of .3 in an easy condition to .2 in a hard condition, and younger subjects might move from a drift rate
of.4 to.3. Assuming the same boundary positions (e.g.,
a = .16, the line marked with 3s) for the older and young
subjects, the change in response times between the easy
and the hard conditions would be greater for older than
for young subjects.
The lefthand panel of Figure 6, which expands a part
of the bottom right panel of Figure 4, shows the distributions of response times that would result under this
assumption-that is,theassumption that an increase in difficulty from one condition to another hurts performance
for older subjects more than for young subjects. The distribution ofdrift rates across older subjects is centered at
a lower value of drift rate than is the distribution of drift
rates for young subjects, and this results in the distributions of response times shown in the figure on the lefthand axis. Both distributions ofresponse times are skewed
to the right, and the older subjects' response times are generally slower, and their distribution of response times is
more spread out than that for the young subjects.
Second, we illustrate what happens in the diffusion
model if the drift rate is the same for older and young
subjects but older subjects set more conservative decision
criteria-that is, the older subjects set wider response
boundaries. In Figure 5, bottom panel, drift rates might be
RATCLIFF, SPIELER, AND McKOON
curacy is reasonably high (e.g., 90% or better), effects
that may not be detectable empirically. Looking for empirical differences in error rates to determine whether
there are criterion shifts cannot be done in the absence of
a model ofprocessing, because, in some cases, large criterion shifts that produce a 100-msec or greater effect on
response times may have little observable effect on accuracy, whereas in other cases there can be large (10%) effects on error rates .
Under both assumptions about how older subjects differ
from young subjects, the distributions of response times
shown in Figure 6 have about the same shape for older as
for young subjects. Because the distributions have approximately the same shape, the resulting Brinley (Q-Q)
plots will be approximately linear. Also, because the distribution is more spread out for the older subjects, the
slope of the Brinley plot will be greater than 1. In other
words, under both assumptions, the diffusion model makes
predictions that are consistent with results from Brinley
plot analyses.
The two illustrations we have given here are not the
only possible differences between older and young subjects in drift rate and boundary positions. For example, a
combination ofdrift and boundary position changes from
young to older subjects would provide response time distributions similar to those in Figure 6. Also, the range of
the nondecision component ofresponse time (Ter ) might
be larger for older subjects than for young subjects, and
the variability parameters might be larger for older subjects
than for young subjects. In the framework of the diffusion model, there are multiple possible explanations for
aging effects on response time, and which of these provides the best explanation can only be discovered by fitting the model to the data.
old v=.2-.4
young v=.3-.5
old a=.10-.18
young a=.08-.12
Slope=2.12
Intercept=-.412
Figure 7. Simulated Brinley plots with drift rate alone varying
between older and young subjects (top panel) or boundary positions alone changing between older and young subjects (bottom
0.45 -L..---r--.--.---.-~
Slope=1.39
Intercept=-.145
v+ 2Ll for an easy condition and v+ Ll for a hard condition
for both older and young subjects. If the boundary for
the young subjects was a2 and the boundary for the older
subjects was aI' the response time difference between
the conditions would be c1 for young subjects and b, for
older subjects. Illustrating the same point in the bottom
right panel ofFigure 4, drift rate might be .4 for the easy
condition and .3 for the hard condition for both young and
older subjects, but the older subjects might be operating
with boundary position a = .16, and the young with boundary position a = .12.
The right-hand panel of Figure 6 shows the distributions of response times that would result under this
assumption-that is, the assumption that older subjects
set wider boundaries. Again, the older subjects' response
times are generally slower, and their distribution of response times is more spread out than that for the young
It should be mentioned here that changes in boundary
positions have only modest effects on error rates if ac-
SIMULATIONS USING
THE DIFFUSION MODEL
The illustrations ofhow the effect ofaging on response
time might be viewed through the diffusion model have,
up to this point, been illustrations ofhow the model works
qualitatively. In this section, we show the results from simulations of the model.
Across the different simulations described below, we
tested a number of plausible assumptions that might be
made about how older subjects differ from young subjects in terms of the components of processing defined
by the diffusion model. In each case, older subjects were
assumed to differ from young subjects in their values of
one or more of the parameters of the model. Variability
was introduced into the parameter values to reflect variability across subjects. For example, the drift rate in an experimental condition might be chosen from a uniform distribution of drift rate values between, say, .2 and .6. For
most of the simulations, the distributions of values of a
AGING AND RESPONSE TIME
Slope=1.58
Intercept=-O.053
Slope=1.49
Intercept=O.019
Slope=1.53
Intercept=-O.018
Response Time for Young (s)
Slope=1.54
Intercept=-O.022
Response Time for Young (s)
Simulation Parameters
a=.12-.22, z=aJ2, v=.2-.4,TeF.4-.6
Young: a=.08-.18, z=al2, v=.4-.6,TeF.3-.5
(T\=.12,s=.1)
Figure 8. Simulated Brinley plot for older and young subjects with boundary positions,
drift rates, and the nondecision component of response time varying across subjects. The parameter values are selected from uniform distributions and vary across the ranges shown in
the figure.
parameter for older and young subjects were wide enough
that they overlapped, with the consequence that fast
older subjects could have faster response times than slow
young subjects, just as in real data. Exact numerical solutions for predictions of response probability, mean response time, response time distributions, and so on are
available for the diffusion model . Given these solutions, exact values can
be produced for the mean response time for a subject in
an experimental condition, given the parameter values
input to the model. Random variability arises from the
random choices from the ranges ofparameter values that
represent the individual subjects, and it is these random
choices that provide random variability in the simulations.
We describe the results of the simulations in terms of
how the diffusion model produces linear Brinley plots
with values of slope and intercept that match those that
have been found in empirical data. For every simulation
reported below, the slope was within 5% of the ratio of
the standard deviation ofolder subjects' response times to
the standard deviation ofyounger subjects' response times.
The standard deviations were computed from the response times that were used to construct the Brinley plot,
the response times for individual subjects in the first series
of simulations, and the mean response times for experimental conditions in the second series of simulations.
A Single Experimental Condition
We begin with simulations that model individual subjects' mean response times forjust one experimental condition. First, it was assumed that older and young subjects
set the same boundary positions (a = .16) but are differ-
RATCLIFF, SPIELER, AND McKOON
with a wider peak and shorter tails than a normal distribution, and the ratio of their standard deviations is within
5% of the slope of the Brinley plot.
The bottom panel of Figure 7 shows the Brinley plot
when it is assumed that older subjects have the same drift
rate as young subjects but set their response boundaries
differently.Forolder subjects, the boundary positions were
chosen from a uniform distribution with a range from .10
to .18, and for young subjects, the boundary positions were
chosen from a uniform distribution with a range from .08
to .12. Again, the distributions ofresponse times for both
the older and the young subjects are symmetric, with a
wider peak and shorter tails than a normal distribution.
Table 2 presents a more comprehensive picture ofwhat
happens to the slope and intercept of the Brinley plot as
a function ofthe means and ranges of drift ratesand boundary positions. In these simulations, only one parameter of
the model was allowedto vary between subjects, either the
boundary position or the drift rate. In each simulation, one
mean response time was produced for each subject.
One simulationwas conducted with 200 young subjects,
with their drift rates varying between .3 and .7 and their
other parameters as shown in the Table 2. Tothese young
subjects, we compared seven different groups of older
subjects (200 subjects per group), the groups varying in
the mean and range ofthe distribution oftheir drift rates.
The table shows the resulting intercepts and slopes of
Brinley plots. The first three groups ofolder subjects each
had the same range of drift values, but with increasingly
lower means, and the last four groups had lower drift values and larger ranges. The resulting Brinley functions
are linear,and the slope ofthe Brinley plot increases as the
mean drift rate decreases, and as the slope increases, the
intercept decreases.
A second simulation was conducted with 200 young
subjects, with their boundary positions varying between
.08 and .12 and the other parameters fixed as shown in
the table. Again, response times for these young subjects
were compared with response times for seven groups of
older subjects, the older subjects' boundaries varying in
the mean and range oftheir distributions. When the range
of boundary positions is the same for older and young
subjects, the Brinley slope is about I. When the range is
increased for older subjects, the slope increases. Because
boundary position has a minimum value (zero), it is likely
that boundary position becomes more variable as the
boundaries move further apart. Therefore, we assumed
that, as the mean value ofthe boundary position increased,
the range increased. As is shown in the table, changes in
boundary position produce linear Brinley functions with
increasing slope when the mean boundary position and
range increase; as the slope increases, the intercept decreases.
The results of these two sets of simulations show all
the Brinley plot regularities. The Brinley plots are linear, with slopes and intercepts similar to those found em-
Simulation Parameters
Old: a=.08-18, z=aJ2,
v=.4-.6,T.,.=.35-.5
Young: a=.06-.16, z=aJ2,
v:.4-.6,T.,.=.35-.5
(T]=.12,s:.1)
Slope=1.42
Intercept=-.21
0.4 V--r-~~==:;:=~
Response Time for Young (s)
Simulation Parameters
Old: a=.08-18, z=aJ2,
v=.4-.6,T.,.=.35-.5
Young: a=.08-.18, z=aJ2,
v=.6-.8,T.,.=.35-.5
(T]:.12,s:.1)
ResponseTime for Young (s)
Figure 9. Simulated Brinley plots for older versus young subjects, with differences among conditions modeled by consistent
differences in drift rate (.05 difference between each condition).
The top panel shows the results when older and young subjects
differ only in boundary position, and the bottom panel shows the
results when older and young subjects differ only in drift rate.
Slope=1.58
Intercept=-.25
ent in their drift rates. That is, the experimental condition
was more difficult for older subjects than for young subjects. The drift rate for each older subject was chosen randomly from a uniformdistribution ofdrift rates between
.2 and .4, and the drift rate for each young subject was
chosen randomly from a uniform distribution of drift
rates between .3 and .5. (Almost the same results would
be obtained ifthe distributions ofdrift rates were normal.)
The response time was then computed for each subject.
The older subjects' response times were plotted against the
young subjects' response times in the top panel of Figure 7, fastest older subject against fastest young subject,
next fastest older subject against next fastest young subject, and so on . The result
shows the typical linear plot, with positive slope and
negative intercept. The distributions of response times
for both the older and the young subjects are symmetric,
AGING AND RESPONSE TIME
ulations, for each individual subject, a value was chosen
randomly for each of the three parameters from uniform
distributions, using the ranges of values shown in the
figure caption. The response time for the individual was
generated from the model with these parameter values.
The widths ofthe ranges ofthe values for all three of the
parameters were assumed to be the same for older and
young subjects, so that the only differences between
older and young subjects were in the means ofthe parameters. The particular ranges chosen were extensions ef'the
ranges ofvalues found when the diffusion model is fit to
empirical data for young subjects . Figure 8 shows
four replications ofthe simulation. There are no systematic deviations from linearity. In each case, the function is
linear, with a slope around 1.5,and the intercept is slightly
negative or near zero. Thus, varying three of the parametersof the model to representthe effectsofaging produces
the same results as varying only drift rate or only boundary position. This reinforces the conclusion that Brinley
plots cannot be used to identify what components of processing are affected by aging in the diffusion model.
Multiple Experimental Conditions
The simulations just described show that the diffusion
model produces Brinley plots that mimic experimental data when individual older subjects' response times
are plotted against individual young subjects' response
times, for a single condition ofan experiment (i.e., a single value ofdifficulty). The diffusion model can successfully account for the empirical Brinley plot under any of
several different assumptions and combinations of assumptions about which components ofprocessing are affected by aging.
The more usual wayto construct Brinley plots is to plot
the mean response time for older subjects against the
mean for young subjects, for each ofa number ofexperimental conditions. To simulate these Brinley plots, we
assumed that the experimental conditions differed in drift
rate. This assumption corresponds to a within-subjects
manipulation in which all-theparameters ofthe model are
fixed and only the quality of evidence coming from the
stimulus changes across conditions. This means that subjects would be unable to change their speed-accuracy criteria (boundary positions in the diffusion model) as a
function ofstimulus condition. One simulation assumed
that the only difference between older and young subjects
was in boundary position settings, and the other assumed
that the only difference was in drift rates (to parallel the
simulations above).
For each simulation, there were 32 older and 32 young
subjects. The top panel ofFigure 9 shows the results when
boundary positions were different for older and young
subjects (with all other parameters set as shown in the figure). Older subjects' boundary positions were selected
from a uniform distribution with a range of .08-.18, and
young subjects' boundary positions were selected from
a uniform distribution with a range of .06-.16. The drift
SimulationParameters
Old: a=.08-18,z=a12,
v=.3-.6,T•.=.35-.5
Young:a=.05-.15,z=a12,
v=.4-.6,T•.=.3-.4
(11=·12,5=.1)
Slope=1.71
Intercept=-.19
Slope=1.56
Intercept=-.12
Response Time for Young (s)
SimulationParameters
Old: a=.08-18,z=a12,
v=.3-.6,T•.=.35-.5
Young:a=.05-.15,z=a12,
v=.4-.6,T•.=.3-.4
(11=·12,5=.1)
Response Time for Young (s)
c:og. 0.55
Figure 10. Simulated Brinley plots for older versus young subjects averaged across conditions, with differences among conditions modeled by differences in drift. The top panel shows the results from consistent differences in drift across conditions (the
drift rate for each condition is .05 larger than the previous one).
The bottom panel shows the result from adding a random value
in the range from - .025 to .025 to the value of drift for each condition for each subject.
pirically. With either boundary position or drift rate
varying, the results match empirical data. Thus, Brinley
plots do not provide a test of which components of processing in the diffusion model would be responsible for
the effects of aging.
In more realistic simulations, several parameters would
vary simultaneously across individual subjects. Figure 8
shows the Brinley plots produced when older subjects are
assumed to have smaller drift rates, wider boundaries,
and larger baseline response times (larger values of Ter)
than young subjects. We chose these three aspects of the
model to vary because they are the ones that most often
vary across individual young subjects . For the sim-
RATCLIFF, SPIELER, AND McKOON
The solid line is a
transformation of
line=2.59xyoung+.600
Simulation Parameters
a=.12-.22, z=a12, v=.3-.5,Ter.4-.6
Young: a=.08-.18, z=a12, v=.4-.6,Ter=.3-.5
(11=·12,s=.1 )
Response Time (s)
Figure 11. Average response time distributions for older and young subjects.
The solid line is a transformation of the young subject response time distribution via the function 2.59RTy + .600.
rate for the easiest experimental condition was selected
from a uniform distribution with a range of.4-.6. The drift
rates for the seven other conditions were successively .05
less than that for the largest drift rate. For each subject,
a mean response time was computed for each condition.
The response times for each condition were then averaged
over subjects, and the condition means were used to construct the Brinley plot. The Brinley plot (Figure 9, top
panel) is linear, with typical values ofslope and intercept.
The bottom panel of Figure 9 shows the results with
drift rate varying between young and older subjects. The
drift rates for the easiest experimental condition were selected from uniform distributions with ranges of .4-.6
for older subjects and .6-.8 for younger subjects. The drift
rates for the seven other conditions were successively .05
less than that for the largest drift rate. Again, the Brinley
plot is linear, with typical slope and intercept.
Figure 10 shows the results of two simulations with
drift rate, boundary position, and residual response time
(Ter) all varying simultaneously between young and
older subjects. The drift rate was assumed to change systematically across conditions, as above. Again, the slope
and intercept (top panel of the figure) have typical values. For the simulation shown in the bottom panel, variability was added to the differences in drift rates for each
condition. Instead of a consistent difference of .05 between the drift rates for each successive condition, a random number between - .025 and +.025 was added to the
consistent drift value. The result (bottom panel of Figure 10) shows that the regular spacing ofpoints in Figure 9
and Figure 10 (top panel) is a consequence ofthe regular
spacing of drift rates; random variability makes that
spacing less regular.
Across all the simulations, the diffusion model produced
typical results for the effect of aging on response time:
Brinley plots were linear, with positive slopes and negative
intercepts, and the slopes were equal to the ratio of standard deviations for the older and young subjects' response
times. The main conclusion is that aging differences can
come from any of the several components of processing
identified by the diffusion model or from combinations of
the components. It would be easy to adjust the parameter
values in any ofthe simulations to produce a specific value
ofslope-say, 1.5. In other words, the Brinley plot characteristics provide only weak constraints on modeling.
OTHER EMPIRICAL RESULTS IN THE
AGING AND RESPONSE TIME DOMAIN
Besides the Brinley plot regularities for mean response
time for older versus young subjects, a number of other
characteristics ofresponse time data have received attention. In the following sections, we show that the diffusion
model is consistent with these experimental results.
Response Time Distributions
G. A. Smith and Brewer found that average response time distributions (for correct responses) for older
AGING AND RESPONSE TIME
a=.08,z=.04
a=.16,z=.08
Quantile Response Time for Standard (s)
(Parameters for the standard are:
a=.12, z=.06, v=.3, 1"\=.12, Ter.3, s=.1)
Figure 12. Simulated quantile response times plotted against each other for
changes in a single parameter in the model. (Note that the scales are different
in the different panels, so that the slopes are not the same across panels.) These
plots would correspond to plots of the quantiles in Figure 11 for older and
young subjects against each other.
subjects slowed and spread, relative to those for young
subjects (for a single experimental condition); that is, the
older subjects' distribution could be produced from the
young subjects' distribution by a transformation: RTo =
1.l2RTy + 14 msec. The average distributions over subjects were produced by Vincent averaging . The distributions had almost the same shape when
scaled by the transformation and lay almost on top of
each other.
We generated response time distributions with the diffusion model to check whether the distributions would fit
the pattern G. A. Smith and Brewer found. The distributions G. A. Smith and Brewer examined had only relatively small differences in mean and spread ofresponse
times between young and older subjects. To more stringently test the diffusion model, we used parameter values
that would give larger differences in mean and spread.
We generated distributions ofresponse times, one distribution per subject, for 60 older subjects and 60 young
subjects, using parameter values in the ranges shown in
Figure 11, with older subjects having a larger boundary
separation, a lower drift rate, and a larger nondecision
component of response time. To average the response
time distributions over subjects, quantile response times
were computed for the response times for each subject,
and these were averaged over subjects . Figure II shows the average cumulative distributions for the young and older subjects. The solid line
is the transformation 
of the function for young subjects (see Figure 11). Just
as in G. A. Smith.and Brewer's study, the older subjects'
distribution and the transformed young subjects' distribution lie on top ofeach other. In other words, the diffusion
model can produce G. A. Smith and Brewer's empirical
We also examined whether variation in only one or another of the diffusion model parameters would give the
correct predictions for the relative shapes ofthe young and
older subjects' distributions. To show whether the distributions were (approximately) linear transformations of
each other, as G. A. Smith and Brewer's data say
they should be, we plotted the quantiles ofthe older and
young response time distributions against each other. If
the distributions are linear transformations ofeach other,
the result should be a straight line. The leftmost panels
show the results with drift rate alone varying between the
older and the young (a drift rate of .4, in the top panel,
RATCLIFF, SPIELER, AND McKOON
"-as-g 0.4
Boundary Position
Drift Rate
Figure 13. Standard deviations in response time as a function of drift rate
and boundary position in the diffusion model.
plotted against a drift rate of.3, and a drift rate of.2, in the
bottom panel, plotted against .3). The right-hand panels
show the results with variation in boundary positions
(boundary parameter a = .08 plotted against a = .12 in the
top panel, and a = .16 plotted against a = .12 in the bottom
panel). In both cases, the functions are linear. This means
that the diffusion model can predict response time distributions that are linear transformations ofeach other.
Another regularity in the aging literature is that, when
a particular quantile is plotted over experimental conditions, a straight line is obtained . Because the
quantiles shown in Figure 12 from the diffusion model
are linear transformations of each other, plotting individual quantiles across a range of conditions (e.g., different
drift rates) for older versus young subjects will produce
linear functions.
Standard Deviations in the Diffusion Model
The standard deviation in a single subject's response
time for a single experimental condition has not been systematically studied but has occasionally been reported
 . In the diffusion model, the standard deviation can vary from changing as fast as mean response time changes across conditions to not changing at
all as mean response time changes. Mean response time
increases both when the distribution of response times
shifts and when the distribution spreads. But the standard deviation increases only when the distribution
spreads. Ifthe distribution shifts only in position, not in
spread, the standard deviation is constant. The behavior
ofthe standard deviation in response time for the diffusion
model is shown in Figure 13 as a function of boundary
position and drift rate.
Fast Subjects and Slow Subjects
Versus the Group Mean
Hale and Jansen plotted response times
for fast young subjects and for slow young subjects against
the mean response times for the whole group of young
subjects. Specifically, they calculated the mean response
time for the fastest halfofthe subjects in each condition
of an experiment and plotted these means against the
means for all the subjects in each condition, and they did
the same thing for the mean response times for the slowest halfofthe subjects. The resulting two functions were
both straight lines, with the line for the slow subjects'
means having a larger slope and lower intercept than the
line for the fast subjects' means. Thus, Brinley plot regularities can be found not just with differences between
older and young subjects, but also for individual differences among young subjects. The Brinley plot slope was
interpreted as an index ofprocessing time.
We simulated Hale and Jansen's functions with
the diffusion model, using 32 subjects and 16experimental conditions. For each subject, the value for each ofthe
three parameters of the model that were allowed to vary
was selected randomly from a uniform distribution (v =
.3-.55, a = .05-.15, and rer = .30-.42). To produce sys-
AGING AND RESPONSE TIME
Slow=1.27*Group-.023
Fast=.67*Group+.068
Group Mean Response Time (s)
Figure 14. Simulated Brinley plots for fast and slow groups ofsubjects, compared with the mean for all subjects .
tematic differences among the 16 conditions, four values
of drift rate (base plus .0, .04, .08, and .12) were crossed
with four values of boundary position (base plus 0, .02,
.04, and .06). In addition, variability in each parameter
for each condition was added, the amount of variability
chosen randomly from the range - .04 to .04 for drift and
the range - .03 to .03 for boundary position. The overall
mean for each subject was used to assign the subject to
the fast or the slow group. Then, the mean response times
for each condition for fast subjects and for slow subjects
were plotted against group means, just as Hale and Jansen
did. The results,shown in Figure 14,are straight lines, with
a slope of0.67 and an intercept of.068 for the fast group
and a slope of 1.27 and an intercept of - .023 for the slow
group (without variability in each condition in each parameter, the slope was 0.67 and the intercept .083 for the
fast group, and the slope was 1.34and the intercept - .060
for the slow group). Thus, the diffusion model captures
the same differences Hale and Jansen found with real
data-that is, it captures individual differences within as
well as across groups-and also accommodates hypotheses about Brinley plot slopes, such as the magnification
hypothesis .
Slopes Versus Intercepts of Brinley Plots
Table2 contains the slopes and intercepts ofthe Brinley
plots for two sets of simulations of the diffusion model.
Figure 15graphs these slopes and intercepts against each
other, as was done in Figure 3 for the data from Cerella
 and Faust et al. . The functions in Figure 15
and Figure 3 are similar; they both have a negative slope
and a positive intercept, with the slope being about
100 msec less than the intercept. This demonstrates the
diffusion model's ability to capture the relationship between slopes and intercepts of the older/young subject
data described by Cerella and predicted by the
Q-Q plot analysis presented earlier.
GENERAL DISCUSSION
Why is a Brinley plot typically linear, and why does it
typically have a slope/of about 1.5? In earlier research,
the answer to this question has been that older subjects'
response times are slower, relative to young subjects' response times, by a constant factor, typically about 1.5. In
this article, we have used Q-Q theory to show that this
answer is not correct. Instead, what Q-Q theory makes
clear is that the plot is linear because the distributions of
response times (across subjects or conditions) for older
subjects' have about the same shape as the distributions
for young subjects and that the slope is equal to the ratio
of standard deviations ofthe older subjects' response times
(across subjects or conditions) to the young subjects' response times.
This reinterpretation makes the Brinley regularities
easier to understand. The range of older subjects' response times is wider than the range of young subjects'
response times. If we believe that older subjects are not
too different in their processing from young subjects, the
older subjects' range being only about 1.5 times wider is
RATCLIFF, SPIELER, AND McKOON
¥----- Slope =-437ms
Intercept = 501ms
Slope of Brinley Plot
Figure 15. Intercepts plotted against slopes from the diffusion model simulations shown in Table 2.
not too surprising. For example, if young subjects' response times ranged from 500 to 800 msec, the Brinley
slope would be 1 if older subjects' response times also
ranged from 500 to 800 msec (assuming that the distributions had the same shape). Or, if younger subjects' times
ranged from 500 to 800 msec and older subjects' times
ranged from 500 to 1,400 msec, the Brinley slope would
be 3. Thus, instead of asking whether a model can produce linear Brinley functions, it is only necessary to ask
whether the distribution of mean response times across
older subjects has the same shape as the distribution
across young subjects, and whether and by how much the
spread of the older subjects' distribution is wider. The
interpretation in terms ofdistributions provides a simpler
meeting point between models of processing and aging
effects. The connection between standard deviations in response times and a model is more easily understood than
the connection between the Brinley function and a model.
Under the Q-Q interpretation ofBrinley plots, the target ofmodeling is the relative shapes and spreads of the
distribution of mean response time across conditions or
subjects of older versus young groups, not the fact that
the slope typically has a value ofabout 1.5.1n moving attention awayfrom the slope value as the theoretically most
relevant piece of data, the Q-Q analysis agrees with the
general conclusion from a recent debate on the utility of
Brinley plots . The conclusion was that
Brinley plots provide only weak constraints either on
models of processing or on models ofthe effects ofaging.
It was argued that any ofa number ofassumptions about
changes as a function ofaging are probably capable of explaining the Brinley patterns of results.
The fact that the Brinley plot, whether considered, as
it was in the past, as a measure ofgeneral slowing or considered via Q-Q analysis as a measure of relative distributions, does not constrain models is illustrated by the diffusion model simulations we carried out. For the diffusion
model, wider distributions of response times for older
than for young subjects can come about because drift rates
have a wider range for older subjects, because older subjects set more conservative boundary positions, or because
ofsome combination ofthese factors, as well as because
of changes in the nondecisional component ofprocessing.
Moreover, there is no single set ofvalues for any ofthese
parameters that is required to get a particular Brinley
slope and intercept; many sets ofparameters values can fit
any particular Brinley plot. It is almost trivial for the diffusion model to simulate data that have all the usual Brinley regularities.
The critical tests among models will involve aspects
ofthe data other than the Brinley regularities. For the diffusion model, the critical tests involve the joint behavior
of response time and accuracy, the way the shape of the
response time distributions changes as a function ofdrift
rate or boundary position, and the relative speeds ofcorrect
and error responses . Because the model is forced to fit
all these measures simultaneously, the model is severely
constrained. Jointly fitting all these dependent variables
can cause the model to fail. But if it succeeds in fitting the
data adequately, the behavior of the parameters of the
model can be used to interpret the effects of aging.
This approach offers the potential ofbeing able to discriminate older from young subjects in multiple ways.
One question is whether the quality of the information that
drives the decision process (drift rate) is different or more
variable across trials for older subjects than for young subjects. Another question is whether older subjects set their
decision criteria (speed-accuracy criteria) more conservatively than do young subjects, and how variable are the
criteria across trials. Another possibility is that the nondecisional component ofresponse time is longer for older
subjects. Increases in task difficulty might affect older
subjects more than young subjects, and this might show up
in any or all ofthe components ofprocessing just listed.
The agenda set by this type of processing model is to
examine performance of older versus young subjects
across a range of different kinds of cognitive tasks. The
interesting questions are what components ofprocessing
are affected differentially for the older subjects by the
changes in task and what components hold constant. For
example, if an individual older subject is more conservative in criteria setting than the average older subject in one
task, is he/she more conservative in other tasks? If the
quality of information extracted from the stimulus (drift
rate) is lower in one task, is it also lower in other tasks,
and in what kinds of other tasks? This approach will not
only be able to identify differences between older and
young groups but will also be able to examine consistency
of components of processing within and across individuals within a group.
In sum, it is our hope that the theoretically based approach to the study ofaging offered by the diffusion model
and other such models will lead to a qualitatively deeper
understanding of the effects of aging on response time.
The earlier, more descriptive models have pointed out
regularities in the data, and we think the stage is set for
theory-based examinations ofthe effects of aging on response time.