Proceedings of the First Workshop on Ethics in Natural Language Processing, pages 66–73,
Valencia, Spain, April 4th, 2017. c⃝2017 Association for Computational Linguistics
Ethical Considerations in NLP Shared Tasks
Carla Parra Escart´ın1, Wessel Reijers2, Teresa Lynn2, Joss Moorkens1,
Andy Way2 and Chao-Hong Liu2
1ADAPT Centre, SALIS, Dublin City University, Ireland
2ADAPT Centre, School of Computing, Dublin City University, Ireland
{carla.parra,wessel.reijers,teresa.lynn,joss.moorkens,andy.way,chaohong.liu}
@adaptcentre.ie
Shared tasks are increasingly common in
our ﬁeld, and new challenges are suggested at almost every conference and
workshop. However, as this has become
an established way of pushing research
forward, it is important to discuss how
we researchers organise and participate in
shared tasks, and make that information
available to the community to allow further research improvements.
In this paper, we present a number of ethical issues
along with other areas of concern that are
related to the competitive nature of shared
As such issues could potentially
impact on research ethics in the Natural
Language Processing community, we also
propose the development of a framework
for the organisation of and participation in
shared tasks that can help mitigate against
these issues arising.
Introduction
Shared tasks are competitions to which researchers or teams of researchers submit systems
that address speciﬁc, predeﬁned challenges. The
competitive nature of shared tasks arises from the
publication of a system ranking in which the authors of the systems achieving the highest scores
obtain public acknowledgement of their work. In
this paper, we discuss a number of ethical issues
and various other areas of concern that relate to
the competitive nature of shared tasks. We then
move to propose the creation of a common framework for shared tasks that could help in overcoming these issues.
The primary goal of shared tasks is to encourage
wider international participation in solving particular tasks at hand. A second objective is to learn
from the competing systems so that research can
move forward from one year to the next, or to establish best practices as to how to tackle a particular challenge.
Over the past few years, the organisation of
and participation in shared tasks has become more
popular in Natural Language Processing (NLP),
speech and image processing. In the ﬁeld of NLP
study, researchers now have an array of annual
tasks in which they can participate.
For example, several shared tasks are organised at the Conference on Natural Language Learning (CoNLL),1
the Conference and Labs of the Evaluation Forum
(CLEF),2 or the International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SEMEVAL).3 For those working on a topic that proves to be particularly challenging, it has also become a trend to propose a
new shared task co-located at a related conference
or workshop in order to encourage contributions
from the wider community to address the problem
at hand. The NLP community has seen a rapid increase in the number of shared tasks recently, with
many repeated periodically while others have been
organised only once. During all collocated workshops at ACL 2016 alone, a total of 9 new shared
tasks were proposed, along with others held annually. The 2016 Conference on Machine Translation (WMT16), for instance, offered 6 shared tasks
already held in previous years along with 4 new
A distinctive feature of shared tasks is their
integral competitive nature.
In the ﬁeld of research ethics, the factor of competition in research
projects has been shown to have potentially negative ethical consequences for upholding research
1 
2 
3 
4 
integrity and the open character of scientiﬁc research. For instance, McCain has argued
that increased competition for funding and publications in the ﬁeld of genetics has resulted in
undesirable ‘secretive’ behaviour of scientists, of
refusal to provide access to data sets or conﬂicts
about ownership of experimental materials. Additionally, Mumford and Helton argued that
the negative perception among researchers of the
intentions of their competitors might invoke unethical behaviour. These are serious consequences
of elements of competition on the work of researchers. However, to date, little attention seems
to have been paid to preventing these problems
from arising in the organisation of shared tasks in
NLP research.
With the experience gathered in our community thanks to the organisation of shared tasks over
the past 30 years, we believe the time is right to
initiate an open discussion on a common ethical
framework for the organisation of shared tasks, in
order to reduce the potential negative ethical consequences of their competitive character. Such discussions should be held in the spirit of trying to
globally establish – as a research community –
which ethical issues should be tackled and considered across all shared tasks; the purpose of this
paper is not to criticise how any particular shared
task is or has been organised thus far in the ﬁeld.
The remainder of this paper is organised as follows: Section 2 is devoted to an overview of the
role of shared tasks in NLP, including their deﬁnition, importance as well as particular issues in
the existing shared tasks in our ﬁeld. Section 3
is devoted to a discussion on the potential negative ethical impacts of the factor of competition
that is insufﬁciently regulated, and ﬁnally Section
4 proposes steps towards the creation of a common
framework for the organisation of shared tasks in
NLP that assists at overcoming the ethical issues
we identify.
Shared Tasks in NLP
As mentioned in Section 1, shared tasks are competitions to which researchers or teams of researchers submit systems that address a particular
challenge. In the ﬁeld of NLP, the ﬁrst shared tasks
were initiated in the United States by NIST in
collaboration with DARPA .
Paroubek et al. report that the ﬁrst shared
tasks – then called evaluation campaigns – focused
on speech processing and started in 1987.5
In 1992, new initiatives focused on the ﬁeld
of text understanding under the umbrella of
the DARPA TIPSTER Program .
Since then, researchers in NLP have experienced
how this type of benchmarking for NLP tools and
systems has become a tradition in many sub-areas.
In fact, some of the current annual shared tasks
date all the way back to 1998 and 1999 when the
ﬁrst SEMEVAL (then called SENSEVAL-1)6 and
CONLL7 were organised.
Typically, shared tasks consist of 4 distinct
phases :
1. Training phase,
2. Dry-run phase,
3. Evaluation phase, and
4. Adjudication phase.
During the training phase, participants are provided with data to calibrate and train their systems. Such systems are subsequently used to process a blind test set during the dry-run phase, and
their results are evaluated against a ‘gold standard’
previously prepared by the shared task organisers.
In the adjudication phase, participants are asked
to raise any issues observed during the evaluation
and validate the obtained results.
Why are shared tasks important in our
Shared tasks are important because they help boost
the pace of development in our ﬁeld and encourage a culture of improving upon the state-of-theart. Shared tasks have an additional advantage: by
using the same data, all systems can be evaluated
objectively and comparisons across systems could
be made easier.
At the same time, some best practices and de
facto standards have evolved from shared tasks,
e.g. the widely used CoNLL format used in parsing and many other NLP tasks, and the splitting
of German compounds in MT proposed by Koehn
and Knight .
A by-product of these shared tasks are the new
datasets that are made available for use by the
5See Pallett for an overview of these ﬁrst shared
tasks and the role that NIST played in them.
6 
7 
wider research community. Shared tasks encourage the development of new resources and also
encourage innovative approaches to data collection. Moreover, provided the data is made available, any researcher can measure the performance
of their system against past shared task data. It
is also possible for any researcher outside one
shared task (possibly investigating different topics) to use the publicly available shared task data
after the event to benchmark new systems or applications, and allow for replication of experiments,
e.g. Mate Tools development reported evaluations
based on datasets from the CoNLL 2009 Shared
Task .
Shared tasks with a large number of participants can also indicate the need to tackle a particular problem, or point to challenges that are particularly attractive for the NLP research community. The participation of industry-based teams in
shared tasks shows that some of them are relevant
beyond the academic research community.
Taken together, shared tasks have proven themselves to be very effective in incentivising research in specialised areas, but they come at a
cost: organisers need to prepare the datasets well
in advance, deﬁne the evaluation criteria, gather
enough interest for participation, rank the submitted systems, and so on. At the same time, there is
little information sharing among shared tasks that
would allow organisers to beneﬁt from the experience of others. As a result, shared tasks vary
greatly in the way they are organised, how the
datasets are shared, and the type of information
(and data) which is available to participants and
the research community both before, during, and
after the evaluation.
Variability across shared tasks
Depending on the task at hand, shared tasks are organised in different ways. In some cases (such as
the MT shared tasks), no annotated data is needed,
and thus only aligned bilingual data is used.
In others, prior to the shared task, the organisers create annotated data that will be distributed
to all participating teams to allow them to prepare their systems for the task. Such annotated
data is used with two main aims: (i) adjusting to
the format required for submissions, and (ii) allowing researchers to explore the data to develop
automatic systems, either rule-based or machinelearning based, so that they are able to perform the
task on unseen data.
In some cases, the shared task organisers will
distinguish between two different tracks for the
same shared task depending on the source of the
data being used to train the systems. In most cases,
all teams in an evaluation test their systems on the
same datasets to allow for easier across-the-board
comparisons (‘closed’ track). Other shared tasks
allow for the inclusion of additional data by individual teams (‘open’ track). In these ‘open’ tracks,
the inclusion of other data is not necessarily veri-
ﬁed and based on a trust system. It is worth noting that, to date, this system has worked well and,
to the best of our knowledge, there have been no
known issues of mistrust in NLP shared tasks.
Depending on the type of shared tasks, different evaluation methodologies will be used, ranging from purely automatic metrics, such as precision and recall for many of the shared tasks focusing on Information Retrieval, to human evaluation,
such as the ranking of MT outputs or automatically generated text.8
Potential ethical issues concerning the
competitive nature of shared tasks
As we have seen in the previous section, there is
currently a great variability and a lack of standardisation in the organisation of shared tasks.
Because shared tasks have become an important part
of the scientiﬁc research in NLP, a certain level
of standardisation is nonetheless required in order to safeguard satisfactory levels of scientiﬁc integrity and openness of scientiﬁc research. This
standardisation in the organisation of shared tasks
is needed speciﬁcally to mitigate potential negative ethical impacts of their competitive character.
With a view to proposing a standard approach to
shared task organisation, in this section, we discuss the potential negative ethical impacts of competition in scientiﬁc research and subsequently illustrate this by addressing potentially problematic
aspects of the organisation of shared tasks in NLP.
Ethical issues arising from competition in
scientiﬁc research
Competition is a factor in scientiﬁc research that is
not limited to the ﬁeld of NLP. In the organisation
of contemporary science, competitive schemes for
8Paroubek et al. offer a good overview of the organisation of shared tasks and the different types of evaluation that one may come across.
scientiﬁc positions, publication possibilities or research funding are increasingly inﬂuential. However, shared tasks are distinctive from traditional
forms of research, such as the writing of individual research papers or the organisation of experiments in a closed research project, because the
element of competition is integral to the research
activity. In other words, shared tasks not only take
place within a competitive context, they are competitions per se.
For this reason, the effects of competition on the
conduct of researchers should be taken seriously.
As Anderson et al. argue: “the relationship between competition and academic misconduct is a serious concern”. A number of negative ethical impacts of competition in scientiﬁc
research are discussed in the literature on research
ethics. We suggest that the NLP community could
draw on previous experiences and studies in the
wider scientiﬁc community. We present three of
the most important ones:
• Secretive behaviour. This effect of competition results from the tendency of researchers
to give themselves an unfair competitive advantage in terms of knowledge concerning
the research challenge at hand.
 suggests that this behaviour can have
several concrete forms, such as the unwillingness to publish research results in a timely
fashion, refusal to provide access to data sets
and conﬂicts concerning the ‘ownership’ of
experimental materials.
• Overlooking the relevance of ethical concerns. Another effect of competition is the
tendency of the teams competing to overlook
the relevance of ethical concerns in their research. As Mumford and Helton explain, this might have the form of disregarding ethical concerns in general, or speciﬁcally with regard to one’s own work while
anticipating the potential ethical misconduct
of others (“if they can do it, why shouldn’t
we?”). This can lead to careless – or questionable – research conduct.
• Relations with other scientists. Because the
stakes in competitions can be very high (they
might result in further or decreased research
funding, or in opening up or closing off of
future career paths), competitions might have
negative impacts on the relations between
peers .
This might
lead researchers to have the tendency to behave unethically with regards to their peers
in order to preserve or strengthen their reputation.
Potential negative effects of competition
in shared tasks in NLP
The motivation for involvement in shared tasks has
evolved somewhat over the recent past. Many researchers in MT, for example, will participate in
the annual shared tasks organised at WMT, where
there is a ranking of the best systems for a proposed task.
Participation and success in tasks
such as these are often used to demonstrate research excellence to funding agencies.
same time, performance of the systems may also
have a greater impact on the funding for a complete research area (not only for individual teams
or institutions).
We only need to look back to
the notorious ALPAC report , whose consequences for research funding
in the US for MT were devastating for a considerable period. Such funding-related motivation can
in turn lead to increased competitiveness.
When we revisit the shared tasks within NLP,
the potential negative ethical impacts of competition identiﬁed in the literature on research ethics
can also be found in this ﬁeld. Here, we discuss
the main issues identiﬁed which require mechanisms to be established by our community to prevent them from happening.
• Secretiveness.
Competitiveness can sometimes lead to secretiveness with respect to
the speciﬁc features used to tune a system
to ensure that the best methods and/or approaches stay in the same institution/team.
Participants usually submit their system descriptions to the shared task, in the form of
presentations and research papers. However,
the way in which such systems are described
may vary greatly, as one can always choose
a more abstract higher-level description to
avoid ‘spilling the beans’ about the methodology applied, and retaining the knowledge
rather than sharing it.
• Unconscious overlooking of ethical concerns. Leading on from the secretiveness issue raised above, teams may unintentionally
be vague in reporting details of their systems’
parameters and functionality solely on the basis that other teams have also previously reported in this way. Such practice can simply
arise from the existence of convention in the
absence of guidelines or standards.
• Potential conﬂicts of interest. Finally, another potential ethical issue is related to organisers or annotators being allowed to participate in the shared task in which they are
involved. Again, while some ﬁnd it unethical
to participate in their own shared task, others disagree, and the community trusts that
in such cases the organisers trained their systems under the same conditions as the rest of
the participants, i.e. they did not take advantage of prior access to data and did not train
their systems for a longer period of time, or
have a sneak peak at – or hand-select for optimal performance – the test data to improve
their system’s performance and cause it to
be highly ranked. Both points of view are
perfectly valid, and in some cases even justiﬁed, e.g. teams working on (usually lowresourced) languages for which they themselves are one of the few potential participants for those languages. While the overlap
of organisers, annotators and participants has
not yet revealed itself to be a major issue in
our ﬁeld, and the goodwill and ethical conduct of all involved is generally trusted, it is
worth considering the establishment of methods for minimising the risk of this happening
in the future. One such measure could be for
the organisers to explicitly state whether the
overlap is likely to happen.9
Subsequently, we have identiﬁed a number of
other potential conﬂicts with the objectivity and
integrity of research that may arise from the competitive nature of shared tasks in NLP. Whether intentional or unintentional, these issues are worth
considering when developing a common framework for the organisation of and participation in
shared tasks:
• Lack of description of negative results. The
fact that negative results are also informative is something that no researcher will deny.
9This type of overlap was highlighted by the organisers of the PARSEME shared task at the 13th Workshop on
Multiword Expressions : 
However, as shown by Fanelli , researchers have a tendency to report only positive results.
He claims that this may be
because they “attract more interest and are
cited more often”, adding that there is a belief that “journal editors and peer reviewers
might tend to favour them, which will further
increase the desirability of a positive outcome
to researchers”.
Furthermore,
pressed to publish in the top conferences in
their ﬁelds, they may be reluctant to submit systems that do not report on positive results. As a result, while we always discover
what worked for a particular task, we are
not usually told what did not work, although
that may be of equal or (even) greater importance than the methodology that worked, as it
would help others to avoid repeating the same
mistake in the future. In fact, it may be the
case that the same approach has been tested
by different institutions with no success and
that we are incurring a hidden redundancy
that does not help us to move forward as a
ﬁeld. In order to prevent these issues from
occurring, we should design mechanisms that
incentivise the publication of negative results
and more thorough error analysis of systems
Similarly, it may be the case that although it
is highly desirable that industry-based teams
participate in a shared task, some may be
reluctant to do so on the basis of the negative impact that this may have for their product if it does not end up among the ﬁrst
ranked. Thus, rather than strengthening the
academia-industry relationship and learning
from each other, we risk making the gap between the two bigger rather than bridging
it. Should we not address this and establish
mechanisms that encourage industrial teams
to participate in shared tasks without such associated risks?
• Withdrawal from competition.
teams may prefer to withdraw from the competition rather than participate if they fear
that their performance may have a negative
impact in their future funding: how could
research excellence on a particular topic be
argued if one’s team came last in a competition? Again, mechanisms could be de-
signed with the aim of discouraging this type
of withdrawal. For example, one possible solution would be to only report on the upper
50% of the ranked systems.
• Potential ‘gaming the system’.
concern is the impact of the results of the
shared task beyond the shared task itself (e.g.
real-world applications, end-users). Shared
tasks are evaluated against a common test
set under the auspices of a ‘fair’ comparison among systems. However, as the ultimate
goal of most participating teams is to obtain
the highest positions in the ranking, there is
a risk of focusing on winning, rather than on
the task itself. Of course, accurate evaluation
is crucial when reporting results of NLP tasks
 ;
MT ).
As evaluation metrics play a crucial role in determining who
is the winner of a shared task, many participating teams will tune their systems so that
they achieve the highest possible score for the
objective function at hand, as opposed to focusing on whether this approach is actually
the best way to solve the problem. This, in
turn, impacts directly on the real-world applications for which solving that challenge is
particularly relevant, as it may be the case
that the ‘winning’ systems are not necessarily the best ones to be used in practice.
As discussed previously, some shared tasks
allow for ‘closed’ and ‘open’ variants, i.e. in
the ‘closed’ sub-task, participants use only
the data provided by the shared task organisers, such that the playing ﬁeld really is level
(we ignore for now the question as to whether
the leading system really is the ‘best’ system
for the task at hand, or (merely) has the best
pre-preprocessing component, for instance).
By contrast, in the ‘open’ challenge, teams
are permitted to add extra data such that true
comparison of the merits of the competing
systems is much harder to bring about.
• Redundancy and replicability in the ﬁeld.
Another important issue is that, although this
should be the overriding goal, we typically
ﬁnd that for any new data set – even for the
same language pair – optimal parameter settings established in a previous shared task do
not necessarily carry over to the new, albeit
related challenge. This is a real problem, as
if this is the case, we should ask ourselves
what we as a ﬁeld are really learning.
the same time, our ﬁeld experiences a lot of
redundancy, as we try to reimplement others’ algorithms against which we test our own
systems. This is the case particularly when
systems participating in a shared task are not
subsequently released to the community.10
• Unequal playing ﬁeld.
Another potential
risk is the fact that larger teams at institutions with greater processing power (e.g. better funded research centres or large multinationals) may have a clear unfair advantage
in developing better performing systems, rendering the ‘competition’ as an unequal playing ﬁeld for researchers in general.
could be mitigated against by establishing,
beforehand, the conditions under which systems are trained and tested for the task.
In this section, we have identiﬁed several potential ethical concerns related to the organization
and participation in shared tasks. As observed, the
three issues discussed in the academic literature on
competition in research (cf. Section 3.1) appear
to be important considerations for shared tasks in
NLP. In addition, we have highlighted some other
areas of potential ethical consideration in our ﬁeld
with respect to shared tasks. In the next section,
we discuss potential paths to tackle the ethical
concerns raised here.
Future directions
The great value of shared tasks is there for all
to see, and there is no doubt that they will continue to be a major venue for many researchers in
NLP in the future. Nonetheless, we have pointed
out several ethical concerns that we believe should
be addressed by the NLP community, and mechanisms created to prevent them should be also
agreed upon. At the same time, there may be other
ethical considerations that the authors have omitted due to lack of knowledge about all shared tasks
10The existence of initiatives such as CLARIN11 or the recent efforts made by ELDA to try to standardize even various versions of the ‘same’ dataset, evaluation metric, or even
a particular run of an experiment show that we are shifting to a new research paradigm where open data, research
transparency, reproducibility of results and a collaborative
approach to advancements in science are advocated .
in NLP, or simply because they arose within participation in speciﬁc shared tasks and have never
been shared with the community. Thus, we see
that a ﬁrst step towards determining potential ethical issues related to the organisation of and participation in shared tasks is to conduct a survey
in our community to ensure broad contribution.
Such a survey – to be launched shortly after discussions at the 2017 Ethics in NLP workshop –
consists of two parts. The ﬁrst tries to gauge the
varying requirements of shared tasks, and the second one aims at assessing what people feel are
important factors for consideration when drawing
up a common framework for shared tasks in NLP.
This common framework will ensure greater transparency and understanding of shared tasks in our
community, and prevent us from encountering the
potential negative impact of the ethical concerns
raised here.
Questions regarding past experiences related to
shared tasks (either as organisers, annotators or
participants) are included in the survey to gather
information regarding (i) best practices used in
speciﬁc shared tasks that could be extrapolated
to new ones, (ii) the type of information that is
available to participants before, during and after
the shared task, (iii) potential ethical concerns encountered in the past and how they were tackled,
(iv) other causes for concern from the NLP community and (v) good experiences that we should
aim at replicating.
Besides recommendations on best practice, we
envisage the creation of shared task checklists
based on the questions in the survey and their
replies. These checklists would target the organisers, annotators and participating teams in shared
tasks, and would be used to state any relevant information required in each case. By subsequently
making them publicly available to the community
(e.g. at the shared task website), any participating team or researcher interested in the shared task
topic would know how speciﬁc topics were addressed in the shared task, and what information
was or will be available to them. What follows is
a non-exhaustive list of some of the items that we
foresee including in the checklist (subject to discussion and amendment):
• Participation of organisers in the shared task;
• Participation of annotators or people who had
prior access to the data in the shared task;
• Public release of the results of the participating systems after the shared task, under an
agreed license;
• Declaration of the list of contributors to a certain system at submission time;
• Anonymisation of the lower (50% ?) of systems evaluated to be referred to by name in
published results;
Conclusion
In this paper we have discussed a number of potential ethical issues in the organisation and participation of shared tasks that NLP scientists should
address to prevent them from arising as problems
in the future. Besides taking into account the particular features of shared tasks, we investigated the
potential ethical issues of competition in scientiﬁc
research and extrapolated such issues to the potential problems that may arise in our own ﬁeld.
In addition, as we believe this should be tackled
by the NLP community as a whole, we have proposed the launch of a survey to gather further information about shared tasks in NLP that will help
in the development of a common framework in the
near future. This would include current best practice, a series of recommendations and checklists
as to what issues should be taken into account,
as well as what information is provided to participants, depending on the type of shared tasks in
Finally, shared tasks in our ﬁeld play an essential role in NLP. They have undoubtedly helped
improve the quality of the systems we develop
across a range of NLP sub-ﬁelds, to a point where
many of them comprise essential components of
professional workﬂows. The system as such is not
irretrievably broken, so there may be a temptation
to not ﬁx the issues outlined in this paper. However, we ﬁrmly believe that the ﬁeld of NLP has
reached a level of maturity where some reﬂection
on the practices that we currently take for granted
is merited, such that our shared tasks become ever
more reliable and consistent across our discipline,
and further strides are made to the beneﬁt of the
ﬁeld as a whole as well as to the wider community.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable feedback.
This research is supported by Science Foundation Ireland in the ADAPT Centre (Grant 13/RC/2106)
(www.adaptcentre.ie) at Dublin City University.