Electrical Synapses in the Thalamic Reticular Nucleus
Carole E. Landisman,1 Michael A. Long,1 Michael Beierlein,1 Michael R. Deans,2 David L. Paul,2 and
Barry W. Connors1
1Department of Neuroscience, Division of Biology and Medicine, Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island 02912, and
2Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115
Neurons of the thalamic reticular nucleus (TRN) provide inhibitory input to thalamic relay cells and generate synchronized
activity during sleep and seizures. It is widely assumed that
TRN cells interact only via chemical synaptic connections.
However, we show that many neighboring pairs of TRN neurons
in rats and mice are electrically coupled. In paired-cell recordings, electrical synapses were able to mediate close correlations between action potentials when the coupling was strong;
they could modulate burst-ﬁring states even when the coupling
strength was more modest. Electrical synapses between TRN
neurons were absent in mice with a null mutation for the
connexin36 (Cx36) gene. Surprisingly, inhibitory chemical synaptic connections between pairs of neurons were not observed,
although strong extracellular stimuli could evoke inhibition in
single TRN neurons. We conclude that Cx36-dependent gap
junctions play an important role in the regulation of neural ﬁring
patterns within the TRN. When combined with recent observations from the cerebral cortex, our results imply that electrical
synapses are a common mechanism for generating synchrony
within networks of inhibitory neurons in the mammalian
forebrain.
Key words: thalamus; reticular nucleus; gap junctions; electrical coupling; connexin36; rat; mouse; inhibition; synchrony
The thalamic reticular nucleus (TRN) is a thin layer of inhibitory
neurons that borders relay nuclei of the dorsal thalamus . Excitatory inputs to TRN neurons come from
topographically aligned collaterals of both thalamocortical and
corticothalamic axons. Neurons of the TRN are exclusively
GABA containing ,
and the primary targets of inhibitory TRN axon terminals are the
thalamic relay neurons . Thus, the anatomy of the TRN suggests that the bidirectional excitatory activity between the thalamus and the neocortex
generates, in parallel, an inhibitory regulation of the relay neurons .
A wide range of functions has been proposed for the TRN; all
of them depend on the nature of its intrinsic circuitry .
Anatomical and physiological investigations of the TRN have
concluded that its neurons interact via chemical synaptic connections . Several studies describe local axon collaterals within the
TRN ; electron microscopy shows that
these axons form axosomatic and axodendritic chemical synapses
on TRN cells .
However, some analyses of the somatosensory thalamus in rats
suggest that intrinsic TRN axons are relatively sparse or absent
 and that TRN neurons interact through
dendrodendritic (presumably GABAergic) synapses . Whatever their precise morphological substrate, there has been nearly universal agreement that
GABA-mediated inhibitory synapses are the mechanism by which
neurons within the TRN network interact , and puncta adherentia,
which are small, specialized intercellular junctions, sometimes
form at dendrodendritic appositions . Unfortunately, the functions of puncta
adherentia are unknown.
Recent work on GABAergic neurons in the neocortex and several other
parts of the mammalian brain 
suggests that electrical coupling may be a common feature of
networks of inhibitory neurons. Gap junctions are the ultrastructural substrate of electrical synapses , and connexins are the proteins that comprise gap junction channels. In situ
hybridization shows that the mRNA for connexin36 (Cx36) , a connexin subtype that is most often associated with neuronal gap junctions , is strongly
expressed in the TRN . Here we show
that Cx36-dependent electrical synapses exist in the TRN of rats
and mice, and we describe their functional properties.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Thalamocortical slices, 300- to 400-m-thick, were prepared as described
previously from either Sprague Dawley rats [postnatal day 14 (P14) to P21] or Cx36 wild-type (WT) or knockout (KO)
littermate mice (P14-P18) and were constructed as described previously
Received Sept. 20, 2001; revised Nov. 8, 2001; accepted Nov. 9, 2001.
This work was supported by the Helen Hay Whitney Foundation (C.E.L.) and by
the Burroughs-Wellcome Trust (M.B.). This work was also funded by National
Institutes of Health Grants NS25983 and NS27248 to B.W.C. and GM37751 and
GM18974 to D.L.P. We thank Jay Gibson for developing the data acquisition and
analysis software and Saundy Patrick and Caterina Sellitto for excellent technical
assistance.
Correspondence should be addressed to Barry W. Connors, Box 1953, Department of Neuroscience, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912. E-mail:
 .
Copyright © 2002 Society for Neuroscience
0270-6474/02/221002-08$15.00/0
The Journal of Neuroscience, February 1, 2002, 22(3):1002–1009
 . Slices were visualized using either an Olympus
Optical (Tokyo, Japan) BX50WI or a Zeiss (Oberkochen, Germany)
Axioskop microscope and a Hamamatsu (Hamamatsu City, Japan) CCD
camera using infrared–differential interference contrast (IR-DIC) in a
submerged recording chamber at 32°C. The bathing solution [artiﬁcial
CSF (ACSF)] contained (in mM): 126 NaCl, 3 KCl, 1.25 NaH2PO4, 26
NaHCO3, 2 CaCl2, 10 dextrose, and either 1 or 2 MgCl2. Micropipettes
were ﬁlled with (in mM): 130 K-gluconate, 0.2 EGTA, 4 KCl, 2 NaCl, 10
HEPES, 20 sucrose, 4 ATP-Mg, 0.3 GTP-Tris, and 14 phosphocreatine-
Tris, pH 7.25–7.5, (280–293 mOsm). Recordings were performed in
current clamp using Axoprobe ampliﬁers (Axon Instruments, Foster
City, CA). In some cases, neurobiotin (4 mg/ml) was added to the
electrode ﬁlling solution to test for dye coupling. The technique for
developing the tissue has been described previously .
Extracellular stimuli were delivered using bipolar stimulating electrodes, monopolar tungsten electrodes, and ACSF-ﬁlled glass electrodes.
Data were collected and analyzed using a digital-to-analog board and
Labview software (National Instruments, Austin, TX) on a personal
computer (Dell Computer Company, Round Rock, TX). To test for the
presence of chemical synapses, ﬁve spikes were elicited in each neuron of
a pair at 40 Hz while observing the postsynaptic membrane potential at
high gain. To estimate the strength of coupling, a small hyperpolarizing
current step (600 msec duration) was injected into one cell while measuring the voltage deﬂection in that cell (V1) and the coupled cell (V2)
(see Fig. 2A); the coupling coefﬁcient was deﬁned as V2/V1. The
coupling coefﬁcients for each cell are derived from the average of 10–20
trials obtained from current steps applied to each cell of a pair; they did
not depend on which cell of each pair was stimulated. For estimates of
the frequency dependence of coupling, resting membrane potentials were
polarized to between 70 and 80 mV to prevent spiking, and sinusoidal
currents were applied to one neuron (1–100 Hz, with amplitudes sufﬁcient to generate peak-to-peak voltage deﬂections of 20–25 mV in the
injected cell).
Electrical synapses between neurons in the TRN
To test for the presence of electrical and chemical synapses, we
recorded from pairs of TRN neurons in slices of rat or mouse
thalamus. Recordings were made along the full extent of the
nucleus (Fig. 1A). However, most recorded pairs were in the
dorsal cap because its relatively low myelination allowed better
visualization of somata. We did not detect any difference in the
electrical coupling of cells recorded at different locations within
the TRN. The intrinsic ﬁring properties of TRN cells in both
mice and rats were similar to previous descriptions . The input resistance of the TRN neurons in rats was
166  54 M (all reported data are means  SD), and the time
constant was 13.1  3.7 msec (n  45). The properties of the
mouse cells are reported below. Cell pairs were spaced 35 m
apart (Fig. 1B). Four TRN cells were injected with neurobiotin,
and their morphology was reconstructed. In all cases, only a single
stained neuron was recovered (Fig. 1C). Each cell had an ovoid
soma and a long primary axon that emanated dorsolaterally and
coursed for several hundred micrometers. The axons made very
few collaterals within the TRN and traveled 0.5–1 mm into
adjacent relay nuclei before branching extensively; in some cases,
they formed terminal tufts.
The chemical synaptic connections between pairs of neurons
were tested by evoking single or short trains of action potentials
in one cell and measuring spike-triggered voltage changes in the
other cell while depolarizing by 10–15 mV to maximize the
visibility of IPSPs. Surprisingly, no evidence of chemical synapses
was observed (rats, n  56 pairs; mice, n  34). The absence of
IPSPs was probably not attributable to the “washout” of postsynaptic receptor function, because we were able to evoke IPSPs by
stimulating extracellularly within the nucleus (data not shown).
As described in previous studies , the current required
to evoke even a minimal IPSP was quite high (400–500 A
evoked a 0.5 mV IPSP at rest when stimulating 10–20 m away),
suggesting that chemical synaptic connections within the TRN are
sparse .
In contrast to chemical synapses, electrical synapses were commonly observed between pairs of TRN cells. Electrical connections were tested by applying current in steps of varying duration,
Structure of the TRN slice and its neurons. A, Low-power
IR-DIC image of the thalamic region of a living slice. Str, Striatum; IC,
internal capsule. B, Higher-power view of a pair of TRN cells with
adjoining somata (left). This pair was not electrically coupled. The right
shows a pair of TRN cells with nonadjoining somata. These cells were
strongly coupled (coupling coefﬁcient of 0.1). Thus, the somata of cell
pairs need not touch to be electrically coupled, and many pairs that do
Reconstruction
neurobiotin-ﬁlled TRN neuron. Three major axonal branches leave the
Landisman et al. • Electrical Synapses in Thalamic Reticular Nucleus
J. Neurosci., February 1, 2002, 22(3):1002–1009 1003
strength, and polarity to one cell while searching for appropriately timed and scaled voltage deﬂections in the second cell.
Approximately 31% (28 of 90) of paired neurons from the TRN
of rats clearly showed electrical coupling (Fig. 2A). The strength
of each electrical connection was quantiﬁed by calculating a
coupling coefﬁcient, which averaged 0.032  0.027 (range, 0.01–
0.13; n  28) for low-frequency, or steady-state, voltage deﬂections. Electrical coupling was symmetric [signals passed equally
well in both directions (Fig. 2A)] and was independent of transjunctional voltage over a range of at least 20 mV.
Electrical synapses had strong low-pass ﬁltering characteristics.
Single action potentials generated a small but rapidly rising
electrical postsynaptic potential in some electrically coupled cells,
and such spikelets had an average rise time of 0.43 msec (Fig. 2B);
the mean coupling coefﬁcient for action potentials in these pairs
was 0.007  0.002. However, in most pairs in which electrical
coupling was clearly evident for relatively slow signals, action
potential-evoked events were not visible; only six pairs in both
rats and mice had visible spikelets (n  39 coupled pairs).
Neurons of the TRN readily generated low-threshold spikes and
spike bursts after hyperpolarization (Fig. 2A) . The relatively slow envelope of depolarization underlying each low-threshold burst evoked a depolarization in
coupled postsynaptic neurons, with a magnitude well predicted by
the low-frequency coupling coefﬁcient of the pair (Fig. 2C); fast
action potentials generated much smaller postsynaptic events
proportionally. In another TRN pair (data not shown), which had
a coupling coefﬁcient of 0.03 (i.e., near the population average),
the 10 mV envelopes of low-threshold spikes evoked postsynaptic
depolarizations of 320 V; fast action potentials did not generate measurable postsynaptic events in this pair. To investigate
the frequency dependence of coupling more systematically, subthreshold sinusoidal currents were injected into single cells while
recording the induced voltage deﬂections in those cells and the
cells coupled to them. The attenuation of the signals recorded in
the noninjected neurons increased rapidly at stimulus frequencies
10 Hz (Fig. 3A,B).
Electrical synapses can regulate ﬁring patterns
Electrical coupling was strong enough for the activity of one TRN
cell to inﬂuence the ﬁring patterns of another. This could be
demonstrated in several ways. Figure 4A shows recordings from a
cell pair with a moderate coupling coefﬁcient of 0.04. When cell
1 was depolarized with 600 msec steps of 100 pA, it generated a
train of action potentials (left traces). When cell 1 received the
same stimulus but cell 2 concurrently received a 300 pA current
step, both the duration of spiking and its rate were decreased in
cell 1 (right traces). In addition, an electrical synapse could sometimes synchronize the action potentials of two simultaneously
ﬁring neurons. The cell pair shown in B was strongly coupled.
Application of simultaneous current stimuli evoked tonic ﬁring in
each cell. The cross-correlogram from the spiking in this pair has
a strong peak centered on 0 msec, with a half-width of only 4 msec
(C), indicating that the ﬁring patterns of the cells were closely
synchronized. This form of spike synchrony could be demonstrated only in the most strongly coupled pairs (i.e., coupling
coefﬁcients 0.1).
Relatively low-frequency ﬂuctuations of membrane potential
were particularly effective at entraining the ﬁring of coupled
neurons. Figure 5A shows data from a pair in which steady
depolarizing current was injected to hold cell 2 close to the
spiking threshold. When sinusoidal stimuli (1 Hz) sufﬁcient to
generate one spike per cycle were applied to cell 1, the spiking of
cell 2 was entrained to the stimulus as well, at two spikes per
cycle. Electrical coupling could also switch TRN cells between
bursting and tonically spiking modes. Sinusoidal (1 Hz) current
stimuli were ﬁrst applied to cell 1 only (Fig. 5B) and adjusted so
that a low-threshold burst ﬁred near the peak of each stimulus
cycle. Next, similar sinusoidal stimuli with the same phase were
applied to both cells. The in-phase stimuli, interacting through
the electrical synapse, reinforced the spiking of cell 1 and forced
it to generate a burst plus two tonic spikes on each cycle. On the
other hand, when the sinusoidal stimuli to the two cells were
subsequently switched to anti-phase, the bursting in both cells was
suppressed, and each ﬁred only one or two spikes at the peak of
each cycle.
Electrical coupling between rat TRN neurons. A, Intracellular
current steps (200 pA) to evoke responses in cell 1 induced attenuated
voltage changes in cell 2 (left traces) (coupling coefﬁcient of 0.1). Tracings
on the right are from the same cell pair, but, in this case, current steps
were delivered to cell 2. B, Close-up of a single presynaptic spike and the
averaged spikelet it induced in the soma of a coupled neighboring cell. C,
Close-up of the rebound burst generated by cell 2 in A (right) and the
coupling potential corresponding to it in cell 1.
1004 J. Neurosci., February 1, 2002, 22(3):1002–1009
Landisman et al. • Electrical Synapses in Thalamic Reticular Nucleus
Electrical synapses in the TRN require Cx36
Cx36 appears to be the predominant type of connexin expressed
in central neurons . We tested the importance of Cx36 for
electrical synapses between TRN neurons by studying WT and
littermate mice that were homozygous for a null mutation of the
Cx36 gene (KO mice). KO mice were constructed so that histochemical reporters were expressed in place of the Cx36 protein
 . The thalamic expression pattern of one
reporter, -galactosidase (-gal), is shown in a 200-m-thick
vibratome section that was cut in the same oblique plane as the
slices used for electrophysiology (Fig. 6A). Staining was very
strong throughout the TRN, but it was notably sparse or absent in
the relay nuclei of the dorsal thalamus. In this example, the
reaction was strongly developed to reveal staining within relay
nuclei. As a result, cellular detail in the TRN is obscured by the
signal intensity. To reveal the cellular distribution of staining,
14-m-thick frozen sections were prepared, and the timing of the
histochemical reaction was optimized for the TRN. As shown in
Figure 6B, intense staining is evident, but it is restricted to a
subset of TRN cell bodies. A substantial number of cells are
completely devoid of the reaction product. Double labeling in
companion sections for -gal and for parvalbumin immunoreactivity (data not shown) conﬁrmed that marker expression is
abundant in some TRN neurons but absent in others. A restriction in Cx36 expression could explain the relatively low incidence
of coupling between neurons in the TRN (31%) compared with
speciﬁc inhibitory interneurons in somatosensory cortex (60%)
 . It is possible that, in the
TRN, as in neocortex, inhibitory neurons are not homogeneous
and that electrical synapses are restricted to some undeﬁned
neuronal subtype.
Paired recordings from TRN neurons of WT and heterozygous
mice revealed that electrical coupling and other electrophysiological properties were very similar to those of TRN neurons from
rats. Electrical coupling occurred in 32% of tested pairs (11 of 34
pairs; two of four of these pairs were in heterozygotes) (Fig. 6C,
left). The mean coupling coefﬁcient between coupled mouse pairs
was 0.032  0.03 (range, 0.01–0.13). In contrast, electrical cou-
Frequency dependence of signal transfer between coupled
neurons. A, Subthreshold sinusoidal currents were injected into one cell of
a coupled pair, and membrane voltage deﬂections were recorded from the
injected cell (top traces) and the cell coupled to it (bottom traces). Stimulus
frequencies were 1 Hz (left traces) and 100 Hz (right traces). Note the
differences in voltage gain between the traces of cell 1 (low gain) and cell
2 (high gain). B, Attenuation of sinusoidal signals across electrical synapses as a function of signal frequency. Data were obtained as described
in A, and attenuation was deﬁned as the ratio of peak-to-peak amplitudes
in the noninjected compared with the injected cell, normalized to the 1
Hz attenuation and expressed as a percentage. Data points are the
means  SEM of measurements from four neuron pairs.
Electrical synapses can regulate spiking. A, Simultaneous recordings from a coupled TRN cell pair. Traces on the left show repetitive
ﬁring in cell 1 as it received a 100 pA pulse of depolarizing current; cell
2 received no current. Traces on the right show how a hyperpolarizing
current step of 300 pA delivered to cell 2 reduced the duration and
frequency of spiking induced by the same 100 pA stimulus to cell 1. B,
Simultaneous current steps applied to a coupled pair (coupling coefﬁcient
of 0.1) evoked repetitive ﬁring in both. Note the small spikelets in cell 2
during intervals of spike silence; each spikelet coincided with a spike in
cell 1. C, Cross-correlogram of the spiking in the pair shown in B shows
a sharp, narrow peak centered on 0 msec.
Landisman et al. • Electrical Synapses in Thalamic Reticular Nucleus
J. Neurosci., February 1, 2002, 22(3):1002–1009 1005
pling between TRN cells in KO tissue was all but absent (Fig. 6C,
right). Only one of 38 pairs had measurable coupling, and that
single coupled KO pair had an exceptionally low coupling coef-
ﬁcient (0.002). Thus, TRN neurons from WT mice exhibited
signiﬁcantly more electrical coupling than the neurons of KO
mice ( p  0.001; Fisher’s exact test). Neither the input resistance
(WT, 130  40 M, n  46; KO, 157  104 M, n  85) nor the
membrane time constant (WT, 10.3  3.4 msec; KO. 9.9  5.4
msec) of TRN cells varied with genotype. Intrinsic ﬁring patterns
of WT and KO neurons were not obviously different. These
results suggest that virtually all electrical coupling between TRN
neurons requires gap junctions containing Cx36.
DISCUSSION
Electrical synapses between TRN neurons
Our central conclusion is that many of the neurons in the TRN of
rodents are interconnected by electrical synapses. At least one
author speculated as early as the 1960s that electrical synapses
might play a role in thalamic circuitry , but the
possibility was never given much credence nor had it been tested
experimentally. Our most direct evidence comes from paired
recordings of TRN neurons: changes of the transmembrane potential induced in one cell cause appropriate changes of potential
in the adjacent cell. The properties of these electrical interactions
are similar to most electrical synapses that have been studied in
vertebrate nervous systems : (1) coupling is symmetric, and current passes equally
well in both directions; (2) there is no obvious rapid gating of the
coupling conductance that depends on transjunctional voltage; (3)
electrical signals are attenuated and low-pass ﬁltered as they pass
from the ﬁrst cell to the second cell; and (4) coupling depends on
the expression of a connexin protein. No other known form of
electrical interaction between neurons is consistent with all of
these properties.
Gap junctions are the morphological hallmark of electrical
synapses , but they are often small and are notoriously difﬁcult to detect by transmission electron microscopy.
The literature on the ultrastructure of gap junctions seems to lack
any description of them between neurons of the TRN . In the neocortex, in which electrical synapses between GABAergic neurons are very common and for which innumerable
ultrastructural studies have been done, descriptions of gap junctions have nevertheless been quite rare .
Surprisingly, we never detected chemical synaptic interactions
in our TRN paired-cell recordings. It is unlikely that technical
artifacts obscured them, because strong extracellular stimuli
evoked IPSPs in single TRN cells. We frequently observed unitary IPSPs when using the same paired-cell recording methods in
the neocortex . Indeed,
Zhang et al. described shock-evoked, as well as miniature
IPSCs, in TRN cells of rodents; IPSPs can also be triggered in
the cells of the ferret perigeniculate nucleus (which is part of the
TRN) by applying glutamate to neighboring cells (Sanchez-Vives
Modulation of spiking patterns mediated by electrical synapses. A, A sine wave current stimulus (1 Hz) was applied to cell 1, with the
amplitude adjusted to generate one spike per cycle. Cell 2, which was electrically coupled to cell 1, was depolarized with steady current to near threshold.
Sine wave stimuli to cell 1 induced entrained spikes in cell 2. The traces below show expansion of the traces above. Spikes in these panels are truncated.
B, In a different pair of electrically coupled cells (coupling coefﬁcient of 0.04), a 1 Hz sine wave stimulus to cell 1 induced ﬁring of a single burst of spikes
on each cycle (left). When both cells were stimulated with similar currents in-phase, cell 1 generated a burst plus two tonic spikes on each cycle (middle).
When the same stimuli were shifted to anti-phase (right), cell 1 ﬁred only two tonic spikes per cycle, and cell 2 ﬁred a single spike per cycle. The top row
shows expanded regions of recordings from cell 1, as indicated. Spike amplitudes have been truncated in all traces.
1006 J. Neurosci., February 1, 2002, 22(3):1002–1009
Landisman et al. • Electrical Synapses in Thalamic Reticular Nucleus
et al., 1997). There are at least two hypotheses with regard to why
we did not observe paired-cell IPSPs. First, it may be that TRN
neurons make very sparse connections with each other. This is
consistent with the report that the size of spontaneous and
miniature IPSCs in the cells of TRN and ventrobasal nucleus
(VB) are similar, yet the peak amplitude of evoked IPSCs is four
times larger in VB cells compared with TRN cells when using
equivalent stimuli . Second, it is possible that
the probability of neurotransmitter release is very low at intra-
TRN synapses; consistent with this, the frequency of miniature
IPSCs was much smaller in TRN than in VB neurons . Our limited testing protocol may have missed synaptic
events of low probability. Both sparse connections and lowrelease probability are consistent with the very large stimulus
currents we needed to evoke IPSPs. Anatomical results favor the
hypothesis of sparse connections, because relatively small numbers of symmetric and GABA-immunoreactive
 axosomatic and axodendritic synapses are
observed within the TRN. It appears that intrinsic axonal arbors
of rat TRN are short and spare or, indeed, absent entirely . Some GABAergic synapses onto TRN cells
also arise from extrinsic sources , which could be activated with extracellular
stimuli but would not be evident in paired-cell recordings. In a
study that combined single-cell reconstruction with serial section
electron microscopy, Pinault et al. suggested that dendrodendritic synapses might be the sole type of GABAergic interconnection in the TRN of rodents. However, not all studies have
supported this conclusion .
It seems very likely that inhibitory synaptic connections within
the TRN exist, but additional studies will be needed to resolve
their properties. Our recordings show that at least a subset of
TRN cells are also coupled by electrical synapses. The circuit
diagram in Figure 7 illustrates the general pattern of chemical and
electrical synaptic connections within the TRN.
Role of Cx36 in the TRN
We found that mice with a null mutation for Cx36 were nearly
devoid of electrical synapses in the TRN. This suggests that Cx36
is an essential component of functional gap junctions between
most TRN neurons. Cx36 may also be sufﬁcient for this purpose,
because it is the only one of 16 connexin subtypes that is
preferentially expressed by central neurons . Studies that combine freeze fracture electron microscopy
Electrical synapses in the TRN depend on Cx36. A, -gal
histochemistry of a section from a Cx36 KO mouse shows strong staining
in the TRN but very weak staining in VB. The section was cut in the
oblique plane used for electrophysiology (see Materials and Methods),
and the reaction was strongly developed in an attempt to reveal staining
in VB. B, Higher-power view of -gal-reacted TRN, showing that some
neurons stain strongly, whereas others are apparently unstained. In this
case, the section was cut in the coronal plane, and the reaction time was
optimized for the TRN. C, Moderate electrical coupling between a
representative pair of TRN cells from a WT mouse (left); coupling was
absent from almost all pairs of TRN cells from KO mice (right).
Synaptic circuitry of the TRN. Rectangular terminals, Excitatory chemical synapses; circular terminals, inhibitory chemical synapses;
zigzagged lines, electrical synapses. The dashed line representing the intra-
TRN chemical synaptic connection indicates uncertainty about its structural basis.
Landisman et al. • Electrical Synapses in Thalamic Reticular Nucleus
J. Neurosci., February 1, 2002, 22(3):1002–1009 1007
with immunocytochemistry have concluded that Cx36, but not
Cx43 and Cx32, is found within gap junctions that interconnect
neurons in a variety of mammalian brain regions . The anatomical localization of Cx36 is also consistent with our physiological results. The mRNA for Cx36 is
densely expressed in the TRN, in stark contrast to most thalamic
relay nuclei, which are “completely devoid of hybridization
grains” . Our -gal staining patterns are
similar to these in situ hybridization patterns (Fig. 6A). The
restricted expression of -gal among TRN cells is consistent with
the relatively modest incidence of electrical coupling; it suggests
that electrical synapses selectively interconnect subsets of TRN
The intercellular channels formed by Cx36 have interesting
properties that distinguish them from other connexins. Cx36
channels have the weakest voltage-dependent gating and the
smallest single-channel conductance of any tested connexin; they
are only slightly permeable to some organic dyes that permeate
other connexin channels easily . This is consistent with the absence of dye coupling
between electrically coupled TRN cells (in this study) and neocortical interneurons .
Recent studies have shown that GABAergic neurons of the
neocortex and hippocampus are
also electrically coupled and that the coupling is severely deﬁcient
in Cx36 KO mice . This
raises the possibility that Cx36 expression is necessary for the
large majority of electrical coupling between inhibitory neurons
of the mammalian forebrain. Such molecular speciﬁcity should be
very helpful for studies of the functional role of electrical synapses, because there are powerful methods potentially available
to manipulate the timing and location of Cx36 expression patterns
selectively.
Functions of electrical synapses in the TRN
Understanding the role of electrical synapses in the TRN is
complicated by uncertainty about the functions of the TRN itself.
This nucleus has been implicated in, among other things, mechanisms of sensory processing , attention , the generation of synchronous, rhythmic activity during
slow-wave sleep and certain seizure states ,
and the development of connections between the thalamus and
the neocortex . These diverse
functions undoubtedly require myriad cellular mechanisms, but
one feature that could be common to all of them is some degree
of synchronized neuronal activity. This converges nicely with the
well known ability of electrical synapses to synchronize neurons
across a range of temporal scales . Our
studies of interactions between paired neurons show clearly that
electrical synapses can synchronize neurons in the TRN. Our
results imply that the relatively strong ﬁltering properties of
electrical connections between TRN cells favor the synchronization of low-frequency events, such as low-threshold calcium spikes
and even slower ﬂuctuations, and preclude spike-to-spike synchrony in all but the most strongly coupled groups of neurons. In
comparison, the electrical synapses between neocortical interneurons are frequently able to mediate a temporally close (1 msec)
synchrony of spikes . The GABAergic synaptic connections within the TRN of
rodents may mediate sustained, rhythmic, propagating activity
during sleep , but there is also evidence
that they serve to desynchronize certain forms of rhythmic activity and restrict them spatially . However, all of these studies assume strong and extensive
local chemical connections, which is not consistent with our
ﬁndings. Studies in ferret perigeniculate nucleus also support the
role of TRN cells in desynchronizing spindle oscillations . Perhaps within the TRN
network, electrical and chemical synapses serve opposing roles,
with chemical synapses desynchronizing relatively high-frequency
activity (e.g., 7–14 Hz sleep spindles) and electrical synapses
synchronizing relatively low-frequency activity (e.g., 1 Hz delta
rhythms), as they do in neocortex . Electrical coupling between TRN neurons may also be important
during certain pathological states, especially seizures. For example, the 3 Hz paroxysms that characterize spike-wave seizures are
accompanied by periodic, synchronized excitation of TRN neurons by corticothalamic synapses .
The excited TRN neurons generate feedforward waves of inhibition in thalamic relay cells, synchronized, perhaps, by the inﬂuence of electrical synapses within the TRN.