Direct and indirect effects for neighborhood-based clustered
and longitudinal data
T.J. VanderWeele
Dept. of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health, 677 Huntington Ave., Boston, MA 02115,
 
Definitions of direct and indirect effects are given for settings in which individuals are clustered in
groups or neighborhoods and in which treatments are administered at the group level. A particular
intervention may affect individual outcomes both through its effect on the individual and by
changing the group or neighborhood itself. Identification conditions are given for controlled direct
effects and for natural direct and indirect effects. The interpretation of these identification
conditions are discussed within the context of neighborhood research and multilevel modeling.
Interventions at a single point in time and time-varying interventions are both considered. The
definition of direct and indirect effects requires certain stability or no-interference conditions;
some discussion is given as to how these no-interference conditions can be relaxed.
Causal inference; direct and indirect effects; interference; longitudinal data; multilevel models;
neighborhood effects; mediation; potential outcomes
1. Introduction
Our concern here will be with observational studies in which individuals are clustered in
groups or neighborhoods and in which the causal effect of a particular cluster-level
intervention is under consideration . We discuss how the potential outcomes
framework extends to this setting and present the
assumptions needed to estimate direct and indirect effects of a cluster- or neighborhoodlevel intervention. Our focus will be on the identification of direct and indirect effects and
we will draw on recent causal inference theory developed for direct and indirect effects in
the setting of non-clustered individual level data . This work circumvents many of the criticisms concerning the estimation of
direct and indirect effects using structural equations modeling and path analysis .
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Sociol Methods Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
 
Sociol Methods Res. 2010 May 1; 38(4): 515–544. doi:10.1177/0049124110366236.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
This is important because much of the work in the social sciences concerning mediation
presupposes that there are no interactions between the effects of the treatment and the
mediator on the outcome. The standard approach consists of regressing the outcome on the
treatment, mediator and covariates to obtain a direct effect and
then subtracting the direct effect from the total effect to obtain an indirect effect. This
approach, however, in general only works when there are no interactions between the effects
of the treatment and the mediator on the outcome. Kaufman et al. has shown when there are interactions or non-linearities, subtracting
what is defined below as a controlled direct effect from a total effect does not in general give
a quantity that can be interpreted as an indirect effect e.g. this difference may be non-zero
even when there is no mediation and the true indirect effect is in fact zero. The work on
direct and indirect effects in causal inference gives more general definitions of direct and
indirect effects based on counterfactuals.
In this paper, we consider direct and indirect effects for interventions taking place at a single
point in time and also extend our results to interventions that may change over time. The
remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides an overview of how the
potential outcomes framework relates to the setting of cluster-level interventions. Section 3
considers the identification of controlled direct effects. Section 4 considers the identification
of natural direct and indirect effects. Section 5 discusses ways in which no-interference or
SUTVA (stable unit treatment value assumption) conditions can be relaxed. Section 6
considers how the results in Sections 3 and 4 can be extended to data that is both clustered
and longitudinal. Section 7 offers some concluding remarks.
2. Cluster-level Interventions
Let Yik denote the individual level outcome for individual i in group or neighborhood or
cluster k. Let Tk denote the cluster-level treatment or intervention under consideration. Let
Xik denote individual level pretreatment characteristics for individual i in cluster k. Let Vk
denote group or neighborhood-level pretreatment characteristics for cluster k. Note that the
setting here differs somewhat from those considered elsewhere in educational research in which individuals are first assigned to
classrooms and then classrooms are assigned to treatments so that there are in effect two
stages of selection to consider: classroom assignment and treatment assignment. In this
paper do not consider interventions to move individuals from one group or neighborhood to
another as, for example, in the MTO study but rather interventions on the neighborhoods or clusters themselves.
Related work discusses the assumptions necessary estimate total causal effects of
neighborhood or cluster-level interventions . See Gitelman and
Hong and Raudenbush for related discussion. Specifically, let Yik(t) denote the
potential or counterfactual outcome individual i in cluster k would have obtained if, possibly
contrary to fact, the cluster-level treatment, Tk, in cluster k were set to t. For the
counterfactual variable Yik(t) to be well-defined one must assume that an individual’s
outcome does not depend on the treatment assigned to clusters other than the individual’s
own cluster. We will refer to this assumption as the neighborhood level stable unit treatment
VanderWeele
Sociol Methods Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
value assumption (or NL-SUTVA). Note that the NL-SUTVA assumption is a weaker
condition than the standard no-interference assumption in causal inference
because treatment is administered at the cluster level rather than the individual level; see
VanderWeele for further discussion. For the counterfactual variable Yik(t) to be
well-defined it must furthermore be assumed that the interventions on the various
neighborhoods do not change the cluster to which individuals belong. Hong and Raudenbush
 refer to this assumption as "intact clusters." For causal effects to be identified,
VanderWeele assumed that cluster-level treatment assignment is ignorable given the
covariates Xik and Vk; i.e. that for t = 0, 1
where A ∐ B|C denotes the independence relation that A is independent of B conditional on
C. Assumption (1) requires that within strata of the covariates Xik and Vk, the distribution of
the potential outcomes, Yik(t), are independent of the treatment actually received, Tk; i.e. that
within strata of the covariates, the groups are comparable in their potential outcomes. The
assumption is often interpreted as requiring that the covariate vectors, Xik and Vk, include all
variables that affect both the treatment and the outcome. VanderWeele noted that an
individual-level covariate need be included in the individual-level covariate vector, Xik, only
if it affects neighborhood-level treatment, Tk, in some way different than the neighborhoodlevel covariate equivalent in Vk; e.g. if treatment decisions used information only on the
mean of neighborhood income rather than on the distribution of income then mean income
would have to be included in Vk but individual income would not have to be included in Xik.
A "consistency" assumption was also needed that Tk = t ⇒ Yik(t) = Yik ; i.e. that the outcome that would have been
observed if treatment were set to what it in fact was is equal to the outcome that was in fact
observed. Under these assumptions it was shown that
The right hand side of equation (2) is given in terms of observed data and can thus be
estimated by appropriate statistical models. Further discussion of NL-SUTVA and of the
ignorability assumption (1) in the context of neighborhood effects research is given
elsewhere .
Multilevel (or hierarchical) modeling is often employed to model conditional expectations of
the form E[Yik|Tk = t, Xik = x, Vk = v] when individuals are clustered in groups or
neighborhoods. The typical model employed for a cluster-level intervention will have the
following form:
where β0 denotes an intercept, uk denotes a neighborhood-level random error and εik denotes
an individual-level random error. The uk and εik are usually assumed to be independent and
identically distributed with mean zero. That the εik are independent of one another implies
that the correlation between deviations from the mean that arises from subjects within the
VanderWeele
Sociol Methods Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
same neighborhood is wholly attributable to the neighborhood random term uk. Model (3) is
also often written in hierarchical form with level 1 given by the equation:
and level 2 given by the equation:
Substituting equation (5) into equation (4) gives equation (3). Estimation of the coefficients
of (3) or equivalently of (4) and (5) is straightforward using standard statistical software.
Equation (3) could of course also be generalized to include interaction terms. If model (3)
holds then under assumption (1), Yik(1)] − Yik(0)] = γ; i.e. γ has a causal interpretation as
the average causal effect for treatment Tk = 1 as compared with Tk = 0. If model (3) does not
hold but some more complex model, possibly including interactions, for the observed data;
i.e. for E[Yik|Tk = t, Xik = x, Vk = v], does hold then (2) can still be used for the estimation of
causal effects Yik(1)] − Yik(0)]. Whenever a multilevel model, such as (3), is employed, it
assumes a particular functional form and inference is only valid if the model is correctly
specified.
The remainder of this paper considers the identification not simply of total causal effects but
of direct and indirect effects. For purposes of illustration we will consider two examples. In
the first, we will consider the effect of the construction of new hospitals, a neighborhood
level intervention, on health outcomes. Let Tk denote the construction of a new hospital in
neighborhood k in year r. Let Yik denote a continuous measure of health status for individual
i in neighborhood k in year r + 1. Let Xik denote a vector of individual level characteristics
for individual i in neighborhood k including variables such as age, sex, race, socioeconomic
status, and prior health status, all measured at the beginning of year r. Let Vk denote
community-level characteristics for neighborhood k including variables such as number of
prior hospitals, neighborhood safety and neighborhood mean income. We will consider a
mediator, Mik, that denotes whether individual i in neighborhood k has access to clinical care
within 10 miles.
In the second example, we will let Tk be a measure of neighborhood policing in the past year
and we will let the outcome, Yik, be an indicator for whether an individual was a victim of
crime any time in the last year; the variables Xik and Vk will once again denote individual
and neighborhood characteristics respectively and we will consider a potential mediator,
Mik, that denotes the average number of hours per week in the past year that an individual
spends walking throughout the neighborhood. Similar examples, outside the context of
mediation can be found in Kaufman and Verbitsky and Raudenbush .
3. Controlled Direct Effects for a Cluster-level Intervention
Now suppose that the individual health outcome Yik is affected by the construction of a new
hospital both by improved health care access at the new hospital and through the changes
that the new hospital brings about in the community. With regard to the latter, the
construction of the new hospital may provide employment opportunities for the
VanderWeele
Sociol Methods Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
neighborhood which may improve individual health outcomes through increasing salaries,
lowering crime, etc. Let Mik be an indicator that denotes whether individual i in
neighborhood k has access to clinical care within 10 miles by some point in time after the
hopsital has been constructed (e.g. by 3 months after the hospital has been constructed).
Note that depending on the size of the areas in a study, building a new hospital may or may
not ensure access to clinical care within 10 miles for all individuals in the neighborhood.
Suppose that by setting up a temporary clinic any individual could be given access to
clinical care within 10 miles and thus that it is hypothetically feasible to intervene on Mik.
Suppose further that it were possible to intervene so as to deny an individual care at a newly
constructed hospital so that we could potentially intervene on neighborhood k and individual
i to set Tk = 1 and Mik = 0. Throughout the remainder of this paper we will assume that
some, possibly hypothetical, intervention on the mediator is available that can change the
value of Mik. If the mediator, Mik, cannot be changed through an intervention, an alternative
approach based on principal stratification may be employed .
Let Yik(t, m) denote the counterfactual value of the health outcome for individual i in
neighborhood k if Tk were set to t and if Mik were set to m. Note that for this quantity to be
well defined the health of individual i in neighborhood k must not depend on the access to a
nearby hospital of any other individual in the same or any other neighborhood nor on the
construction of hospitals in neighborhoods other than the individual’s own. We will refer to
this assumption as the individual and neighborhood level stable unit treatment value
assumption. Note that this is a considerably stronger assumption than that of the
neighborhood level SUTVA assumption considered above: a neighborhood-level nointerference assumption is required for treatment but a stronger individual-level nointerference assumption is required for the mediator. In Section 5 we discuss
how this assumption can be relaxed.
Consider the following two contrasts:
The contrast given in (6) considers the causal effect of the hospital construction intervening
so that the individual is not able to attain access to clinical care within 10 miles; the
expression in (6) thus can be interpreted as the causal effect of the hospital on an individual
that is not due to that individual’s access to health care related to the new hospital. Similarly
the expression in (7) considers the causal effect of the hospital construction intervening to
ensure that the individual is able to attain access to clinical care within 10 miles. Note that
contrasts of the form (6) and (7) consider interventions which fix both Tk and Mik to
particular values. Expressions such as (6) and (7) are thus referred to as "controlled direct
effects" because contrast (6) and (7) represent the direct effect of hospital
construction on health controlling for individual access; i.e. intervening to set individual
VanderWeele
Sociol Methods Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
access to 0 or 1, respectively. More generally, define the controlled direct effect for
individual i in cluster k by
. Note that the definition of
controlled direct effects allows the magnitude of the direct effect to vary with m; this is in
contrast to much of the literature on direct effects in the structural equation modeling
literature in which the direct effect is assumed homogenous for all levels
of the mediator. In the following section controlled direct effects will be contrasted to
"natural" direct and indirect effects and these remarks concerning relaxing homogeneity (i.e.
allowing interaction between the effects of the treatment and mediator on the outcome)
pertain also to natural direct and indirect effects. We might also be interested in contrasts of
Expression (8) considers the average causal effect of access to clinical care within 10 miles
intervening to ensure that a new hospital in the neighborhood is built; expression (9)
considers the average causal effect of access to clinical care within 10 miles intervening to
ensure that no new hospital is built.
The joint effect of the hospital construction and access to clinical care within 10 miles can
be decomposed as follows:
Note also that the decomposition given in (10) is a decomposition of the joint effect of Tk
and Mik rather than of simply the effect of hospital construction Tk alone. The decomposition
given in (10) is not unique. For example, the joint effect could also be decomposed as Yik(1,
1) − Yik(0, 0) = {Yik(1, 1) − Yik(0, 1)} + {Yik(0, 1) − Yik(0, 0)}. In the next section when we
consider natural direct and indirect effects we will provide a decomposition of the effect of
hospital construction Tk alone rather than the joint effect of Tk and Mik together.
We now turn to conditions for the identification of expressions (6)–(9). As noted above, in
order to estimate the causal effects of a neighborhood level intervention, the ignorability
assumption (1) must hold; that is to say Xik and Vk must contain all individual and
neighborhood level variables that confound the relationship between the neighborhood level
treatment, Tk, and the outcome, Yik. In order to estimate contrasts of the form (6) and (7); i.e.
controlled direct effects, we will require not only that the treatment-outcome relationship is
unconfounded given Xik and Vk but also that the mediator-outcome relationship is
unconfounded given Tk, Xik and Vk. Formally we will need the following conditions:
VanderWeele
Sociol Methods Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Condition (11) requires that Xik, Vk contain all the confounders of the treatment-outcome
relationship; condition (12) requires that Tk, Xik, Vk contain all the confounders of the
mediator-outcome relationship. Depending on how rich the covariates sets Xik and Vk are,
assumptions (11) and (12) may or may not be reasonable. Causal directed acyclic graphs can
be useful in assessing these assumptions . If conditions (11) and (12) do
hold then we will be able to estimate controlled direct effects of the form (6) and (7), as
stated in the following theorem. Note we will assume throughout this paper that the
consistency condition holds for Yik(t, m); i.e. that Tk = t, Mik = m ⇒ Yik(t, m) = Yik
 . The proofs of all theorems are given in the online
appendix. These generally follow those for non-clustered data.
Theorem 1. If for some set of variables Xik and Vk conditions (11) and (12) hold then the
average controlled direct effect
is identified
and is given by
Theorem 1 gives an empirical formula for expression (6) when t = 1, t′ = 0 and m = 0 and for
(7) when t = 1, t′ = 0 and m = 1. Note that the expression on the left hand side of (13) is a
causal quantity; the expression on the right hand side of equation (13) is given in terms of
the observed data and could be estimated from a multi-level model which extends equation
(3) so as to include Mik such as the model
where once again uk and εik are assumed to be independent and identically distributed with
mean zero. Under model (14) and the conditions (11) and (12), the controlled direct effect in
(13) is given by
. As before, interaction terms could be included
in the multi-level model given in (14) if appropriate and, using (13), the controlled direct
effect could then be expressed as a different combination of the regression coefficients. If
the outcome is not continuous, a generalized linear multilevel model 
could be employed in place of (14). In the neighborhood policing example, for instance, the
outcome, Yik, was a binary variable indicating whether or not an individual was the victim of
a crime in the past year. In estimating controlled direct effects from generalized linear
multilevel models, equation (13) can be used but care must be taken to transform estimates
using the inverse link function so that the expression Yik|Xik = x, Vk = v, Tk = t, Mik = m],
rather than its transform, is used in (13). Furthermore for generalized linear multilevel
models, estimates conditional on the cluster uk will not in general equal effect estimates
marginalized over uk and when employing a generalized linear multilevel model to estimate
controlled direct effects, it will be necessary to integrate over uk in order to use expression
(13). Standard errors for the expression in (13) could then be obtained by bootstrap
VanderWeele
Sociol Methods Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
techniques. Alternatively, a marginal approach using generalized estimating equations could
be used and such an approach has been advocated elsewhere on grounds of efficiency
 .
It can also be verified that if conditions (11) and (12) hold then expressions (8) and (9) are
also identified from the data and:
Note that both conditions (11) and (12) must hold in order to identify controlled direct
effects. Condition (11) is very similar to condition (1) above for the identification of total
effects. Condition (12) requires that mediator-outcome relationship is unconfounded given
Tk, Xik and Vk. Note that if there are unmeasured confounding variables of the mediatoroutcome relationship so that condition (12) is violated, then estimates of the controlled
direct effect will be biased .
In order to ensure that condition (12) holds, additional covariates, beyond those necessary to
identify total effects, may need to be included in Xik and Vk. Suppose, for example, that the
area in which a hospital was to be constructed was just east of a particular town and that the
west side of the town had more industrial factories and hence more air pollution. For
simplicity suppose further that those living on the east side of the town would be within 10
miles of the new hospital and those on the west side would not. In this case, a variable
indicating whether an individual lived on the east side or the west side of the town would
need to be included in the individual level covariate vector, Xik, because this variable would
then affect both the mediator, Mik (whether or not the individual had access to clinical care
within 10 miles), and the health status outcome, Yik, because of air pollution. Note that in
this example if the total effect, rather than the controlled direct effect, were of interest then
the side of town that individuals lived in might not need to be included in the individual
level covariate vector, Xik, if information on which individuals lived on which side of the
town was not used in making treatment decisions about the construction of the hospital.
In some cases the variables that confound the relationship between the mediator and
outcome might be consequences of treatment .
Denote the individual and cluster level covariates that confound the mediator-outcome
relationship and are consequences of treatment by Zik and Wk respectively. In such cases, to
identify controlled direct effects condition (12) can be modified to Yik(t, m) ∐ Mik|Tk, Xik,
Vk, Zik, Wk; provided this condition holds, along with condition (11), controlled direct
effects are still identified and given by Yik(t, m)] − Yik (t, m′)] = ∑x,v,z,w{ Yik|Xik = x, Vk =
v, Tk = t, Mik = m, Zik = z, Wk = w] − Yik|Xik = x, Vk = v, Tk = t, Mik = m′, Zik = z, Wk =
w]}P(Zik = z, Wk = w|Xik = x, Vk = v, Tk = t)P(Xik = x, Vk = v) . One would have to use the expression just
given rather than that given in (13) if, for example, the building of the hospital led to
VanderWeele
Sociol Methods Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
employment and higher incomes for some individuals which caused them to move from the
west side to the east side of the town. In this case, the variable indicating the side of the
town is both a consequence of treatment and confounds the relationship between the
mediator and the outcome.
4. Natural Direct and Indirect Effects for a Cluster-level Intervention
In the previous section, we considered controlled direct effects of the form (6) and. These
controlled direct effects represented the effect of neighborhood level treatment, Tk, on
individual level outcomes, Yik, intervening to fix the individual level mediator, Mik, to some
level m. In contrast with controlled direct effects, natural direct effects fix the intermediate
variable to the level it would have been under the presence or absence of treatment.
Although perhaps of less direct policy relevance, these natural direct effects may be of
interest in understanding the mechanisms through which particular outcomes arise and in
assessing the extent to which the effect of treatment is mediated . Let Mik(t) denote the counterfactual outcome for the individual level
mediator, Mik, if, possibly contrary to fact, Tk had been set to t. The neighborhood level
SUTVA condition for Mik(t) to be well-defined is that the individual level mediator, Mik(t),
for individual i in cluster k does not depend on the value of the cluster-level intervention,
Tk′, of any other neighborhood k′ ≠ = k. The consistency condition for Mik(t) is Tk = t ⇒
Mik(t) = Mik. Consider the following expression:
The expression given in (15) represents the effect of neighborhood level treatment, Tk,
intervening to set the individual level mediator, Mik, to what it would have been if Tk had in
fact been set to 0. More generally define the natural direct effect for individual i in
neighborhood k by
In order to estimate natural direct and indirect effects we need, in addition to the ignorability
conditions (11) and (12), two other ignorability conditions:
Condition (16) states that the effect of neighborhood level treatment, Tk, on the individual
level mediator, Mik, is unconfounded given Xik and Vk. Condition (17) essentially requires
that there is no effect of neighborhood level treatment Tk which itself confounds the
relationship between the individual level mediator, Mik, and the outcome, Yik .
Depending on the specific study, assumptions (16) and (17) may or may not hold.
Additional discussion is given below. If these assumptions do hold then we have the
following Theorem.
VanderWeele
Sociol Methods Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Theorem 2. If conditions (11), (12), (16) and (17) hold then the average natural direct effect
is identified and is given by
The quantity on the right hand side of expression (18), the difference in expectations, Yik|
Xik = x, Vk = v, Tk = t, Mik = m] − Yik|Xik = x, Vk = v, Tk = t*, Mik = m], could be estimated
from a multilevel model such as that given in (14). In order to estimate P(Mik = m|Xik = x, Vk
= v, Tk = t′) a separate regression model will be needed. Generalized linear multilevel
models will again be needed if the outcome or mediator is not continuous. Once the quantity
in (18) is obtained, standard errors could be calculated by bootstrapping techniques.
Pearl , in the context of causal directed acyclic graphs , gives identifiability conditions for controlled directed effects and natural direct and
indirect effects for non-clustered data which are somewhat weaker than (11), (12), (16) and
(17); some alternative identification conditions are also given by other authors ; these conditions could
similarly be generalized to multi-level data. However, in general, natural direct and indirect
effects will not be identified if there is a consequence of the treatment that confounds the
relationship between the mediator and the outcome unless there is no
interaction between the effects of the treatment and the mediator on the outcome in which
case controlled direct effects and natural direct effects coincide.
Recall that condition (17) essentially required that there be no effect of neighborhood level
treatment, Tk, which itself confounds the relationship between the individual level mediator,
Mik, and the outcome, Yik. Thus if the building of the hospital led to employment and higher
incomes for some individuals which caused them to move from the west side to the east side
of the town where there was access to the hospital within 10 miles and less air pollution then
condition (17) would be violated. As explained in the previous section, controlled direct
effects would still be identified in this case; but natural direct effects in general would not be
identified. If the variable indicating side of the town of individuals’ residence was not
affected by the construction of the hospital then (17) might then still hold; alternatively if the
side of the town of an individual’s residence did not affect health outcomes except through
access to clinical care (e.g. if air pollution were not an issue) then (17) might again still hold.
However, whenever a variable is a consequence of treatment and confounds the mediatoroutcome relationship, natural direct effects are not in general identified.
Now consider an expression such as
The expression given in (19) represents the average causal effect of neighborhood level
treatment, Tk, of building a hospital mediated through individual level access to clinical care,
VanderWeele
Sociol Methods Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Mik. More precisely, the expression given in (19) assumes an intervention to build a hospital
in neighborhood k (i.e. setting Tk = 1) and compares what would happen to individual level
health outcomes, Yik, if individual level access, Mik, were set to what it would have been if
Tk were 1 in contrast to what it would have been if Tk were 0. More generally define the
natural indirect effect for individual i in neighborhood k by
. Under assumptions (11), (12), (16) and
(17), the same assumptions required for natural direct effects, natural indirect effects are also
identified.
Theorem 3. If conditions (11), (12), (16) and (17) hold then the average natural indirect
is identified and is given by:
As with expression (18) in Theorem 2, in order to estimate the quantity on the right hand
side of expression (20), the expectation Yik|Xik = x, Vk = v, Tk = t′, Mik = m] could be
estimated from a multilevel model such as that given in (14) and a separate regression model
will be needed to estimate probabilities of the form P(Mik = m|Xik = x, Vk = v, Tk = t).
Standard errors for the quantity in (20) could be calculated by bootstrapping techniques. As
noted above, the approach can easily accomodate interactions between the effects of the
treatment and the mediator on the outcome. For example, if mulitlevel models for Yik and
Mik are given by:
with uk, εik, ξk; ηik all mutually independent with mean zero, then it is relatively
straightforward to show that the natural direct effect,
, and natural indirect effect,
, are given by:
Similarly, the natural direct effect,
, and indirect effect,
VanderWeele
Sociol Methods Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Note that if there is no interaction between the effects of the treatment and the mediator on
the outcome so that κ = 0, then the expressions for the natural direct effect reduce to γ(t − t*)
and the expressions for the natural indirect effect reduce to θλ(t − t*).
It is easy to verify that the total average causal effect (of building a new hospital or
increasing the level of neighborhood policing) can be decomposed into a natural direct effect
and a natural indirect effect. For example:
and similarly,
The expression in (21), for example, decomposes the total effect of building a hospital on
individual health outcomes into (i) a natural indirect effect,
, the portion of the effect of building a
hospital mediated through the increase in access to clinical care that the new hospital
provides and (ii) a natural direct effect,
portion of the effect of building a hospital on individual health outcomes if individual access
to clinical care within 10 miles had been set to what it would have been had no hospital been
built. In this setting the natural direct effect represents the portion of the effect of building a
hospital on individual health outcomes mediated by pathways other than improved access to
clinical care e.g. by changing the neighborhood itself. More generally,
. Note that expressions (21) and (22), unlike
say expression (10), is a decomposition of the total effect of building a new hospital Yik(1) −
Yik(0), rather than of the average joint effect of building a hospital and ensuring access Yik(1,
1) − Yik(0, 0).
The decomposition of a total effect into a natural direct and indirect effects may also be of
interest in the neighborhood policing example. Let t denote a high level of neighborhood
policing and t* a low level of neighborhood policing. The average total effect Yik(t) −
Yik(t*)] can be decomposed into the sum of an average natural direct effect, Yik(t, Mik(t)) −
Yik(t*, Mik(t))], and an average natural indirect effect, Yik(t*, Mik(t)) − Yik(t*, Mik(t*))]. If
VanderWeele
Sociol Methods Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
the neighborhood policing is effective we might expect the average natural direct effect to
be negative: the increased neighborhood policing directly decreases the incidence of crime.
However, it is possible that for the average natural indirect effect, the increased
neighborhood policing may lead to an increase in the mediator, the average number of hours
individuals spend per week walking through their neighborhoods, and may consequently
lead to potentially increased exposure to criminal activity. Estimation of the average natural
indirect effect would allow a researcher to assess whether the data supports a hypothesis like
this. If the indirect effect were positive this would indicate that increased neighborhood
policing indirectly increases crime by increasing the time individuals spend walking through
the neighborhood. We might still expect the total effect to be negative with direct effect of
neighborhood policing on crime dominating the indirect effect. In such a case the direct
effect would be of greater magnitude than the total effect; the total would not be as
substantial because of the, possibly inadvertent, indirect effect of increasing hours spent
5. Relaxing No-Interference Assumptions
The no-interference assumptions which were required so that counterfactuals of the form
Yik(t, m) and Mik(t) were well defined, and thus so that controlled and natural direct and
indirect effect could be defined, were quite strong. In order to define controlled direct effects
we needed counterfactuals of the form Yik(t, m) to be well-defined and so we required that
the outcome for individual i in cluster k did not depend on the value of the mediator for any
other individual i′ in the same or any other cluster nor on the cluster-level treatment of any
other cluster k′. In addition, in order to define natural direct and indirect effects, we also
needed counterfactuals of the form Mik(t) to be well defined and so we required that the
individual level mediator for individual i in cluster k did not depend on the value of the
cluster-level treatment of any other cluster k′. We thus required a no-interference assumption
at the individual level for the mediator and no-interference assumptions at the cluster level
for the treatment. The no-interference assumption at the individual level required for the
mediator is a particularly strong assumption in the context of the study of neighborhoods.
In many settings these assumptions are unlikely to hold. Consider, for instance, the example
of trying to estimate the controlled direct effects of constructing a new hospital in a
particular neighborhood on individual health outcomes intervening on access. The no
interference conditions in this context would require that the health outcome for individual i
in neighborhood k does not depend on whether any other individual i′ in the same or any
other neighborhood has access to clinical care within 10 miles, nor on whether a hospital is
built in any other neighborhood k′. The individual-level no-interference assumption for the
mediator may well fail to hold here. In the case of a potential flu epidemic, for example,
access to clinical care within 10 miles for individual i′ in neighborhood k may allow for a .u
vaccine to be administered to individual i′ which in turn may prevent individual i in
neighborhood k from contracting the flu. Thus the health status of individual i in this case
would depend on whether individual i′ in the same neighborhood has access to clinical care.
When such violations of the no-interference assumptions occur, counterfactuals of the form
Yik(t, m) are not well defined. In the neighborhood policing example, it may be the case that
an increase in the mediator, Mik, hours per week an individual spends walking through the
VanderWeele
Sociol Methods Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
neighborhood, may for a particular individual lead to increased exposure to crime. However,
it might also be the case that, as more and more individuals spend time walking through the
neighborhood, criminal activity in fact decreases because of increased public monitoring
within that neighborhood. In such a setting we would once again have individual-level
interference within a cluster for the mediator (time spent walking) because individual i in
neighborhood k may not become a victim of crime because some other individual, i′, in the
same neighborhood, by walking, is present at the scene at which the crime would have
otherwise occured.
These examples of interference create difficulties for causal inference and for reasoning
about direct and indirect effects. Fortunately, there has been recent work on relaxing nointerference assumptions in the setting of clustered treatments . We will briefly
indicate how this work can be applied in the context of estimating direct and indirect effects
of cluster-level interventions. Note also other authors have considered the relaxation of nointerference assumptions in the context of general randomized experiments and of randomizing individuals to a change in neighborhood .
In the context of neighborhood effects it is noted in related work that if neighborhoods or clusters included in a study
are sufficiently geographically separated then the assumption that the outcome for individual
i in cluster k does not depend on the neighborhood-level intervention of any other
neighborhood k′ is likely to hold at least approximately. This is sometimes referred to as an
assumption of partial interference . We will
therefore focus our attention here on violations of the no-interference assumption that
require that the outcome for individual i in cluster k not depend on the the value of the
mediator for any other individual i′ in the same or any other cluster i.e. on violations of the
individual-level no-interference assumption for the mediator. In particular, we will assume
that the outcome for individual i in cluster k does depend on the the values of the mediator
for other individuals in the same cluster but not in other clusters. We assume that the
outcome and mediator for individual i in cluster k does not depend on the intervention in any
other cluster k′. The remarks made here, however, can be adapted to settings in which other
types of no-interference assumptions are violated. For example, Verbitsky and Raudenbush
 consider violations of no-interference assumptions which involve spillover effects
from the intervention for one neighborhood to another. Indeed, in some studies the spillover
effects may be amongst the primary effects of interest . Here we have essentially avoided between-cluster
interference for the treatment and mediator by assuming neighborhoods are geographically
separated; within-cluster interference for the treatment is not an issue because treatment is
administered at the cluster level; and thus our focus is on individual-level within-cluster
interference for the mediator.
Let M−ik denote the values of the mediator for all individuals i′ ≠ i in cluster k. Let Yik(t, mi,
f(m−i)) be the counterfactual value of the outcome for individual i in cluster k if Tk were set
to t, if Mik were set to m and if M−ik were set to m−i where f is some function of m−i. In the
context of the hospital construction example, f(m−i) might indicate the proportion of
VanderWeele
Sociol Methods Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
individuals i′ ≠ i in neighborhood k which have access to clinical care within 10 miles. In the
context of neighborhood policing f(m−i) might indicate the average number of hours per
week spent walking in neighborhood k for all individuals i′ ≠ i in neighborhood k. In this
neighborhood policing example we might then expect Yik(t, mi, f(m−i)) to increase with mi
(beacuse of greater exposure to potential criminal activity) and to decrease with f(m−i)
(because of greater public monitoring). Using these modified counterfactuals accounting for
interference, controlled direct effects and natural direct and indirect effects can still be
defined. Let Mk denote
where nk denotes the number of individual in cluster k. Let
M−ik(t) denote the counterfactual values of the mediator for all individuals i′ ≠ i in cluster k
if Tk were set to t. We define the controlled direct effect for individual i in neighborhood k,
intervening to set Mk to m by
define the natural direct effect for individual i in neighborhood k by
. We define the
natural indirect effect for individual i in neighborhood k by
In order to identify direct and indirect effects under such interference, modified ignorability
conditions are also needed. Let X−ik denote the values of the covariates for all individuals i′
≠ i in cluster k and let h be some function of X−ik. It can be verified, by a modification of the
argument given in the proof of Theorem 1, that if
then controlled direct effects are identified and given by
The expression on the right hand side of (25) is given in terms of the observed data and the
conditional expectations could be estimated from a multilevel model which extends (14), so
as to include terms for f(M−ik) and h(X−ik), such as:
where once again uk and εik are assumed to be independent and identically distributed with
mean zero. Interaction terms could be included in the multilevel model given in (26) if
appropriate. Condition (23) is similar to condition (11) above but requires that it holds for all
mi and f(m−i) rather than just for mi. Condition (24) is similar to condition (12) but it
requires that within strata of Tk, Xik, Vk, h(X−ik), the effects of Mik and f(M−ik) on Yik are
unconfounded rather than merely the effect of Mik on Yik. If in addition to (23) and (24), if
we also have the following two conditions,
VanderWeele
Sociol Methods Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
then it can be shown by a modification of the argument given in the proof of Theorem 2 that
expressions such as Yik(t, Mik(t′), f(M−ik(t′))] are identified and given by Yik(t, Mik(t′),
f(M−ik(t′))]
The expression on the right hand side of (29) is given in terms of the observed data. The
conditional expectation can once again be estimated using a multilevel model such as that
given in (26). A separate bivariate multilevel regression model will be needed to estimate
the probabilities P(Mik = mi, f (M−ik) = f(m−i)|Xik = x, Vk = v, h (X−ik) = h, Tk = t′). Note that
(29) can be used to estimate average natural direct effects since
Equation (29) can also be used to estimate average natural indirect effects since
Condition (27) is similar to condition (16) except that it requires that it hold jointly for
{Mik(t), f(M−ik(t))} rather than for Mik(t) only. Condition (28) is likewise similar to (17)
except that it again requires that the condition hold jointly for {Mik(t′), f(M−ik(t′))} rather
than for Mik(t′) only.
6. Extensions to Clustered Longitudinal Data
Our discussion up until this point has assumed that the cluster-level intervention takes place
at a single point in time. In the context of non-clustered interventions, van der Laan and
Petersen provide discussion of how the definitions of direct and indirect effects
can be extended to a longitudinal setting in which the treatment, mediator and confounding
variables may change over time. Here we adapt their discussion for the case of direct and
indirect effects for clustered longitudinal data.
We index time by s = 0, 1; …, S. Let Yik denote the individual level outcome for individual i
in cluster or neighborhood k at the end of the study. Let Xiks denote individual level
characteristics for individual i in cluster k at time s. Let Vks denote cluster-level
characteristics for cluster k at time s. Let Tks denote the cluster-level treatment or
intervention at time s. Let Miks be some individual level mediator for individual i in cluster k
at time s. Let
denote the vector (Xik0, Xik1, †, Xiks) and similarly let
denote Vks, Tks and Miks respectively from time periods 0 through s. We will use
denote the
counterfactual outcome for individual i in cluster k if
VanderWeele
Sociol Methods Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
denote the counterfactual value of the individual level
intermediate, Miks, if
. We will assume that the individual and
neighborhood level SUTVA conditions apply for every time-point so that
are well-defined. Let
from time periods 0
through s and let
This longitudinal setting may be of interest, for example, in the context of the neighborhood
policing setting. It may take time, a number of months or years, of increased neighborhood
policing before substantial changes in walking behavior or in the incidence of crime takes
place; it may be the cumulative effects of neighborhood policing that eventually lead to
changes in walking behavior or incidence of crime. Consideration of this clustered and
longitudinal setting would thus allow for assessing how the effects of neighborhood policing
on crime outcomes change or accumulate over time.
For clustered longitudinal data we define the controlled direct effect by
. To estimate average controlled direct effects we can
use the following theorem.
Theorem 4. If
The right hand side of (32) is given in terms of observed data. Average controlled direct
effects for clustered longitudinal data can be estimated from (32) since
. In practice, in order to estimate controlled
direct effects from longitudinal data, one could employ multi-level marginal structural
models recently developed by Hong and Raudenbush . These models are a
generalization for clustered data of the individual level marginal structural models
developed by Robins ; these individual level marginal
structural models have also be employed in the estimation of direct and indirect effects for
non-clustered data . The
implementation of multilevel marginal structural models is beyond the scope of this paper;
see the work of Hong and Raudenbush for details.
VanderWeele
Sociol Methods Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Condition (30) requires that for each time-period s the effect of treatment, Tks, on outcome,
Yik, is unconfounded given the covariate history,
, up until time s, the treatment
, up until time s − 1, and the mediator history,
, up until time s − 1.
Condition (31) requires that for every time-period s the effect of the mediator, Miks, on
outcome, Yik, is unconfounded given the covariate history,
, up until time s, the
treatment history,
, up until time s and the mediator history,
, up until time s − 1.
We can also define natural direct and indirect effects for clustered longitudinal data. The
natural direct effect can be defined as
. The natural indirect
effect can be defined as
We again can decompose the total effect of treatment,
, into a natural direct effect and a
natural indirect effect:
. We can use the following theorem to estimate average natural direct and indirect effects.
Theorem 5. If (30) and (31) hold and if in addition we also have that
The right hand side of (35) is given in terms of observed data. Average natural direct effects
for clustered longitudinal data can be estimated from (35) since
. Average natural indirect effects
can be estimated from (35) since
Condition (33) requires that for each time-period s the effect of treatment, Tks, on the
mediator, Miks, is unconfounded given the covariate history,
, up until time s, the
treatment history,
, up until time s − 1 and the mediator history,
, up until
time s − 1. Condition (34) is a longitudinal generalization of condition (17) above. It will be
violated if for any s there is an effect of treatment, Tks, which itself confounds the
VanderWeele
Sociol Methods Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
relationship between the mediator, Miks, and the outcome, Yik. Such an assumption may be
reasonable when treatment, Tks, is randomized at each time period s and when the mediator,
Miks, is measured shortly after treatment. However, assumption (34) like assumption (17) is
a strong assumption and will often be violated.
7. Discussion
We have given conditions under which controlled direct effects and natural direct and
indirect effects can be estimated from observational data for a cluster-level intervention both
for interventions occurring at a single point in time and for time-varying interventions. The
conditions under which such estimation can take place are relatively strong. For the
estimation of controlled direct effects, we required that the effect of treatment on the
outcome was unconfounded given the covariates and that the effect of the mediator on the
outcome was unconfounded given the covariates. For the estimation of natural direct and
indirect effects we also required that the effect of treatment on the mediator was
unconfounded given the covariates and that there was no consequence of treatment that
confounded the mediator-outcome relationship.
In addition to these ignorability (or no unmeasured confounding) conditions we also
required certain stability or no-interference conditions. In particular, in order to define
controlled direct effects we initially required that the outcome for individual i in cluster k did
not depend on the the value of the mediator for any other individual i′ in the same or any
other cluster nor on the cluster-level intervention of any other neighborhood k′. In addition,
in order to define natural direct and indirect effects, we also initially required that the
individual level mediator for individual i in cluster k did not depend on the value of the
cluster-level intervention of any other neighborhood k′. Essentially we made an individuallevel no-inference assumption for the mediator as well as neighborhood-level nointerference assumptions for the treatment. The individual-level no-interference assumption
for the mediator is particularly stringent and in many contexts will be unlikely to hold.
Fortunately, as discussed in Section 5, these assumptions can be relaxed and we have
provided definitions and identification conditions for direct and indirect effects under
individual-level interference. Nevertheless, the assumptions required for the identification of
the direct and indirect effects of a cluster-level intervention are considerable. Whether these
assumptions hold approximately in any given study will have to be judged by subject matter
experts and determined on a case-by-case basis.
This work has generalized the counterfactual approach to direct and indirect effects to the multilevel setting. The advantage of
this approach over the approach typically advocated in the structural equation modeling
literature is that it allows
for the definition, estimation and effect decomposition of direct and indirect effects even in
settings in which there are interactions and nonlinearities; as discussed above, the approach
does not assume that the direct effects, for example, are homogenous for all levels of the
mediator. A further advantage of considering direct and indirect effects in a counterfactual
setting is that the no unmeasured confounding assumptions required to interpret estimates
causally are made clear. As has been noted above, the identification assumptions required
VanderWeele
Sociol Methods Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
for natural direct and indirect effects are even stronger than those required for controlled
direct effects. The counterfactual approach also makes clear the no-interference assumptions
required in defining total, direct and indirect effects and provides a framework within which
such no-inference assumptions can be relaxed. In the multilevel setting, the definition and
identification is complicated by issues concerning correlated data and by potential
interference; but, these complications aside, the counterfactual approach to direct and
indirect effects in the individual level setting otherwise carries over in a relatively
straightforward way to the multilevel setting.
In this paper we have focused on cases in which the treatment or intervention of interest was
at the neighborhood or cluster level. A similar approach to direct and indirect effects could
be applied with clustered data in which the treatment was administered at the individual
level. Some of the issues discussed in this paper carry over in a straightforward way even
when individual level treatment is being considered. The neighborhood treatment variable,
Tk, would be replaced by individual level treatment, Tik. The identification assumptions
described in this paper would still apply with Tk replaced by Tik throughout; though one
would have to consider whether these assumptions were satisfied in any particular study.
The multilevel model in (14) could be replaced by
again with interactions or generalized linear multilevel models being used as appropriate.
However, a significant additional complication that arises when treatment is administered at
the individual level is that within-cluster interference could then arise both for the treatment
variable and for the mediator variable. An approach similar to that described in section 5 for
relaxing no-interference assumptions for the mediator would also have to be employed for
the treatment variable and such approaches to handle within-cluster inference for treatment
variables have been discussed in the literature . Future work could develop a fully general approach
which allowed for both within-cluster interference and between-cluster interference, at both
the treatment stage and the mediator stage, and which considered the identifcation of not just
total, direct and indirect effects but also within-cluster spillover effects and between-cluster
spillover effects.
Acknowledgments
The author thanks Steve Raudenbush and Guanglei Hong for several helpful comments on an earlier draft of this