Nature  |  Vol 584  |  13 August 2020  |  257
Estimating the effects of non-pharmaceutical
interventions on COVID-19 in Europe
Seth Flaxman1,7, Swapnil Mishra2,7, Axel Gandy1,7, H. Juliette T. Unwin2, Thomas A. Mellan2,
Helen Coupland2, Charles Whittaker2, Harrison Zhu1, Tresnia Berah1, Jeffrey W. Eaton2,
Mélodie Monod1, Imperial College COVID-19 Response Team*, Azra C. Ghani2,
Christl A. Donnelly2,3, Steven Riley2, Michaela A. C. Vollmer2, Neil M. Ferguson2, Lucy C. Okell2
& Samir Bhatt2,7 ✉
Following the detection of the new coronavirus1 severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) and its spread outside of China, Europe has experienced
large epidemics of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). In response, many European
countries have implemented non-pharmaceutical interventions, such as the closure
of schools and national lockdowns. Here we study the effect of major interventions
across 11 European countries for the period from the start of the COVID-19 epidemics
in February 2020 until 4 May 2020, when lockdowns started to be lifted. Our model
calculates backwards from observed deaths to estimate transmission that occurred
several weeks previously, allowing for the time lag between infection and death. We
use partial pooling of information between countries, with both individual and shared
effects on the time-varying reproduction number (Rt). Pooling allows for more
information to be used, helps to overcome idiosyncrasies in the data and enables
more-timely estimates. Our model relies on fixed estimates of some epidemiological
parameters (such as the infection fatality rate), does not include importation or
subnational variation and assumes that changes in Rt are an immediate response to
interventions rather than gradual changes in behaviour. Amidst the ongoing
pandemic, we rely on death data that are incomplete, show systematic biases in
reporting and are subject to future consolidation. We estimate that—for all of the
countries we consider here—current interventions have been sufficient to drive Rt
below 1 (probability Rt < 1.0 is greater than 99%) and achieve control of the epidemic.
We estimate that across all 11 countries combined, between 12 and 15 million
individuals were infected with SARS-CoV-2 up to 4 May 2020, representing between
3.2% and 4.0% of the population. Our results show that major non-pharmaceutical
interventions—and lockdowns in particular—have had a large effect on reducing
transmission. Continued intervention should be considered to keep transmission of
SARS-CoV-2 under control.
Following the identification of the new coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 in
Wuhan (China) in December 2019 and its global spread, large epidemics
of COVID-19 have ensued in Europe. In response to the rising numbers of
cases and deaths and to preserve health systems, European countries—
as with those in Asia—have implemented measures to control their
epidemics. These large-scale non-pharmaceutical interventions vary
between countries, but include social distancing (such as banning large
gatherings), border closures, school closures, measures to isolate symptomatic individuals and their contacts, and large-scale lockdowns of
populations with all but essential internal travel banned. Understanding
whether these interventions have had the desired effect of controlling
the epidemic, and which interventions are necessary to maintain control, is critical given their large economic and social costs. The key aim
of these interventions is to reduce Rt, a fundamental epidemiological
quantity that represents the average number of infections generated at
time t by each infected case over the course of their infection.
In China, strict movement restrictions and other measures (including case isolation and quarantine) began to be introduced from 23
January 2020, which achieved a downward trend in the number of
confirmed new cases during February and resulted in zero new confirmed indigenous cases in Wuhan by 19 March 2020. Studies have
estimated how the values of Rt changed during this time in different
 
Received: 30 March 2020
Accepted: 22 May 2020
Published online: 8 June 2020
Check for updates
1Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London, London, UK. 2MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis, Jameel Institute for Disease and Emergency Analytics, Imperial College
London, London, UK. 3Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 7These authors contributed equally: Seth Flaxman, Swapnil Mishra, Axel Gandy, Samir Bhatt. *A list of members
and their affiliations appears at the end of the paper. ✉e-mail: 
258  |  Nature  |  Vol 584  |  13 August 2020
areas of China, from around 2–4 during the uncontrolled epidemic
to below 1 (refs. 1,2).
Estimating Rt for SARS-CoV-2 presents challenges, owing to the high
proportion of infections that are not detected by health systems1,3,4
and to the regular changes in testing policies, which resulted in different proportions of infections being detected over time and between
countries. Initially, most countries had the capacity to test only a small
proportion of suspected cases and reserved tests for severely ill patients
or for high-risk groups (for example, the contacts of positively tested
individuals).
An alternative way to estimate the course of the epidemic is to calculate backwards from observed deaths to the number of infections.
We introduce a Bayesian mechanistic model linking the infection cycle
to observed deaths, inferring the total population infected (attack
rates) as well as Rt. We assess whether there is evidence that interventions have so far been successful at reducing Rt to values below 1. We
simulate a hypothetical counterfactual scenario in which Rt remains at
starting levels to estimate the deaths that would have occurred without
interventions.
Reported deaths are likely to be far more reliable than case data—
although reported death data still have limitations. First, early deaths
attributable to COVID-19 may have been missed. Second, there is
variation in the reporting of deaths by country and over time. Third,
reporting delays are expected and can be both systematic and random
in nature. We attempt to overcome these data limitations by using a
consolidated data source, incorporating noise in our observational
model, partially pooling of information between countries and performing a sensitivity analysis under scenarios of underreporting to
test our conclusions (Supplementary Information).
Our model relies on fixed estimates of some epidemiological parameters, such as the onset-to-death distribution, the infection fatality rate
and the generation distribution, that are based on previous work5,6; we
perform a sensitivity analysis on these parameters. Our parametric
form of Rt assumes that changes in Rt are an immediate response to
interventions rather than gradual changes in behaviour, and it does
not include importation or subnational variation. We assume that
individual interventions have a similar effect in different countries,
and that the efficacy of these interventions remains constant over
time. Our framework infers Rt from mortality data, while accounting
for time lags since infections occurred. As a result, even with perfect
data and partial pooling, we cannot perfectly predict the current value
of Rt. However, the credible intervals on Rt show the self-consistent
behaviour that is a hallmark of a fully Bayesian analysis throughout
the entire period we study, exhibiting appropriate shrinkage as more
data become available (Supplementary Videos 1–3).
Italy was the first European country to begin major
non-pharmaceutical interventions, and other countries followed soon
afterwards (Extended Data Fig. 4). The onset of interventions ranged
between 2 March and 29 March 2020. We analysed data on mortality
from COVID-19 in 11 European countries until 4 May 2020, at which
point lockdowns were relaxed in Italy and Spain. For each country, we
model the number of infections, the number of deaths and Rt (Fig. 1).
Rt is modelled as a piecewise constant function that changes only when
an intervention occurs. Each country has its own individual starting Rt
before interventions took place. For all countries, interventions are
assumed to have the same relative effect on Rt and are informed by
mortality data across all countries. The only exception is that we use
partial pooling to introduce country-specific effects of the effectiveness of the last intervention introduced in the study period in a country
(which is usually lockdown).
Estimated infections, Rt and effect sizes
In all countries, we estimate there are orders-of-magnitude fewer infections detected (Fig. 1, Extended Data Figs. 1, 2) than true infections, most
likely owing to mild and asymptomatic infections as well as limited
testing capacities and changes in testing policy. In Italy, our results
suggest that—cumulatively—2.8 (2.2–3.5) million people (all parenthetical ranges refer to 95% credible intervals) have been infected as of 4
May 2020, which gives an attack rate of 4.6% (3.6–5.8%) of the population (Table 1). In Spain (which has also experienced a large number of
deaths), we estimate that 5.5% of the population (2.6 (2.1–3.3) million
people) have been infected to date. Germany, the most populous country in our study, is estimated to have one of the lowest attack rates at
0.85% with 710,000 (550,000–930,000) people infected. Belgium has
the highest estimated attack rates of 8%, followed by Spain with 5.5%.
Although there have been few reliable national serological studies7,
initial small-scale surveys in Austria8 and Denmark9 closely align with
our estimates. A much larger study in Spain is very closely aligned with
our estimates10. To some extent, these initial results validate our choice
of infection fatality rate.
Averaged across all countries, we estimate the initial Rt to be 3.8 (2.4–
5.6), consistent with previous analyses1,11. These estimates are informed
by our choice of generation-interval distribution and the initial growth
rate of observed deaths. A shorter assumed generation time results in
lower starting Rt (Supplementary Discussion 3). The initial values of Rt are
also uncertain, owing to (a) importation (rather than local transmission)
being the dominant source of new infections in the early period of the
epidemic and (b) possible under-ascertainment in deaths, particularly
before testing became widespread. We perform sensitivity analyses
around these parameters (Supplementary Discussions 10, 11).
We estimate large reductions in Rt in response to the combined
non-pharmaceutical interventions. Our results—which are driven
more by countries with advanced epidemics and larger numbers of
deaths—suggest that these interventions have together had a substantial effect on transmission, as measured by changes in the estimated
Rt. At the time of this study, we find current estimates of Rt to range
from a posterior mean of 0.44 (0.26–0.61) for Norway to a posterior
mean of 0.82 (0.73–0.93) for Belgium, with an average of 0.66 across
the 11 countries—an 82% reduction compared to the pre-intervention
values. For all countries, we find that current interventions have been
sufficient to drive Rt below 1 (probability Rt < 1.0 is greater than 99%
across all countries we consider) and achieve control of the epidemic.
These conclusions are corroborated by studies from individual countries—France12, Spain13, Germany14 and the UK15—over a similar period,
which arrive at very similar estimates despite different methodologies
and data. For example, a previous study12 estimates an Rt of 0.67 for
France using hospitalization records (we estimate 0.68); for Germany,
the Robert Koch Institute reports Rt of 0.76 using electronically notified cases14 (we estimate 0.71). The retrospective stability of our model
(Supplementary Videos 1–3) is variable when the implementations of
interventions are very dissimilar; an example of this is seen in Sweden,
where interventions were dissimilar to other countries and led initially
to large uncertainty. Our model uncertainty is also dependent on the
magnitude of Rt; this occurs because infections are a nonlinear function
of Rt and are sensitive to small increases. Uncertainty shrinks greatly
when Rt is reduced. Examples of this effect are seen in all countries, but
it is most pronounced in Belgium and France; these countries show
large uncertainties in the number of infections in the early period of
the epidemic. Our choice of parameterizing Rt using piecewise constant
functions means that we cannot capture the fine-scale variation that
could be achieved by using additional covariates.
Lockdown has an identifiable large effect on transmission (81%
(75–87%) reduction) (Fig. 2). The close spacing of interventions in
time (Extended Data Fig. 4) means that the individual effects of the
other interventions are not identifiable (Fig. 2). Our partial pooling
model requires only one country to provide a signal for the effect of
a given intervention, and this effect is then shared across all countries. Although this sharing can potentially lead to initial over- or
under-estimation of the effect of an intervention, it also means that a
Nature  |  Vol 584  |  13 August 2020  |  259
Daily number of infections
Daily number of deaths
Complete lockdown
Public events banned
School closure
Self isolation
Social distancing
Daily number of infections
Daily number of deaths
Daily number of infections
Daily number of deaths
Daily number of infections
Daily number of deaths
Fig. 1 | Country-level estimates of infections, deaths and Rt for France, Italy,
Spain and the UK. Left, daily number of infections. Brown bars are reported
infections; blue bands are predicted infections; dark blue, 50% credible
interval; light blue 95% credible interval. The number of daily infections
estimated by our model drops immediately after an intervention, as we assume
that all infected people become immediately less infectious through the
intervention. Afterwards, if Rt is above 1, the number of infections will start
growing again. Middle, daily number of deaths. Brown bars are reported
deaths; blue bands are predicted deaths; credible intervals are as in the left
plot. Right, Rt. Dark green, 50% credible interval; light green, 95% credible
interval. Icons are interventions, shown at the time at which they occurred.
260  |  Nature  |  Vol 584  |  13 August 2020
consistent signal for all countries can be estimated before that signal
is present in data from an individual country16. Therefore, this sharing
is potentially useful for generating early warnings, by leveraging what
happened in countries with earlier epidemics to inform countries with
more-recent epidemics.
Estimated effect of interventions on deaths
Extended Data Table 1 shows total deaths forecast from the beginning
of the epidemic up to and including 4 May 2020 under our fitted model
and under the counterfactual model, which predicts what would have
happened if no interventions were implemented (and Rt = R0; that is,
the initial Rt estimated before interventions came into effect).
By comparing the deaths predicted under the model with no interventions to the deaths predicted in our intervention model, we calculated the total deaths averted in our study period. We find that across
11 countries 3.1 (2.8–3.5) million deaths have been averted owing to
interventions since the beginning of the epidemic; Extended Data Fig. 5
compares the actual total deaths to the counterfactual total deaths. The
counterfactual model without interventions is illustrative only, and
reflects the assumptions of our model. We do not account for changes
in behaviour; in reality, even in the absence of government interventions we would expect Rt to decrease and therefore would overestimate
deaths in the no-intervention model. Conversely, we do not consider the
effect on the infection fatality rate as a result of an overwhelmed health
system in which patients may not be able to access critical care facilities,
which would underestimate the number of counterfactual deaths. In
the Supplementary Information, we show further counterfactual estimates under differing assumptions of the generation distribution and
onset-to-death distribution and all scenarios broadly show the same
trends. Given this agreement across differing scenarios, we believe
our estimates for the counterfactual deaths averted to be plausible.
Discussion
During the ongoing transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in Europe, we analyse
trends in the numbers of deaths to assess the extent to which transmission
has been reduced. Representing the infection process associated with
COVID-19 using a semi-mechanistic, joint Bayesian hierarchical model, we
can reproduce trends observed in the data relating to deaths and produce
empirically driven predictions that are valid over short time horizons.
We estimate that there have been many more infections than are
currently reported. The high level of under-ascertainment of infections
that we estimate here is probably due to the focus on testing in hospital
settings, which misses milder or asymptomatic cases in the community. Despite this, we estimate that only a relatively small minority of
individuals in each country have been infected (Table 1). Our estimates
imply that the populations in Europe are not close to herd immunity
(about 70% if R0 is 3.8)17. Furthermore, with values of Rt below 1 in all
countries, the rate of acquisition of herd immunity will slow down rapidly. Our estimates for attack rates during our study period are consistent with those reported from national serological studies7. Similarly,
comparable studies estimating Rt all agree that the number as of 4 May
2020 is less than 1.
To our knowledge, our modelling approach is unique in pooling information from multiple countries at once. Using this approach means
that we require a central consolidated data source (such as data from
the European Centre of Disease Control (ECDC)), and also that trends
in some countries will be affected by those countries with more data.
We argue that this effect is beneficial, in that it helps to minimize idiosyncrasies in the data16, as well as to improve consistency of estimates
over time. Although our qualitative conclusions surrounding the effect
of interventions and the finding that Rt is less than 1 are robust to our
choice of whether to incorporate pooling or not, the ability to use a
greater extent of available data and share information across countries
in a statistically principled manner markedly improves the consistency of model predictions across the study period (Supplementary
Videos 1–3).
Most interventions were implemented in rapid succession in many
countries, and as such it is difficult to disentangle the individual
effect sizes of each intervention. In our analysis, we find that only the
effect of lockdown is identifiable, and that it has a substantial effect
(81% (75–87%) reduction in Rt). Taking into account country-specific
effects, the effect size of lockdown remains large across all countries
(Supplementary Fig. 29).
We acknowledge the limitations of existing mortality data relating to COVID-19—in particular, deaths outside hospitals may be
underreported. However, by using the ECDC data, we rely on a
comprehensive data source that is refined and updated each day
in a systematic process. Our sensitivity analysis of underreporting
and statistical-measurement noise suggests that we may slightly
Table 1 | Total population infected by country
Percentage of total population infected (mean (95% credible
interval))
0.76% (0.59–0.98%)
8% (6.1–11%)
1.0% (0.81–1.4%)
3.4% (2.7–4.3%)
0.85% (0.66–1.1%)
4.6% (3.6–5.8%)
0.46% (0.34–0.61%)
5.5% (4.4–7.0%)
3.7% (2.8–5.1%)
Switzerland
1.9% (1.5–2.4%)
5.1% (4.0–6.5%)
Posterior model estimates of the attack rate by country (percentage of total population
infected) as of 4 May 2020. Results are derived from a model representing 11 countries with
a total population of 375 million and 128,928 reported COVID-19-related deaths up to 4 May
Social distancing
encouraged
Self isolation
School closure
Public events
No effect on transmissibility
Ends transmissibility
Relative reduction in Rt (%)
Governmental intervention
First intervention
Later intervention
Fig. 2 | Effectiveness of interventions on Rt. Our model includes five
covariates for governmental interventions, adjusting for whether the
intervention was the first one undertaken by the government in response to
COVID-19 (red) or was subsequent to other interventions (green). Mean relative
percentage reduction in Rt is shown with 95% posterior credible intervals. If
100% reduction is achieved, Rt = 0 and there is no more transmission of
COVID-19. Lockdown is significantly different from the other interventions; the
other interventions are not significantly different from each other, probably
owing to the fact that many interventions occurred on the same day or within
days of each other (as shown in Extended Data Fig. 4). Results are derived from a
model that represents 11 countries with a total population of 375 million and
128,928 reported COVID-19-related deaths up to 4 May 2020.
Nature  |  Vol 584  |  13 August 2020  |  261
underestimate the attack rates in some countries, but this does not
change our overall conclusions pertaining to Rt. However, even if
the data were complete, our method cannot surmount the time lag
between infections and deaths and can only fully identify trends in
infections 2–3 weeks earlier. Extensions of our model could use case,
hospitalization or intensive care data, but reconciling the different
biases inherent in these sources while ensuring parsimony is challenging and would require additional assumptions.
The modern understanding of infectious disease, combined with
a global publicized response, has meant that nationwide interventions could be implemented with widespread adherence and support.
Given the observed infection fatality ratios and the epidemiology of
COVID-19, major non-pharmaceutical interventions have had an effect
in reducing transmission in all of the countries we have considered.
In all countries in this study, we find that these interventions have
reduced Rt below 1, and have contained their epidemics at the current time. When looking at simplistic counterfactual models over the
whole epidemic, the number of potential deaths averted is substantial.
We cannot say for certain that the current measures will continue to
control the epidemic in Europe; however, if current trends continue
there is reason for optimism.
Online content
Any methods, additional references, Nature Research reporting summaries, source data, extended data, supplementary information,
acknowledgements, peer review information; details of author contributions and competing interests; and statements of data and code
availability are available at 
Li, R. et al. Substantial undocumented infection facilitates the rapid dissemination of
novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2). Science 368, 489–493 .
Zhang, J. et al. Patterns of human social contact and contact with animals in Shanghai,
China. Sci. Rep. 9, 15141 .
Zhao, A. J. et al. Antibody responses to SARS-CoV-2 in patients of novel coronavirus
disease 2019. Clin. Infect. Dis. ciaa344 .
Jombart, T. et al. Inferring the number of COVID-19 cases from recently reported deaths.
Wellcome Open Research 5, 78 .
Verity, R. et al. Estimates of the severity of coronavirus disease 2019: a model-based
analysis. Lancet 20, 669–677 .
Bi, Q. et al. Epidemiology and transmission of COVID-19 in 391 cases and 1286 of their
close contacts in Shenzhen, China: a retrospective cohort study. Lancet Infect.
Dis.  .
Bobrovitz, N. et al. Lessons from a rapid systematic review of early SARS-CoV-2
serosurveys. Preprint at medRxiv 
Statistics Austria. COVID-19 Prevalence Study: Maximum 0.15% of Austrian Population
Infected with SARS-CoV-2 .
Erikstrup, C. et al. Estimation of SARS-CoV-2 infection fatality rate by real-time antibody
screening of blood donors. Clin. Infect. Dis. ciaa849  
Pollán, M. et al. Prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 in Spain (ENE-COVID): a nationwide,
population-based seroepidemiological study. Lancet  
6736(20)31483-5 .
Zhang, J. et al. Age profile of susceptibility, mixing, and social distancing shape the
dynamics of the novel coronavirus disease 2019 outbreak in China. Preprint at medRxiv
   .
Salje, H. et al. Estimating the burden of SARS-CoV-2 in France. Science 369, 208–211
Hyafil, A. & Morina, D. Analysis of the impact of lockdown on the reproduction number
of the SARS-Cov-2 in Spain. Gac. Sanit. 
Robert Koch Institute. Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Daily Situation Report of the
Robert Koch Institute .
Davies, N. G., Kucharski, A. J., Eggo, R. M., Gimma, A. & Edmunds, W. J. The effect of
non-pharmaceutical interventions on COVID-19 cases, deaths and demand for hospital
services in the UK: a modelling study. Lancet 5, E375–E385 .
Gelman, A. & Hill, J. Data Analysis using Regression and Multilevel/Hierarchical Models
 .
Miller, J. C. A note on the derivation of epidemic final sizes. Bull. Math. Biol. 74, 2125–2141
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2020
Imperial College COVID-19 Response Team
Pablo N. Perez-Guzman2, Nora Schmit2, Lucia Cilloni2, Kylie E. C. Ainslie2, Marc Baguelin2,
Adhiratha Boonyasiri4, Olivia Boyd2, Lorenzo Cattarino2, Laura V. Cooper2,
Zulma Cucunubá2, Gina Cuomo-Dannenburg2, Amy Dighe2, Bimandra Djaafara2,
Ilaria Dorigatti2, Sabine L. van Elsland2, Richard G. FitzJohn2, Katy A. M. Gaythorpe2,
Lily Geidelberg2, Nicholas C. Grassly2, William D. Green2, Timothy Hallett2, Arran Hamlet2,
Wes Hinsley2, Ben Jeffrey2, Edward Knock2, Daniel J. Laydon2, Gemma Nedjati-Gilani2,
Pierre Nouvellet2,5, Kris V. Parag2, Igor Siveroni2, Hayley A. Thompson2, Robert Verity2,
Erik Volz2, Caroline E. Walters2, Haowei Wang2, Yuanrong Wang2, Oliver J. Watson2,6,
Peter Winskill2, Xiaoyue Xi1 & Patrick G. T. Walker2
4NIHR Health Protection Research Unit in Healthcare Associated Infections and Antimicrobial
Resistance, Imperial College London, London, UK. 5School of Life Sciences, University of
Sussex, Brighton, UK. 6Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Brown University,
Providence, RI, USA.
Our model uses daily consolidated death data from the ECDC for
11 European countries currently experiencing the COVID-19 epidemic:
Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Norway, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland and the UK. The ECDC provides information on
confirmed cases and deaths attributable to COVID-19. For population
counts, we use the United Nations Population Division age-stratified
We also catalogue data on the nature and type of major
non-pharmaceutical interventions. We looked at the government webpages from each country as well as their official public health webpages
to identify the latest advice or laws being issued by the government and
public health authorities. We collected the following: school closure
ordered; case-based measures; public events banned; social distancing encouraged; lockdown decreed; and the time of the first and last
intervention. A full list of the timing of these interventions and the
sources we have used is provided in the Supplementary Notes, Supplementary Table 2.
By using the ECDC data, we rely on a consolidated data source
compiled by the ECDC, who include many sources of data each day,
constantly refining and updating data using a comprehensive and
systematic process. However, despite the rigorous protocols, countries
may vary in the specifics of the data that they report to the ECDC. For
example, there is variation in reporting (that is, community versus hospital) and time lags. Despite these issues, we use ECDC data to ensure
as much consistency as possible across all countries.
A visual summary of our model is presented in Extended Data Fig. 3;
details are provided in the Supplementary Methods.
We fit our model to observed deaths according to ECDC data from
11 European countries. The modelled deaths are informed by an
infection-to-death distribution (Supplementary Fig. 1; derived from
assumptions about the time from infection to the onset of symptoms
and about the time from the onset of symptoms to death), and the
population-averaged infection fatality ratio (adjusted for the age structure and contact patterns of each country, as discussed in the Supplementary Methods, Supplementary Table 3).
Given these distributions and ratios, modelled deaths are a function
of the number of infections. The number of infections is modelled as
the product of Rt with a discrete convolution of the previous infections.
Individual components of this convolution sum are weighted by the
generation time distribution (the average time from the infection of
one person to the time at which they infect another; Supplementary
Fig. 2). In our work, we approximate the generation time distribution
using the serial interval distribution. Rt is a function of the initial Rt
before interventions and the effect sizes from interventions, in which
interventions are modelled as piecewise constant functions.
Following the Bayesian hierarchy from bottom to top gives us a full
framework to see how interventions affect infections, which can result
in deaths. A schematic of our model is shown in Extended Data Fig. 3. To
maximize the ability to observe the effect of interventions on deaths,
we fit our model jointly for all 11 European countries, and use partial
pooling of information between countries with both individual and
shared effects on Rt. Partial pooling operates on the last intervention,
which is—in most cases—lockdown. The effect of partial pooling can
be seen in Supplementary Discussion 12, Supplementary Fig. 29. We
chose a balanced prior that encodes the prior belief that interventions
have an equal chance of having an effect or not, and ensure a uniform
prior on the joint effect of all interventions (Supplementary Fig. 3).
We evaluate the effect of our Bayesian prior distribution choices and
evaluate our Bayesian posterior calibration to ensure our results are
statistically robust.
We perform extensive model validation and sensitivity analyses. We
validate our model by cross-validation over a 14-day period (Supplementary Discussion 1, Supplementary Table 1) and we show the fits for
holdout samples in Supplementary Figs. 5–15. We check the convergence
of the Markov chain Monte Carlo sampler (Supplementary Fig. 4). We
consider the sensitivity of our estimates of Rt to the mean of the generation distribution (Supplementary Discussion 3, Supplementary Figs. 16,
17). We further show that the choice of generation distribution does not
change our counterfactual conclusions (Supplementary Fig. 18). Using
univariate analyses and uninformative priors, we find (Supplementary
Fig. 19) that all effects on their own serve to decrease Rt (Supplementary
Discussion 4). We compare our model to a non-parametric Gaussian
Process model (Supplementary Discussion 5). To assess the effect of
individual countries on the results, we perform a ‘leave one country
out’ sensitivity analysis (Supplementary Discussion 6, Supplementary
Figs. 20, 21). To validate our starting values of Rt, we compare our model
against an exponential-growth linear model (Supplementary Discussion 7, Supplementary Fig. 22). Instead of a joint analysis, we consider
fits of our model to individual countries (Supplementary Discussion 8,
Supplementary Figs. 23–26). We perform a sensitivity analysis with
respect to the onset-to-death distribution (Supplementary Discussion 9,
Supplementary Fig. 27). We validate our probabilistic seeding scheme
through an importance-sampling leave-one-out cross-validation (Supplementary Discussion 10). We consider a model extension with a constant, probabilistic under-reporting (Supplementary Discussion 11),
finding that Rt does not change substantially (Supplementary Fig. 28).
Our model is different to other approaches (such as EpiEstim19) that
use the discrete renewal equation. We use the renewal equation as a
latent process to model infections and propose a generative mechanism to connect these infections to death data. Simply applying the
renewal equation directly to death data requires positing a mechanism
in which deaths in the past can cause future deaths (see, for example,
ref. 20). In addition, for Rt, we are able to use a functional relationship in
which non-pharmaceutical interventions can have a direct effect on Rt.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Research Reporting Summary linked to this paper.
Data availability
Death counts for the 11 European countries for the time period in our
study and the full set of posterior draws from our model are available
at 
Code availability
All source code and data necessary for the replication of our results
and figures are available at An R package based on our method is available at
 
United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. World
Population Prospects 2019: Data Booklet, ST/ESA/SER.A/424. .
Cori, A., Ferguson, N. M., Fraser, C. & Cauchemez, S. A new framework and software to
estimate time-varying reproduction numbers during epidemics. Am. J. Epidemiol. 178,
1505–1512 .
20. Goldstein, E. et al. Reconstructing influenza incidence by deconvolution of daily
mortality time series. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106, 21825–21829 .
Acknowledgements S.B. acknowledges the NIHR BRC Imperial College NHS Trust Infection
and COVID themes, the Academy of Medical Sciences Springboard award and the Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation. L.C.O. acknowledges funding from a UK Royal Society fellowship.
Initial research on covariates in Supplementary Table 2 was crowdsourced; we thank a number
of people across the world for help with this. This work was supported by Centre funding from
the UK Medical Research Council under a concordat with the UK Department for International
Development, the NIHR Health Protection Research Unit in Modelling Methodology and
Community Jameel. We thank F. Valka for creating our website, and A. Gelman and the Stan
team for helpful discussions. We acknowledge the resources provided by Cirrus UK National
Tier-2 HPC Service at EPCC ( funded by the University of Edinburgh
and EPSRC (EP/P020267/1), and cloud compute time donated by Microsoft and Amazon.
Author contributions S.B., S.F., S.M. and A.G. conceived and designed the study. S.B., S.F.,
S.M., A.G., H.C., H.J.T.U., T.A.M., M.A.C.V., J.W.E. and N.M.F. performed analysis. L.C.O., S.B., S.F.,
A.G., A.C.G., C.A.D., S.R. and N.M.F. wrote the first draft of the paper. S.B., S.F., H.C., C.W., P.W.,
T.B., P.N.P.G., N.S., L. Cilloni, M.A.C.V. and H.C. collected data. All authors discussed the results
and contributed to the revision of the final manuscript.
Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information is available for this paper at 
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to S.B.
Peer review information Nature thanks David Earn and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for
their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer reports are available.
Reprints and permissions information is available at 
Extended Data Fig. 1 | Country-level estimates of infections, deaths and
Rt for Belgium, Germany, Sweden and Switzerland. Left, daily number of
infections. Brown bars are reported infections; blue bands are predicted
infections; dark blue, 50% credible interval; light blue, 95% credible interval.
The number of daily infections estimated by our model drops immediately
after an intervention, as we assume that all infected people become
immediately less infectious through the intervention. Afterwards, if Rt is above
1, the number of infections will starts growing again. Middle, daily number of
deaths. Brown bars are reported deaths; blue bands are predicted deaths;
credible intervals are as in the left plot. Right, Rt. Dark green, 50% credible
interval; light green, 95% credible interval. Icons are interventions, shown at
the time at which they occurred.
Extended Data Fig. 2 | Country-level estimates of infections, deaths and
Rt for Austria, Norway and Denmark. Left, daily number of infections. Brown
bars are reported infections; blue bands are predicted infections; dark blue,
50% credible interval; light blue, 95% credible interval. The number of daily
infections estimated by our model drops immediately after an intervention, as
we assume that all infected people become immediately less infectious
through the intervention. Afterwards, if Rt is above 1, the number of infections
will starts growing again. Middle, daily number of deaths. Brown bars are
reported deaths; blue bands are predicted deaths; credible intervals are as in
the left plot. Right, Rt. Dark green, 50% CI; light green, 95% CI. Icons are
interventions, shown at the time at which they occurred.
symptoms to
distribution
to symptoms
distribution
population
fatality ratio
infections
serial interval
distribution
time varying
reproduction
public events
distancing
encouraged
schools or
universities
intervention
EFFECTS SHARED
ALL COUNTRIES
reproduction
interventions
Extended Data Fig. 3 | Model summary. This figure shows a summary of the components of our model.
MARCH 2020
distancing
encouraged
Case based
Switzerland
Extended Data Fig. 4 | Timings of interventions. Timings of interventions for the 11 European countries included in our analysis. For further details, see
the Supplementary Information.
Cumulative number of deaths
counterfactual
Extended Data Fig. 5 | Deaths averted owing to interventions. Lower and upper credible interval for the cumulative number of deaths for the 11 European
countries in our model with interventions (pink) and the no-interventions counterfactual model (blue). Reported deaths are shown as a thick black line.
Extended Data Table 1 | Total forecasted deaths since the beginning of the epidemic up to 4 May 2020 in our model and in a
counterfactual model that assumes no interventions had taken place
Estimated averted deaths over this time period as a result of the interventions. Numbers in brackets are 95% credible intervals.
nature research | reporting summary
April 2020
Corresponding author(s):
Dr Samir Bhatt
Last updated by author(s): May 22, 2020
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see our Editorial Policies and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection
No such software was used
Data analysis
RStan version 2.19.3 was used within R version 3.6.3
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors and
reviewers. We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
All source code and data necessary for the replication of our results is available at 
The full set of posterior draws from our model are available at 
nature research | reporting summary
April 2020
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences
Behavioural & social sciences
Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Life sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Sample size
No samples were collected; data on the count of COVID-19-related deaths over time in 11 European countries was used.
Data exclusions
No data was excluded.
Replication
Randomization
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
Materials & experimental systems
n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies
Eukaryotic cell lines
Palaeontology and archaeology
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
Dual use research of concern
n/a Involved in the study
Flow cytometry
MRI-based neuroimaging