Instance-aware Semantic Segmentation via Multi-task Network Cascades
Jifeng Dai
Kaiming He
Microsoft Research
{jifdai,kahe,jiansun}@microsoft.com
Semantic segmentation research has recently witnessed
rapid progress, but many leading methods are unable to
identify object instances. In this paper, we present Multitask Network Cascades for instance-aware semantic segmentation. Our model consists of three networks, respectively differentiating instances, estimating masks, and categorizing objects. These networks form a cascaded structure, and are designed to share their convolutional features.
We develop an algorithm for the nontrivial end-to-end training of this causal, cascaded structure. Our solution is a
clean, single-step training framework and can be generalized to cascades that have more stages. We demonstrate
state-of-the-art instance-aware semantic segmentation accuracy on PASCAL VOC. Meanwhile, our method takes only
360ms testing an image using VGG-16, which is two orders
of magnitude faster than previous systems for this challenging problem. As a by product, our method also achieves
compelling object detection results which surpass the competitive Fast/Faster R-CNN systems.
The method described in this paper is the foundation of
our submissions to the MS COCO 2015 segmentation competition, where we won the 1st place.
1. Introduction
Since the development of fully convolutional networks
(FCNs) , the accuracy of semantic segmentation has
been improved rapidly thanks to deeply
learned features , large-scale annotations , and
advanced reasoning over graphical models . Nevertheless, FCNs and improvements are
designed to predict a category label for each pixel, but are
unaware of individual object instances. Accurate and fast
instance-aware semantic segmentation is still a challenging
problem. To encourage the research on this problem, the recently established COCO dataset and competition only
accept instance-aware semantic segmentation results.
There have been a few methods addressing instance-aware semantic segmentation using convolushared features
shared features
Figure 1. Illustrations of common multi-task learning (left) and our
multi-task cascade (right).
tional neural networks (CNNs) . These methods all
require mask proposal methods that are slow at
inference time. In addition, these mask proposal methods
take no advantage of deeply learned features or large-scale
training data, and may become a bottleneck for segmentation accuracy.
In this work, we address instance-aware semantic segmentation solely based on CNNs, without using external
modules (e.g., ). We observe that the instance-aware semantic segmentation task can be decomposed into three different and related sub-tasks. 1) Differentiating instances. In
this sub-task, the instances can be represented by bounding
boxes that are class-agnostic. 2) Estimating masks. In this
sub-task, a pixel-level mask is predicted for each instance.
3) Categorizing objects. In this sub-task, the category-wise
label is predicted for each mask-level instance. We expect
that each sub-task is simpler than the original instance segmentation task, and is more easily addressed by convolutional networks.
Driven by this decomposition, we propose Multi-task
Network Cascades (MNCs) for accurate and fast instanceaware semantic segmentation. Our network cascades have
three stages, each of which addresses one sub-task. The
three stages share their features, as in traditional multi-task
learning . Feature sharing greatly reduces the test-time
computation, and may also improve feature learning thanks
to the underlying commonality among the tasks. But unlike
many multi-task learning applications, in our method a later
stage depends on the outputs of an earlier stage, forming
a causal cascade (see Fig. 1). So we call our structures
“multi-task cascades”.
Training a multi-task cascade is nontrivial because of the
 
for each RoI
for each RoI
conv feature map
RoI warping,
box instances (RoIs)
mask instances
categorized instances
shared features
Figure 2. Multi-task Network Cascades for instance-aware semantic segmentation. At the top right corner is a simpliﬁed illustration.
causal relations among the multiple outputs. For example,
our mask estimating layer takes convolutional features and
predicted box instances as inputs, both of which are outputs of other layers. According to the chain rule of backpropagation , the gradients involve those with respect
to the convolution responses and also those with respect
to the spatial coordinates of predicted boxes. To achieve
theoretically valid backpropagation, we develop a layer that
is differentiable with respect to the spatial coordinates, so
the gradient terms can be computed.
Our cascade model can thus be trained end-to-end via a
clean, single-step framework. This single-step training algorithm naturally produces convolutional features that are
shared among the three sub-tasks, which are beneﬁcial to
both accuracy and speed. Meanwhile, under this training
framework, our cascade model can be extended to more
stages, leading to improvements on accuracy.
We comprehensively evaluate our method on the PAS-
CAL VOC dataset. Our method results in 63.5% mean Average Precision (mAPr), about 3.0% higher than the previous best results using the same VGG network .
Remarkably, this result is obtained at a test-time speed of
360ms per image, which is two orders of magnitudes faster
than previous systems .
Thanks to the end-to-end training and the independence
of external modules, the three sub-tasks and the entire
system easily beneﬁt from stronger features learned by
deeper models. We demonstrate excellent accuracy on the
challenging MS COCO segmentation dataset using an extremely deep 101-layer residual net (ResNet-101) , and
also report our 1st-place result in the COCO segmentation
track in ILSVRC & COCO 2015 competitions.
2. Related Work
Object detection methods involve predicting object bounding boxes and categories. The work of R-
CNN adopts region proposal methods (e.g., )
for producing multiple instance proposals, which are used
for CNN-based classiﬁcation. In SPPnet and Fast R-
CNN , the convolutional layers of CNNs are shared on
the entire image for fast computation. Faster R-CNN 
exploits the shared convolutional features to extract region
proposals used by the detector. Sharing convolutional features leads to substantially faster speed for object detection
systems .
Using mask-level region proposals, instance-aware semantic segmentation can be addressed based on the R-CNN
philosophy, as in R-CNN , SDS , and Hypercolumn .
Sharing convolutional features among masklevel proposals is enabled by using masking layers . All
these methods rely on computationally expensive mask proposal methods. For example, the widely
used MCG takes 30 seconds processing an image, which
becomes a bottleneck at inference time. DeepMask 
is recently developed for learning segmentation candidates
using convolutional networks, taking over 1 second per image. Its accuracy for instance-aware semantic segmentation
is yet to be evaluated.
Category-wise semantic segmentation is elegantly tackled by end-to-end training FCNs . The output of an
FCN consists of multiple score maps, each of which is for
one category. This formulation enables per-pixel regression
in a fully-convolutional form, but is not able to distinguish
instances of the same category. The FCN framework has
been further improved in many papers (e.g., ), but
these methods also have the limitations of not being able to
predict instances.
3. Multi-task Network Cascades
In our MNC model, the network takes an image of arbitrary size as the input, and outputs instance-aware semantic
segmentation results. The cascade has three stages: proposing box-level instances, regressing mask-level instances,
and categorizing each instance. These three stages are designed to share convolutional features (e.g., the 13 convolutional layers in VGG-16 ). Each stage involves a loss
term, but a later stage’s loss relies on the output of an earlier stage, so the three loss terms are not independent. We
train the entire network cascade end-to-end with a uniﬁed
loss function. Fig. 2 illustrates our cascade model.
In this section we describe the deﬁnition for each stage.
In the next section we introduce an end-to-end training algorithm to address the causal dependency.
3.1. Regressing Box-level Instances
In the ﬁrst stage, the network proposes object instances
in the form of bounding boxes. These bounding boxes are
class-agnostic, and are predicted with an objectness score.
The network structure and loss function of this stage follow the work of Region Proposal Networks (RPNs) ,
which we brieﬂy describe as follows for completeness. An
RPN predicts bounding box locations and objectness scores
in a fully-convolutional form. On top of the shared features, a 3×3 convolutional layer is used for reducing dimensions, followed by two sibling 1×1 convolutional layers for regressing box locations and classifying object/nonobject. The box regression is with reference to a series of
pre-deﬁned boxes (called “anchors” ) at each location.
We use the RPN loss function given in . This loss
function serves as the loss term L1 of our stage 1. It has a
L1 = L1(B(Θ)).
Here Θ represents all network parameters to be optimized.
B is the network output of this stage, representing a list of
boxes: B = {Bi} and Bi = {xi, yi, wi, hi, pi}, where Bi
is a box indexed by i. The box Bi is centered at (xi, yi) with
width wi and height hi, and pi is the objectness probability.
The notations in Eqn.(1) indicate that the box predictions
are functions of the network parameters Θ.
3.2. Regressing Mask-level Instances
The second stage takes the shared convolutional features
and stage-1 boxes as input. It outputs a pixel-level segmentation mask for each box proposal. In this stage, a masklevel instance is still class-agnostic.
Given a box predicted by stage 1, we extract a feature of
this box by Region-of-Interest (RoI) pooling . The
purpose of RoI pooling is for producing a ﬁxed-size feature
from an arbitrary box, which is set as 14×14 at this stage.
We append two extra fully-connected (fc) layers to this feature for each box. The ﬁrst fc layer (with ReLU) reduces
the dimension to 256, followed by the second fc layer that
regresses a pixel-wise mask. This mask, of a pre-deﬁned
spatial resolution of m × m (we use m = 28), is parameterized by an m2-dimensional vector. The second fc layer
has m2 outputs, each performing binary logistic regression
to the ground truth mask.
With these deﬁnitions, the loss term L2 of stage 2 for
regressing masks exhibits the following form:
L2 = L2(M(Θ) | B(Θ)).
Here M is the network outputs of this stage, representing
a list of masks: M = {Mi} and Mi is an m2-dimensional
logistic regression output (via sigmoid) taking continuous
values in . Eqn.(2) indicates that the mask regression
loss L2 is dependent on M but also on B.
As a related method, DeepMask also regresses discretized masks.
DeepMask applies the regression layers
to dense sliding windows (fully-convolutionally), but our
method only regresses masks from a few proposed boxes
and so reduces computational cost. Moreover, mask regression is only one stage in our network cascade that shares
features among multiple stages, so the marginal cost of the
mask regression layers is very small.
3.3. Categorizing Instances
The third stage takes the shared convolutional features,
stage-1 boxes, and stage-2 masks as input. It outputs category scores for each instance.
Given a box predicted by stage 1, we also extract a feature by RoI pooling. This feature map is then “masked” by
the stage-2 mask prediction, inspired by the feature masking strategy in . This leads to a feature focused on the
foreground of the prediction mask. The masked feature is
given by element-wise product:
(Θ) = FRoI
(Θ) · Mi(Θ).
is the feature after RoI pooling, Mi(Θ) is a
mask prediction from stage 2 (resized to the RoI resolution), and · represents element-wise product. The masked
feature FMask
is dependent on Mi(Θ). Two 4096-d fc layers are applied on the masked feature FMask
. This is a
mask-based pathway. Following , we also use another
box-based pathway, where the RoI pooled features directly
fed into two 4096-d fc layers (this pathway is not illustrated
in Fig. 2). The mask-based and box-based pathways are
concatenated. On top of the concatenation, a softmax classiﬁer of N+1 ways is used for predicting N categories plus
one background category. The box-level pathway may address the cases when the feature is mostly masked out by
the mask-level pathway (e.g., on background).
The loss term L3 of stage 3 exhibits the following form:
L3 = L3(C(Θ) | B(Θ), M(Θ)).
Here C is the network outputs of this stage, representing
a list of category predictions for all instances: C = {Ci}.
This loss term is dependent on B(Θ) and M(Θ) (where
B(Θ) is used for generating the RoI feature).
4. End-to-End Training
We deﬁne the loss function of the entire cascade as:
L(Θ) =L1(B(Θ)) + L2(M(Θ) | B(Θ))
+ L3(C(Θ) | B(Θ), M(Θ)),
where balance weights of 1 are implicitly used among the
three terms. L(Θ) is minimized w.r.t. the network parameters Θ. This loss function is unlike traditional multi-task
learning, because the loss term of a later stage depends on
the output of the earlier ones. For example, based on the
chain rule of backpropagation, the gradient of L2 involves
the gradients w.r.t. B.
The main technical challenge of applying the chain rule
to Eqn.(5) lies on the spatial transform of a predicted box
Bi(Θ) that determines RoI pooling. For the RoI pooling
layer, its inputs are a predicted box Bi(Θ) and the convolutional feature map F(Θ), both being functions of Θ. In Fast
R-CNN , the box proposals are pre-computed and ﬁxed,
and the backpropagation of RoI pooling layer in only involves F(Θ). However, this is not the case in the presence
of B(Θ). Gradients of both terms need to be considered in
a theoretically sound end-to-end training solution.
In this section, we develop a differentiable RoI warping
layer to account for the gradient w.r.t. predicted box positions and address the dependency on B(Θ). The dependency on M(Θ) is also tackled accordingly.
Differentiable RoI Warping Layers.
The RoI pooling
layer performs max pooling on a discrete grid based
on a box. To derive a form that is differentiable w.r.t. the
box position, we perform RoI pooling by a differentiable
RoI warping layer followed by standard max pooling.
The RoI warping layer crops a feature map region and
warps it into a target size by interpolation. We use F(Θ) to
denote the full-image convolutional feature map. Given a
predicted box Bi(Θ) centered at (xi(Θ), yi(Θ)) with width
wi(Θ) and height hi(Θ), an RoI warping layer interpolates
the features inside the box and outputs a feature of a ﬁxed
spatial resolution. This operation can be written as linear
transform on the feature map F(Θ):
(Θ) = G(Bi(Θ))F(Θ).
Here F(Θ) is reshaped as an n-dimensional vector, with
n = WH for a full-image feature map of a spatial size
W × H. G represents the cropping and warping operations, and is an n′-by-n matrix where n′ = W ′H′ corresponds to the pre-deﬁned RoI warping output resolution
W ′ × H′. FRoI
(Θ) is an n′-dimensional vector representing the RoI warping output. We note that these operations
are performed for each channel independently.
The computation in Eqn.(6) has this form:
G(u, v; u′, v′|Bi)F(u,v),
where the notations Θ in Eqn.(6) are omitted for simplifying
presentation. Here (u′, v′) represent a spatial position in the
target W ′ × H′ feature map, and (u, v) run over the fullimage feature map F.
The function G(u, v; u′, v′|Bi) represents transforming
a proposed box Bi from a size of [xi −wi/2, xi + wi/2) ×
[yi−hi/2, yi+hi/2) into another size of [−W ′/2, W ′/2)×
[−H′/2, H′/2).
Using bilinear interpolation, G is separable: G(u, v; u′, v′|Bi) = g(u, u′|xi, wi)g(v, v′|yi, hi)
g(u, u′|xi, wi) = κ(xi + u′
W ′ wi −u),
where κ(·) = max(0, 1 −| · |) is the bilinear interpolation function, and xi +
W ′ wi maps the position of
u′ ∈[−W ′/2, W ′/2) to the full-image feature map domain. g(v, v′|yi, hi) is deﬁned similarly. We note that because κ is non-zero in a small interval, the actual computation of Eqn.(7) involves a very few terms.
According to the chain rule, for backpropagation involving Eqn.(6) we need to compute:
where we use ∂Bi to denote ∂xi, ∂yi, ∂wi, and ∂hi for
simplicity. The term
∂Bi in Eqn.(9) can be derived from
Eqn.(8). As such, the RoI warping layer can be trained with
any preceding/succeding layers. If the boxes are constant
(e.g., given by Selective Search ), Eqn.(9) is not needed,
which becomes the case of the existing RoI pooling in .
After the differentiable RoI warping layer, we append a
max pooling layer to perform the RoI max pooling behavior.
We expect the RoI warping layer to produce a sufﬁciently
ﬁne resolution, which is set as W ′ × H′ = 28 × 28 in this
paper. A max pooling layer is then applied to produce a
lower-resolution output, e.g., 7×7 for VGG-16.
The RoI warping layer shares similar motivations with
the recent work of Spatial Transformer Networks . In
 , a spatial transformation of the entire image is learned,
which is done by feature interpolation that is differentiable
w.r.t. the transformation parameters. The networks in 
are used for image classiﬁcation. Our RoI warping layer
is also driven by the differentiable property of interpolating
features. But the RoI warping layer is applied to multiple
proposed boxes that are of interest, instead of the entire image. The RoI warping layer has a pre-deﬁned output size
and arbitrary input sizes, in contrast to .
shared features
Figure 3. A 5-stage cascade. On stage 3, bounding boxes updated
by the box regression layer are used as the input to stage 4.
Masking Layers. We also compute the gradients involved
in L3(C(Θ) | B(Θ), M(Θ)), where the dependency on
B(Θ) and M(Θ) is determined by Eqn.(3).
differentiable RoI warping module (FRoI
), the operations
in Eqn.(3) can be simply implemented by an element-wise
product module.
In summary, given the differentiable RoI warping module, we have all the necessary components for backpropagation (other components are either standard, or trivial to
implement). We train the model by stochastic gradient descent (SGD), implemented in the Caffe library .
5. Cascades with More Stages
Next we extend the cascade model to more stages within
the above MNC framework.
In Fast R-CNN , the (N+1)-way classiﬁer is trained
jointly with class-wise bounding box regression. Inspired
by this practice, on stage 3, we add a 4(N+1)-d fc layer for
regression class-wise bounding boxes , which is a sibling
layer with the classiﬁer layer. The entire 3-stage network
cascade is trained as in Sec. 4.
The inference step with box regression, however, is
not as straightforward as in object detection, because our
ultimate outputs are masks instead of boxes. So during inference, we ﬁrst run the entire 3-stage network and obtain
the regressed boxes on stage 3. These boxes are then considered as new proposals1. Stages 2 and 3 are performed
for the second time on these proposals. This is in fact 5stage inference. Its inference-time structure is illustrated in
Fig. 3. The new stages 4 and 5 share the same structures
as stages 2 and 3, except that they use the regressed boxes
from stage 3 as the new proposals. This inference process
can be iterated, but we have observed negligible gains.
Given the above 5-stage cascade structure (Fig. 3), it is
easy to adopt our algorithm in Sec. 4 to train this cascade
end-to-end by backpropagation. Training the model in this
way makes the training-time structure consistent with the
1To avoid multiplying the number of proposals by the number of categories, for each box we only use the highest scored category’s bounding
box regressor.
inference-time structure, which improves accuracy as will
be shown by experiments. It is possible to train a cascade
with even more stages in this way. But due to concerns on
fast inference, we only present MNCs with up to 5 stages.
6. Implementation Details
Non-maximum suppression. On stage 1, the network produces ∼104 regressed boxes. For generating the proposals for stage 2, we use non-maximum suppression (NMS)
to reduce redundant candidates.
The threshold of the
Intersection-over-Union (IoU) ratio for this NMS is 0.7 as
in . After that, the top-ranked 300 boxes will be
used for stage 2. During training, the forward/backward
propagated signals of stages 2 and 3 only go through the
“pathways” determined by these 300 boxes. NMS is similar to max pooling, maxout , or other local competing layers , which are implemented as routers of forward/backward pathways.
During inference, we use the
same NMS strategy to produce 300 proposals for stage 2.
Positive/negative samples. (i) On stage 1, their deﬁnitions
follow . (ii) On stage 2, for each proposed box we ﬁnd
its highest overlapping ground truth mask. If the overlapping ratio (IoU) is greater than 0.5, this proposed box is considered as positive and contributes to the mask regression
loss; otherwise is ignored in the regression loss. The mask
regression target is the intersection between the proposed
box and the ground truth mask, resized to m × m pixels.
(iii) On stage 3, we consider two sets of positive/negative
samples. In the ﬁrst set, the positive samples are the instances that overlap with ground truth boxes by box-level
IoU ≥0.5 (the negative samples are the rest). In the second set, the positive samples are the instances that overlap
with ground truth instances by box-level IoU ≥0.5 and
mask-level IoU ≥0.5. The loss function of stage 3 involves
two (N+1)-way classiﬁers, one for classifying mask-level
instances and the other for classifying box-level instances
(whose scores are not used for inference). The reason for
considering both box-level and mask-level IoU is that when
the proposed box is not a real instance (e.g., on the background or poorly overlapping with ground truth), the regressed mask might be less reliable and thus the box-level
IoU is more conﬁdent.
Hyper-parameters for training. We use the ImageNet pretrained models (e.g., VGG-16 ) to initialize the shared
convolutional layers and the corresponding 4096-d fc layers. The extra layers are initialized randomly as in .
We adopt an image-centric training framework : the
shared convolutional layers are computed on the entire image, while the RoIs are randomly sampled for computing
loss functions. In our system, each mini-batch involves 1
image, 256 sampled anchors for stage 1 as in 2, and 64
2Though we sample 256 anchors on stage 1 for computing the loss
VGG-16 net
training strategies
shared features?
end-to-end training?
training 5-stage cascades?
 (%)
Table 1. Ablation experiments on PASCAL VOC 2012 validation. For (a), (b), and (c), the cascade structures for training have 3 stages.
The inference process (5-stage, see 5) is the same for all cases; the models are only different in the training methods. The pre-trained
models are ZF net (left) and VGG-16 net (right).
sampled RoIs for stages 2 and 3. We train the model using a
learning rate of 0.001 for 32k iterations, and 0.0001 for the
next 8k. We train the model in 8 GPUs, each GPU holding
1 mini-batch (so the effective mini-batch size is ×8). The
images are resized such that the shorter side has 600 pixels
 . We do not adopt multi-scale training/testing , as
it provides no good trade-off on speed vs. accuracy .
Inference. We use 5-stage inference for both 3-stage and
5-stage trained structures. The inference process gives us a
list of 600 instances with masks and category scores (300
from the stage 3 outputs, and 300 from the stage 5 outputs).
We post-process this list to reduce similar predictions. We
ﬁrst apply NMS (using box-level IoU 0.3 ) on the list
of 600 instances based on their category scores. After that,
for each not-suppressed instance, we ﬁnd its “similar” instances which are deﬁned as the suppressed instances that
overlap with it by IoU ≥0.5. The prediction masks of the
not-suppressed instance and its similar instances are merged
together by weighted averaging, pixel-by-pixel, using the
classiﬁcation scores as their averaging weights. This “mask
voting” scheme is inspired by the box voting in . The averaged masks, taking continuous values in , are binarized to form the ﬁnal output masks. The averaging step improves accuracy by ∼1% over the NMS outcome. This postprocessing is performed for each category independently.
7. Experiments
7.1. Experiments on PASCAL VOC 2012
We follow the protocols used in recent papers 
for evaluating instance-aware semantic segmentation. The
models are trained on the PASCAL VOC 2012 training set,
and evaluated on the validation set. We use the segmentation annotations in for training and evaluation, following . We evaluate the mean Average Precision,
which is referred to as mean APr or simply mAPr. We
evaluate mAPr using IoU thresholds at 0.5 and 0.7.
Ablation Experiments on Training Strategies.
1 compares the results of different training strategies for
MNCs. We remark that in this table all results are obtained
function, the network of stage 1 is still computed fully-convolutionally on
the entire image and produces all proposals that are used by later stages.
via 5-stage inference, so the differences are contributed by
the training strategies. We show results using ZF net 
that has 5 convolutional layers and 3 fc layers, and VGG-16
net that has 13 convolutional layers and 3 fc layers.
As a simple baseline (Table 1, a), we train the three
stages step-by-step without sharing their features. Three
separate networks are trained, and a network of a later stage
takes the outputs from the trained networks of the earlier
stages. The three separate networks are all initialized by the
ImageNet-pre-trained model. This baseline has an mAPr of
60.2% using VGG-16. We note that this baseline result is
competitive (see also Table 2), suggesting that decomposing
the task into three sub-tasks is an effective solution.
To achieve feature sharing, one may follow the step-bystep training in . Given the above model (a), the shared
convolutional layers are kept unchanged by using the last
stage’s weights, and the three separate networks are trained
step-by-step again with the shared layers not tuned, following . Doing so leads to an mAPr of 60.5%, just on par
with the baseline that does not share features. This suggests
that sharing features does not directly improve accuracy.
Next we experiment with the single-step, end-to-end
training algorithm developed in Sec. 4. Table 1 (c) shows
the result of end-to-end training a 3-stage cascade.
mAPr is increased to 62.6%. We note that in Table 1 (a),
(b), and (c), the models have the same structure for training. So the improvement of (c) is contributed by end-to-end
training this cascade structure. This improvement is similar to other gains observed in many practices of multi-task
learning . By developing training algorithm as in Sec. 4,
we are able to train the network by backpropagation in a
theoretically sound way. The features are naturally shared
by optimizing a uniﬁed loss function, and the beneﬁts of
multi-task learning are witnessed.
Table 1 (d) shows the result of end-to-end training a 5stage cascade. The mAPr is further improved to 63.5%.
We note that all results in Table 1 are based on the same
5-stage inference strategy. So the accuracy gap between (d)
and (c) is contributed by training a 5-stage structure that is
consistent with its inference-time usage.
The series of comparisons are also observed when using
the ZF net as the pre-trained model (Table 1, left), showing
the generality of our ﬁndings.
 (%) (%) time/img (s)
SDS (AlexNet) 
Hypercolumn 
MNC [ours]
Table 2. Comparisons of instance-aware semantic segmentation on
the PASCAL VOC 2012 validation set. The testing time per image
(including all steps) is evaluated in a single Nvidia K40 GPU, except that the MCG proposal time is evaluated on a CPU. MCG
is used by and its running time is about 30s. The running time of is our estimation based on the description from
the paper. The pre-trained model is VGG-16 for and ours.
O2P is not based on deep CNNs, and its result is reported by .
Table 3. Detailed testing time (seconds) per image of our method
using 5-stage inference. The model is VGG-16. “Others” include
post-processing and communications among stages.
Comparisons with State-of-the-art Methods. In Table 2
we compare with SDS , Hypercolumn , and CFM
 , which are existing CNN-based semantic segmentation
methods that are able to identify instances. These papers reported their mAPr under the same protocol used by our experiments. Our MNC has ∼3% higher than previous best results. Our method also has higher 
than previous methods.
Fig 4 shows some examples of our results on the validation set. Our method can handle challenging cases where
multiple instances of the same category are spatially connected to each other (e.g., Fig 4, ﬁrst row).
Running Time. Our method has an inference-time speed
of 360ms per image (Table 2), evaluated on an Nvidia K40
GPU. Table 3 shows the details. Our method does not require any external region proposal method, whereas the region proposal step in SDS, Hypercolumn, and CFM costs
30s using MCG. Furthermore, our method uses the shared
convolutional features for the three sub-tasks and avoids redundant computation. Our system is about two orders of
magnitude faster than previous systems.
Object Detection Evaluations. We are also interested in
the box-level object detection performance (mAPb), so that
we can compare with more systems that are designed for
object detection. We train our model on the PASCAL VOC
2012 trainval set, and evaluate on the PASCAL VOC 2012
test set for object detection. Given mask-level instances
generated by our model, we simply assign a tight bounding
box to each instance. Table 4 shows that our result (70.9%)
compares favorably to the recent Fast/Faster R-CNN systems . We note that our result is obtained with fewer
training images , but with mask-level
training data
R-CNN 
Fast R-CNN 
Fast R-CNN 
VOC 07++12
Faster R-CNN 
Faster R-CNN 
VOC 07++12
MNC [ours]
MNCbox [ours]
MNCbox [ours]†
VOC 07++12
Table 4. Evaluation of (box-level) object detection mAP on the
PASCAL VOC 2012 test set. “12” denotes VOC 2012 trainval, and
“07++12” denotes VOC 2007 trainval+test and 2012 trainval. The
pre-trained model is VGG-16 for all methods.†: 
robots.ox.ac.uk:8080/anonymous/NUWDYX.html
mAP@[.5:.95] (%)
mAP@.5 (%)
VGG-16 
ResNet-101 
Table 5. Our baseline segmentation result (%) on the MS COCO
test-dev set. The training set is the trainval set.
annotations. This experiment shows the effectiveness of our
algorithm for detecting both box- and mask-level instances.
The above detection result is solely based on the masklevel outputs. But our method also has box-level outputs
from the box regression layers in stage 3/5. Using these
box layers’ outputs (box coordinates and scores) in place of
the mask-level outputs, we obtain an mAPb of 73.5% (Table 4). Finally, we train the MNC model on the union set
of 2007 trainval+test and 2012 trainval. As the 2007 set has
no mask-level annotation, when a sample image from the
2007 set is used, its mask regression loss is ignored (but the
mask is generated for the later stages) and its mask-level
IoU measure for determining positive/negative samples is
ignored. These samples can still impact the box proposal
stage and the categorizing stage. Under this setting, we obtain an mAPb of 75.9% (Table 4), substantially better than
Fast/Faster R-CNN .
7.2. Experiments on MS COCO Segmentation
We further evaluate on the MS COCO dataset . This
dataset consists of 80 object categories for instance-aware
semantic segmentation. Following the COCO guidelines,
we use the 80k+40k trainval images to train, and report the
results on the test-dev set. We evaluate the standard COCO
metric (mAPr@IoU=[0.5:0.95]) and also the PASCAL metrics (mAPr@IoU=0.5). Table 5 shows our method using
VGG-16 has a result of 19.5%/39.7%.
The end-to-end training behavior and the independence
of external models make our method easily enjoy gains
from deeper representations. By replacing VGG-16 with an
extremely deep 101-layer network (ResNet-101) , we
achieve 24.6%/44.3% on the MS COCO test-dev set . It is noteworthy that ResNet-101 leads to a relative
improvement of 26% (on mAPr@[.5:.95]) over VGG-16,
which is consistent to the relative improvement of COCO
object detection in .
This baseline result is close to
the 2nd-place winner’s ensemble result (25.1%/45.8% by
FAIRCNN). On our baseline result, we further adopt global
context modeling and multi-scale testing as in , and
ensembling.
Our ﬁnal result on the test-challenge set is
28.2%/51.5%, which won the 1st place in the COCO segmentation track3 of ILSVRC & COCO 2015 competitions.
Fig. 5 shows some examples.
3 
8. Conclusion
We have presented Multi-task Network Cascades for fast
and accurate instance segmentation. We believe that the
idea of exploiting network cascades in a multi-task learning framework is general. This idea, if further developed,
may be useful for other recognition tasks.
Our method is designed with fast inference in mind, and
is orthogonal to some other successful strategies developed
previously for semantic segmentation. For example, one
may consider exploiting a CRF to reﬁne the boundaries
of the instance masks. This is beyond the scope of this paper
and will be investigated in the future.
Figure 5. Our instance-aware semantic segmentation results on the MS COCO test-dev set using ResNet-101 .