Proceedings of The 10th International Natural Language Generation conference, pages 238–242,
Santiago de Compostela, Spain, September 4-7 2017. c⃝2017 Association for Computational Linguistics
Analysing Data-To-Text Generation Benchmarks
Laura Perez-Beltrachini
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
10 Crichton Street, Edinburgh EH8 9AB
Claire Gardent
CNRS, LORIA, UMR 7503
Vanoeuvre-l`es-Nancy, F-54506
A generation system can only be as good as
the data it is trained on.
In this short paper, we propose a methodology for analysing
data-to-text corpora used for training microplanner i.e., systems which given some input
must produce a text verbalising exactly this input. We apply this methodology to three existing benchmarks and we elicite a set of criteria
for the creation of a data-to-text benchmark
which could help better support the development, evaluation and comparison of linguistically sophisticated data-to-text generators.
Introduction
In some scenarios, generation datasets provide linguistic descriptions of a speciﬁc domain and application ). However, in other
scenarios generation datasets aim at broader syntactic ) or domain coverage.
Recently, several datasets have been created to train
data-to-text generators . It is unclear however to what extent the generation task exercised by
these datasets is linguistically challenging. Do these
datasets provide enough variety to support the development of high-quality data-to-text generators ?
In this paper, we propose a methodology for characterising the variety and complexity of these datasets.
We exemplify its use by applying it to three existing
training corpora for NLG and we conclude by eliciting a set of criteria for the creation of data-to-text
benchmarks which could better support the development, evaluation and comparison of linguistically
sophisticated data-to-text generators.
Our classiﬁcation aims to assess to what extent a
data-to-text corpus will allow for the learning of a
linguistically sophisticated microplanner i.e., a microplanner which can handle a wide range of linguistic constructions and their interaction. We focus
on the following four criteria: linguistic and computational diversity (How complex or varied are the
data and the texts?), lexical richness (Is the dataset
lexically varied ?), syntactic variety (Is the dataset
syntactically varied and in particular, does it include
text of varied syntactic complexity ?) and informational adequacy (Does the text match the information contained in the data ?).
Linguistic and Computational Diversity.
Linguistic and computational diversity can be assessed
using the following metrics1:
Size: the number of training instances in the dataset
Nb. of Rel: the number of distinct relations
Sub.Ent: the number of distinct subject entities
Rel.Obj.Ent: the number of relation-object pairs
Da Len: the average length of the input data computed as
the number of subject-relation-object triples
Da Ptns: the number of distinct relation combinations
Da Inst: the number of distinct data inputs
1We assume that a data-to-text corpus for NLG includes entities, concepts and binary relations. Following RDF terminology, we refer to the ﬁrst argument of a binary relation as a subject entity and to the second as an object entity.
PPxDa Inst: the average (min/max) number of paraphrases per data input.
Lexical Richness.
 ’s system automatically measure various dimensions of lexical richness. Two measures are particularly relevant here.
Type-token ratio (TTR) is a measure of diversity
deﬁned as the ratio of the number of word types
to the number of words in a text. To address the
fact that this ratio tends to decrease with the size of
the corpus, Mean segmental TTR (MSTTR) is computed by dividing the corpus into successive segments of a given length and then calculating the average TTR of all segments.
Lexical sophistication (LS) measures the proportion of relatively unusual or advanced word types in
the text. In practice, LS is the proportion of lexical
word types which are not in the list of 2,000 most
frequent words from the British National Corpus.
Syntactic Variation
To support the training of
generators with wide syntactic coverage, a benchmark needs to show a balanced distribution of the
various syntactic phenomena present in the target
language. To characterise the syntactic coverage of
a dataset, we use a complexity classiﬁcation proposed in the domain of language learning development assessment which consists of eight levels: (0)
simple sentences, including questions (1) inﬁnitive
or -ing complement with subject control; (2) conjoined noun phrases in subject position; conjunctions of sentences, of verbal, adjectival, or adverbial construction; (3) relative or appositional clause
modifying the object of the main verb; nominalization in object position; ﬁnite clause as object of main
verb; subject extraposition; (4) subordinate clauses;
comparatives; (5) nonﬁnite clauses in adjunct positions; (6) relative or appositional clause modifying
subject of main verb; embedded clause serving as
subject of main verb; nominalization serving as subject of main verb; (7) more than one level of embedding in a single sentence.
We use ’s system for the automatic
measurement of syntactic variability. Brieﬂy, this
system decomposes parse trees2 into component
sub-trees and scores each of these sub-trees based
2Parses are obtained using Collins’ constituent parser
 .
RNNLGLaptop
RNNLGHotel
RNNLGRestaurant
WIKIBIOASTRO
Table 1: Match between Text and Data. M: Missing
content in the text, A: Additional content in the text,
MA: both additional and missing, E:Exact.
on the type of the syntactic constructions detected
in it using a set of heuristics. Sentences are then
assigned to a syntactic level based on the scores assigned to the sub-trees it contains as follows. If all
sub-trees found in that sentence are assigned to level
zero, the sentence is assigned to level 0; if one and
only one non-zero level is assigned to one or more
sub-trees, the sentence is assigned to that non-zero
level; if two or more different non-zero scores are
assigned to two or more of the sub-trees, the sentence is assigned to level 7. When evaluated against
a gold standard of 500 sentences independently rated
by two annotators with a very high inter-annotator
agreement (kappa = 0.91), the system achieves an
F-Score of 93.2% .
Informational Adequacy
A microplanner should
express all or part of the content expressed in the input data. It is therefore important to verify that this
is the case through manual examination of a random
subset of the dataset. A data/text pair will be considered an “Exact” match if all data is verbalised by
the text. It will be labelled as “Missing” if part of
the data is not present in the text (content selection)
and as “Additional” if the text contains information
not present in the input data.
Case Study
To illustrate the usage of the evaluation grid proposed in the preceding section, we apply it to three
datasets recently proposed for data-to-text generation by , and .
 ’s dataset (WIKIBIO) focuses
on biographies and associates Wikipedia infoboxes
with the ﬁrst sentence of the corresponding article
in Wikipedia. As the dataset is much larger than the
other datasets and is not domain speciﬁc, we extract
two subsets of it for better comparison: one whose
size is similar to the other datasets (WIKIBIO16317) and
one which is domain speciﬁc in that all biographies
are about astronauts (WIKIBIOASTRO).
The other two datasets were created manually
with humans providing text for dialogue acts in the
case of ’s
RNNLG datasets (laptop, TV, hotel, restaurant) and
image descriptions in the case of ’s dataset (IMAGEDESC).
We also include a text-only corpus for comparison with the texts contained in our three datasets.
This corpus (GMB) consists of the texts from the
Groningen Meaning Bank ) and covers different genres (e.g., news,
jokes, fables).
Linguistic and Computational Diversity.
Table 2 gives the descriptive statistics for each of these
three datasets. It shows marked differences in terms
of size ( WIKIBIO16317 being the largest and IMAGEDESC
the smallest), number of distinct relations (from 16
for IMAGEDESC to 2367 for WIKIBIO16317 ) and average
number of paraphrases (15.11 for IMAGEDESC against
1 to 3.72 for the other two datasets).
The number of distinct data inputs (semantic variability) also
varies widely (from 77 distinct data inputs for the IM-
AGEDESC corpus to 12527 for RNNLGLaptop). Overall
the number of distinct relations is relatively small.
Lexical Richness.
The WIKIBIO dataset, even when
restricted to a single type of entity (namely, astronauts) has a higher MSTTR. This higher lexical variation is probably due to the fact that this dataset also
has the highest number of relations (cf. Table 2):
more relations brings more diversity and thus better
lexical range. Indeed, there is a positive correlation
between the number of relations in the dataset and
MSTTR (Spearman’s rho +0.385).
Again the WIKIBIO dataset has a markedly higher
level of lexical sophistication than the other datasets.
The higher LS might be because the WIKIBIO text are
edited independently of input data thereby leaving
more freedom to the authors to include additional
information. It may also result from the fact that
the WIKIBIO dataset, even though it is restricted to biographies, covers a much more varied set of domains
than the other datasets as people’s lives may be very
diverse and consequently, a more varied range of
topics may be mentioned than in a domain restricted
Syntactic variation.
Figure 1 summarises the results for the various datasets. A ﬁrst observation is
that the proportion of simple texts (Level 0) is very
high across the board (42% to 68%). In fact, in all
data sets but two, more than half of the sentences are
of level 0 (simple sentences). In comparison, only
35% of the GMB corpus sentences are of level 0.
Second, levels 1, 4 and to a lesser extent level
3, are absent or almost absent from the data sets.
We conjecture that this is due to the shape and
type of the input data. Inﬁnitival clauses with subject control (level 1) and comparatives (level 4) involve coreferential links and relations between entities which are absent from the simple binary relations comprising the input data. Similarly, non ﬁnite
complements with their own subject (e.g., “John
saw Mary leaving the room”, Level 3) and relative
clauses modifying the object of the main verb (e.g.,
“The man scolded the boy who stole the bicycle”,
Level 3) require data where the object of a literal is
the subject of some other literal. In most cases however, the input data consists of sets of literals predicating facts about a single entity.
Third, datasets may be more or less varied in
terms of syntactic complexity. It is in particular noticeable that, for the WIKIBIO dataset, three levels (1,
3 and 7) covers 84% of the cases. This restricted variety points to stereotyped text with repetitive syntactic structure. Indeed, in WIKIBIO, the texts consist of the ﬁrst sentence of biographic Wikipedia articles which typically are of the form “W (date of
birth - date of death) was P”. where P usually is an
arbitrarily complex predicate potentially involving
relative clauses modifying the object of main verb
(Level 3) and coordination (Level 7).
Informational Adequacy.
Each data-text pair was
independently rated by two annotators resulting in a
kappa score ranging between 0.566 and 0.691 depending on the dataset. The results shown in Table 1 highlight some important differences. While
the RNNLG datasets have a high percentage of exact entries (82% to 94%), the IMAGEDESC dataset is
less precise (44% of exact matches). The WIKIBIO
datasets does not contain a single example where
data and text coincide.
These differences can be
Nb. of Rel
Rel.Obj.Ent
PPxDa Inst.
WIKIBIO16317
WIKIBIOASTRO
RNNLGLaptop
RNNLGHotel
3.72(1/149)
RNNLGRestaurant
1.82(1/101)
15.11(8/22)
Table 2: Datasets descriptive statistics. ‡Note that we consider as distinct entities those given by the name
relations and that in the RNNLG datasets not all dialogue acts describe entities (e.g. inform count or ?select).
WIKIBIO16317
WIKIBIOASTRO
RNNLGLaptop
RNNLGHotel
RNNLGRestaurant
Table 3: Lexical Sophistication (LS) and Mean
Segmental Type-Token Ratio (MSTTR).
Figure 1: Syntactic complexity. D-Level sentence
distribution.
traced back to the way in which each resource was
created. The WIKIBIO dataset is created automatically
from Wikipedia infoboxes and articles while information adequacy is not checked for. In the IMAGEDESC
dataset, the texts are created from images using
crowdsourcing. It seems that this method, while enhancing variety, makes it easier for the crowdworkers to omit some information.
Conclusion
The proposed measures suggest several key aspects
to take into account when constructing a data-totext dataset for the development and evaluation of
NLG systems.
Lexical richness can be enhanced
by including data from different domains, using a
large number of distinct relations and ensuring that
the total number of distinct inputs is high. Wide
and balanced syntactic coverage is difﬁcult to ensure and probably requires input data of various size
and shape, stemming from different domains. Informational adequacy is easiest to achieve using crowdsourcing which also facilitates the inclusion of paraphrases. In future work, it would be interesting to
further exploit such analyses of data-to-text corpora
(i) to better characterise the generators that can be
learnt from a given corpus, (ii) to perform a graded
analysis of generation systems on data of various
syntactic complexity or (iii) to support error mining (which type of data is most often associated with
generation failure ?).
More speciﬁcally, our classiﬁcation could be useful to identify sources of under-performance and
thus directions for improvements.
For instance,
BLEU results reported by on
three different datasets indicate that the same systems are facing different difﬁculties on each of these.
Indeed, lexical richness is higher (Table 3) for the
RNNLGLaptop dataset for which 
reports the lowest BLEU score. But also the proportion of simple sentences is lower (Figure 1) in
this dataset. A focused evaluation could report on
BLEU scores aggregated on the syntactic classiﬁcation of sentences into levels.
Acknowledgments
This research was partially supported by the French
National Research Agency within the framework of
the WebNLG Project (ANR-14-CE24-0033).