Perception & Psychophysics
1997, 59 (3), 389-403
On measuring selective attention
to an expected sensory modality
CHARLES SPENCE
University ofCambridge, Cambridge, England
JON DRIVER
Birkbeck College, University ojLondon, London, England
Perceptual judgments can be affected by expectancies regarding the likelytarget modality. This has
been taken as evidence for selective attention to particular modalities, but alternative accounts remain
possible in terms of response priming, criterion shifts, stimulus repetition, and spatial confounds. We
examined whether attention to a sensory modalitywould still be apparent when these alternatives were
ruled out. Subjects made a speeded detection response (Experiment 1),an intensity or color discrimination (Experiment 2),or a spatial discrimination response (Experiments 3 and 4) for auditory and visual targets presented in a random sequence. On each trial, a symbolic visual cue predicted the likely
target modality. Responses were always more rapid and accurate for targets presented in the expected
versus unexpected modality, implying that people can indeed selectively attend to the auditory or visual modalities. Whensubjects were cued to both the probable modality of a target and its likely spatiallocation (Experiment 4), separable modality-cuingand spatial-cuing effects were observed. These
studies introduce appropriate methods for distinguishing attention to a modality from the confounding factors that have plagued previous normal and clinical research.
Mechanisms of attention allow us to concentrate on
events of interest in the environment. Many researchers
have suggested that sensory modality is one dimension
along which selective processing can be mediated .
That is, they claim that people can selectively direct their
covert attention to just one modality, and as a result process events more efficiently in that modality than in situations where attention must be simultaneously divided
between several sensory modalities or where attention is
directed to another modality.
A further claim has been that abnormalities in selective
attention to one modality versus another may underlie
the cognitive deficits found in a number ofclinical populations, including schizophrenics , autistics , and
cerebel1arpatients . Evidence apparently consistent with this view comes from numerous
This work was supported by grants from the Medical Research Council (U.K.) and by a Junior Research Fellowship to the first author from
St. John's College, Cambridge. Our thanks go to Pierre Jolicouer, Ray
Klein, Hal Pashler, Robert Rogers, and Jan Theeuwes for their helpful
comments on an earlier version of this manuscript. Correspondence may
be addressed to Charles Spence at Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge CB2 3EB,
England (e-mail: ) or Jon Driver at Department
of Psychology, Birkbeck College, University of London, Malet Street,
London WC IE 7HX, England (e-mail: ).
studies taken to show that these populations have an impaired ability both to focus their attention on a particular
sensory modality and to shift their attention between different modalities, as compared with normals .
Unfortunately, due to several methodological problems,
the appropriate interpretation of these prior findings on
modality selection is not clear. Alternative accounts which
are either entirely nonattentional or involve attention to
locations rather than to modalities remain possible. Given
the wide interest in modality selection by both normals
and clinical populations, it seems important that appropriate methods be developed to index it. With this in mind,
the sections below summarize previous studies of selective attention to modalities, in both normal and clinical
populations, while highlighting the methodological problems in these studies.
The Apparent Benefits of Knowing
Target Modality
Wundt was one
of the first to seek empirical support for the claim that
subjects can attend to a sensory modality. He reported that
people detected stimuli more slowly when target modality was uncertain than when they were sure ofthe modality in advance. Mowrer, Rayman, and Bliss similarly found that subjects detected auditory targets more
Copyright 1997 Psychonomic Society, Inc.
SPENCE AND DRIVER
rapidly when instructed to react only to sounds than when
instructed to react to either auditory or visual targets. This
benefit occurred even when, in both conditions, only
sounds were actually presented following the instructions.
More recently, Boulter used a trial-by-trial cuing
paradigm and found reaction time (RT) benefits for the
detection ofauditory, visual, and tactile targets when target modality was cued with 100% validity, as opposed to
when target modality was uncertain. Comparable benefits for the detection of auditory and visual targets when
their modality was expected have been reported in children as young as 4 years of age and, to varying degrees, in various other
normal, schizophrenic, and autistic populations . Unfortunately, it is possible
to explain all of the positive modality-cuing results in
nonattentional terms. The various alternative accounts are
illustrated in turn below, by representative studies.
Possible Response Priming Artifacts
Verleger and Cohen reported improvements
from valid modality cuing in both normal and schizophrenic individuals, who had to press one button for auditory targets and another for visual targets. Response
latencies were shorter in modality-certain blocks than in
target-modality-uncertain blocks. However, this result
may reflect response priming rather than a true benefit in
perceptual processing for targets in the attended modality. In blocks where target modality was certain, subjects
also knew which response to make prior to target presentation . This alone could produce
the RT benefit for modality-certain blocks; effectively, a
choice RT task has been turned into a simple RT task.
This criticism can also be leveled at several other studies
that used a modality-discrimination procedure .
Possible Criterion Shifts
The advantage of modality certainty for all the experiments cited so far might merely reflect criterion shifts
rather than any form of attentional selection per se . That is, subjects
may just lower their criteria for responding to events in
the expected modality rather than becoming more sensitive to them. Results consistent with such an explanation
were reported by M. W.Kristofferson . Subjects in
her experiment monitored a light and a simultaneous tone,
releasing a response key as soon as they detected the offset ofeither stimulus. Offsets were detected more rapidly
in blocks where the modality of offset was certain. On a
few catch trials, neither stimulus was terminated, so no response should have been made. In fact, more than twice
as many false-alarm responses were made when target
modality was certain. This is consistent with a loweredcriterion for response in the expected modality rather than
a true attentional shift toward it.
Such criterion accounts can be further examined by
experiments in which subjects make a speeded discrimination, so that both speed and accuracy can be measured. A more risky criterion should result in faster but
less accurate performance in the expected modality. Posner et al. reported a study in which subjects made
a left/right spatial discrimination regarding the location
ofauditory and visual targets. In "expect-auditory" blocks,
the majority (80%) of the targets were auditory and the
remainder were visual. Performance for these blocks was
compared with blocks that had either equal numbers of
auditory and visual targets or a majority ofvisual targets
("expect vision"). Responses were faster and more accurate for auditory targets in the expect-auditory blocks
than in the expect-vision blocks (and vice versa for visual
targets). These complementary RT and accuracy effects
make criterion accounts implausible. Moreover, response
priming cannot account for these findings either, because
the appropriate response for each target could not be anticipated in any condition. Similar effects were reported
by Klein , who used the same left/
right blocked discrimination task, and have also been
found in a range offurther discrimination tasks when the
likely modality is blocked .
However, due to an unintended confound between
expectancy-based factors (henceforth referred to as endogenous) and stimulus-driven factors (termed exogenous), there is a further problem in interpreting all ofthese
studies. The distinction between exogenous and endogenous attention has turned out to be critical in research
on spatial covert attention . We
suspect that it will be equally important in the analysis of
attention to modalities, as described below.
Expectancy Effects or Stimulus-Driven
Modality-Shifting Effects?
The most common interpretation for the blockedcuing technique just described, where one modality is
consistently more likely than another over a whole block
oftrials, has been that improvements in performance for
the more common (and thus expected) modality are due
to a voluntary shift ofendogenous attention to that modality. However, this overlooks potential intertrial effects of
an exogenous nature. For instance, regardless of any expectancies, there may be some cost in responding to targets when their modality changes successively-or some
benefit in responding to a repeated sequence of identical
stimuli. Such exogenous stimulus-repetition factors are
perfectly confounded with the expectancy manipulation
in blocked designs. For instance, as visual targets become
more likely overall in a block, the proportion of visualvisual sequences for successive targets versus auditoryvisual sequences must also increase.
Numerous findings demonstrate a robust performance
cost, or modality-shifting effect (MSE), whenever target
modality changes between successive trials . That is, subjects respond more rapidly to
a target when the preceding trial had a target in the same
modality (ipsimodal trial) than when it was in a different
modality (cross-modal trial). The MSE can occur even
when stimulus and response uncertainty are removed
 , and it is primarily
influenced by the sequence of imperative target stimuli
 
and is little influenced by interspersed nontarget stimuli.
The nature of the confound in blocked designs, between MSEs and endogenous attentional factors, may become clearer if we take the Posner et al. study that
was described earlier as a concrete example. In their experiment, 80% of targets in the expect-auditory blocks
were auditory. Most ofthese auditory targets would therefore occur on ipsimodal trials (i.e., the auditory target
was more likely to have been preceded by another auditory target than by a visual target). In contrast, the majority ofauditory targets in the expect-vision blocks would
be on cross-modal trials (i.e., the auditory target was more
likely to have been preceded by a visual target than by
another auditory target). It is therefore possible that RTs
to auditory targets were elevated in the expect-vision
blocks, as compared with expect-auditory blocks, solely
due to the cost associated with an exogenous, stimulusdriven MSE rather than because ofany endogenous shift
of attention to the expected modality.
This confound between the MSE and endogenous factors extends to all the other blocked cuing studies we have
cited so far . The present article is not concerned
with the exact mechanisms that produce the widely observed MSE or with whether these are attentional in nature .
For present purposes, the important point is that, by definition, the MSE is a purely stimulus-driven effect, depending only on whether successive stimuli have the same
modality, regardless of any expectations. It is thus different in kind from the deliberate direction ofendogenous
attention toward an expected modality that has usually
been invoked to explain modality-certainty effects in
blocked designs.
In one previous study,Dinnerstein and Zlotogura 
did seek to overcome the confound between exogenous MSEs and endogenous expectancy effects when
using a blocked modality-cuing paradigm. When comparing detection latencies for blocks where all targets were
ofthe same modality versus blocks where target modal-
ATTENDING TO A MODALITY
ity was uncertain, their technique was to analyze crossmodal and ipsimodal trials separately. Performance was
faster on ipsimodal trials in the modality-certain blocks
than on ipsimodal trials in the modality-uncertain blocks
(apparently demonstrating the effects of endogenous attention to a sensory modality). In turn, performance was
faster on these ipsimodal trials than on crossmodal trials
in the modality-uncertain block (demonstrating a separable MSE). However, Dinnerstein and Zlotogura unfortunately used detection latencies as their critical performance measure, and so the criterion account discussed
earlier cannot be ruled out for their data.
Trial-by-trial cuing procedures provide an alternative
means to Dinnerstein and Zlotogura's analysis for
separating modality-expectancy effects from exogenous
influences such as the MSE. With this method, the likely
modality for the next target can be changed unpredictably
from trial to trial, being signaled by a cuing event. As a
result, cross-modal and ipsimodal trials (with respect to
the target modality ofthe preceding trial) can occur equally
often for targets in the expected and unexpected modalities. Hence, any advantage found for targets in the
expected-modality trials cannot be due to an MSE. Such
advantages have indeed been reported by some previous
studies . However, due to yet another type of confound, which applies
to the vast majority ofprior studies ofmodality selection,
the interpretation of such results still remains problematic. This confound arises because targets from distinct
modalities have typically been presented from different
positions.
Modality-Cuing or Spatial-Cuing Effects?
In the prototypical modality-cuing experiment, auditory targets are presented over headphones and visual
targets are presented on a monitor placed in front of the
subject. For instance, in the "expect-vision" trials ofthe
Posner et al. study, 80% of the targets were presented from the screen in front of the subject, whereas
in the "expect-auditory" blocks, the majority of targets
were presented over headphones at the head. Accordingly,
subjects may not have been using their advance knowledge to direct attention to a particular modality per se, but
rather to direct their attention to one location or another
(e.g., in front and below for the visual events, but closer
to the head for the auditory events). Responses might
then have been slower for auditory targets on "expectvision" trials than on "expect-audition" trials simply because attention was directed to the wrong location, and
not because it was directed to the wrong modality. Furthermore, any such orienting ofattention to the likely target location could even have occurred overtly, as eye
movements have not been monitored, or even fixation instructions described, in the vast majority of previous
modality-cuing experiments.
A spatial-cuing interpretation for previous modalitycuing results is made all the more plausible when one considers the many studies showing that people invariablyuse
SPENCE AND DRIVER
spatially informative cues to shift their endogenous attention to the expected target location .
This applies both in vision and in hearing . The possible relevance of such
spatial selection for previous studies purporting to measure modality selection is perhaps best illustrated by example. Boulter presented sounds over headphones
and lights from a more distant position. He compared conditions where target modality (and thus, inadvertently,
target location) was 100% certain, with conditions where
target modality (and thus target location) was unknown.
Performance was better on modality-certain trials. However, this may have arisen simply because it is more efficient to focus endogenous spatial attention on a single
location (as in the modality-certain conditions) than to
divide spatial attention across different locations (as required in the modality-uncertain condition). Indeed, Driver and Spence have recently documented that attending to different locations
in hearing and vision is less efficient than concentrating
on a common location across the modalities.
Such purely spatial reinterpretations of modalitycertainty effects are possible for every modality-cuing
experiment in which auditory and visual targets were presented from different positions. In fact, this applies for
the vast majority of previous studies on modality selection . The confound of modality with location
also applies for most studies that have implemented eventrelated potential (ERP) measures in addition to purely
behavioral measures ofattention to a modality .
In summary of all the preceding sections, many studies ofmodality cuing for auditory and visual targets have
found performance advantages when stimuli are presented in an expected modality. Such advantages have
usually been attributed to endogenous covert shifts ofattention to the expected modality. However, these prior
findings can all be attributed instead to response priming, criterion shifts, stimulus-driven MSEs, or inadvertent spatial-cuing effects. To our knowledge, only one
published study might be argued to circumvent all ofthese
potential problems. This is a study reported by Posner
et al. , which concerned attention to
touch versus vision.
Posner et al. required subjects to make a speeded
discrimination regarding the intensity (high vs. low) of
light flashes or vibrotactile stimuli. The use ofsuch a discrimination task renders both response-priming and criterion accounts for any modality-expectancy effect implausible. Tactile stimuli were presented via either oftwo
buzzers situated under the index fingers of the left and
right hands; visual targets were presented via LEDs on the
left or right directly next to these buzzers (thus minimizing any confound of modality with position). Visual
and tactile targets were presented in equal proportions
and in a random order (thus minimizing any confounds
of modality expectancy with stimulus sequence, and
hence avoiding any contamination by the MSE). The results were that visual cues that predicted the likely target
modality for the current trial produced RT benefits when
valid and costs when invalid relative to a neutral cue.
These RT effects were matched by similar trends in the
error data, ruling out criterion-shift accounts.
The most plausible account for these results is that
people can endogenously direct their covert attention
to vision rather than to touch, or vice versa. Some caution should be exercised, however, before extrapolating
from Posner et aI.'s findings concerning touch
and vision to our case ofattention for the auditory versus
visual modalities. Several recent studies have questioned
the similarity of attentional effects reported across different sensory modalities. For example, spatial cues predicting the likely target location under conditions of
modality uncertainty are effective when the target is either auditory or visual but
apparently not when the target is tactile or visual . Furthermore, asymmetrical links between exogenous spatial orienting across the auditory
and visual modalities have recently been reported
 . These findings demonstrate
that attentional phenomena observed for one pairing of
sensory modalities need not extend to a different combination of modalities.
Given these concerns, and our own interests in the ability to allocate attention specifically to the auditory or visual modalities, our first study followed the general logic
of the Posner et al. experiment (i.e., cuing the
likely target modality on a trial-by-trial basis while leaving target location equally uncertain in each modality),
but now presented visual and auditory targets from comparable locations. On each trial, a visual cue indicated that
the subsequent target was more likely to be presented in
one modality or the other, or that the two modalities were
equally likely, but this cue gave no indication as to which
location the target would be presented from. Subjects were
required to make a speeded detection response, irrespective oftarget modality. With a view to examining any criterion shifts, catch trials in which no target stimulus was
presented (and where responses had to be withheld) were
also included unpredictably.
If people can allocate their covert attention to the auditory versus visual modalities, then RTs to auditory targets should be faster following a valid expect-auditory
cue than following an invalid expect-vision cue, whereas
visual detection should be faster after the expect-vision
cue. Ifsubjects simply lower their criteria for responding
to signals in the cued modality, then this should result in
an increased rate of erroneous responses (false alarms)
on catch trials following a modality cue than on those
• = Cue Light
following a neutral cue, as previously found by Kristofferson . We reasoned that if subjects were specifically instructed to avoid lowering their criterion for responding to the cued modality, then they might show an
attentional facilitation ofRTs, without any concomitant
increase in false alarms, assuming selective attention to
audition or vision is indeed possible.
EXPERIMENT 1
This study investigated whether subjects could use advance information about likely target modality in order
to direct their attention endogenously to audition or vision on a trial-by-trial basis. Targets were randomly presented from one of four target locations situated 18.7°
above or below the midline and 52.7° to either side offixation (see Figure I for a schematic view ofthe experimental setup seen from a raised position behind the subject's
head). Targets were presented equally often in each modality and from each of the four locations. A central visual cue informed the subjects on each trial to direct their
attention to audition, or to vision, or to both modalities
in the neutral divided-attention condition. The subjects
were required to make a simple detection response on trials when a target was presented, while making no response on catch trials where no target was presented.
Subjects. Ten subjects were recruited (8 men and 2 women)
through advertisements; all were naive as to the purpose of the experiment. Their mean age was 25 years, with a range of 21-41
years, and all except I was right-handed by self-report. All reported
normal hearing and normal or corrected-to-normal vision.
Apparatus and Materials. All the studies were conducted in a
darkened soundproofbooth (178 X 122 X 91 em) with a background
luminance of0.12 cd/m-. The subject sat at a table and faced straight
ahead, with his/her head resting in an adjustable chinrest. The cue
and fixation lights were located 45 em in front, in a row at eye level.
The fixation light was an amber LED at the center, and the cue lights
o = Fixation Light
a = Target Light
o= Target Loudspeaker
Figure 1. Schematic view ofthe positions of the fixation, cue,
and target lights, plus target loudspeakers in Experiment 1, as
seen from a raised position behind the subject's central cartooned head.
ATTENDING TO A MODALITY
were arranged on the horizontal plane, as shown in Figure I, covering a distance of 5 em between the most eccentric cue lights. The
expect-vision cue consisted ofthe illumination ofthe two red LEDs
situated at 0.9
0 from fixation. The expect-audition cue consisted of
the illumination ofthe two green LEDs situated 3.0
0 from fixation,
and the illumination ofboth the red and the green cue lights served
as a neutral cue to signal divided attention.
The auditory targets were presented from one of four boxmounted oval loudspeaker cones (12.7 X 7.6 em, 8Q, 20 W,Radio
Spares Part No. RS 245-304). Each auditory target consisted offive
20-msec white-noise bursts presented at 75 dB(A), as measured
from the subject's ear position, each burst separated by a 10-msec
silent gap. These sounds were chosen to be highly localizable . A bright red LED (luminance
of64.3 cd/m-) was placed directly in the front ofthe middle ofeach
of the four loudspeaker cones. The visual targets consisted of the
uninterrupted 150-msec illumination of one of these LEDs. The
subjects were required to press a button situated on the table directly
in front ofthem as soon as they detected a target, irrespective of its
modality or location. RTs were measured in milliseconds from target onset, using an 82C54 interval-timer chip on one of the inputoutput cards (Blue Chip Technology parts DCM-16 and DOP-24),
which interfaced to the loudspeaker cones, LEDs, and response buttons.
Design. The two within-subjects factors were target modality
(auditory or visual) and cue validity (valid, neutral, or invalid).
There were 60 practice trials, followed by six test blocks of 162 trials each. In each experimental block there were 104 (64%) valid trials, where the target modality was correctly predicted by the cue, 26
(16%) neutral trials, 26 (16%) invalid trials, and 6 (4%) catch trials
(2 after an expect-vision cue, 2 after a neutral divided-attention cue,
and 2 after an expect-audition cue). An equal number of auditory
and visual targets were presented from each ofthe four possible target locations within each block of trials. The cue validity was the
same for both modalities, vision and audition were cued equally
often, and the various conditions appeared in random order.
Procedure. The fixation light was illuminated at the beginning
of each trial. The subjects were instructed to foveate its location
throughout each trial. In any case, auditory and visual targets could
appear only at the same four locations on the comers of a large
imaginary rectangle centered at fixation, and thus particular eye
movements could not favor either modality. After 300 msec, the fixation light was turned off and the central modality cue was presented for a period that varied randomly between 600 and 900 msec.
The target was presented as this cue was extinguished. The subjects
were required to press the response button on trials in which they
detected a target and to refrain from responding on the catch trials.
They were told to respond as rapidly and as accurately as possible.
The trial was terminated after 1,000 msec ifno response had been
made. The subject was given feedback in the form of the fixation
light flickering for 270 msec if a response was erroneous (either
failing to make a response when a target occurred or responding
when no target had been presented). Otherwise, all lights were extinguished on response and remained so for 500 msec before the
next trial was initiated. Subjects were told about the cue validities
at the beginning of the experiment, and were requested at the start
of every block to attend to the modality indicated by the cue as most
likely for the next target.
The first block of trials was treated as practice and
was therefore not analyzed. Trials on which an incorrect
response occurred and trials immediately succeeding an
incorrect response were also discarded from the RT analysis. In addition, trials on which the RT was below
50 msec or over 1,000 msec were removed. These latency
criteria removed less than 2% of trials. The intersubject
SPENCE AND DRIYER
Mean Reaction Times (in Milliseconds), Their Standard
Deviations, and Mean Costs Plus Benefits for Auditory
and Visual Targets in the Detection Task of Experiment 1
Discussion
The results of Experiment 1 show that symbolic cues
which predict the likely target modality on a trial-by-trial
basis can influence the detection of targets presented in
the expected versus the unexpected modality, with better
performance in the former case. This result extends the
numerous previous modality-cuing studies that have
mean RTs (after these exclusions), together with the mean
"costs plus benefits" (i.e., the difference between RTs
for invalid and valid trials), are shown in Table 1. Mean,
rather than median, RTs were computed for each subject
because the different cue conditions had different probabilities of occurrence , with valid trials being more likely. In the analyses reported in the main
text for every experiment in this article, data were pooled
across the factor oftarget position, which never produced
any critical interaction with the factors ofprimary interest. However, at the suggestion ofa reviewer (Ray Klein),
the Appendix also presents further analyses, which include the target-position factor, for completeness.
The RT data were analyzed using a within-subjects
analysis ofvariance (ANaYA), with the factors oftarget
modality (auditory or visual) and cue validity (valid, invalid, or neutral). There was a highly significant main
effect ofmodality [F(1,9) = 408.4,p < .0001], with subjects responding more rapidly to auditory targets (M =
281 msec) than to visual targets (M = 344 msec). The effect of validity was also significant [F(2,18) = 6.3,p =
.008], with subjects responding more rapidly on validly
cued trials than on neutrally cued trials and with slowest
responses on invalid trials. The interaction between target
modality and validity was close to significance [F(2, 18) =
2.9,p = .08]. Pairwise comparisons (ttests) ofthese data
showed that the neutrally cued trials were significantly
faster than invalidly cued trials for both auditory (mean
of 18 msec, p < .01) and visual target trials (mean of
10 msec, p < .05). However, validly cued trials were significantly faster than neutrally cued trials only for visual
targets (mean of 14 msec, p < .01) and not for auditory
targets (mean of -2 msec, n.s.). Analysis of the falsealarm data revealed that subjects made slightly fewer errors on catch trials where vision was the cued modality
(mean of 4.7%) than on either auditory-cued or neutralcued trials (mean of 5.3% for both). A one-way ANaYA
[type of cue (3)] revealed that this trend was not significant [F(2,18) = .1, n.s.].
Note-By t test pairwise comparison: *p < .01.
EXPERIMENT 2
Subjects. Twelve new subjects (7 men and 5 women) were recruited as in Experiment I; all ofthem were naive as to the purpose
of the experiment. Their mean age was 23 years, with a range of
19-30 years, and all were right-handed by self-report.
Apparatus and Materials. The apparatus and materials were
as in the previous experiment, with the following exceptions. The
loud target sound was presented at 75 dB(A), and the quiet target, at
55 dB(A). An additional yellowturbo LED (luminance of 41.4cd/m-)
was placed to the immediate right of each of the four red target
LEDs used in Experiment I. The subjects were required to press
one button in response to the loud sound or the yellow light and another button, with the other hand, in response to the quiet sound or
the red light. The buttons were located, one in front ofthe other, on
the table directly in front ofthe subject. Each response was equally
likely to be appropriate following each modality cue.
Design. The two within-subjects factors were target modality (auditory or visual) and cue validity . In contrast to the vast majority ofsuch prior studies, the modality cues used in this experiment provided
no spatial information with regard to the likely target location, as auditory and visual targets appeared in the
same set of widely dispersed possible locations. Therefore, these results cannot be attributed to any inadvertent
form of spatial cuing. Nor can they be attributed to response priming, because the same response was used regardless of target modality, or to any inadvertent confound of modality expectancy with the MSE, because,
target modality was equally likely to be the same or different from that of the target on the previous trial for all
conditions.
Analysis ofthe error rates from the catch trials revealed
no tendency for subjects to make more erroneous responses (false alarms) on trials where a modality cue was
presented than on neutral-cue trials. This null effect on
overall false alarms suggests that subjects were not lowering their criteria for responding to stimuli in the cued
modality (e.g., as compared with the neutral condition).
However, it is possible that they may have simultaneously
lowered their criteria in the expected modality and raised
them for the unexpected modality, as compared with the
neutral condition.' Accordingly, to rule out the possible
criterion-shift account, our subsequent experiment used
a discrimination response. Subjects were now required
to make a discrimination response regarding the intensity (loud vs. quiet) ofauditory targets and the color (red
vs. yellow) of visual targets. Any trials on which an erroneous response was made here can presumably be
identified with the presented target modality (e.g., a yellow response to a red target will unambiguously count as
a visual rather than auditory error). Wepredicted that subjects should be both faster andlor more accurate when responding to targets presented in the expected modality,
which was again cued on a trial-by-trial basis.
Costs Plus
Cue Validity
gard to target modality) as before. No catch trials were presented in
this experiment. For all subjects, 60% ofall trials had valid cues, 20%
had neutral, and 20%, invalid. There were 70 practice trials, followed
by six test blocks of 160 trials each. The four different possible targets (red light, yellow light, loud sound, or quiet sound) were presented equally often from each ofthe four possible target locations
within each block of trials. The cue validity was the same for both
modalities, and the various conditions appeared in random order.
Procedure. The procedure was as for Experiment 1, with the following exceptions. The subjects were now required to press the key
further away from them for a loud auditory target or a yellow light
target and the nearer key for a quiet sound or a red light and to respond
as rapidly and accurately as possible. They were allowed 2,000 msec
in which to respond before the trial was terminated. If no response
was made within this time or if an incorrect response was made,
feedback was given by a flickering fixation light, as before.
Trials on which the RT was below 50 msec or over
1,500 msec were discarded from the analysis. This removed less than 5% of the trials. The intersubject mean
RTs (after these exclusions), together with the mean
"costs plus benefits" (i.e., invalid minus valid differences)
and the corresponding error rates for each condition
across all trials are shown in Table 2. The RT data were
analyzed using a within-subjects ANOVAwith the factors
of target modality (auditory or visual) and cue validity
(valid, invalid, or neutral). There was a main effect of
modality [F(1,II) = 16.0, p = .002], with subjects responding more rapidly to auditory targets than to visual
targets. There was also a significant effect of validity
[F(2,22) = 7.4,p = .004], with subjects responding more
rapidly on validly cued trials than on neutrally cued trials and with slowest responses on invalid trials. There
was no interaction between target modality and validity
[F(2,22) = 1.3, n.s.]. Pairwise comparisons (t tests) of
these data showed that neutrally cued trials gave significantly faster responses than invalidly cued trials for auditory target trials (mean of27 msec, p < .01), but not for
visual targets (mean of 13 msec, n.s.). Validly cued trials were significantly faster than neutrally cued trials for
visual targets (mean of 19 msec, p < .05) but not for auditory targets (mean of 1 msec, n.s.). An analogous
ANOVAon the error data revealed no significant effects
or interactions (F < 1 for all terms).
Discussion
The results of the second study show once again that
response latencies can be influenced when subjects are
given advance information concerning the likely target
ATTENDING TO A MODALITY
modality. For both auditory and visual targets, discrimination was more rapid on valid trials than on invalid trials, with intermediate performance on neutral trials in
the visual modality. The difference between valid and invalid trials was the only comparison to reach significance
in both modalities. It is possible that the size ofthe overall validity effect (costs plus benefits) may have been too
small to permit significant differences to emerge between the neutral conditions and those on which either a
valid or invalid cue was presented, given the power ofthe
experiment.
Criterion shifts do not offer a natural explanation for
these cuing effects, as discrimination rather than detection
was required. Less cautious responding for targets in the
expected modality might have produced an RT advantage, but this alone should have been offset by an increase
in errors for targets in the cued modality, which we did
not reliably find. The size ofthe overall costs plus benefits for valid versus invalid modality cues was similar in
the two modalities (see Table 2).
However, one methodological concern with any interpretation of Experiment 2 in terms of endogenous attention to the cued modality remains. One oftwo quite different tasks (color vs. loudness discrimination) was
required, depending on the modality of the target presented. It is possible that subjects may have used the
modality cue simply in order to prepare for one or the
other ofthese different tasks rather than in order to
attend to a particular modality. According to this interpretation, subjects may use the attend-auditory cue as an
instruction to prepare for intensity discrimination and
the attend-vision cue to prepare for color discrimination.
If preparation for a particular task reduces response latencies, the validity effects described in Experiment 2
might be attributed entirely to endogenous task preparation rather than to the beneficial effects of directing attention to one sensory modality versus another.
Several recent studies have shown that a cost is incurred
on trials where the task is changed from that of the previous trial, as compared to performance on trials with the
task repeated . This task-switching cost occurs across a wide
variety of task combinations. More importantly for our
purposes, it is reduced (although not completely eliminated) when subjects are informed in advance that a task
switch is about to occur. Rogers and Monsell have
suggested that this reduction with advance information
Mean Reaction Times (in Milliseconds), Their Standard Deviations,
Mean Costs Plus Benefits, and Percentages of Errors for Auditory and
Visual Targets in the Intensity/Color Discrimination Task in Experiment 2
Cue Validity
Costs Plus
Note-By t test pairwise comparison: *p < .01.
SPENCE AND DRIVER
is caused by the endogenous reconfiguration of task set
 . Since task-preparation effects can arise even when all possible tasks in the experimental situation arise within the same sensory modality,
it could be suggested that our present cuing effects have
absolutely nothing to do with preparation for one modality versus another, but simply reflect preparation for one
task versus another.
One approach to this problem is to use a discrimination task that is the same in the two modalities (or at least
is as nearly the same as possible, given the absolute necessity ofpresenting stimuli in different modalities). One
task which might fit this criterion is the spatial discrimination task (left vs. right) previously used by several
other researchers for studying modality selection . One
cannot be certain a priori that this discrimination of azimuth will constitute exactly the same task for targets in
the two modalities. Indeed, definitions of exactly what
would constitute a single common "task" are extremely
scarce . However, it does at least seem certain that the
stimulus-response mapping required for the two modalities would be more similar in a spatial discrimination
task, where any auditory or visual target presented on the
left is paired with a left response and right stimuli are always paired with right responses, than it would be for our
previous tasks (Experiment 2), where a loud auditory target and a yellow visual target had to be mapped to the
same response, while quiet sounds were mapped with
red lights.
Furthermore, evidence reported by Auerbach and Sperling suggests that auditory and visual direction
may in fact be represented as a single common dimension. Subjects in their study were required tojudge whether
two sequentially presented stimuli (auditory or visual)
came from the same or different positions. Judgments of
relative position for the two targets were no less variable
ifboth targets were ofthe same modality than ifone was
auditory and the other visual. Auerbach and Sperling
argued that if the representations of auditory and visual
azimuths had been coded in separate modality-specific
representations, then there should havebeen a greater variability in responding when the comparison stimuli were
ofdifferent modalities than when both targets were ofthe
same modality and therefore could be judged on the basis
ofthe same representation.
Auerbach and Sperling concluded that the locations ofauditory and visual stimuli are coded in a common representation. Taking this point, together with our
observations about equivalent stimulus-response mappings within a compatible localization task, auditory and
visual spatial discrimination may fit our requirement for
a pair of tasks where advance information about the
probable target modality is unlikely to provide crucial information for a complex reconfiguration oftask set. We
return to this issue in the General Discussion.
EXPERIMENT 3
In Experiment 3, we attempted to replicate the modalitycuing effects reported in our previous studies, but now
using just one common spatial discrimination task for
targets in both modalities. The design of this study was
very similar to that of Experiment 2, with the exception
that subjects were now required to discriminate either the
azimuth of targets in both modalities (left vs. right, irrespective of the elevation of the target) or their elevation
(up vs. down, irrespective of the side of target presentation). The azimuth task is similar to the one used by several other researchers to investigate modality selection
 , except that our stimuli for it could also vary in elevation.
As in our previous experiments, subjects were cued at
the beginning ofeach trial as to the likely modality ofthe
target, although cue validity was now increased slightly
due to the removal of neutral-cue trials, in order to increase power and simplify the design (i.e., we now measured just costs plus benefits from modality cuing). The
cue correctly predicted the modality of the target on
83.3% ofthe trials and was invalid on the remaining 16.7%
oftrials. Subjects performed the azimuth discrimination
task during one half ofthe experiment, and the elevation
task during the remainder, with the order ofpresentation
for the tasks counterbalanced across subjects. Our use of
both azimuth and elevation tasks was dictated by an ongoing series ofother experiments, tangential to the main
issues here. The critical point for our present purposes is
that ifwe can assume that the equivalent localization tasks
for auditory and visual targets represent variations ofthe
same basic task across sensory modalities, rather than entirely distinct tasks, then any validity effects may be unambiguously attributed to endogenous shifts ofattention
to the likely target modality rather than to endogenous
task preparation.
Subjects. Ten new subjects (4 men and 6 women) were recruited
to take part in this experiment; all were right-handed by self-report.
Their mean age was 26 years, with a range of 18-42 years.
Apparatus and Materials. The apparatus and materials were
as in Experiment 2, with the following exceptions. The subjects performed the elevation task using the same buttons as in Experiment 2
(where they had been used for the color and intensity-discrimination
tasks), now pressing the key further away from them for a target
from either ofthe upper positions (regardless of side and modality)
and the nearer key for a target from either of the lower target positions. Two additional response buttons were used during the azimuth discrimination task, which was run in separate blocks. One of
these additional buttons was located to the left ofthe up/down buttons and the other, to the right. The subjects pressed the left button
for a target from either of the left loudspeaker cones or adjacent LEDs
(now regardless ofelevation as well as modality) and the right button for targets presented from either of the loudspeaker cones or
LEDs situated to the right. Thus, in all cases, the position ofthe key
was compatible with the localization response required.
Design. The subjects were given up to 100 practice trials, followed by four blocks of 144 experimental trials for each task. Five
subjects started with four blocks of the elevation-discrimination
task; the other 5 subjects started with the azimuth discrimination.
There were 120 (83.3%) valid trials and 24 (16.7%) invalid trials
within each of the experimental blocks. The three within-subjects
factors were task discrimination (elevation or azimuth), target modality (auditory or visual), and validity (valid or invalid).
The usual latency criteria removed 1.5% oftrials from
the azimuth discrimination task and 4.4% of trials from
the elevation task. The mean RTs are shown in Table 3,
along with corresponding error rates. A three-way withinsubjects ANOVA was conducted on the RT data, with the
factors oftask discrimination (elevation or azimuth), target modality (auditory or visual), and cue validity (valid
or invalid). There was a highly significant main effect of
task [F(l,9) = 97.7,p < .0001], with subjects responding
more rapidly when making an azimuth discrimination than
when making an elevation judgment. The factors oftask
and modality interacted [F(I,9) = 19.6, P < .002], revealing that subjects responded more rapidly to auditory
targets than to visual targets in the azimuth task, but more
rapidly to visual targets in the elevation task, consistent
with the known localization limits in these modalities.
Pairwise comparisons (t tests) revealed that the only
significant difference between the modalities was for the
elevation-discrimination task (mean difference between
auditory and visual RTs = 49 msec, p < .01).
The effect of cue validity was significant [F(l,9) =
20.4, P < .002], with subjects responding more rapidly
on valid trials than on invalid trials. None ofthe other effects or interactions were significant [for modality, F(l,9)
= 1.8,p = .21; for task X modality X validity,F(l,9) =
1.7, p = .23; for all other interactions, F < 1]. Pairwise
comparisons (t tests) confirmed that the modality-cuing
effect was significant for both tasks in both modalities
(see mean costs plus benefits in Table 3). An equivalent
ANOVA on the error data revealed a significant main effect of task [F(l,9) = 6.3,p = .03] caused by subjects'
making more errors on the elevation task than on the azimuth task. None ofthe other effects or interactions were
significant [for validity, F(l,9) = 3.3, p = .10; for modality, F(l,9) = 3.6, p = .09; and for task X validity,
F(l,9) = 2.0,p = .19; for all otherterms,F< 1]. However,
ATTENDING TO A MODALITY
note that the numerical trend in errors was for poorer
performance on invalid trials, in agreement with the RT
Discussion
The results ofExperiment 3 demonstrate that subjects
could discriminate both the elevation and azimuth ofauditory and visual targets more rapidly when correctly
cued as to the likely target modality. This advantage for
targets in the expected modality was also present numerically in the error-rate data. To reduce the possibility
that the modality-expectancy effects merely reflected task
cuing, we had used a spatial discrimination task in which
the stimulus-response mapping was highly compatible
for targets in both modalities. Such a task-cuing explanation seems intuitively more plausible when two obviously different tasks are arbitrarily paired together, as
with, for example, the auditory intensity and visual color
discrimination tasks paired in Experiment 2. It seems less
plausible for the similar and compatible tasks used across
the two modalities here.
As discussed earlier, the modality-cuing benefits reported in most previous studies might be explained solely
in terms ofspatial orienting effects because targets from
different modalities appeared in quite separate positions.
We have now successfully demonstrated modality-cuing
effects when this spatial confound is removed. However,
this leads to a further question: Wasthe inadvertent spatialcuing information inherent in previous studies actually
used by the subjects, given that our own results show that
modality cuing alone can affect performance? It is possible that, under conditions where a cue informs subjects
both of the likely modality of the target and of its likely
position, the subjects may use only one form of expectancy in directing their attention. The subjects might focus
their attention entirely upon the expected modality, ignoring information that is also potentially available regarding the likely target location. If so, the spatial confounds
discussed earlier in previous research would become relatively insignificant. Alternatively, they might use the spatial information that was inadvertently given by modality
cues in prior studies as well as (or instead of) the modality information.
Mean Reaction Times (in Milliseconds), Their Standard Deviations, Mean
Costs Plus Benefits, and Percentages of Errors for Auditory and Visual
Targets in the Azimuth and Elevation Discrimination Tasks in Experiment 3
Cue Validity
Costs Plus
Elevation Discrimination
Azimuth Discrimination
Note-By t test pairwise comparison: "p < .05, tp < .05.
SPENCE AND DRIVER
Thus, it still remains unclear whether the many previous studies described in our introduction actually measured attention to a modality, as they claimed, or merely
attention to the locations that were inadvertently confounded with modality; or perhaps they measured some
unknown combination ofthese two processes. This difficulty in interpretation applies for numerous prior studies
with normal populations and also with schizophrenic populations and autistic populations , as considered further in the General Dis-
Our final study sought to test whether people could
use advance information about both likely target modality and likely target position to direct their covert attention. Our purpose was to examine whether future studies
of modality selection should take potential spatial confounds seriously. In Experiment 4, we used an azimuth
discrimination paradigm similar to that in Experiment 3,
with the exception that targets could now be presented
from only a single position on either side of the subject's
midline, because no elevation task was used (i.e., there
was no longer any variation in vertical location). In some
blocks of trials, auditory targets were presented monaurally over headphones and visual targets were presented
from in front ofthe subject, as in the previous studies reported by Klein and Posner et aI. , among
many others. Since all sounds came from the headphones
but all lights came from LEDs in front of the subject,
cues to the likely target modality now also gave information about likely target position (i.e., in front and below
in the case ofthe lights, but at the head in the case ofthe
sounds). Thus, this new arrangement deliberately reintroduced the confound between modality and position that
had been inadvertently present in most previous studies
of modality selection, as discussed earlier.
For other blocks of trials in our final study, auditory
targets were presented from external loudspeaker cones
placed directly behind the target LEDs, as in our preceding experiments in this study. Ifmodality cuing completely overrides spatial cuing, then there should be no
difference between the size of the validity effects for
modalities seen under these two conditions. However, if
inadvertent spatial cuing also occurs when modality cues
are given and targets from distinct modalities appear in
different locations, then we should see larger validity effects under the headphone-presentation conditions (where
both modality and spatial-cuing information is available)
than under the external loudspeaker condition (where
only modality-cuing information is present).
EXPERIMENT 4
Subjects. Fourteen new subjects (7 men and 7 women) were recruited to take part in this experiment; all were right-handed by selfreport. Their mean age was 27 years, with a range of 20--46 years.
Apparatus and Materials. These were as in Experiment 3, with
the following exceptions. There were now only two rather than four
possible positions for auditory and visual targets, with one on either
side offixation. In some conditions (no spatial cuing), auditory and
visual targets were presented from the same two possible external
locations, with auditory targets presented from one of two loudspeaker cones situated directly behind the target LEDs. In other
conditions (spatial cuing), auditory stimuli were presented monaurally over headphones, while visual stimuli were presented in front
of the subject , in our case by still using the LEDs in front ofthe nowdisconnected loudspeaker cones. The subjects made a spatially compatible discriminative response (pressing the left or right button) to
indicate the lateral target location in all cases. The loudness ofthe
targets was the same from the external loudspeakers and the headphones-75 dB(A), as measured from the subject's ear position.
Design and Procedure. The subjects were given 100 practice
trials, followed by two test blocks of 240 experimental trials, for
both the spatial-cuing and the no-spatial-cuing conditions, with
order ofspatial cuing blocked and counterbalanced across subjects.
There were 200 (83.3%) valid trials and 40 (16.7%) invalid trials
within each of the test blocks, in random order. The three withinsubjects factors were presence or absence of spatial-cuing (headphones vs, external loudspeakers, respectively), target modality (auditory or visual), and validity (valid or invalid). The subjects were
instructed at the beginning of every block of trials to attend to the
modality indicated as likely by the central visual cue, which was presented on each trial, as in previous experiments. Furthermore, subjects were also told at the beginning ofevery block whether the auditory targets would be presented from the external loudspeaker
cones for that block of trials or from the headphones.
The usual latency criteria resulted in the removal of
less than 0.1% ofthe trials. As noted by Ulrich and Miller
 , in cases where exclusions are so minor, RT truncation does not introduce any spurious effects. The resulting mean RTs are shown in Table 4, along with corresponding error rates. A three-way within-subjects ANOVA
was conducted on the RT data [spatial cuing (headphone
vs. loudspeaker) X target modality (2) X cue validity (2)].
There was a highly significant main effect of modality
[F(I,13) = 49.4,p< .0001], with subjects responding more
rapidly to auditory targets than to visual targets. There was
also amain effect ofvalidity [F(1,13) = 24.7,p = .0003],
revealing that subjects responded more rapidly on valid
than on invalid trials. The interaction between validity and
modality was significant [F(1,13) = 4.9,p = .04], with
subjects showing a greater validity effect for visual targets than for auditory targets. More importantly, there
was a significant interaction between spatial cuing and
validity [F(1,13) = 5.0,p = .04], with subjects showing
a greater validity effect in the headphone presentation
conditions (mean invalid minus valid effect of 45 msec)
than when target sounds were presented from external
ATTENDING TO A MODALITY
Mean Reaction Times (in Milliseconds), Their Standard Deviations,
Mean Costs Plus Benefits, and Percentages of Errors for Auditory and
Visual Targets in the Azimuth Discrimination Tasks in Experiment 4,
Separated by Source of Presentation of Auditory Targets
Cue Validity
Costs Plus
Auditory Headphone Presentation
Auditory External Loudspeaker Presentation
Note-By t test pairwise comparison: *p < .01.
loudspeakers (mean effect of34 msec). None ofthe other
effects or interactions were significant [for spatial cuing,
F(l, 13) = 2.8, P = .12; for all other interactions, F < 1].
An equivalent ANOVA on the error data revealed no significant effects or interactions [for validity, F(l,13) =
1.7,P = .21; for modality, F(l,13) = 1.3, P = .27; for
spatial cuing, F(l,13) = l.O,p = .33; for spatial cuing X
validity, F(l, 13) = 2.8, P = .12; and for spatial cuing X
modality, F(I,13) = 2.4,p = .14; for all other terms,
F < 1]. It should be noted that although there were no
significant effects in the analysis oferrors, the trend was
for larger costs plus benefits (i.e., invalid minus valid
differences) in error data for the headphone blocks,
where position was confounded with modality. This allows us to rule out speed-accuracy tradeoffs for the significantly larger cuing effects in RTs with headphones
versus external loudspeakers.
Discussion
The results ofExperiment 4 replicate and extend those
from our previous studies, again showing more rapid responses when target modality is validly precued. More
importantly, the results also show a significant interaction
between the size ofthis modality-cuing effect and whether
or not spatial information was also given by the modality cue. Subjects showed a significantly larger RT advantage (M = 45 msec) from knowing both the likely modality and the likely target position (at the headphones vs.
in front ofthe subject) than from knowing just the modality when all target events were presented at equivalent
external loci (M = 34 msec). This result shows that subjects in many previous modality-cuing experiments, where
auditory and visual targets were presented from different
locations, may have been using the modality cue to direct
their attention both to a particular modality and to the most
likely target location. That is, what has been described
previously as the benefits caused solely by attending to
a particular modality may actually have represented
some unknown combination ofmodality cuing plus spatial cuing benefits. The present experiment shows that
these two influences on performance can be separated by
an appropriate method.
GENERAL DISCUSSION
Previous studies ofattention to audition and vision have
reported that many judgments improve when people are
validly precued concerning target modality. Although
this has been taken as showing modality selection, numerous alternative accounts are possible. First, modalitycuing effects in detection tasks 
may merely reflect criterion shifts . Likewise, studies that report an RT
benefit in discriminations without providing error rates
 might similarly reflect criterion shifts that produce speed-accuracy
tradeoffs.
Second, response priming could account for the
modality-cuing effects reported in tasks requiring a modality discrimination . Third, the use of a blocked-cuing design
in many studies has led to a confound between stimulusdriven MSEs, governed by the sequential relations between
successive target stimuli, and endogenous attentional factors that depend on expectancies . Finally, all ofthese studies plus many others suffer from the presentation of auditory and visual targets from very different
locations. This means that modality cues effectively provide spatial information as well, about the likely target
location. It is then uncertain what proportion of the advantages from modality cuing in these studies is due to
space-based versus modality-based attention.
These methodological problems seem particularly unfortunate, given the recent interest in apparent pathologies of attention toward particular sensory modalities
among various clinical populations such as schizophrenics, autistics, and cerebellar patients .
Our review shows that, in fact, the various modality-cuing
effects that have been examined by these clinical studies
may not reflect attentional phenomena at all (i.e., they
might all just reflect criterion shifts, response priming effects, or stimulus-repetition priming effects, as described
in our introduction). Alternatively, they might all reflect
mechanisms ofspatial selection rather than of modality
selection.
In the experiments reported here, we examined whether
modality-cuing effects would be found in normals when
all these various confounds were removed. We used an
adaptation of Posner et al.'s paradigm, where a
symbolic cue predicts the probable target modality on a
trial-by-trial basis. Experiment 1found that detection responses for auditory and visual targets were faster when
modality was correctly cued. Analysis ofcatch-trial data
(in which a cue but no target was presented) showed no
tendency for a higher false-alarm rate when modality
was cued, but subtle criterion-shift accounts remained
difficult to rule out since false alarms could not be unambiguously attributed to one modality or the other rather
than to direct their attention to one or another sensory
modality per se. This seemed particularly likely because
very different stimulus-response mappings were used
for the auditory versus visual tasks.
To reduce the likelihood of this confound, subjects
made a comparable spatial discrimination response for
targets in either modality in our subsequent studies. Performance remained faster and more accurate for stimuli
in the cued modality. This provides stronger evidence that
cuing leads to preferential processing in the attended
modality, rather than merely a remapping of stimulus
categories to responses.
Our first three studies deliberately presented auditory
and visual targets from comparable external locations.
In the final experiment, some conditions deliberately
reintroduced the confound between modality and location that had been inadvertantly present in most previous
studies ofmodality cuing. For half of the experiment, subjects made left/right discriminations for sounds presented
over headphones and lights presented from in front of
them . In the other halfofthe study, sounds
for the left/right discrimination were presented from
loudspeakers located at the visual stimuli. The size ofthe
modality-cuing effect was significantly greater in the
headphones condition (where lights were in front but
sounds at the head) than when targets in both modalities
came from comparable external locations in front ofthe
subjects. This provides empirical support for our claim
that most previous modality-cuing experiments, both
clinicial and normal, will have systematically overestimated the size of any modality-cuing benefits by confounding modality cuing with inadvertant spatial cuing.
As noted earlier, definitions of what would constitute
a common task across modalities (or even within a single modality) are rare . We
hope that the spatial-discrimination task used in Experiments 3 and 4 may provide one example of a task that is
as nearly identical across the two modalities as is possible, given the unavoidable need to present stimuli in different modalities when examining the current issues. Subjects were required to make a response that was highly
compatible with targets in both modalities, and to do so
in order to signal their discrimination ofan attribute (location) that has been argued to rely on a common representation across hearing and vision . At the very least, our localization tasks provide an
intuitively more similar task environment for the two
modalities than that used in Experiment 2, where subjects
were required to make one response to quiet sounds and
red lights and the other response to loud sounds and yellow lights. Here, the stimulus-response mapping seems
entirely arbitrary and quite different for the two modalities, so that the modality-cuing effects might plausibly
reflect complex task reconfiguration rather than selective
attention to a particular sensory modality. Ultimately,
there seems to be no decisivewayofresolving the involvement of task reconfiguration in modality cuing when
usingjust behavioral measures, other than by making such
involvement increasingly implausible, as we have tried
to do. However, ERP studies, which measure the activity
in the neural systems underlying behavior, provide a further line of evidence which appears to support an attentional account for some effects of modality cuing.
The results ofseveral ERP studies provide converging
evidence that focusing on a particular sensory modality
can result in the enhanced processing of stimuli in that
modality. These studies typically examine averaged
changes in electrical activity against time, measured by
electrodes on the subject's scalp, as a function of the
stimuli presented to the subject and ofwhether or not the
subject is instructed to attend to these stimuli. Results
from numerous ERP studies suggest that selective attention can result in selective amplitude enhancement of processing within modality-specific neural areas . This enhancement
of processing within primarily modality-specific sensory
areas clearly favors an attentional interpretation of modality cuing, in terms ofpreferential sensory processing for
stimuli within the cued modality, over an account purely
in terms of endogenous task-set reconfiguration, which
is widely held to depend on amodal control areas, such
as the frontal lobes .
However, there are two important caveats to be placed
on the majority of prior ERP studies on this issue. First,
we are aware ofonly one study, by Hillyard et al. ,
that presented auditory and visual stimuli from comparable locations. In all of the other ERP studies, auditory
and visual stimuli were inadvertantly presented from different locations, and so most ofthe ERP results mayjust
reflect the effects ofspatial shifts ofattention rather than
the effects of attending to a particular modality. Second,
it is unclear whether the enhanced neural activity revealed in the focused-attention conditions by ERP measures reflects a true perceptual benefit for targets in the
expected modality or merely a criterion shift. It would
therefore be extremely useful in future studies to combine the behavioral methods introduced here with various
neuroimaging techniques, such as ERP, PET, or fMRI.