FairUMAP 2020: The 3rd Workshop on Fairness in User
Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization
Bamshad Mobasher
DePaul University
Chicago, IL, USA
 
Styliani Kleanthous
Cyprus Center for Algorithmic
Transparency, OUC
Nicosia, Cyprus
 
Michael Ekstrand
People & Information Research Team
Boise State University
Boise, ID, USA
 
Bettina Berendt
TU Berlin & KU Leuven
Berlin & Leuven, Germany & Belgium
 
Jahna Otterbacher
Cyprus Center for Algorithmic
Transparency, OUC
Nicosia, Cyprus
 
Avital Shulner Tal
University of Haifa
Haifa, Israel
 
The 3rd FairUMAP workshop brings together researchers working
at the intersection of user modeling, adaptation, and personalization
on the one hand, and bias, fairness and transparency in algorithmic
systems on the other hand.
Algorithmic fairness, Algorithmic bias, user modeling, personalization, adaptation, transparency, explainability
ACM Reference Format:
Bamshad Mobasher, Styliani Kleanthous, Michael Ekstrand, Bettina Berendt,
Jahna Otterbacher, and Avital Shulner Tal. 2020. FairUMAP 2020: The 3rd
Workshop on Fairness in User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization.
In Proceedings of the 28th ACM Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation and
Personalization (UMAP ’20), July 14–17, 2020, Genoa, Italy. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 2 pages. 
INTRODUCTION
User modeling and personalized recommendations, often enabled
by data-rich machine learning, are key enabling technologies that
allow intelligent systems to learn from users, adapting their output
to users’ needs and preferences. These techniques have become an
essential part of systems that help users find relevant content in
today’s highly complex, information-rich environments. However,
there has been a growing recognition that they raise novel ethical,
policy, and legal challenges. It has become apparent that a singleminded focus on the user preferences has obscured other important
and beneficial outcomes such systems must be able to deliver. System properties such as fairness, transparency, balance, openness
to diversity, and other social welfare considerations, are not captured by typical metrics, based on which data-driven personalized
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
UMAP ’20, July 14–17, 2020, Genoa, Italy
© 2020 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6861-2/20/07.
 
models are optimized. Indeed, widely used personalization methods in popular sites such as Facebook, Google News and YouTube,
have been heavily criticized for personalizing information delivery
too heavily at the cost of other objectives. This workshop brings
together researchers working at the intersection of user modeling,
adaptation, and personalization on one hand, and bias, fairness and
transparency in algorithmic systems on the other hand.
Objectives and Topics of Interest
We invited papers on a range of topics including: Bias and discrimination in user modeling, personalization and recommendation;
algorithms for fairness-aware personalization; Definitions, metrics
and criteria for optimizing and evaluating fairness-related aspects
of personalized systems; Data preprocessing and transformation
methods to address bias in training data; User modeling approaches
that take fairness and bias into account; User studies to evaluate
impact of personalization on fairness, balance, diversity, and other
social welfare criteria; Balancing needs of multiple stakeholders in
recommender systems and other personalized systems; and ‘Filter
bubble’ or ‘balkanization’ effects of personalization.
WORKSHOP PROGRAM AND
ORGANIZATION
FairUMAP 2020 followed a peer review process for paper acceptance. At least two program committee members reviewed each
submission. Five papers were accepted for presentation. 1
Accepted Papers
Spenelli and Crovella present an empirical exploration of the
nature of YouTube recommendations, concentrating on socially impactful dimensions. Their results show initial evidence that YouTube’s
recommendations are exposing extreme and unscientific viewpoints
and that there is a fundamental tension between user privacy and
extreme recommendations. Following a similar approach, Kyriakou,
Kleanthous, Otterbacher and Papadopoulos , analyzed popular
1ACM UMAP 2020 was run in a virtual format due to COVID-19.
Workshop Summary
UMAP ’20, July 14–17, 2020, Genoa, Italy
Image Tagging Cognitive Services that infer emotion from a person’s face, considering whether they perpetuate racial and gender stereotypes. The authors examined the descriptions on a set
of controlled images, produced by both Cognitive Services and
crowdworkers, finding initial evidence that Cognitive Services can
perpetuate stereotypes.
Rastegarpanah, Crovella and Gummadi looked into the fairness notions for algorithmic decision-making systems. The authors
demonstrate that these systems should expand to incorporate the
inputs used by a system. Deshpande, Foulds and Pan studied the
effects of sociolinguistic bias on resume-to-job-description matching algorithms and developed a fairness-aware matching algorithm.
Smets, Walravens and Ballon considered the challenges of developing personalized public services. The authors explain how
optimizing for the common good, requires moving away from a
purely personalized-oriented approach and into two best practices
in the design of digital public services: participatory design and
open data.
Program Committee
David Chin (University of Hawaii); Bart Knijnenburg (Clemson
University); Pablo Castells (Universidad Autónoma de Madrid);
Jean Garcia-Gathright (Spotify); Toshihiro Kamishima (National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology
(AIST)); Ludovico Boratto (Eurecat); Alejandro Bellogin (Universidad Autonoma de Madrid); Solon Barocas (Princeton University); Yong Zheng (Illinois Institute of Technology); Pradeep
Kumar Murukannaiah (Delft University of Technology).
Organization Committee
Bamshad Mobasher is professor of Computer Science and the
director of the Center for Web Intelligence at DePaul University
in Chicago. His research areas include Web mining, personalization, and recommender systems. Mobasher serves on the steering
committees for ACM RecSys and ACM UMAP conferences, on the
editorial board of User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction, and
as associate editor for the ACM Trans. on the Web, the ACM Trans.
on Interactive Intelligent Systems, and ACM Trans. on Internet
Technologies.
Styliani Kleanthous is a senior researcher in the Cyprus Center for Algorithmic Transparency (CyCAT) Open University of
Cyprus and RISE Research Centre, Cyprus. Styliani’s main research
interests are in the area of Community/group Modeling. She specializes in exploiting psychological and social theories for modeling
user preferences, for designing intelligent interaction and adaptive
user support. Styliani is working on modeling social interaction
within 3D Virtual Worlds in several contexts (e.g. learning, collaboration, socialisation), with emphasis on the psychological and social
factors that underpin these interactions.
Bettina Berendt is a professor in the Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science at Technische Universität Berlin,
Director of the Weizenbaum Institute for the Networked Society,
Berlin, and guest professor at the Department of Computer Science at KU Leuven. Her research interests are data and text mining
and in particular the interactions with how people make decisions
faced with the artificial and human intelligence, and privacy- and
fairness-related as well as other ethical aspects of these situations.
She is an inaugural member of the steering committee for the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAccT) and
has been a co-organizer of previous FairUMAP workshops and of
Deconstructing FAT at ACM FAT* 2020.
Michael Ekstrand is assistant professor of Computer Science
and co-director of the People and Information Research Team at
Boise State University. His research examines the human dimensions of modern information access systems systems, particularly
recommender systems. His publications include papers at FAccT
(formerly FAT*) and RecSys, and a tutorial presented at SIGIR 2019
and RecSys 2019 on fairness in information access. He co-organized
the 2017 and 2018 FATREC Workshops on Responsible Recommendation at RecSys, the Fairness Track in TREC 2019–2020, and the
FACTS-IR workshop at SIGIR 2019. He also serves on the FAccT
Executive Committee and co-chairs the FAccT Network.
Jahna Otterbacher is an assistant professor in the School of
Pure and Applied Sciences at the Open University of Cyprus. Jahna
also holds an appointment as team leader of the Transparency in
Algorithms Group at RISE (Research centre on Interactive media,
Smart systems and Emerging technologies). She is the Coordinator
of the H2020 project “Cyprus Center for Algorithmic Transparency,”
which investigates social and cultural biases in information access
systems as well as their origins in data, development processes, and
user behaviors.
Avital Shulner Tal is a junior researcher in the Information
Systems Department at the University of Haifa, Israel. She is a Ph.D.
student and holds a Master’s degree from the Information Systems
Department at the University of Haifa. Avital’s main research interests are concentrated in the area of Algorithmic Transparency
and Fairness. Avital is a fellow researcher in the Cyprus Center for
Algorithmic Transparency (CyCAT) and in The Center for Cyber,
Law and Policy (CCLP), University of Haifa, Israel.