Received January 17, 2019, accepted January 31, 2019, date of publication February 5, 2019, date of current version February 22, 2019.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2897580
An Improved Ant Colony Optimization
Algorithm Based on Hybrid Strategies
for Scheduling Problem
1,2,3, (Member, IEEE), JUNJIE XU1, AND HUIMIN ZHAO
1College of Electronic Information and Automation, Civil Aviation University of China, Tianjin 300300, China
2Co-innovation Center of Shandong Colleges and Universities: Future Intelligent Computing, Yantai 264005, China
3Liaoning Key Laboratory of Welding and Reliability of Rail Transportation Equipment, Dalian Jiaotong University, Dalian 116028, China
Corresponding author: Huimin Zhao ( )
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61771087, Grant 51605068, and Grant
51875072, in part by the Innovative Talents Promotion Plan of Liaoning Colleges and Universities under Grant LR2017058, and in part by
the Liaoning BaiQianWan Talents Program.
In this paper, an improved ant colony optimization(ICMPACO) algorithm based on the
multi-population strategy, co-evolution mechanism, pheromone updating strategy, and pheromone diffusion mechanism is proposed to balance the convergence speed and solution diversity, and improve the
optimization performance in solving the large-scale optimization problem. In the proposed ICMPACO
algorithm, the optimization problem is divided into several sub-problems and the ants in the population
are divided into elite ants and common ants in order to improve the convergence rate, and avoid to fall into
the local optimum value. The pheromone updating strategy is used to improve optimization ability. The
pheromone diffusion mechanism is used to make the pheromone released by ants at a certain point, which
gradually affects a certain range of adjacent regions. The co-evolution mechanism is used to interchange
information among different sub-populations in order to implement information sharing. In order to verify
the optimization performance of the ICMPACO algorithm, the traveling salesmen problem (TSP) and the
actual gate assignment problem are selected here. The experiment results show that the proposed ICMPACO
algorithm can effectively obtain the best optimization value in solving TSP and effectively solve the gate
assignment problem, obtain better assignment result, and it takes on better optimization ability and stability.
INDEX TERMS
Co-evolution mechanism, ACO, pheromone updating strategy, pheromone diffusion
mechanism, hybrid strategy, assignment problem.
I. INTRODUCTION
Ant colony optimization (ACO) algorithm was proposed by
Dorigo in 1992 . It is a heuristic evolutionary algorithm
based on population, which is inspired by the research results
of the collective behavior of the real ants in nature. It has
been proved that the ACO algorithm takes on a better optimization performance in solving optimization problems. The
ACO algorithm relies on the activities of many individualities
and feedback of information. Although the activity of ant is
very simple, the activity of whole ant colony is acceptable.
The ACO algorithm has the characteristics of distributed
The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and
approving it for publication was Dongxiao Yu.
computing, positive feedback and heuristic search. In
essence, it is a heuristic global optimization algorithm in the
evolutionary algorithm – . In process of the evolution,
the information interaction based on pheromone plays a very
important role.
Due to the advantages of the ACO algorithm, it is widely
applied in solving combinatorial optimization problems,
such as the traveling salesman problem, assignment problem, job-shop scheduling problem, vehicle routing problem, graph coloring problem and network routing problem
and so on – . A lot of experts have devoted themselves to the research of the ACO algorithm, and some
improved ACO algorithms are proposed to solve the complex optimization problems. Some better results and effects
VOLUME 7, 2019
2019 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only.
Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See for more information.
W. Deng et al.: ICMPACO Algorithm Based on Hybrid Strategies for Scheduling Problem
are obtained in recent years. But with the increasing of
the complexity of large-scale optimization problems, these
improved ACO algorithms have some inherent shortcomings
in solving large-scale optimization problems, such as the
slow convergence speed, local optimum value, and so on
 – . Therefore, in order to improve the optimization
performance of the ACO algorithm, the multi-population
strategy, co-evolution mechanism, pheromone updating strategy, and pheromone diffusion mechanism are introduced
into the ACO algorithm in order to propose a novel
multi-population co-evolution ant colony optimization (ICM-
PACO) algorithm. The traveling salesmen problem (TSP) and
actual gate assignment problem are selected to verify the
effectiveness of the ICMPACO algorithm.
II. RELATED WORK
For the studies of the ACO algorithm, some experts
and scholars proposed a lot of improved ACO algorithms in recent years. Coelho et al. proposed a
modiﬁed continuous approach of ACO combined with
a differential evolution method. Rada-Vilela et al. 
proposed eight multi-objective ACO algorithms for the
time and space assembly line balancing problem. He and
Ma proposed a multi-objective ACO algorithm to
study non-redundant linear sensor network design problems. Juang et al. proposed a co-evolution continuous ACO algorithm to address the accuracy-oriented
fuzzy systems design problems. Yang et al. proposed
an improved ACO algorithm, which combines swarm intelligence with local search to improve the efﬁciency and
accuracy. Myszkowski et al. proposed a hybrid ACO
algorithm based on classical heuristic priority rules with
ACO algorithm. Ariyasingha and Fernando proposed
a multi-objective ACO for solving most real world combinatorial optimization problems. Jiang et al. proposed a
co-evolutionary multi-ant colony optimization algorithm for
ship multi and branch pipe route design under various kinds
of constraints. Zuo et al. proposed a multi-objective
optimization method based on the ACO algorithm for
task-scheduling problems. Bagherinejad and Dehghani 
proposed a swarm intelligence-based algorithm named
Non-dominated sorting ACO algorithm for capacitated multivehicle allocation of customers. Krynicki et al. proposed a multi-pheromone variant of ACO system. Chen
and Wang proposed a novel offensive strategy based
on multi-group ACO for the 2D soccer simulation league.
Marzband et al. proposed a multi-layer ACO algorithm for real time experimental implementation of optimum
energy management system. Khan and Baig proposed a novel method to ﬁnd the relevant feature subset
by using ACO minimum-redundancy-maximum-relevance.
Zhong and Ai proposed a novel ACO algorithm, called
modiﬁed ACO algorithm for multi-objective single-model
assembly line balancing problem. Huang and Yu proposed several novel hybrid ant colony optimization-based
algorithms to resolve multi-objective job-shop scheduling
problem with equal-size lot splitting. Zhou et al. 
proposed a multi-objective multi-population ACO algorithm for continuous domain. Vijayalakshmi et al. 
proposed a novel robust energy efﬁcient ACO routing
algorithm to enhance the performance of Max-Min-Path
approach. Tiwari and Vidyarthi proposed an improved
auto controlled ACO algorithm using the lazy ant concept.
Shariﬁpour et al. proposed a memetic ACO algorithm
based on evolution strategies for structural test data generation. Akka and Khaber proposed an improved ACO
algorithm that uses a stimulating probability to help the ant
in its selection of the next grid and employ new heuristic
information based on the principle of unlimited step length
to expand the vision ﬁeld and increase the visibility accuracy. Chen and Shen proposed a new population-based
evolutionary optimization algorithm, elite-mixed continuous
ACO algorithm with central initialization for improving the
accuracy of Takagi-Sugeno-Kang-type recurrent fuzzy network designs. The other methods are also proposed in recent
year – .
As can be known from the above analysis of these related
works, the researchers have proposed hybrid ACO algorithm,
the multi-objective ACO, co-evolution continuous ACO, the
multi-group ACO, the multi-layer ACO, the multi-objective
multi-population ACO, the auto controlled ACO, memetic
ACO and elite-mixed continuous ACO and so on. These
improved ACO algorithms are used to solve the complex optimization problems and obtain better optimization results. But
they still exist the slow convergence speed, and are easy to fall
into local optimum value. Therefore, it is necessary to further
and deeply study an improved ACO algorithm with the better
optimization performance. In this paper, the multi-population
strategy, co-evolution mechanism, pheromone updating strategy and pheromone diffusion mechanism are introduced into
the ACO algorithm to propose a novel improved ant colony
optimization(ICMPACO) algorithm.
III. THE ACO ALGORITHM
The ACO algorithm consists of a number of iterations. In each
iteration, a number of ants construct complete solutions by
using heuristic information and the collected experiences of
previous populations of ants. These collected experiences are
represented by using the pheromone trail, which is deposited
on the constituent elements of a solution. The pheromone can
be deposited on the components and/or the connections in a
solution depending on the solving problem. The procedure of
pheromone update rule is described as follows.
A. THE TRANSITION RULE
An ant is a simple computational agent in the ACO algorithm.
It iteratively constructs a solution for the problem at hand.
At each iteration of the algorithm, each ant moves from a
state r to state s, corresponding to a more complete intermediate solution. The kth ant from state r to state s is selected
among the unvisited states memorized in Jk
r according to the
VOLUME 7, 2019
W. Deng et al.: ICMPACO Algorithm Based on Hybrid Strategies for Scheduling Problem
following formula:
max[τi(r, u)α · η(r, u)β]
if q ≤q0(Exploitation)
The trail level represents a posteriori indication of the
desirability of that move. Trails are updated usually when all
ants have completed their solution, increasing or decreasing
the level of trails corresponding to moves that were part of
‘‘good’’ or ‘‘bad’’ solutions, respectively.
In general, the kth ant moves from state r to state s with the
probability pk(r, s),
pk(r, s) =
τ(r, s)α · η(r, s)β
τ(r, u)α · η(r, u)β
In here, pk(r, s) is the transition probability, τ (r, u) is the
pheromone concentration between the state r and the state u
in the ith population, η (r, u) is the length of the trail from
the state r and the state u, Jk
r is the set of unvisited states of
the kth ant in the ith population, the parameter α and β are the
control parameters, q is a uniform probability .
B. THE PHEROMONE UPDATE RULE
To improve the quality of solution, the pheromone trails must
be updated. Trail updating includes local and global updating.
The local trail updating formula is described as follow:
τ(r, u) = (1 −ρ)τ(r, s) +
In the formula (3), ρ (0 < ρ < 1) is the pheromone trial
evaporating rate. 1τk(r, s) is the amount of pheromone trail
added to the edge (r, s) by ant k between time t and t + 1t
in the tour. It is described as follow:
1τk(r, s) =
where Q is a constant parameter, Lk is the distance of the
sequence πt toured by ant in 1t.
IV. A NEW MULTI-POPULATION CO-EVOLUTION ANT
COLONY OPTIMIZATION(ICMPACO) ALGORITHM
In the actual applications of the ACO algorithm, the ACO
algorithm takes on the positive feedback, parallelism and better optimization performance in solving optimization problems. But it exists deﬁciencies of premature convergence
and difﬁcultly determining control parameters, slow convergence speed, and so on. The co-evolution algorithm is a
global optimization algorithm inspired by the co-evolutionary
phenomenon in nature. It adopts the idea of decomposition
and coordination to decompose the complex optimization
problem into multiple interacting optimization sub-problems,
which are optimized separately and coordinate wholly. Therefore, the multi-population strategy, the co-evolution mechanism, the pheromone updating strategy and pheromone
diffusion mechanism are introduced into the ACO algorithm
in order to propose a new multi-population co-evolution
ant colony optimization(ICMPACO) algorithm for solving
large-scale optimization problem in this paper. In the ICM-
PACO algorithm, the multi-population strategy is used to
divide ants into elite ants and common ants to improve the
convergence rate and avoid to fall into local optimum value.
The pheromone updating strategy is used to improve the
optimization ability. The pheromone diffusion mechanism is
used to make the pheromone released by ants at a certain
point, which gradually affects a certain range of adjacent
regions. The co-evolution mechanism is used to interchange
information among different sub-populations to implement
the information sharing. These strategies and mechanisms are
fully used to improve the optimization performance of the
ACO algorithm.
A. MULTI-POPULATION STRATEGY
In the ACO algorithm, only one kind of ants is used to generate new solutions, and the ant colony size, selection parameter
and convergence parameter are used to control the solutions.
In general, it is difﬁcult to determine the appropriate values
of parameters in order to obtain the improved ACO algorithm with fast convergence speed and avoiding premature
convergence. Therefore, a multi-population strategy is used
to improve the ACO algorithm. This strategy will divide ants
into elite ants and common ants. The elite ants can obtain
information from solution archive, and generate solutions
by adopting a Gaussian kernel function and a probability
selection strategy. The difference is that the elite ants have
a set of own parameters. In essence, the elite ants are used
to improve the convergence rate of the ACO algorithm. The
common ants are used to generate new solutions with the
slower speed by adopting the single Gaussian function and the
average value of each dimension in order to avoid to fall into
local optimum value. The Gaussian function for the normal
ants is described as follow.
(x−µi,N )2
|si,e −si|
N(x) is the Gaussian function for normal ants in the
ith dimension, µi,N is its sample value, and σi,N is calculated
standard deviation. si is the average value of solutions in the
ith dimension, ξN is a constant which is used to control the
convergence rate of common ants. Therefore, the common
ants can effectively enlarge the search range and enhance
global search ability.
VOLUME 7, 2019
W. Deng et al.: ICMPACO Algorithm Based on Hybrid Strategies for Scheduling Problem
B. PHEROMONE UPDATING STRATEGY
In the ACO algorithm, the pheromone updating is a key problem, it includes the local pheromone updating and the global
pheromone updating. In order to improve the optimization
performance of the ACO algorithm in solving complex optimization problem, the new pheromone updating strategy and
pheromone diffusion mechanism are proposed to improve the
ACO algorithm.
1) THE LOCAL PHEROMONE UPDATING STRATEGY
Before the ﬁrst iteration of the ACO algorithm is executed,
the pheromones on each edge are equal constants. When
any ant in the ACO algorithm completes the current iteration, the local pheromone updating strategy is carried out
on the each passed edge for ant. The expression of the local
pheromone updating strategy is described as follow:
x,y = (1 −ρL)τ (i)
x,y + ρL1τ (i)
where, ρL ∈(0, 1) is local pheromone evaporating coefﬁcient, 1−ρL is the pheromone residue factor, τ (i)
0 is the initial
pheromone value. When the node value is 1, τ (i)
0 is a suitable
small negative number. When the node value is 0, τ (i)
2) THE GLOBAL PHEROMONE UPDATING STRATEGY
In one iteration, after all ants in the ACO algorithm complete
their solutions, the passed nodes are carried out the global
pheromone updating strategy. The expressions of the local
pheromone updating strategy are described as follows:
x,y = (1 −ρG)τ (i)
x,y + ρG1τ (i)
(x, j) ∈Global optimal solution
(x, j) ∈Iterative optimal solution
where, ρG ∈(0, 1) is global pheromone evaporating coefﬁcient, 1 −ρG is the pheromone residue factor, F(i)
G is global
optimal solution and F(i)
is iterative optimal solution.
3) THE PHEROMONE DIFFUSION MECHANISM
In the pheromone updating mechanism, the ant uses a single pheromone release mode. This mode can only affect
the subsequent ants with the passed same point, and cannot
guide the search of ants in a certain range of neighboring regions. Thus, it will affect the optimization performance. In this paper, on the basis of the local pheromone
updating strategy or global pheromone updating strategy,
the pheromone diffusion mechanism is used to improve the
ACO algorithm. The possibility of better solution in the
adjacent neighborhood is usually larger than that in other
regions. Therefore, the pheromone diffusion mechanism can
make the pheromone released by ants at a certain point, which
gradually affects a certain range of adjacent regions. The
other ants try to avoid to search the adjacent neighborhood of
the poor solution in order to tend to search the adjacent neighborhood of the better solution for improving the optimization
performance in solving large-scale optimization problems.
The pheromone updating mechanism is described as follows:
x,y = (1 −ρD)τ (i)
x,y + ρL1τ (i)
dr(ox, oy),
dr(ox, oy) < 1
where, N is the number of obtained solutions in this iteration,
x is the left guiding pheromone concentration on the source
object ox, dr(ox, oy) = 1/(f + 1) is the correlation distance
between two objects.
C. THE CO-EVOLUTION MECHANISM
The co-evolution mechanism is a new kind of evolutionary
mechanism based on co-evolution theory in recent years.
It admits the biological diversity, emphasizes a certain dependence between organisms and organisms, organisms and
environment in the process of evolution. It uses co-evolution
theory to construct the competition relation or cooperation
relation among two or more populations in order to improve
the optimization performance by the interaction of multiple
populations. It emphasizes the existing interaction among
different sub-populations, and affects each other and coevolves together. Therefore, the co-evolution mechanism is
introduced into the ACO algorithm to realize information
interaction among different sub-populations.
D. THE MODEL AND STEPS OF THE
ICMPACO ALGORITHM
The model of the ICMPACO algorithm based on co-evolution
mechanism, pheromone updating strategy, pheromone diffusion mechanism and hybrid strategy is shown in Figure 1.
The steps of the ICMPACO algorithm are described as
Step 1. Divide the optimization problem into several
sub-problems, and each sub-problem corresponds to one
sub-population.
Step 2. Initialize the parameters of the ICMPACO algorithm. These parameters include the number of ants(k),
pheromone amount(Q), the maximum number of iterations (T), the parameter(α and β), volatility coefﬁcient(ρ),
Step 3. Randomly select the initial position for each ant.
Step 4. Each sub-population independently execute the
search process. The transition probability of the next state is
calculated according to Formula(2).
Step 5. Locally update the pheromone concentration of
the passed path of ants in each sub-population according to
Formula(8).
Step 6. Locally update the pheromone concentration of
the adjacent path according to the pheromone diffusion
mechanism (Formula(11) and Formula(12)) for each subpopulation.
Step 7. Globally update the pheromone concentration for
each passed path according to formula (8) and Formula(10).
VOLUME 7, 2019
W. Deng et al.: ICMPACO Algorithm Based on Hybrid Strategies for Scheduling Problem
FIGURE 1. The model of the ICMPACO algorithm.
Step 8. If each ant executes Step 4 ∼Step 7 in this iteration,
then continue to execute next step, otherwise go to Step 4.
Step 9. Determine whether the maximum number of
iterations(T) is achieved or the obtained solution has met
the requirement. If this end condition does not meet, then
execute Step 4 in order to start a new evolution, otherwise
go to Step10.
Step 10. After ten iterations are completed, the obtained
solutions of all sub-populations are exchanged in order to
select better solutions.
V. APPLICATION OF THE ICMPACO ALGORITHM
FOR SOLVING TSP
A. TRAVELING SALESMEN PROBLEM
Traveling salesmen problem(TSP) is one which has
commanded much attention of mathematicians and computer
scientists speciﬁcally, because it is so easy to describe and
so difﬁcult to solve. This problem can simply be stated as
follow: a search for the shortest closed tour that visits each
city once and only once. The TSP can be represented by a
complete directed graph G = (N, A), where N is a set of n
nodes (vertices), also called cities, and A is a set of arcs and
D = dij is the cost (distance) matrix associated with each arc
(i, j) ∈A. The cost matrix D can be either symmetric or asymmetric. The TSP is the problem of ﬁnding a shortest closed
tour visiting each of the n = |N| nodes of G exactly once.
The distances between the cities are independent direction of
traversing arcs, that is, dij = dji is for every pair of nodes in
symmetric TSP. In the asymmetric TSP at least for one pair
of nodes (i, j), we have dij ̸= dji. All TSP instances used in
the empirical studies from the TSPLIB benchmark library.
Deﬁne the variables:
if the arc(i, j) is in the tour
The TSP can be formulated by the following generalization
of a well-known integer program formulation.
Objective function:
The constraints are written as follows:
j = 1, 2, 3, · · · , n
i = 1, 2, 3, · · · , n
xij ∈{0, 1},
i, j = 1, 2, 3, · · · , n
xij ≤|S| −1,
2 ≤|S| ≤N −2
In these formulations, the objective function (14) represents
the total cost to be minimized. Constraints (15) ensure that
each position j is occupied by only one city, while constraint (16) guarantees that each city i is assigned to exactly
one position. Constraint (17) represents the integrality constraints of variables zero–one xij(xij ≥0). Constraint (18)
assures that each city in the ﬁnal route will be visited one
time and that no sub-routes will be formed.
B. EXPERIMENT ENVIRONMENT AND PARAMETERS
In order to demonstrate the optimization performance of
the proposed ICMPACO algorithm, eight TSP standard
instances from TSPLIB standard library( 
uni-heidelberg.de/groups/comopt/software/TSPLIB95/) are
selected in this paper. According to the characteristic of
TSPLIB, the distance between any two cities is computed by
the Euclidian distance and then rounded off after the decimal
point. The basic ACO algorithm and improved ACO(IACO)
based on swarm intelligence with local search are selected
to compare the optimization performance with the proposed
ICMPACO algorithm. The experiment environments are:
Matlab2014b, the Pentium CPU i7, 8.0GB RAM with Windows10. The values of parameters in these algorithms could
be a complicated problem itself, the change of parameters
could affect the optimum value. In the simulation experiments, the alternative values were tested and modiﬁed for
some functions to obtain the most reasonable initial values
of these parameters. These selected values of the parameters
take on the optimal solution and the most reasonable running
time of these algorithms to efﬁciently complete the problem
solving. So the most reasonable initial values of these parameters are obtained by testing and modifying. The obtained
initial values of these parameters are shown in Table 1.
VOLUME 7, 2019
W. Deng et al.: ICMPACO Algorithm Based on Hybrid Strategies for Scheduling Problem
TABLE 1. The set of the parameters.
C. EXPERIMENT RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
In the simulation experiment, for each TSP standard instance,
the basic ACO algorithm, IACO algorithm and the proposed
ICMPACO algorithm are executed 10 times, respectively.
The indexes of maximum value, minimum value, average
value and variance of the 10 results are used to describe
and compare the experiment results. The experiment results
are shown in Table 2. In here, the optimal value represents
the obtained best value. The maximum value represents the
obtained maximum value in the simulation test of 10 times,
the minimum value represents the obtained minimum value
in the simulation test of 10 times, the average value represents the average value of 10 times. The variance represents
the variance between the maximum value and the minimum
The experiment results of the basic ACO algorithm,
the IACO algorithm and the proposed ICMPACO algorithm in solving TSP standard instances of dantzig42, eil51,
berlin52, eil101, pr107, ch130, kroA200 and rat783 are
shown in Table 2. As can be seen from Table 2, it can
clearly see the optimization performance and effect of the
basic ACO algorithm, IACO algorithm and the ICMPACO
algorithm in solving TSP. For three optimization algorithms,
the experiment results show that the ICMPACO algorithm can
obtain the best optimization values in solving all TSP standard examples, especially for berlin52, eil51 and dantzig42.
The ICMPACO algorithm can obtain 7548.6, 429.8871 and
703.1199, respectively, which are almost close to the optimal
value of 7542, 426 and 699. It shows that the ICMPACO
TABLE 2. The experiment results of different TSP.
VOLUME 7, 2019
W. Deng et al.: ICMPACO Algorithm Based on Hybrid Strategies for Scheduling Problem
FIGURE 2. The optimal path of dantzig42(703.1199).
FIGURE 3. The optimal path of eil51 (429.8871).
algorithm has better optimization ability than the basic
ACO algorithm and the IACO algorithm in solving these
TSP standard instances. From the average value, the ICM-
PACO algorithm can also obtain the best average value.
It shows that the optimization performance of the ICM-
PACO algorithm is more obvious advantage. It can be seen
that the variance of the optimization performance of the
proposed ICMPACO algorithm in solving the TSP is also
the smallest value for dantzig42, eil51, berlin52, eil101,
pr107, ch13, which shows that the ICMPACO algorithm
has better stability than the basic ACO algorithm and the
IACO algorithm.
In order to further describe the optimization performance
of the proposed ICMPACO algorithm, the best routes found
by the ICMPACO algorithm for TSP and their costs (their
route lengths) are illustrated in Figure 2. ∼Figure 9. Note
that the way the network grows, as far as possible like
an expanding ring, reduces the possibility of crossings
in the routes, which are characteristic of locally optimal
FIGURE 4. The optimal path of rat783 (7548.6).
FIGURE 5. The optimal path of eil101(668.236).
VI. APPLICATION OF THE ICMPACO ALGORITHM
FOR SOLVING GATE ASSIGNMENT PROBLEM
A. EXPERIMENT DATA AND EXPERIMENT
ENVIRONMENT A
Gate assignment problem is a combinatorial optimization
problem with multi-objective properties – . The better
gate assignment is beneﬁcial to the perfect combination of
safety and efﬁciency. The service satisfaction for passengers
is an important operation index, so the shortest walk distances of passengers is selected as the optimization objective
function. The robustness realization is the balanced idle time
for each gate in order to make the personnel and equipment
with the relatively balanced work time and ensure the smooth
work progress, so the most balanced idle time for each gate is
selected as the optimization objective function. The apron is
generally far away from the terminal, the ﬂights need to rely
on taxiing for seriously affecting the satisfaction of passengers. Therefore, the least ﬂights to the apron are selected as
the optimization objective function. In summary, the shortest
walk distances of passengers, the most balanced idle time for
VOLUME 7, 2019
W. Deng et al.: ICMPACO Algorithm Based on Hybrid Strategies for Scheduling Problem
FIGURE 6. The optimal path of pr107(45649).
FIGURE 7. The optimal path of ch130(6183.4).
each gate and the least ﬂights to the apron are selected as
the optimization objectives for constructing a multi-objective
optimization model, which is carried out the non-quantized
processing to obtain the normalized objective function as
qikfkyik +µ3
The experiment data came from Guangzhou Baiyun airport of China on July 26, 2015. There are 20 available
gates and 158 ﬂights. The gates are divided into large gate,
medium gate and small gate according to the size of the
available aircraft, and the ﬂights are also divided into large
ﬂight, medium ﬂight and small ﬂight. All ﬂights that are not
assigned to the gates only can park to the apron. The information of gates is described in Table 3. The information of
ﬂights is described in Table 4. The experiment environments
are: Matlab2016b, the Pentium CPU i7, 8.0GB RAM with
Windows10.
FIGURE 8. The optimal path of kroA200 (31267).
FIGURE 9. The optimal path of rat783(9229).
TABLE 3. The information of gates.
B. EXPERIMENTAL RESULT
The ICMPACO algorithm is used to solve the gate assignment model. The experiments were continuously carried out
VOLUME 7, 2019
W. Deng et al.: ICMPACO Algorithm Based on Hybrid Strategies for Scheduling Problem
TABLE 4. The information of flights.
20 times. The best one time in 20 times was selected to
analyze in here. The obtained assignment result is shown
As can be seen from Table 5, there are 132 ﬂights, which
are assigned to 20 gates. And there are 26 ﬂights, which are
parked to the apron. The assigned efﬁciency is 83.5%. From
the number of assigned result for each gate, the number of
ﬂights are more balanced for each gate. There are 16 gates,
which have been assigned 5 ﬂights or more 5 ﬂights. The
Gate 13 parks 11 ﬂights, Gate 6 parks 10 ﬂights, Gate 1,
Gate 4, Gate 9 and Gate 10 park 9 ﬂights, Gate 3, Gate 8
and Gate 18 park 7 ﬂights. There are 4 gates, which park 6
ﬂights for each gate. There are 2 gates, which park 5 ﬂights
for each gate. There are 3 gates, which gates park 4 ﬂights
for each gate. As can be seen from the comprehensive result
of gate assignment, the proposed ICMPACO algorithm can
fast and effectively assign these ﬂights to 20 gates or the
apron, and obtain the ideal assignment result. Therefore, this
proposed ICMPACO algorithm takes on better optimization
performance in solving gate assignment problem, and has
more effective searching ability.
C. COMPARISON AND ANALYSIS OF RESULTS
In order to further demonstrate the optimization performance
of the proposed ICMPACO algorithm, the basic ACO algorithm and similarity ACO(IACO) algorithm are used to solve
the gate assignment problem. These parameters are set the
same in Table 1. The experiments were carried out for 5 consecutive simulations. The calculation and comparison results
are shown Table 6 and Figure 10.
As can be seen from Table 6 and Figure 10., the basic
ACO algorithm is used to solve the gate assignment problem,
the best assignment result is to assign 124 ﬂights to gates, and
the average assignment result is to assign 121 ﬂights to gates
and the average running time is 10.3252s. The IACO algorithm is used to solve the gate assignment problem, the best
assignment result is to assign 127 ﬂights to gates, and the
average assignment result is to assign 123.2 ﬂights to gates
and the average running time is 17.9454s. The ICMPACO
algorithm is used to solve the gate assignment problem,
TABLE 5. The gate assignment results.
VOLUME 7, 2019
W. Deng et al.: ICMPACO Algorithm Based on Hybrid Strategies for Scheduling Problem
TABLE 6. The calculation and comparison results.
FIGURE 10. The comparison results for average value.
the best assignment result is to assign 132 ﬂights to gates, and
the average assignment result is to assign 120 ﬂights to gates
and the average running time is 31.5514s. Therefore, for the
basic ACO algorithm, the IACO algorithm and the ICMPACO
algorithm in solving the gate assignment problem, the best
assignment result and the average assignment result of the
ICMPACO algorithm is better than those of the basic ACO
algorithm and the IACO algorithm. That’s to say, the solution
quality is the best by using the ICMPACO algorithm. But
from the experiment results, we can see that time complexity
of the ICMPACO algorithm is worse than time complexity of
the basic ACO algorithm and the IACO algorithm.
In general, although the ICMPACO algorithm uses more
time to solve gate assignment problem, the solution quality
of the ICMPACO algorithm has been improved by comparing
the solution quality of the basic ACO algorithm and IACO
algorithm. The ICMPACO algorithm can effectively improve
the comprehensive optimization performance of gate assignment problem. Therefore, the proposed ICMPACO algorithm
takes on the ability to escape the local minimum value and
improve the global search ability. It can effectively provide a
valuable reference for assigning the gates.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, a new multi-population co-evolution ant colony
optimization (ICMPACO) algorithm based on combining
the multi-population strategy, the co-evolution mechanism,
the pheromone updating strategy and pheromone diffusion
mechanism is proposed to solve the large-scale complex
optimization problems. And the optimization performance of
the ICMPACO algorithm is compared with the basic ACO
algorithm and the IACO algorithm in solving the traveling
salesmen problem and gate assignment problem. The proposed ICMPACO algorithm can obtain the best optimization
value in solving these TSP standard examples and the gate
assignment problem. It can assign 132 ﬂights to 20 gates
and the assigned efﬁciency reaches 83.5%, and fast obtain
the ideal gate assignment result. Therefore, the proposed
ICMPACO algorithm takes on better optimization ability and
stability than the ACO algorithm and IACO algorithm.
Because the ICMPACO algorithm exists the longer computation time in solving complex optimization problem,
the ICMPACO algorithm need to further be studied in order
to reduce the time complexity. In the future work, the
ICMPACO algorithm will be studied deeply.