Deep Interest Network for Click-Through Rate Prediction
Guorui Zhou, Chengru Song, Xiaoqiang Zhu
Ying Fan, Han Zhu, Xiao Ma, Yanghui Yan, Junqi Jin, Han Li, Kun Gai
Alibaba Group
{guorui.xgr,chengru.scr,xiaoqiang.zxq,zhuhan.zh,fanying.fy,maxiao.ma,yanghui.yyh,junqi.jjq,lihan.hl,jingshi.gk}@
alibaba-inc.com
Click-through rate prediction is an essential task in industrial
applications, such as online advertising. Recently deep learning
based models have been proposed, which follow a similar Embedding&MLP paradigm. In these methods large scale sparse input
features are first mapped into low dimensional embedding vectors,
and then transformed into fixed-length vectors in a group-wise
manner, finally concatenated together to fed into a multilayer perceptron (MLP) to learn the nonlinear relations among features. In
this way, user features are compressed into a fixed-length representation vector, in regardless of what candidate ads are. The use
of fixed-length vector will be a bottleneck, which brings difficulty
for Embedding&MLP methods to capture user’s diverse interests
effectively from rich historical behaviors. In this paper, we propose
a novel model: Deep Interest Network (DIN) which tackles this challenge by designing a local activation unit to adaptively learn the
representation of user interests from historical behaviors with respect to a certain ad. This representation vector varies over different
ads, improving the expressive ability of model greatly. Besides, we
develop two techniques: mini-batch aware regularization and data
adaptive activation function which can help training industrial deep
networks with hundreds of millions of parameters. Experiments on
two public datasets as well as an Alibaba real production dataset
with over 2 billion samples demonstrate the effectiveness of proposed approaches, which achieve superior performance compared
with state-of-the-art methods. DIN now has been successfully deployed in the online display advertising system in Alibaba, serving
the main traffic.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems →Display advertising; Recommender
Click-Through Rate Prediction, Display Advertising, E-commerce
INTRODUCTION
In cost-per-click (CPC) advertising system, advertisements are
ranked by the eCPM (effective cost per mille), which is the product
of the bid price and CTR (click-through rate), and CTR needs to be
predicted by the system. Hence, the performance of CTR prediction
model has a direct impact on the final revenue and plays a key role
in the advertising system. Modeling CTR prediction has received
much attention from both research and industry community.
Recently, inspired by the success of deep learning in computer
vision and natural language processing , deep learning based
methods have been proposed for CTR prediction task .
These methods follow a similar Embedding&MLP paradigm: large
scale sparse input features are first mapped into low dimensional
embedding vectors, and then transformed into fixed-length vectors
in a group-wise manner, finally concatenated together to fed into
fully connected layers (also known as multilayer perceptron, MLP)
to learn the nonlinear relations among features. Compared with
commonly used logistic regression model , these deep learning
methods can reduce a lot of feature engineering jobs and enhance
the model capability greatly. For simplicity, we name these methods
Embedding&MLP in this paper, which now have become popular
on CTR prediction task.
However, the user representation vector with a limited dimension in Embedding&MLP methods will be a bottleneck to express
user’s diverse interests. Take display advertising in e-commerce
site as an example. Users might be interested in different kinds of
goods simultaneously when visiting the e-commerce site. That is
to say, user interests are diverse. When it comes to CTR prediction
task, user interests are usually captured from user behavior data.
Embedding&MLP methods learn the representation of all interests
for a certain user by transforming the embedding vectors of user
behaviors into a fixed-length vector, which is in an euclidean space
where all users’ representation vectors are. In other words, diverse
interests of the user are compressed into a fixed-length vector,
which limits the expressive ability of Embedding&MLP methods.
To make the representation capable enough for expressing user’s
diverse interests, the dimension of the fixed-length vector needs to
be largely expanded. Unfortunately, it will dramatically enlarge the
size of learning parameters and aggravate the risk of overfitting
under limited data. Besides, it adds the burden of computation and
storage, which may not be tolerated for an industrial online system.
On the other hand, it is not necessary to compress all the diverse
interests of a certain user into the same vector when predicting
a candidate ad because only part of user’s interests will influence
his/her action (to click or not to click). For example, a female swimmer will click a recommended goggle mostly due to the bought
of bathing suit rather than the shoes in her last week’s shopping
list. Motivated by this, we propose a novel model: Deep Interest
Network (DIN), which adaptively calculates the representation vector of user interests by taking into consideration the relevance of
historical behaviors given a candidate ad. By introducing a local
activation unit, DIN pays attentions to the related user interests by
soft-searching for relevant parts of historical behaviors and takes a
weighted sum pooling to obtain the representation of user interests
with respect to the candidate ad. Behaviors with higher relevance
to the candidate ad get higher activated weights and dominate the
representation of user interests. We visualize this phenomenon in
the experiment section. In this way, the representation vector of
 
user interests varies over different ads, which improves the expressive ability of model under limited dimension and enables DIN to
better capture user’s diverse interests.
Training industrial deep networks with large scale sparse features is of great challenge. For example, SGD based optimization
methods only update those parameters of sparse features appearing
in each mini-batch. However, adding with traditional ℓ2 regularization, the computation turns to be unacceptable, which needs to
calculate L2-norm over the whole parameters (with size scaling
up to billions in our situation) for each mini-batch. In this paper,
we develop a novel mini-batch aware regularization where only
parameters of non-zero features appearing in each mini-batch participate in the calculation of L2-norm, making the computation
acceptable. Besides, we design a data adaptive activation function,
which generalizes commonly used PReLU by adaptively adjusting the rectified point w.r.t. distribution of inputs and is shown to
be helpful for training industrial networks with sparse features.
The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
• We point out the limit of using fixed-length vector to express
user’s diverse interests and design a novel deep interest
network (DIN) which introduces a local activation unit to
adaptively learn the representation of user interests from
historical behaviors w.r.t. given ads. DIN can improve the
expressive ability of model greatly and better capture the
diversity characteristic of user interests.
• We develop two novel techniques to help training industrial
deep networks: i) a mini-batch aware regularizer, which
saves heavy computation of regularization on deep networks
with huge number of parameters and is helpful for avoiding
overfitting, ii) a data adaptive activation function, which
generalizes PReLU by considering the distribution of inputs
and shows well performance.
• We conduct extensive experiments on both public and Alibaba datasets. Results verify the effectiveness of proposed
DIN and training techniques. Our code1 is publicly available. The proposed approaches have been deployed in the
commercial display advertising system in Alibaba, one of
world’s largest advertising platform, contributing significant
improvement to the business.
In this paper we focus on the CTR prediction modeling in the
scenario of display advertising in e-commerce industry. Methods
discussed here can be applied in similar scenarios with rich user
behaviors, such as personalized recommendation in e-commerce
sites, feeds ranking in social networks etc.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We discuss related
work in section 2 and introduce the background about characteristic
of user behavior data in display advertising system of e-commerce
site in section 3. Section 4 and 5 describe in detail the design of
DIN model as well as two proposed training techniques. We present
experiments in section 6 and conclude in section 7.
RELATEDWORK
The structure of CTR prediction model has evolved from shallow to
deep. At the same time, the number of samples and the dimension
1Experiment
 
of features used in CTR model have become larger and larger. In
order to better extract feature relations to improve performance,
several works pay attention to the design of model structure.
As a pioneer work, NNLM learns distributed representation
for each word, aiming to avoid curse of dimension in language
modeling. This method, often referred to as embedding, has inspired
many natural language models and CTR prediction models that
need to handle large-scale sparse inputs.
LS-PLM and FM models can be viewed as a class of networks with one hidden layer, which first employs embedding layer
on sparse inputs and then imposes specially designed transformation functions for target fitting, aiming to capture the combination
relations among features.
Deep Crossing , Wide&Deep Learning and YouTube Recommendation CTR model extend LS-PLM and FM by replacing
the transformation function with complex MLP network, which
enhances the model capability greatly. PNN tries to capture
high-order feature interactions by involving a product layer after
embedding layer. DeepFM imposes a factorization machines as
"wide" module in Wide&Deep with no need of feature engineering. Overall, these methods follow a similar model structure with
combination of embedding layer (for learning the dense representation of sparse features) and MLP (for learning the combination
relations of features automatically). This kind of CTR prediction
model reduces the manual feature engineering jobs greatly. Our
base model follows this kind of model structure. However in applications with rich user behaviors, features are often contained with
variable-length list of ids, e.g., searched terms or watched videos in
YouTube recommender system . These models often transform
corresponding list of embedding vectors into a fixed-length vector
via sum/average pooling, which causes loss of information. The
proposed DIN tackles it by adaptively learning the representation
vector w.r.t. given ad, improving the expressive ability of model.
Attention mechanism originates from Neural Machine Translation (NMT) field . NMT takes a weighted sum of all the annotations to get an expected annotation and focuses only on information
relevant to the generation of next target word. A recent work, Deep-
Intent applies attention in the context of search advertising.
Similar to NMT, they use RNN to model text, then learn one
global hidden vector to help paying attention on the key words in
each query. It is shown that the use of attention can help capturing
the main intent of query or ad. DIN designs a local activation unit
to soft-search for relevant user behaviors and takes a weighted sum
pooling to obtain the adaptive representation of user interests with
respect to a given ad. The user representation vector varies over
different ads, which is different from DeepIntent in which there is
no interaction between ad and user.
We make code publicly available, and further show how to successfully deploy DIN in one of the world’s largest advertising systems with novel developed techniques for training large scale deep
networks with hundreds of millions of parameters.
BACKGROUND
In e-commerce sites, such as Alibaba, advertisements are natural
goods. In the rest of this paper, without special declaration, we regard ads as goods. Figure 1 briefly illustrates the running procedure
Figure 1: Illustration of running procedure of display advertising system in Alibaba, in which user behavior data plays
important roles.
of display advertising system in Alibaba, which consists of two
main stages: i) matching stage which generates list of candidate ads
relevant to the visiting user via methods like collaborative filtering,
ii) ranking stage which predicts CTR for each given ad and then
selects top ranked ones. Everyday, hundreds of millions of users
visit the e-commerce site, leaving us with lots of user behavior data
which contributes critically in building matching and ranking models. It is worth mentioning that users with rich historical behaviors
contain diverse interests. For example, a young mother has browsed
goods including woolen coat, T-shits, earrings, tote bag, leather
handbag and children’s coat recently. These behavior data give us
hints about her shopping interests. When she visits the e-commerce
site, system displays a suitable ad to her, for example a new handbag. Obviously the displayed ad only matches or activates part of
interests of this mother. In summary, interests of user with rich
behaviors are diverse and could be locally activated given certain
ads. We show later in this paper making use of these characteristics
plays important role for building CTR prediction model.
DEEP INTEREST NETWORK
Different from sponsored search, users come into display advertising system without explicitly expressed intentions. Effective approaches are required to extract user interests from rich historical
behaviors when building the CTR prediction model. Features that
depict users and ads are the basic elements in the CTR modeling
of advertisement system. Making use of these features reasonably
and mining information from them are critical.
Feature Representation
Data in industrial CTR prediction tasks is mostly in a multi-group
categorial form, for example, [weekday=Friday, gender=Female,
visited_cate_ids={Bag,Book}, ad_cate_id=Book], which is normally
transformed into high-dimensional sparse binary features via encoding . Mathematically, encoding vector of i-th feature
group is formularized as ti ∈RKi . Ki denotes the dimensionality of
feature group i, which means feature group i contains Ki unique ids.
ti[j] is the j-th element of ti and ti[j] ∈{0, 1}. ÍKi
j=1 ti[j] = k. Vector ti with k = 1 refers to one-hot encoding and k > 1 refers
to multi-hot encoding. Then one instance can be represent as
M]T in a group-wise manner, where M is number of feature groups, ÍM
i=1 Ki = K, K is dimensionality of the
entire feature space. In this way, the aforementioned instance with
Table 1: Statistics of feature sets used in the display advertising system in Alibaba. Features are composed of sparse
binary vectors in the group-wise manner.
Feature Group
Dimemsionality
#Nonzero Ids per Instance
User Profile
User Behavior
visited_goods_ids
visited_shop_ids
visited_cate_ids
Ad Features
Context Features
four groups of features are illustrated as:
 
weekday=Friday
gender=Female
[0, .., 1, ..., 1, ...0]
visited_cate_ids={Bag,Book}
[0, .., 1, ..., 0]
ad_cate_id=Book
The whole feature set used in our system is described in Table
1. It is composed of four categories, among which user behavior
features are typically multi-hot encoding vectors and contain rich
information of user interests. Note that in our setting, there are no
combination features. We capture the interaction of features with
deep neural network.
Base Model(Embedding&MLP)
Most of the popular model structures share a similar
Embedding&MLP paradigm, which we refer to as base model, as
shown in the left of Fig.2. It consists of several parts:
Embedding layer. As the inputs are high dimensional binary
vectors, embedding layer is used to transform them into low dimensional dense representations. For the i-th feature group of ti,
let Wi = [wi
Ki ] ∈RD×Ki represent the i-th embedding dictionary, where wi
j ∈RD is an embedding vector with dimensionality of D. Embedding operation follows the table lookup
mechanism, as illustrated in Fig.2.
• If ti is one-hot vector with j-th element ti[j] = 1, the embedded representation of ti is a single embedding vector
• If ti is multi-hot vector with ti[j] = 1 for j ∈{i1,i2, ...,ik },
the embedded representation of ti is a list of embedding
vectors: {ei1,ei2, ...eik } = {wi
Pooling layer and Concat layer. Notice that different users
have different numbers of behaviors. Thus the number of non-zero
values for multi-hot behavioral feature vector ti varies across instances, causing the lengths of the corresponding list of embedding
vectors to be variable. As fully connected networks can only handle
fixed-length inputs, it is a common practice to transform the
list of embedding vectors via a pooling layer to get a fixed-length
ei = pooling(ei1,ei2, ...eik ).
Figure 2: Network Architecture. The left part illustrates the network of base model (Embedding&MLP). Embeddings of cate_id,
shop_id and goods_id belong to one goods are concatenated to represent one visited goods in user’s behaviors. Right part is our
proposed DIN model. It introduces a local activation unit, with which the representation of user interests varies adaptively
given different candidate ads.
Two most commonly used pooling layers are sum pooling and
average pooling, which apply element-wise sum/average operations
to the list of embedding vectors.
Both embedding and pooling layers operate in a group-wise
manner, mapping the original sparse features into multiple fixedlength representation vectors. Then all the vectors are concatenated
together to obtain the overall representation vector for the instance.
MLP. Given the concatenated dense representation vector, fully
connected layers are used to learn the combination of features automatically. Recently developed methods focus on designing
structures of MLP for better information extraction.
Loss. The objective function used in base model is the negative
log-likelihood function defined as:
(y logp(x) + (1 −y) log(1 −p(x))),
where S is the training set of size N, with x as the input of the
network andy ∈{0, 1} as the label,p(x) is the output of the network
after the softmax layer, representing the predicted probability of
sample x being clicked.
The structure of Deep Interest Network
Among all those features of Table 1, user behavior features are
critically important and play key roles in modeling user interests
in the scenario of e-commerce applications.
Base model obtains a fixed-length representation vector of user
interests by pooling all the embedding vectors over the user behavior feature group, as Eq.(1). This representation vector stays the
same for a given user, in regardless of what candidate ads are. In
this way, the user representation vector with a limited dimension
will be a bottleneck to express user’s diverse interests. To make
it capable enough, an easy method is to expand the dimension of
embedding vector, which unfortunately will increase the size of
learning parameters heavily. It will lead to overfitting under limited
training data and add the burden of computation and storage, which
may not be tolerated for an industrial online system.
Is there an elegant way to represent user’s diverse interests in
one vector under limited dimension? The local activation characteristic of user interests gives us inspiration to design a novel
model named deep interest network(DIN). Imagine when the young
mother mentioned above in section 3 visits the e-commerce site,
she finds the displayed new handbag cute and clicks it. Let’s dissect
the driving force of click action. The displayed ad hits the related
interests of this young mother by soft-searching her historical behaviors and finding that she had browsed similar goods of tote bag
and leather handbag recently. In other words, behaviors related to
displayed ad greatly contribute to the click action. DIN simulates
this process by paying attention to the representation of locally
activated interests w.r.t. given ad. Instead of expressing all user’s
diverse interests with the same vector, DIN adaptively calculate
the representation vector of user interests by taking into consideration the relevance of historical behaviors w.r.t. candidate ad. This
representation vector varies over different ads.
The right part of Fig.2 illustrates the architecture of DIN. Compared with base model, DIN introduces a novel designed local activation unit and maintains the other structures the same. Specifically,
activation units are applied on the user behavior features, which
performs as a weighted sum pooling to adaptively calculate user
representation vU given a candidate ad A, as shown in Eq.(3)
vU (A) = f (vA, e1, e2, .., eH ) =
a(ej, vA)ej =
where {e1,e2, ...,eH } is the list of embedding vectors of behaviors
of user U with length of H, vA is the embedding vector of ad A.
In this way, vU (A) varies over different ads. a(·) is a feed-forward
network with output as the activation weight, as illustrated in Fig.2.
Apart from the two input embedding vectors, a(·) adds the out
product of them to feed into the subsequent network, which is an
explicit knowledge to help relevance modeling.
Local activation unit of Eq.(3) shares similar ideas with attention
methods which are developed in NMT task . However different
from traditional attention method, the constraint of Í
i wi = 1 is
relaxed in Eq.(3), aiming to reserve the intensity of user interests.
That is, normalization with softmax on the output of a(·) is abandoned. Instead, value of Í
i wi is treated as an approximation of
the intensity of activated user interests to some degree. For example, if one user’s historical behaviors contain 90% clothes and 10%
electronics. Given two candidate ads of T-shirt and phone, T-shirt
activates most of the historical behaviors belonging to clothes and
may get larger value ofvU (higher intensity of interest) than phone.
Traditional attention methods lose the resolution on the numerical
scale of vU by normalizing of the output of a(·).
We have tried LSTM to model user historical behavior data in
the sequential manner. But it shows no improvement. Different
from text which is under the constraint of grammar in NLP task,
the sequence of user historical behaviors may contain multiple
concurrent interests. Rapid jumping and sudden ending over these
interests causes the sequence data of user behaviors to seem to be
noisy. A possible direction is to design special structures to model
such data in a sequence way. We leave it for future research.
TRAINING TECHNIQUES
In the advertising system in Alibaba, numbers of goods and users
scale up to hundreds of millions. Practically, training industrial
deep networks with large scale sparse input features is of great
challenge. In this section, we introduce two important techniques
which are proven to be helpful in practice.
Mini-batch Aware Regularization
Overfitting is a critical challenge for training industrial networks.
For example, with addition of fine-grained features, such as features of goods_ids with dimensionality of 0.6 billion (including
visited_дoods_ids of user and дoods_id of ad as described in Table 1), model performance falls rapidly after the first epoch during
training without regularization, as the dark green line shown in
Fig.4 in later section 6.5. It is not practical to directly apply traditional regularization methods, such as ℓ2 and ℓ1 regularization, on
training networks with sparse inputs and hundreds of millions of
parameters. Take ℓ2 regularization as an example. Only parameters
of non-zero sparse features appearing in each mini-batch needs
to be updated in the scenario of SGD based optimization methods
without regularization. However, when adding ℓ2 regularization
it needs to calculate L2-norm over the whole parameters for each
mini-batch, which leads to extremely heavy computations and is
unacceptable with parameters scaling up to hundreds of millions.
Figure 3: Control function of PReLU and Dice.
In this paper, we introduce an efficient mini-batch aware regularizer, which only calculates the L2-norm over the parameters
of sparse features appearing in each mini-batch and makes the
computation possible. In fact, it is the embedding dictionary that
contributes most of the parameters for CTR networks and arises the
difficulty of heavy computation. Let W ∈RD×K denote parameters
of the whole embedding dictionary, with D as the dimensionality of
the embedding vector and K as the dimensionality of feature space.
Expand the ℓ2 regularization on W over samples
L2(W) = ∥W∥2
where wj ∈RD is the j-th embedding vector, I(xj , 0) denotes if
the instance x has the feature id j, and nj denotes the number of
occurrence for feature id j in all samples. Eq.(4) can be transformed
into Eq.(5) in the mini-batch aware manner
where B denotes the number of mini-batches, Bm denotes them-th
mini-batch. Let αmj = max(x,y)∈Bm I(xj , 0) denote if there is at
least one instance having the feature id j in mini-batch Bm. Then
Eq.(5) can be approximated by
In this way, we derive an approximated mini-batch aware version
of ℓ2 regularization. For the m-th mini-batch, the gradient w.r.t. the
embedding weights of feature j is
∂L(p(x ), y)
in which only parameters of features appearing in m-th mini-batch
participate in the computation of regularization.
Data Adaptive Activation Function
PReLU is a commonly used activation function
if s ≤0. = p(s) · s + (1 −p(s)) · αs,
where s is one dimension of the input of activation function f (·)
and p(s) = I(s > 0) is an indicator function which controls f (s) to
switch between two channels of f (s) = s and f (s) = αs. α in the
second channel is a learning parameter. Here we refer to p(s) as the
control function. The left part of Fig.3 plots the control function of
PReLU. PReLU takes a hard rectified point with value of 0, which
may be not suitable when the inputs of each layer follow different
distributions. Take this into consideration, we design a novel data
adaptive activation function named Dice,
f (s) = p(s) · s + (1 −p(s)) · αs, p(s) =
with the control function to be plotted in the right part of Fig.3.
In the training phrase, E[s] and Var[s] is the mean and variance
of input in each mini-batch. In the testing phrase, E[s] and Var[s]
is calculated by moving averages E[s] and Var[s] over data. ϵ is a
small constant which is set to be 10−8 in our practice.
Dice can be viewed as a generalization of PReLu. The key idea
of Dice is to adaptively adjust the rectified point according to distribution of input data, whose value is set to be the mean of input.
Besides, Dice controls smoothly to switch between the two channels.
When E(s) = 0 and Var[s] = 0, Dice degenerates into PReLU.
EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we present our experiments in detail, including
datasets, evaluation metric, experimental setup, model comparison
and the corresponding analysis. Experiments on two public datasets
with user behaviors as well as a dataset collected from the display
advertising system in Alibaba demonstrate the effectiveness of
proposed approach which outperforms state-of-the-art methods on
the CTR prediction task. Both the public datasets and experiment
codes are made available1.
Datasets and Experimental Setup
Amazon Dataset2. Amazon Dataset contains product reviews and
metadata from Amazon, which is used as benchmark dataset . We conduct experiments on a subset named Electronics,
which contains 192,403 users, 63,001 goods, 801 categories and
1,689,188 samples. User behaviors in this dataset are rich, with
more than 5 reviews for each users and goods. Features include
goods_id, cate_id, user reviewed goods_id_list and cate_id_list.
Let all behaviors of a user be (b1,b2, . . . ,bk, . . . ,bn), the task is to
predict the (k+1)-th reviewed goods by making use of the first k
reviewed goods. Training dataset is generated with k = 1, 2, . . . ,n−
2 for each user. In the test set, we predict the last one given the first
n −1 reviewed goods. For all models, we use SGD as the optimizer
with exponential decay, in which learning rate starts at 1 and decay
rate is set to 0.1. The mini-batch size is set to be 32.
MovieLens Dataset3. MovieLens data contains 138,493 users,
27,278 movies, 21 categories and 20,000,263 samples. To make it
suitable for CTR prediction task, we transform it into a binary classification data. Original user rating of the movies is continuous
value ranging from 0 to 5. We label the samples with rating of 4
and 5 to be positive and the rest to be negative. We segment the
data into training and testing dataset based on userID. Among all
138,493 users, of which 100,000 are randomly selected into training
set (about 14,470,000 samples) and the rest 38,493 into the test set
(about 5,530,000 samples). The task is to predict whether user will
rate a given movie to be above 3(positive label) based on historical behaviors. Features include movie_id, movie_cate_id and user
rated movie_id_list, movie_cate_id_list. We use the same optimizer,
learning rate and mini-batch size as described on Amazon Dataset.
Alibaba Dataset. We collected traffic logs from the online display advertising system in Alibaba, of which two weeks’ samples
are used for training and samples of the following day for testing.
The size of training and testing set is about 2 billions and 0.14 billion
respectively. For all the deep models, the dimensionality of embedding vector is 12 for the whole 16 groups of features. Layers of MLP
is set by 192 × 200 × 80 × 2. Due to the huge size of data, we set the
mini-batch size to be 5000 and use Adam as the optimizer. We
2 
3 
Table 2: Statistics of datasets used in this paper.
Categories
Amazon(Electro).
MovieLens.
20,000,263
60 million
0.6 billion
2.14 billion
a For MovieLens dataset, goods refer to be movies.
apply exponential decay, in which learning rate starts at 0.001 and
decay rate is set to 0.9.
The statistics of all the above datasets is shown in Table 2. Volume
of Alibaba Dataset is much larger than both Amazon and MovieLens,
which brings more challenges.
Competitors
• LR . Logistic regression (LR) is a widely used shallow
model before deep networks for CTR prediction task. We
implement it as a weak baseline.
• BaseModel. As introduced in section4.2, BaseModel follows
the Embedding&MLP architecture and is the base of most of
subsequently developed deep networks for CTR modeling.
It acts as a strong baseline for our model comparison.
• Wide&Deep . In real industrial applications, Wide&Deep
model has been widely accepted. It consists of two parts: i)
wide model, which handles the manually designed cross
product features, ii) deep model, which automatically extracts nonlinear relations among features and equals to the
BaseModel. Wide&Deep needs expertise feature engineering
on the input of the "wide" module. We follow the practice in
 to take cross-product of user behaviors and candidates
as wide inputs. For example, in MovieLens dataset, it refers to
the cross-product of user rated movies and candidate movies.
• PNN . PNN can be viewed as an improved version of
BaseModel by introducing a product layer after embedding
layer to capture high-order feature interactions.
• DeepFM . It imposes a factorization machines as "wide"
module in Wide&Deep saving feature engineering jobs.
In CTR prediction field, AUC is a widely used metric . It measures
the goodness of order by ranking all the ads with predicted CTR,
including intra-user and inter-user orders. An variation of user
weighted AUC is introduced in which measures the goodness
of intra-user order by averaging AUC over users and is shown to be
more relevant to online performance in display advertising system.
We adapt this metric in our experiments. For simplicity, we still
refer it as AUC. It is calculated as follows:
i=1 #impressioni × AUCi
i=1 #impressioni
where n is the number of users, #impressioni and AUCi are the
number of impressions and AUC corresponding to the i-th user.
Besides, we follow to introduce RelaImpr metric to measure
relative improvement over models. For a random guesser, the value
of AUC is 0.5. Hence RelaImpr is defined as below:
RelaImpr =
 AUC(measured model) −0.5
AUC(base model) −0.5
Figure 4: Performances of BaseModel with different regularizations on Alibaba Dataset. Training with fine-grained дoods_ids
features without regularization encounters serious overfitting after the first epoch. All the regularizations show improvement,
among which our proposed mini-batch aware regularization performs best. Besides, well trained model withдoods_ids features
gets higher AUC than without them. It comes from the richer information that fine-grained features contained.
Table 3: Model Coparison on Amazon Dataset and Movie-
Lens Dataset. All the lines calculate RelaImpr by comparing
with BaseModel on each dataset respectively.
MovieLens.
Amazon(Electro).
DIN with Dicea 0.7348
a Other lines except LR use PReLU as activation function.
Result from model comparison on Amazon
Dataset and MovieLens Dataset
Table 3 shows the results on Amazon dataset and MovieLens dataset.
All experiments are repeated 5 times and averaged results are reported. The influence of random initialization on AUC is less than
0.0002. Obviously, all the deep networks beat LR model significantly,
which indeed demonstrates the power of deep learning. PNN and
DeepFM with specially designed structures preform better than
Wide&Deep. DIN performs best among all the competitors. Especially on Amazon Dataset with rich user behaviors, DIN stands out
significantly. We owe this to the design of local activation unit structure in DIN. DIN pays attentions to the locally related user interests
by soft-searching for parts of user behaviors that are relevant to candidate ad. With this mechanism, DIN obtains an adaptively varying
representation of user interests, greatly improving the expressive
ability of model compared with other deep networks. Besides, DIN
with Dice brings further improvement over DIN, which verifies
the effectiveness of the proposed data adaptive activation function
Table 4: Best AUCs of BaseModel with different regularizations on Alibaba Dataset corresponding to Fig.4. All the
other lines calculate RelaImpr by comparing with first line.
Regularization
Without goods_ids feature and Reg.
With goods_ids feature without Reg.
With goods_ids feature and Dropout Reg.
With goods_ids feature and Filter Reg.
With goods_ids feature and Difacto Reg.
With goods_ids feature and MBA. Reg.
0.6031 9.68%
Performance of regularization
As the dimension of features in both Amazon Dataset and Movie-
Lens Dataset is not high (about 0.1 million), all the deep models
including our proposed DIN do not meet grave problem of overfitting. However, when it comes to the Alibaba dataset from the online
advertising system which contains higher dimensional sparse features, overfitting turns to be a big challenge. For example, when
training deep models with fine-grained features (e.g., features of
дoods_ids with dimension of 0.6 billion in Table 1), serious overfitting occurs after the first epoch without any regularization, which
causes the model performance to drop rapidly, as the dark green line
shown in Fig.4. For this reason, we conduct careful experiments to
check the performance of several commonly used regularizations.
• Dropout . Randomly discard 50% of feature ids in each
• Filter. Filter visited дoods_id by occurrence frequency in
samples and leave only the most frequent ones. In our setting,
top 20 million дoods_ids are left.
• Regularization in DiFacto . Parameters associated with
frequent features are less over-regularized.
• MBA. Our proposed Mini-Batch Aware regularization method
(Eq.4). Regularization parameter λ for both DiFacto and MBA
is searched and set to be 0.01.
Fig.4 and Table 4 give the comparison results. Focusing on the
detail of Fig.4, model trained with fine-grained дoods_ids features
brings large improvement on the test AUC performance in the first
epoch, compared without it. However, overfitting occurs rapidly
in the case of training without regularization (dark green line).
Dropout prevents quick overfitting but causes slower convergence.
Frequency filter relieves overfitting to a degree. Regularization in
DiFacto sets a greater penalty on дoods_id with high frequency,
which performs worse than frequency filter. Our proposed minibatch aware(MBA) regularization performs best compared with all
the other methods, which prevents overfitting significantly.
Besides, well trained models with дoods_ids features show better
AUC performance than without them. This is duo to the richer
information that fine-grained features contained. Considering this,
although frequency filter performs slightly better than dropout,
it throws away most of low frequent ids and may lose room for
models to make better use of fine-grained features.
Result from model comparison on Alibaba
Table 5 shows the experimental results on Alibaba dataset with full
feature sets as shown in Table 1. As expected, LR is proven to be
much weaker than deep models. Making comparisons among deep
models, we report several conclusions. First, under the same activation function and regularization, DIN itself has achieved superior
performance compared with all the other deep networks including
BaseModel, Wide&Deep, PNN and DeepFM. DIN achieves 0.0059
absolute AUC gain and 6.08% RelaImpr over BaseModel. It validates
again the useful design of local activation unit structure. Second,
ablation study based on DIN demonstrates the effectiveness of
our proposed training techniques. Training DIN with mini-batch
aware regularizer brings additional 0.0031 absolute AUC gain over
dropout. Besides, DIN with Dice brings additional 0.0015 absolute
AUC gain over PReLU.
Taken together, DIN with MBA regularization and Dice achieves
total 11.65% RelaImpr and 0.0113 absolute AUC gain over Base-
Model. Even compared with competitor DeepFM which performs
best on this dataset, DIN still achieves 0.009 absolute AUC gain. It
is notable that in commercial advertising systems with hundreds
of millions of traffics, 0.001 absolute AUC gain is significant and
worthy of model deployment empirically. DIN shows great superiority to better understand and make use of the characteristics of
user behavior data. Besides, the two proposed techniques further
improve model performance and provide powerful help for training
large scale industrial deep networks.
Result from online A/B testing
Careful online A/B testing in the display advertising system in
Alibaba was conducted from 2017-05 to 2017-06. During almost a
month’s testing, DIN trained with the proposed regularizer and activation function contributes up to 10.0% CTR and 3.8% RPM(Revenue
Per Mille) promotion4 compared with the introduced BaseModel,
the last version of our online-serving model. This is a significant
improvement and demonstrates the effectiveness of our proposed
approaches. Now DIN has been deployed online and serves the
main traffic.
4In our real advertising system, ads are ranked by CTRα · bid-price with α > 1.0,
which controls the balance of promotion of CTR and RPM.
Table 5: Model Comparison on Alibaba Dataset with full
feature sets. All the lines calculate RelaImpr by comparing
with BaseModel. DIN significantly outperforms all the other
competitors. Besides, training DIN with our proposed minibatch aware regularizer and Dice activation function brings
further improvements.
BaseModela,b
Wide&Deepa,b
DIN Modela,b
DIN with MBA Reg.a
DIN with Dice b
DIN with MBA Reg. and Dice
a These lines are trained with PReLU as the activation function.
b These lines are trained with dropout regularization.
It is worth mentioning that online serving of industrial deep
networks is not an easy job with hundreds of millions of users visiting our system everyday. Even worse, at traffic peak our system
serves more than 1 million users per second. It is required to make
realtime CTR predictions with high throughput and low latency.
For example, in our real system we need to predict hundreds of
ads for each visitor in less than 10 milliseconds. In our practice,
several important techniques are deployed for accelerating online
serving of industrial deep networks under the CPU-GPU architecture: i) request batching which merges adjacent requests from
CPU to take advantage of GPU power, ii) GPU memory optimization
which improves the access pattern to reduce wasted transactions
in GPU memory, iii) concurrent kernel computation which allows
execution of matrix computations to be processed with multiple
CUDA kernels concurrently. In all, optimization of these techniques
doubles the QPS (Query Per Second) capacity of a single machine
practically. Online serving of DIN also benefits from this.
Visualization of DIN
Finally we conduct case study to reveal the inner structure of DIN
on Alibaba dataset. We first examine the effectiveness of local activation unit. Fig.5 illustrates the activation intensity of user behaviors
with respect to a candidate ad. As expected, behaviors with high
relevance to candidate ad are weighted high.
We then visualize the learned embedding vectors. Taking the
young mother mentioned before as example, we randomly select
9 categories (dress, sport shoes, bags, etc) and 100 goods of each
category as the candidate ads for her. Fig.6 shows the visualization
of embedding vectors of goods with t-SNE learned by DIN, in
which points with same shape correspond to the same category. We
can see that goods with same category almost belong to one cluster,
which shows the clustering property of DIN embeddings clearly.
Besides, we color the points that represent candidate ads by the
prediction value. Fig.6 is also a heat map of this mother’s interest
density distribution for potential candidates in embedding space. It
shows DIN can form a multimodal interest density distribution in
Figure 5: Illustration of adaptive activation in DIN. Behaviors with high relevance to candidate ad get high activation
Figure 6: Visualization of embeddings of goods in DIN.
Shape of points represents category of goods. Color of points
corresponds to CTR prediction value.
candidates’ embedding space for a certain user to capture his/her
diverse interests.
CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we focus on the task of CTR prediction modeling in
the scenario of display advertising in e-commerce industry with
rich user behavior data. The use of fixed-length representation
in traditional deep CTR models is a bottleneck for capturing the
diversity of user interests. To improve the expressive ability of
model, a novel approach named DIN is designed to activate related
user behaviors and obtain an adaptive representation vector for
user interests which varies over different ads. Besides two novel
techniques are introduced to help training industrial deep networks
and further improve the performance of DIN. They can be easily
generalized to other industrial deep learning tasks. DIN now has
been deployed in the online display advertising system in Alibaba.