Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers
1993,25 (2), /37-142
Heuristic filtering and reliable calibration
methods for video-based pupil-tracking systems
DAVE M. STAMPE
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Methods for enhancing the accuracy of fixation and saccade detection and the reliability of
calibration in video gaze-tracking systems are discussed. The unique aspects of the present approach include effective low-delay noise reduction prior to the detection of fixation changes,
monitoring of gaze position in real time by the operator, identification of saccades as small as
0 while eliminating false fixations, and a quick, high-precision, semiautomated calibration
procedure.
Eye-position recording has produced important results
in fields such as reading research, visual search, and problem solving. Almost all experiments utilizing eye-position
measures require reporting the location, length, and order
of fixations (significant periods of gaze in which the eye
is stationary). Other data, such as pupil size and blink
rates, are less often utilized, but should be available if
An important consideration in any recording system is
that data validity be preserved, with as few artifacts and
distortions introduced by the recording process as possible. In the case of eye-position recording equipment, noise
can mask small changes in gaze location, and equipment
setup problems can cause reported gaze location to be in
error by several degrees of visual angle. Therefore, these
systems must be designed with the best possible noise reduction and calibration procedures.
The techniques discussed in this paper were developed
for a gaze-position recording system implemented on an
IBM-compatible 386 computer, with the use of an ISCAN
RK-416PC pupil-tracking board and a video camera as
input. The system has one monitor for the subject and
another for the operator, the latter displaying the same
image as the subject's monitor plus a real-time gazeposition cursor. The cursor display requires a low-delay
filter to remove noise from the eye-position data in order
to reduce jitter. Also, the low delay of the cursor and filter
makes possible the implementation of gaze-contingent displays, in which the image on the subject's monitor changes
with gaze position. For example, the cursor may be
replaced by a mask to continuously block foveal vision.
The system itself will not be discussed further, except as
it relates to the development of the methods described.
I will first discuss data and noise characteristics of pupiltracking devices and present the methodsdeveloped for the
The author thanks Eyal Reingold, Elizabeth Bosman, and an anonymous
reviewer for their comments on a preliminary version of this paper. A
listing of the C code for the mapping function and coefficient calculation
is available from theauthor. Correspondence should be addressed to D. M.
Stampe, Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
Canada M5S 2Z9 (e-mail: ).
filtering of the position data and for the related issue of
fixation and saccade detection, comparing the new methods with the literature. Methods for mapping the eyetracker-position data into monitor-screen coordinates and
their effect on data validity are analyzed. The calibration
procedure will then be discussed, and improvements made
possibleby the real-timefeedbacksystem will be described.
TRACKER DATA CHARACTERISTICS
Data from video-based pupil tracking devices such as
the ISCAN RK-416PC are complicated by the low sample rate and resolution of the present generation of these
devices. The sampling rate is set by the video field rate
(60 Hz for the NTSC television standard, or 16.7 msec
between samples). At this rate, the shortest fixations,
83 msec in length, are covered by only five samples, and
short saccades will not be sampled at all, appearing instead as abrupt jumps in position.
Eye-position data from the tracker is quantized in units
as large as 1
0 of visual angle, depending on the exact
pupil-tracking method used and the video camera's field
of view. Systems that utilize both corneal reflection and
pupil tracking to cancel head movement effects have less than half the resolution of pupil tracking
alone. Since noise peaks in the tracker data can beas high
as 4 quantization units, the low resolution makes detection of small saccades difficult unless the noise can be removed by filtering.
One solution to the tracker resolution problem is to have
the stimulus cover a larger field of view, resulting in larger
eye movements and decreasing the relative amount of
noise. This should be done with caution, since subjects
may adopt different strategies for larger field-of-view presentations than would be the case in more natural viewing conditions. A physical limit ofthe field of view is occlusion of the pupil edges by the eyelids, which limits the
usable eye rotation to ±25° horizontally and ± 15
0 vertically. This range may be extended by increasing environmental lighting to reduce pupil size or by presenting stimuli in black on a white background, which will also reduce
Copyright 1993 Psychonomic Society, Inc.
retinal afterimages and may lead to more natural task performance. As a guideline, the current system has a usable field of view of 22
0 horizontally x 18
0 vertically,
and the tracker data is quantized in steps equivalent to
0 horizontally and 0.25
0 vertically (1.0 mm and
2.0 mm, respectively, at a monitor distance of 450 mm).
Eye-tracking systems with analog outputs such as EOG
(electrooculography) or scleral/limbus reflection devices
permit high sampling rates and resolution, although their
noise levels are fairly high. For these systems, linear filters
are often used to remove noise . Because of the low sampling rate of pupil-tracking
systems, linear filters would smooth position data excessively, making saccade detection difficult or impossible.
Instead of linear filtering, template-matching logical
filters may be utilized. These filters compare each data
sample with neighboring samples and modify or pass the
sample accordingly. They function well at low sample
rates and add little or no delay to the data processing.
Their template-matching characteristics make them ideal
for removing impulse noise and detecting saccades or fixations in the data.
Most of the reported methods of analysis for video gazetracking systems rely on the relatively low noise level and
attempt to detect fixation changes directly without first
removing noise. The delta method, introduced by Mason
 , computes a running average of all samples in the
fixation as the fixation position estimate. When a new sample's distance from the estimated fixation position exceeds
the delta value threshold, a new fixation is begun. Unfortunately, this filter requires fairly large delta threshold values (typically 1
0 or greater) and may produce false
fixations caused by noise pulses. It also produces false
fixations during long saccades that must be eliminated
later. Kliegl and Olson have developed methods
to clean up this filter's output by eliminating or combining short fixations, usually during postprocessing of experimental data; however this would add too much delay
to the real-time display system.
rules can be expressed in forms that are implemented in
a few lines of code, using comparisons and copies.
Ideally, the data from the eye tracker would consist of
periods of little or no motion (fixations) and regions of
rapid motion or jumps in position (saccades). See Figure I (and Figure 4 for temporal detail) for an example
of real horizontal eye-position data recorded during a reading trial, including a long return sweep and smaller wordfixation saccades. Notice the nontrivial noise level that
could mask small saccades.
The overall goal is to eliminate the noise content of the
tracker output, defined as its difference from a saccade
(a monotonically increasing or decreasing feature) and fixation (plateau) model. The noise content is defined as consisting of nonmonotonic features (e.g., an increase followed by a decrease in value) that are too short to be
fixations,
which are defined as being three samples
(50 msec) or greater in duration. The noise also includes
ringing or overshoot artifacts following saccades, which
can confuse the saccade detector into extending the saccade into the next fixation.
Almost all noise produced by the video tracker is in
the form of one-sample spikes, with two-sample pulses
occurring less than once a second. A simple means to recognize one-sample noise spikes is to look for an increase
in value followed by an immediate decrease in value (or
vice versa) by checking each sample against the next and
previous samples. The detected noise pulse is replaced
by the neighboring sample closest in value to it rather than
by the mean of the neighboring samples, since this produces the flattest fixation output (see Figure 2). To make
the "next" sample available, the filter introduces a onesample delay. Output from this stage is largely noise-free
and is used for the gaze-position cursor display because
of its low delay.
The second filter stage eliminates any two-sample noise
events. The first filter stage will convert all two-sample
noise events into flat-topped sample pairs, making detection simple. The filter looks for sample pairs with the same
value that do not equal either of their neighbors, and
260 -r------------------,
Figure 1. Horizontal eye-position data collected during a reading
task, before and after heuristic filtering.
Heuristic Filter Design
Rather than detecting fixations directly, a logical filter
was developed to remove the noise from the position data
before detection of saccades and fixations. This provides
clean data for the real-time gaze-position cursor display
and prevents false fixation output. Also, the cleaned eyeposition data are available for verification of correct operation or for studies in which saccade characteristics are
The design of the heuristic filter relies on "rules of
thumb" deduced by examining the noise characteristics
in the raw data and by studying human analysis methods.
These heuristics are similar to those found in expert systems and are stated by a list of goals to be achieved. The
--Filtered
-- Unfiltered
TIme (100 mS or 6 samples per llck)
HEURISTIC FILTERING AND CALIBRATION
Figure 2. Flowcharts of the heuristic mters and saccade detector.
Tsace and Tru are the detector thresholds; x is the current input, xl,
x2, and x3 are progressively delayed samples.
Stage 1 output
Filtered output
(1 sample delay)
(3 sample delay)
e) Ambiguous~
Filter input
c) Saccade
d) Saccade
a) Impulse
and increase the threshold, we compute the difference of
data separated by 2 samples. All nonmonotonic features
smaller than 3 samples in size were removed by the heuristic filters, thus the samples between the tested points can
be ignored.
To prevent stretching of saccades and erosion of fixations, the detector also requires that the previous sample
and the current sample differ by less than the fixation
threshold T«x- This forces the saccade detector to tum off
as soon as the fixation begins (see Figure 2c for flowchart).
The fixation threshold causes quick saccades (less than three
samples in duration) to be judged by distance rather than
by velocity, which sets the absolute minimum detectable
saccade length and rejects smaller steps as noise.
The saccade detector sees filtered eye-tracker-position
data before it has been mapped into screen coordinates.
Thus, the thresholds are specified in eye-tracker data units
Figure 3. Heuristic filter processing of common noise types ill video
tracker data. Ticks or steps indicate divisions between data samples. Examples (a) and (b) are noise reduction within a fIXation, (c)
and (d) are saccades, and (e)is ambiguous data interpreted as a small
c) saccade detector
b) Filter 2
e) Filter 1
replaces both samples by the neighbor closer in value to
them. The delay of the second filter is two samples, for
a total filter delay of three samples (see Figure 2b). Since
this filter's output is used for saccade detection only, the
delay is relatively unimportant. The horizontal and vertical position data and the pupil-size data from the eye
tracker are filtered separately.
The results of the filter stages on common noise events
are shown in Figure 3. In all cases, the noise features are
removed completely, revealing the underlying saccade/
fixation structure. Performance of the filter on real data
from a reading task can be seen in Figure I, with a
sample-by-sample detail from this data shown in Figure 4.
Note the preservation of the saccade structure and slow
glides (possibly from head movements).
~--1-_+_--+--I___+-_+_-+---__+---+-J
Time (100 mS or 6 samples per tick)
.t:::- 230
255r;::======:;---------i
Figure 4. Detail of heuristic filtering on data (vertical scale expanded) from the top left of Figure 1. Each line segment is a separate data sample. Note the preservation of saccade structure and
the slow drift at right caused by head movement.
Fixations are defined as being separated by saccades,
which may be detected by their rapidly changing location. Where sampling rates are high, a linear highpass
filter may be used to detect saccades . With the low sampling rates of video-based
trackers, template-matching filters must be used instead.
Saccades are discriminated by their velocity: A criterion of 30° /sec or higher is common, since this is the limit
of pursuit eye movement speed. A simple test for a saccade is to compute the difference between adjacent samples and compare this with the saccade threshold Tsacc .
The threshold equivalent to 30 0/sec is 0.5° per sample
at 60 samples/sec, which may be below the limit of resolution for some tracking systems. To improve sensitivity
SACCADE DETECTION AND
FIXATION PROCESSING
Time (100 mS or 6 samples per tick)
Figure 6. Data flow for the eye-position recording system with
heuristic filters and real-time gaze-position display.
Figure 5. Saccade detector output (gray bars) for filtered data from
reading task.
Mapping Function and Coefficient Solution
Choice of a mapping function sets the number of
calibration points that must be presented. Calibration
schemes reported in the literature use anywhere from 3
points (for a nonlinear one-dimensional calibration) to 25
points (for an extreme example of piecewise linear calibration). The average gaze position mapping error is a Ushaped function of the number of points gathered for
calibration . A low number of points forces the use of a simplistic mapping function that may be unable to correct all distortions. As more
target positions are gathered, the spatial noise caused by
inexact fixation of targets by the subject increases.
McConkie has suggested that each calibration target be presented several times and that the mean position
be used, but this can result in subject habituation, and the
longer calibration time increases the likelihood of head
Mapping functions for two-dimensional data reported in
the literature are of two types, piecewise and nonlinear.
The piecewise method divides the screen into a grid of cells,
and a target point is presented at each grid junction. The
data gathered from the tracker then defines a grid of quadrilaterals, each of which is separately mapped back onto
its original rectangular grid cell . The shortcoming of this method is that
MAPPING GAZE POSITION TO MONITOR
SCREEN COORDINATES
All filtering and fixation integration is performed in eyetracker-position coordinates. To be useful, the eyetracker-position data must be converted to locations on
the subject's monitor screen. By expressing gaze locations
as display pixel coordinates, a standard format for drawing images and analyzing the subject's fixation positions
is created. In the present system, the standard pixel coordinate system is the 640 x 480 pixel VGA display mode.
Conversion from eye-tracker data to screen coordinates
is performed by a mapping function, the selection ofwhich
determines how distortions between screen and tracker
data are corrected. The coefficients of the mapping function are derived by the process of calibration, in which
a set of targets in known positions are displayed to the
subject, and the eye-tracker-position data is recorded.
Given several of these position correspondences, the mapping function's coefficients can be computed.
and may not correspond to a constant visual angle over
the entire screen. This results in the best noise rejection
by the detector, assuming the tracker noise level does not
vary with the eye position. Tn« is determined by the residual tracker noise level after filtering and cannot be arbitrarily reduced if an eye-tracker setup with lower resolution is used, whereas Tsacc scales approximately with
tracker resolution, to a minimum of 2 units. For the horizontal saccade detector of the implemented system, Tsacc
is 5 (tracker data units) and Ts« is 1, which allows detection of saccades of 0.5
0 or greater.
Tests on real data show that the saccade detector works
better than the single-sample difference detector both in
reading tasks with small, fast saccades, and on visual
search tasks that may have slower saccades. Figure 5
shows its action on filtered data from Figure 1, with the
saccade detector response indicated by gray bars. The bars
have been shifted to compensate for the one-sample delay introduced by the detector. The detector always marks
the last sample of a fixation as part of the following saccade, which is easily compensated for in the fixation integration processing. A separate saccade detector is used
for horizontal and vertical data.
All data between saccades are part of one fixation, including the first sample marked as part of the saccade.
The position for the fixation is computed by averaging
all of its samples' horizontal and vertical positions. Pupil
diameter is integrated in the same fashion. After mapping
of the averaged position data to pixel coordinates on the
subject's monitor (as described later), these data are written to the output file. Blinks are detected by sudden drops
in pupil size and are also recorded. The flow of data
through the eye-position recorder is shown in Figure 6.
A postprocessing program processes the output file to reject short fixations and blinks. The postprocessor provides
the flexibility required to implement a variety of analysis
methods (e.g., fixation cluster analysis or lumping of fixations separated by blinks).
HEURISTIC FILTERING AND CALIBRATION
Eye tracker output
feedback to operator
Figure 7. Calibration screen showing target positions, presentation order, and eye-tracker-output feedback.
abrupt changes in scaling and distortion can occur at the
boundaries between grid cells. Adding more cells to the
grid reduces these changes but requires a large increase
in the number of data points to be collected.
Nonlinear mapping functions are capable of smooth
changes in mapping across the screen. The most common
nonlinear mapping function is the biquadratic, introduced
by Sheena and Borah . This function requires nine
calibration points to compute all coefficients (close to the
optimum for minimal mapping error) and can be evaluated in real time (60 times/sec) for display of the gazeposition cursor. The form chosen for the mapping function is the following:
x, = a + bx + cy + dx" + ey
y, = f + gx + hy + ix? + j y 2
X = x, + m[q]x,y,
y = y, + n[q]x,y"
in which x, y are the tracker data coordinates, X, Yare
the monitor screen coordinates, a, b, c, d, e, [, g, h, i,
j are coefficients determined by solving a 5 X 5 matrix for
each equation, m[q], n[q] are correction coefficients for
each of the four data quadrants, and q is the quadrant into
which data mapped by the first two equations fall.
The nonlinear terms allow curved distortions to be corrected and can change scaling smoothly across the screen
(unlike piecewise mapping functions). However, the nonlinear characteristics of the function can produce problems as well. The squared terms in the equation become
very large as the gaze position approaches the edges of
the screen, and small errors in calibration-point fixation
or head movements can result in large errors in screen
gaze position there. For this reason, it is suggested that
the area of the screen outside the calibration "box" in
Figure 7 not be used. Figure 7 also shows the positions
of the nine calibration targets and a set of typical eyetracker-position correspondences as displayed during calibration on the operator's monitor.
Given the nine eye-tracker/screen-position correspondences, the coefficients of the mapping equation can be
computed. Five simultaneous equations for each of the
biquadratic equations are solved, using the position of
Points 1-5. The solution is reduced to a 4 x4 matrix by
translating Point I to the coordinate (0,0) in both screen
and tracker coordinate systems, which also provides
coefficients a and e. The matrix is then solved with
Cramer's rule. A full matrix solution is used instead of
an incremental procedure , because the full solution improves the calibration when the
mapping function must perform rotation. The solution
takes less than 500 usee on a 486/25 PC (with internal
math coprocessor) and less than 50 msec on a 386/33 PC
(without coprocessor). The quadrant correction coefficients are determined by using Points 6, 7, 8, and 9 after
these points are translated by the biquadratic equations.
The C code for the mapping function and the coefficient
calculation is available from the author.
Calibration Procedure
To perform the system calibration, the first nine calibration points are displayedin the order indicatedin Figure 7.
The eye-tracker-positiondata are displayed in real time by
a cursor on the operator's monitor, along with markers
showing the eye-tracker positions for previous points in
the calibration sequence. This presentation helps the operator decide if the subject is properly fixating the target.
Once the subject's eye position is correct and stable, the
operator presses the spacebar to record the calibration
point, and the next target is presented. Because the operator monitors the eye-tracker data and controls the presentation of the targets, subjects quickly learn to fixate the
points properly and not to make spurious eye movements.
During the calibration-point collection, both a lowpass
(smoothing) filter with a time constant of 1 sec and the
heuristic filtering are applied to the tracker data to remove
any microsaccades and noise. Because blinks or saccades
may occur while the operator is pressing the spacebar,
resulting in collection of bad data, a motion detector monitors the eye-tracker output and disables the collection of
calibration data for 300 msec after such an event is detected. If the subject blinks, the operator sees that the
calibration did not proceed to the next point and repeats
the keypress a second or so later. Operators quickly learn
the best "rhythm" for each subject, allowing quick
calibration of otherwise unusable subjects, some of whom
can display blink rates as high as twice a second.
The data are now processed to compute the mapping
function coefficients. Finally, the center point is presented
again, and its new position is used to correct for any drift
in head- or eye-resting position. The new center-point position is subtracted from the original position of the center
point, and the resulting correction applied to the eyetracker-position data before mapping to screen coordinates. Assuming that head movements cause the same
Calibration targets
with order of
presentation to subject
Present stimuli within
this area to reduce
calibration edge effects
change in tracker-position data for all points on the screen,
this cancels the effects of head motion without the need
for recalibration. This process of recentering is quick and
effective.
Immediately after system calibration, a test screen is
presented to the subject. This is a 5 x 5 grid of letters,
each about 1.2
0 in size. The subject is asked to fixate the
center letter, then each ofthe corner letters by name. Because the gaze position is displayed in real time, the
calibration error can be estimated and the calibration
repeated immediately if required. The gaze-position cursor size is the equivalent of 1
0 of visual angle and is used
as a reference measure of the position error. An error in
gaze position mapping of 0.5
0 on the center letter and
lOon the corner letters is considered acceptable, although
most calibrations show less error. Typically, less than I
calibration in 10 needs to be repeated with untrained subjects, and even less often with experienced subjects.
The recentering target is usually presented before each
trial screen, and the corresponding eye-tracker position
is used to correct for head movement. The target may take
the place of, or be combined with, the fixation point that
is usually presented before each trial screen. The target
need not be at the center of the screen: A reference point
at the desired location may be collected during calibration and used to compute the change in position of a recentering target presented before later trials. With the use
of recentering, calibration need only be performed at the
start of every block of trials, or at the start of every recording session. As head movement is a fact of life in
most gaze-position recording systems, this unobtrusive
correction technique is essential.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
Video-based eye-tracking systems pose special problems of noise reduction, and of saccade and fixation analysis, due to their relatively low spatial resolution and sampling rates. By using a heuristically derived cascade of
two template-matching filters, noise can be removed before saccades are detected, resulting in a significant reduction in false fixations compared with direct fixation
detection methods. The filtered data can also be used
directly for real-time display of gaze position and for implementation of gaze-contingent displays.
The on-line calibration procedure takes advantage of
real-time feedback of gaze position to improve the quality of the data collected and easily handles subjects with
high blink rates or unstable fixation patterns who otherwise could not be tested. Relying on the operator's implicit feedback through control of the calibration process,
one or two training calibrations for new subjects are sufficient to achieve good calibration results. The use of recentering screens lets fullcalibration be performed less often,
reducing subject fatigue and speeding data collection. The
semiautomated calibration procedure helps train subjects
and is not affected by anticipatory saccades or blinks. Even
if automated calibration is available, manual collection
should remain a calibration option for handling difficult
subjects who cannot otherwise be tested.