Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 5004–5009
Brussels, Belgium, October 31 - November 4, 2018. c⃝2018 Association for Computational Linguistics
Data Augmentation via Dependency Tree Morphing for Low-Resource
G¨ozde G¨ul S¸ahin
UKP Lab, Department of Computer Science
Technische Universit¨at Darmstadt
Darmstadt, Germany
 
Mark Steedman
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, Scotland
 
Neural NLP systems achieve high scores in
the presence of sizable training dataset. Lack
of such datasets leads to poor system performances in the case low-resource languages.
We present two simple text augmentation
techniques using dependency trees, inspired
from image processing. We “crop” sentences
by removing dependency links, and we “rotate” sentences by moving the tree fragments
around the root. We apply these techniques to
augment the training sets of low-resource languages in Universal Dependencies project. We
implement a character-level sequence tagging
model and evaluate the augmented datasets on
part-of-speech tagging task.
We show that
crop and rotate provides improvements over
the models trained with non-augmented data
for majority of the languages, especially for
languages with rich case marking systems.
Introduction
Most recently, various deep learning methods have
been proposed for many natural language understanding tasks including sentiment analysis, question answering, dependency parsing and semantic
role labeling. Although these methods have reported state-of-the-art results for languages with
rich resources, no signiﬁcant improvement has
been announced for low-resource languages. In
other words, feature-engineered statistical models still perform better than these neural models
for low-resource languages.1 Generally accepted
reason for low scores is the size of the training
data, i.e., training labels being too sparse to extract
meaningful statistics.
Label-preserving data augmentation techniques
are known to help methods generalize better by
1For example, in the case of dependency parsing, recent
best results from CoNLL-18 parsing shared task can be compared to the results of traditional language-speciﬁc models.
increasing the variance of the training data.
has been a common practice among researchers
in computer vision ﬁeld to apply data augmentation, e.g., ﬂip, crop, scale and rotate images,
for tasks like image classiﬁcation . Similarly, speech
recognition systems made use of augmentation
techniques like changing the tone and speed of the
audio , noise
addition and synthetic audio generation . Comparable techniques for data augmentation are less obvious for NLP tasks, due to structural differences
among languages. There are only a small number of studies that tackle data augmentation techniques for NLP, such as Zhang et al. for text
classiﬁcation and Fadaee et al. for machine
translation.
In this work, we focus on languages with small
training datasets, that are made available by the
Universal Dependency (UD) project. These languages are dominantly from Uralic, Turkic, Slavic
and Baltic language families, which are known to
have extensive morphological case-marking systems and relatively free word order. With these
languages in mind, we propose an easily adaptable, multilingual text augmentation technique
based on dependency trees, inspired from two
common augmentation methods from image processing: cropping and rotating. As images are
cropped to focus on a particular item, we crop the
sentences to form other smaller, meaningful and
focused sentences. As images are rotated around
a center, we rotate the portable tree fragments
around the root of the dependency tree to form a
synthetic sentence. We augment the training sets
of these low-resource languages via crop and rotate operations. In order to measure the impact of
augmentation, we implement a uniﬁed characterlevel sequence tagging model. We systematically
train separate parts-of-speech tagging models with
the original and augmented training sets, and evaluate on the original test set. We show that crop
and rotate provide improvements over the nonaugmented data for majority of the languages, especially for languages with rich case marking system.
We borrow two fundamental label-preserving augmentation ideas from image processing: cropping
and rotation. Image cropping can be deﬁned as
removal of some of the peripheral areas of an image to focus on the subject/object (e.g., focusing
on the ﬂower in a large green ﬁeld). Following this
basic idea, we aim to identify the parts of the sentence that we want to focus and remove the other
chunks, i.e., form simpler/smaller meaningful sentences 2. In order to do so, we take advantage of
dependency trees which provide us with links to
focuses, such as subjects and objects. The idea is
demonstrated in Fig. 1b on the Turkish sentence
given in Fig. 1a. Here, given a predicate (wrote)
that governs a subject (her father), an indirect object (to her) and a direct object (a letter); we form
three smaller sentences with a focus on the subject (ﬁrst row in Fig. 1b: her father wrote) and
the objects (second and third row) by removing
all dependency links other than the focus (with its
subtree). Obviously, cropping may cause semantic shifts on a sentence-level. However it preserves
local syntactic tags and even shallow semantic labels.
Images are rotated around a chosen center with
a certain degree to enhance the training data. Similarly, we choose the root as the center of the sentence and rotate the ﬂexible tree fragments around
the root for augmentation. Flexible fragments are
usually deﬁned by the morphological typology of
the language . For instance,
languages close to analytical typology such as English, rarely have inﬂectional morphemes. They
do not mark the objects/subjects, therefore words
have to follow a strict order. For such languages,
sentence rotation would mostly introduce noise.
On the other hand, large number of languages
such as Latin, Greek, Persian, Romanian, Assyrian, Turkish, Finnish and Basque have no strict
word order (though there is a preferred order) due
2Focus should not be confused with the grammatical category FOC.
her father
(a) Dependency analysis
Babası yazdı (Her father he-wrote)
Ona yazdı (He-wrote to her)
Bir mektup yazdı (He-wrote a letter)
(b) Sentence Cropping
Babası yazdı bir mektup ona (SVOIO)
Yazdı babası ona bir mektup (VSIOO)
Bir mektup yazdı babası ona (OVSIO)
Ona bir mektup yazdı babası (IOOVS)
(c) Sentence Rotating
Figure 1: Demonstration of augmentation ideas
on the Turkish sentence “Babası ona bir mektup
yazdı” (Her father wrote her a letter). S: Subject,
V: Verb, O:Object, IO: Indirect Object. Arrows
are drawn from dependent to head. Both methods
are applied to the Labels of Interest (LOI).
to their extensive marking system. Hence, ﬂexible
parts are deﬁned as marked fragments which are
again, subjects and objects. Rotation is illustrated
in Fig. 1c on the same sentence.
In order to investigate the impact of the augmentation, we design a simple sequence tagging
model that operates on the character level. Many
low-resource languages we deal with in the Experiments section are morphologically rich. Therefore, we use a character-level model to address the
rare word problem and to learn morphological regularities among words.
For each sentence s, we produce a label sequence ⃗l, where lt refers to POS tag for the t-th
token. Given g as gold labels and θ as model parameters we ﬁnd the values that minimize the negative log likelihood of the sequence:
ˆθ = arg min
log(p(gt|θ, s))
To calculate p(lt|θ, s), we ﬁrst calculate a word
embedding, ⃗w, for each word. We consider words
as a sequence of characters c0, c1, .., cn and use a
bi-LSTM unit to compose the character sequence
into ⃗w, as in Ling et al. :
hwb = bi-LSTM(c0, c1, .., cn)
⃗w = Wf · ⃗
hwf + Wb · ⃗
Later, these embeddings are passed onto another
bi-LSTM unit:
⃗hf, ⃗hb = bi-LSTM( ⃗wt)
Hidden states from both directions are concatenated and mapped by a linear layer to the label
space. Then label probabilities are calculated by a
softmax function:
p(⃗lt|s, p) = softmax(Wl · [ ⃗hf; ⃗hb] + ⃗bl)
Finally the label with the highest probability is assigned to the input.
Experiments and Results
We use the data provided by Universal Dependencies v2.1 project. Since our
focus is on languages with low resources, we only
consider the ones that have less than 120K tokens.
The languages without standard splits and sizes
less than 5K tokens, are ignored. We use the universal POS tags deﬁned by UD v2.1.
To keep our approach as language agnostic and
simple as possible, we use the following universal dependency labels and their subtypes to extract
the focus and the ﬂexible fragment: NSUBJ (nominal subject), IOBJ (indirect object), OBJ (indirect
object) and OBL (oblique nominal). These dependency labels are referred to as Label of Interest
(LOI). The root/predicate may be a phrase rather
than a single token. We use the following relations
to identify such cases: FIXED, FLAT, COP (copula)
and COMPOUND. Other labels such as ADVMOD
can also be considered ﬂexible, however are ignored for the sake of simplicity. We enumerate all
ﬂexible chunks and calculate all reordering permutations. Keeping the LOI limited is necessary
to reduce the number of permutations. We apply
reordering only to the ﬁrst level in the tree. Our
method overgeneralizes, to include sequences that
are not grammatical in the language in question.
We regard the ungrammatical sentences as noise.
Number of possible cropping operations are
limited to the number of items that are linked via
an LOI to the root. If we call it n, then the number of possible rotations would be (n+1)! since n
pieces and the root are ﬂexible and can be placed
anywhere in the sentence. To limit the number
of rotations, we calculate all possible permutations for reordering the sentence and then randomly pick n of them. Each operation is applied
with a certain probability p to each sentence, (e.g.,
if p = 1, n number of crops; if p = 0.5 an average
of n/2 crops will be done).
We use the model in Sec. 2 to systematically
train part-of-speech taggers on original and augmented training data sets. To be able measure the
impact of the augmentation, all models are trained
with the same hyperparameters.
All tokens are
lowercased and surrounded with special start-end
Weight parameters are uniformly initialized between −0.1 and +0.1.
We used one
layer bi-LSTMs both for character composition
and POS tagging with hidden size of 200. Character embedding size is chosen as 200. We used
dropout, gradient clipping and early stopping to
prevent overﬁtting for all experiments. Stochastic
gradient descent with an initial learning rate as 1 is
used as the optimizer. Learning rate is reduced by
half if scores on development set do not improve.
Average of multiple runs for 20 languages are
given in Fig. 1.
Here, Org column refers to
our baseline with non-augmented, original training set, where Imp% is the improvement over the
baseline by the best crop/ﬂip model for that language. It is evident that, with some minor exceptions, all languages have beneﬁted from a type of
augmentation. We see that the biggest improvements are achieved on Irish and Lithuanian, the
ones with the lowest baseline scores and the smallest training sets 3. Our result on both languages
show that both operations reduced the generalization error surprisingly well in the lack of training
Tagging results depend on many factors such
as the training data size, the source of the treebank (e.g., news may have less objects and subjects compared to a story), and the language typology (e.g., number/type of case markers it uses). In
Fig. 2, the relation between the data size and the
improvement by the augmentation is shown. Pearson correlation coefﬁcient for two variables is calculated as −0.35.
Indo-European (IE)
: Baltic and Slavic languages are known to have around 7 distinct case
markers, which relaxes the word order.
As expectedly, both augmentation techniques improve
the scores for Baltic (Latvian, Lithuanian) and
Slavic (Belarusian, Slovak, Serbian, Ukranian)
3Although the total size of the Irish dataset is larger than
many, the splits are unbalanced. The training set contains 121
trees while the test has 454 trees.
Lithuanian
IE, Baltic
Belarusian
IE, Slavic
IE, Celtic
North Sami
Uralic, Sami
Uralic, Ugric
Vietnamese
Austro-Asiatic
IE, Germanic
Old Slavic
IE, Slavic
IE, Germanic
IE, Baltic
IE, Germanic
IE, Slavic
IE, Slavic
IE, Slavic
Table 1: POS tagging accuracies on UDv2.1 test sets. Best scores are shown with bold. Org: Original.
p: operation probability. Imp%: Improvement over original (Org) by the best model trained with the
augmented data.
languages, except for Old Church Slavic (OCS).
OCS is solely compiled from bible text which is
known to contain longer and passive sentences.
We observe that rotation performs slightly better
than cropping for Slavic languages. In the presence of a rich marking system, rotation can be
considered a better augmenter, since it greatly increases the variance of the training data by shuf-
ﬂing. For Germanic (Gothic, Afrikaans, Danish)
languages, we do not observe a repeating gain, due
to lack of necessary markers.
Uralic and Turkic
: Both language types have
an extensive marking system. Hence, similar to
Slavic languages, both techniques improve the
: Case system of modern Tamil de-
ﬁnes 8 distinct markers, which explains the improved accuracies of the augmented models. We
would expect a similar result for Telugu. However
Telugu treebank is entirely composed of sentences
from a grammar book which may not be expressive and diverse.
Related Work
Similar to sentence cropping, Vickrey and Koller
 deﬁne transformation rules to simplify sentences (e.g., I was not given a chance to eat - I
ate) and shows that enrichening training set with
simpliﬁed sentences improves the results of semantic role labeling. One of the ﬁrst studies in
text augmentation , replaces a
randomly chosen word with its randomly chosen
synonym extracted from a thesaurus. They report
improved test scores when a large neural model
is trained with the augmented set. Jia and Liang
 induce grammar from semantic parsing
training data and generate new data points by sampling to feed a sequence to sequence RNN model.
Fadaee et al. chooses low-frequency words
instead of a random word, and generate synthetic
sentence pairs that contain those rare words.
Discussion
Unlike majority of previous NLP augmentation
techniques, the proposed methods are meaningpreserving, i.e., they preserve the fundamental
meaning of the sentence for most of the tested languages. Therefore can be used for variety of problems such as semantic role labeling, sentiment
analysis, text classiﬁcation. Instead of those problems, we evaluate the idea on the simplest possible
task (POS) for the following reasons:
• It gets harder to measure the impact of the
idea as the system/task gets complicated due
to large number of parameters.
Figure 2: Treebank size versus gain by augmentation
• POS tagging performance is a good indicator
of performances of other structured prediction tasks, since POS tags are crucial features
for higher-level NLP tasks.
Our research interest was to observe which augmentation technique would improve which language, rather than ﬁnding one good model. Therefore we have not used development sets to choose
one good augmentation model.
Conclusion and Future Work
Neural models have become a standard approach
for many NLP problems due to their ability to
extract high-level features and generalization capability.
Although they have achieved state-ofthe-art results in NLP benchmarks with languages
with large amount of training data, low-resource
languages have not yet beneﬁted from neural models. In this work, we presented two simple text
augmentation techniques using dependency trees
inspired by image cropping and rotating. We evaluated their impact on parts-of-speech tagging in
a number of low-resource languages from various
language families. Our results show that:
• Language families with rich case marking
systems (e.g., Baltic, Slavic, Uralic) bene-
ﬁt both from cropping and rotation. However, for such languages, rotation increases
the variance of the data relatively more, leading to slightly better accuracies.
• Both techniques provide substantial improvements over the baseline (non-augmented
data) when only a tiny training dataset is
available.
This work aimed to measure the impact of the
basic techniques, rather than creating the best
text augmentation method. Following these encouraging results, method can be improved by
(1) considering the preferred chunk order of the
language during rotation, (2) taking languagespeciﬁc ﬂexibilities into account (e.g., Spanish
typically allows free subject inversion (unlike object)). Furthermore, we plan to extend this work
by evaluating the augmentation on other NLP
benchmarks such as language modeling, dependency parsing and semantic role labeling.
code is available at 
gozdesahin/crop-rotate-augment.
Acknowledgements
G¨ozde G¨ul S¸ahin was a PhD student at Istanbul
Technical University and a visiting research student at University of Edinburgh during this study.
She was funded by T¨ubitak (The Scientiﬁc and
Technological Research Council of Turkey) 2214-
A scholarship during her visit to University of Edinburgh. This work was supported by ERC H2020
Advanced Fellowship GA 742137 SEMANTAX
and a Google Faculty award to Mark Steedman.
We would like to thank Adam Lopez for fruitful
discussions, guidance and support during the ﬁrst
author’s visit. We thank to the anonymous reviewers for useful comments and to Ilia Kuznetsov for
his valuable feedback.