Target-driven Visual Navigation in Indoor Scenes
using Deep Reinforcement Learning∗
Roozbeh Mottaghi2
Eric Kolve2
Joseph J. Lim1
Abhinav Gupta2,3
Li Fei-Fei1
Ali Farhadi2,4
1Stanford University, 2Allen Institute for AI, 3Carnegie Mellon University, 4University of Washington
Abstract— Two less addressed issues of deep reinforcement
learning are (1) lack of generalization capability to new target
goals, and (2) data inefﬁciency i.e., the model requires several
(and often costly) episodes of trial and error to converge, which
makes it impractical to be applied to real-world scenarios. In
this paper, we address these two issues and apply our model
to the task of target-driven visual navigation. To address the
ﬁrst issue, we propose an actor-critic model whose policy is a
function of the goal as well as the current state, which allows to
better generalize. To address the second issue, we propose AI2-
THOR framework, which provides an environment with highquality 3D scenes and physics engine. Our framework enables
agents to take actions and interact with objects. Hence, we can
collect a huge number of training samples efﬁciently.
We show that our proposed method (1) converges faster than
the state-of-the-art deep reinforcement learning methods, (2)
generalizes across targets and across scenes, (3) generalizes to a
real robot scenario with a small amount of ﬁne-tuning (although
the model is trained in simulation), (4) is end-to-end trainable
and does not need feature engineering, feature matching between frames or 3D reconstruction of the environment.
The supplementary video can be accessed at the following
link: 
I. INTRODUCTION
Many tasks in robotics involve interactions with physical
environments and objects. One of the fundamental components of such interactions is understanding the correlation
and causality between actions of an agent and the changes
of the environment as a result of the action. Since the 1970s,
there have been various attempts to build a system that
can understand such relationships. Recently, with the rise
of deep learning models, learning-based approaches have
gained wide popularity , .
In this paper, we focus on the problem of navigating a
space to ﬁnd a given target goal using only visual input.
Successful navigation requires learning relationships between
actions and the environment. This makes the task well suited
to a Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) approach. However, general DRL approaches (e.g., , ) are designed to
learn a policy that depends only on the current state, and the
target goal is implicitly embedded in the model parameters.
Hence, it is necessary to learn new model parameters for a
new target. This is problematic since training DRL agents is
computationally expensive.
* This work is part of the Plato project of the Allen Institute for Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (AI2) and it was done while the ﬁrst author was an intern at
observation
new observation
action: turn left
observation
target-driven visual navigation
The goal of our deep reinforcement learning model is to navigate
towards a visual target with a minimum number of steps. Our model takes
the current observation and the image of the target as input and generates
an action in the 3D environment as the output. Our model learns to navigate
to different targets in a scene without re-training.
In order to achieve higher adaptability and ﬂexibility,
we introduce a target-driven model. Our model takes the
visual task objective as an input, hence we can avoid retraining for every new target goal. Our model learns a policy
that jointly embeds the target goal and the current state.
Essentially, an agent learns to take its next action conditioned
on both its current state and target, rather than its current
state only. Hence, there is no need to re-train the model
for new targets. A key intuition that we rely on is that
different training episodes share information. For example,
agents explore common routes during the training stage while
being trained for ﬁnding different targets. Various scenes also
share generalizable aspects (e.g., a fridge is usually near a
microwave). In short, we exploit the fact that learning for
new targets will be easier with the models that have been
trained for other targets.
Unfortunately, training and quantitatively evaluating DRL
algorithms in real environments is often tedious. One reason
is that running systems in a physical space is time consuming. Furthermore, acquiring large-scale action and interaction
data of real environments is not trivial via the common image
dataset collection techniques. To this end, we developed
one of the ﬁrst simulation frameworks with high-quality 3D
scenes, called The House Of inteRactions (AI2-THOR). Our
simulation framework enables us to collect a large number
of visual observations for action and reaction in different
environments. For example, an agent can freely navigate (i.e.
move and rotate) in various realistic indoor scenes, and is
able to have low- and high-level interactions with the objects
 
(e.g., applying a force or opening/closing a microwave).
We evaluate our method for the following tasks: (1) Target
generalization, where the goal is to navigate to targets that
have not been used during training within a scene. (2) Scene
generalization, where the goal is to navigate to targets in
scenes not used for training. (3) Real-world generalization,
where we demonstrate navigation to targets using a real
robot. Our experiments show that we outperform the state-ofthe-art DRL methods in terms of data efﬁciency for training.
We also demonstrate the generalization aspect of our model.
In summary, in this paper, we introduce a novel reinforcement learning model that generalizes across targets
and scenes. To learn and evaluate reinforcement learning
models, we create a simulation framework with high-quality
rendering that enables visual interactions for agents. We
also demonstrate real robot navigation using our model
generalized to the real world with a small amount of ﬁnetuning.
II. RELATED WORK
There is a large body of work on visual navigation. We
provide a brief overview of some of the relevant work.
The map-based navigation methods require a global map of
the environment to make decisions for navigation (e.g., ,
 , , ). One of the main advantages of our method
over these approaches is that it does not need a prior map
of the environment. Another class of navigation methods
reconstruct a map on the ﬂy and use it for navigation , ,
 , , or go through a training phase guided by humans
to build the map , . In contrast, our method does not
require a map of the environment, as it does not have any
assumption on the landmarks of the environment, nor does it
require a human-guided training phase. Map-less navigation
methods are common as well , , , . These
methods mainly focus on obstacle avoidance given the input
image. Our method is considered map-less. However, it
possesses implicit knowledge of the environment. A survey
of visual navigation methods can be found in .
Note that our approach is not based on feature matching
or 3D reconstruction, unlike e.g., , . Besides, our
approach does not require supervised training for recognizing
distinctive landmarks, unlike e.g., , .
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has been used in a variety of
applications. propose a policy gradient RL approach for
locomotion of a four-legged robot. discuss policy gradient methods for learning motor primitives. propose an
RL-based method for obstacle detection using a monocular
camera. apply reinforcement learning to autonomous
helicopter ﬂight. use RL to automate data collection
process for mapping. propose a kernel-based reinforcement learning algorithm for large-scale settings. use RL
for making decisions in ATARI games. In contrast to these
approaches, our models use deep reinforcement learning to
handle high-dimensional sensory inputs.
Recently, methods that integrate deep learning methods
with RL have shown promising results. propose deep
Q networks to play ATARI games. propose a new
Project Malmo
Virtual KITTI
Screenshots of our framework and other simulated learning
frameworks: ALE , ViZDoom , UETorch , Project Malmo ,
SceneNet , TORCS , SYNTHIA , Virtual KITTI .
search algorithm based on the integration of Monte-Carlo
tree search with deep RL that beats the world champion in
the game of Go. propose a deep RL approach, where
the parameters of the deep network are updated by multiple
asynchronous copies of the agent in the environment. 
use a deep RL approach to directly map the raw images into
torques at robot motors. Our work deals with much more
complex inputs than ATARI games, or images taken in a
lab setting with a constrained background. Additionally, our
method is generalizable to new scenes and new targets, while
the mentioned methods should be re-trained for a new game,
or in case of a change in the game rules.
There have been some effort to develop learning methods
that can generalize to different target tasks , . In
contrast, our model takes the target goal directly as an input
without the need of re-training.
Recently, physics engines have been used to learn the
dynamics of real-world scenes from images , , .
In this work, we show that a model that is trained in
simulation can be generalized to real-world scenarios.
III. AI2-THOR FRAMEWORK
To train and evaluate our model, we require a framework
for performing actions and perceiving their outcomes in a
3D environment. Integrating our model with different types
of environments is a main requirement for generalization
of our model. Hence, the framework should have a plugn-play architecture such that different types of scenes can
be easily incorporated. Additionally, the framework should
have a detailed model of the physics of the scene so the
movements and object interactions are properly represented.
For this purpose, we propose The House Of inteRactions
(AI2-THOR) framework, which is designed by integrating a
physics engine (Unity 3D) 1 with a deep learning framework
1 
(Tensorﬂow ). The general idea is that the rendered
images of the physics engine are streamed to the deep
learning framework, and the deep learning framework issues
a control command based on the visual input and sends it
back to the agent in the physics engine. Similar frameworks
have been proposed by , , , , , but the
main advantages of our framework are as follows: (1) The
physics engine and the deep learning framework directly
communicate (in contrast to separating the physics engine
from the controller as in ). Direct communication is
important since the feedback from the environment can be
immediately used for online decision making. (2) We tried to
mimic the appearance distribution of the real-world images
as closely as possible. For example, work on Atari
games, which are 2D environments and limited in terms of
appearance or is a collection of synthetic scenes that
are non-photo-realistic and do not follow the distribution of
real-world scenes in terms of lighting, object appearance,
textures, and background clutter, etc. This is important for
enabling us to generalize to real-world images.
To create indoor scenes for our framework, we provided
reference images to artists to create a 3D scene with the
texture and lighting similar to the image. So far we have 32
scenes that belong to 4 common scene types in a household
environment: kitchen, living room, bedroom, and bathroom.
On average, each scene contains 68 object instances.
The advantage of using a physics engine for modeling
the world is that it is highly scalable (training a robot in
real houses is not easily scalable). Furthermore, training the
models can be performed cheaper and safer (e.g., the actions
of the robot might damage objects). One main drawback of
using synthetic scenes is that the details of the real world
are under-modeled. However, recent advances in the graphics
community make it possible to have a rich representation of
the real-world appearance and physics, narrowing the discrepancy between real world and simulation. Fig. 2 provides
a qualitative comparison between a scene in our framework
and example scenes in other frameworks and datasets. As
shown, our scenes better mimic the appearance properties of
real world scenes. In this work, we focus on navigation, but
the framework can be used for more ﬁne-grained physical
interactions, such as applying a force, grasping, or object
manipulations such as opening and closing a microwave.
Fig. 3 shows a few examples of high-level interactions. We
will provide Python APIs with our framework for an AI agent
to interact with the 3D scenes.
IV. TARGET-DRIVEN NAVIGATION MODEL
In this section, we ﬁrst deﬁne our formulation for targetdriven visual navigation. Then we describe our deep siamese
actor-critic network for this task.
A. Problem Statement
Our goal is to ﬁnd the minimum length sequence of actions
that move an agent from its current location to a target
that is speciﬁed by an RGB image. We develop a deep
reinforcement learning model that takes as input an RGB
Our framework provides a rich interaction platform for AI agents.
It enables physical interactions, such as pushing or moving objects (the ﬁrst
row), as well as object interactions, such as changing the state of objects
(the second row).
image of the current observation and another RGB image of
the target. The output of the model is an action in 3D such
as move forward or turn right. Note that the model learns a
mapping from the 2D image to an action in the 3D space.
B. Problem Formulation
Vision-based robot navigation requires a mapping from
sensory signals to motion commands. Previous work on
Reinforcement Learning typically do not consider highdimensional perceptual inputs . Recent deep reinforcement learning (DRL) models provide an end-to-end
learning framework for transforming pixel information into
actions. However, DRL has largely focused on learning goalspeciﬁc models that tackle individual tasks in isolation. This
training setup is rather inﬂexible to changes in task goals.
For instance, as pointed out by Lake et al. , changing the
rule of the game would have devastating performance impact
on DRL-based Go-playing systems . Such limitation
roots from the fact that standard DRL models , aim
at ﬁnding a direct mapping (represented by a deep neural
network π) from state representations s to policy π(s).
In such cases, the goal is hardcoded in neural network
parameters. Thus, changes in goals would require to update
the network parameters in accordance.
Such limitation is especially problematic for mobile robot
navigation. When applying DRL to the multiple navigation
targets, the network should be re-trained for each target. In
practice, it is prohibitive to exhaust every target in a scene.
This is the problem caused by a lack of generalization – i.e.,
we would have to re-train a new model when incorporating
new targets. Therefore, it is preferable to have a single
navigation model, which learns to navigate to new targets
without re-training. To achieve this, we specify the task
objective (i.e., navigation destination) as inputs to the model,
instead of implanting the target in the model parameters.
We refer to this problem as target-driven visual navigation.
Formally, the learning objective of a target-driven model is to
learn a stochastic policy function π which takes two inputs,
a representation of current state st and a representation of
target g and produces a probability distribution over the
generic siamese layers
scene-specific layers
observation
Network architecture of our deep siamese actor-critic model. The
numbers in parentheses show the output dimensions. Layer parameters in
the green squares are shared. The ResNet-50 layers (yellow) are pre-trained
on ImageNet and ﬁxed during training.
action space π(st,g). For testing, a mobile robot keeps taking
actions drawn from the policy distribution until reaching the
destination. This way, actions are conditioned on both states
and targets. Hence, no re-training for new targets is required.
C. Learning Setup
Before introducing our model, we ﬁrst describe the key
ingredients of the reinforcement learning setup: action space,
observations and goals, and reward design.
1) Action space: Real-world mobile robots have to deal
with low-level mechanics. However, such mechanical details
make the learning signiﬁcantly more challenging. A common approach is to learn at a certain level of abstraction,
where the underlying physics is handled by a lower-level
controller (e.g., 3D physical engine). We train our model with
command-level actions. For our visual navigation tasks, we
consider four actions: moving forward, moving backward,
turning left, and turning right. We use a constant step length
(0.5 meters) and turning angle (90 degree). This essentially
discretizes the scene space into a grid-world representation.
To model uncertainty in real-world system dynamics, we add
a Gaussian noise to steps N (0,0.01) and turns N (0,1.0)
at each location.
2) Observations and Goals: Both observations and goals
are images taken by the agent’s RGB camera in its ﬁrstperson view. The beneﬁt of using images as goal descriptions
is the ﬂexibility for specifying new targets. Given a target
image, the task objective is to navigate to the location and
viewpoint where the target image is taken.
3) Reward design: We focus on minimizing the trajectory
length to the navigation targets. Other factors such as energy
efﬁciency could be considered instead. Therefore, we only
provide a goal-reaching reward (10.0) upon task completion.
To encourage shorter trajectories, we add a small time
penalty (-0.01) as immediate reward.
We focus on learning the target-driven policy function
π via deep reinforcement learning. We design a new deep
neural network as a non-linear function approximator for π,
where action a at time t can be drawn by:
a ∼π(st,g|u)
where u are the model parameters, st is the image of the
current observation, and g is the image of the navigation
target. When target g belongs to a ﬁnite discrete set, π
can be seen as a mixture model, where g indexes the right
set of parameters for each goal. However, the number of
real-world goals is often countless (due to many different
locations or highly variable object appearances). Thus, it
is preferable to learn a projection that transforms the goals
into an embedding space. Such projection enables knowledge
transfer across this embedding space, and therefore allows
the model to generalize to new targets.
Navigational decisions demand an understanding of the
relative spatial positions between the current locations and
the target locations, as well as a holistic sense of scene
layout. We develop a new deep siamese actor-critic network
to capture such intuitions. Fig. 4 illustrates our model for
the target-driven navigation tasks. Overall, the inputs to the
network are two images that represent the agent’s current
observation and the target. Our approach to reasoning about
the spatial arrangement between the current location and the
target is to project them into the same embedding space,
where their geometric relations are preserved. Deep siamese
networks are a type of two-stream neural network models
for discriminative embedding learning . We use two
streams of weight-shared siamese layers to transform the
current state and the target into the same embedding space.
Information from both embeddings is fused to form a joint
representation. This joint representation is passed through
scene-speciﬁc layers (refer to Fig. 4). The intention to have
scene-speciﬁc layers is to capture the special characteristics
(e.g., room layouts and object arrangements) of a scene
that are crucial for the navigation tasks. Finally, the model
generates policy and value outputs similar to the advantage
actor-critic models . In this model, targets across all scenes
share the same generic siamese layers, and all targets within
a scene share the same scene-speciﬁc layer. This makes the
model better generalize across targets and across scenes.
E. Training Protocol
Traditional RL models learn for individual tasks in separation, resulting in the inﬂexibility with respect to goal
changes. As our deep siamese actor-critic network shares
parameters across different tasks, it can beneﬁt from learning
with multiple goals simultaneously. A3C is a type of
reinforcement learning model that learns by running multiple
copies of training threads in parallel and updates a shared
set of model parameters in an asynchronous manner. It has
been shown that these parallel training threads stabilize each
other, achieving the state-of-the-art performance in the videogame domain. We use a similar training protocol as A3C.
However, rather than running copies of a single game, each
thread runs with a different navigation target. Thus, gradients
are backpropagated from the actor-critic outputs back to the
lower-level layers. The scene-speciﬁc layers are updated by
gradients from the navigation tasks within the scene, and the
generic siamese layers are updated by all targets.
F. Network Architectures
The bottom part of the siamese layers are ImageNetpretrained ResNet-50 layers (truncated the softmax
layer) that produce 2048-d features on a 224×224×3 RGB
image. We freeze these ResNet parameters during training.
We stack 4 history frames as state inputs to account for
the agent’s previous motions. The output vectors from both
streams are projected into the 512-d embedding space. The
fusion layer takes a 1024-d concatenated embedding of the
state and the target, generating a 512-d joint representation.
This vector is passed through two fully-connected scenespeciﬁc layers, producing 4 policy outputs (i.e., probability
over actions) and a single value output. We train this network
with a shared RMSProp optimizer of learning rate 7×10−4.
V. EXPERIMENTS
Our main objective for target-driven navigation is to ﬁnd
the shortest trajectories from the current location to the
target. In this section, we ﬁrst evaluate our model with
baseline navigation models that are based on heuristics and
standard deep RL models. One major advantage of our
proposed model is the ability to generalize to new scenes
and new targets. We conduct two additional experiments to
evaluate the ability of our model to transfer knowledge across
targets and across scenes. Also, we show an extension of
our model to continuous space. Lastly, we demonstrate the
performance of our model in a complex real setting using a
real robot.
A. Navigation Results
We implement our models in Tensorﬂow and train
them on an Nvidia GeForce GTX Titan X GPU. We follow
the training protocol described in Sec. IV-E to train our deep
siamese actor-critic model (see Fig. 4) with 100 threads,
each thread learns for a different target. It takes around 1.25
hours to pass through one million training frames across all
threads. We report the performance as the average number of
steps (i.e., average trajectory length) it takes to reach a target
from a random starting point. The navigation performance
is reported on 100 different goals randomly sampled from
20 indoor scenes in our dataset. We compare our ﬁnal
model with heuristic strategies, standard deep RL models,
and variations of our model. The models we compare are:
1) Random walk is the simplest heuristic for navigation.
In this baseline model, the agent randomly draws one
out of four actions at each step.
2) Shortest Path provides an upper-bound performance
for our navigation model. As we discretize the walking
space by a constant step length (see Sec. IV-C), we can
compute the shortest paths from the starting locations
training frames (in millions)
average trajectory length
A3C (4 threads)
A3C (1 thread)
One-step Q
Target-driven single branch
Target-driven ﬁnal
Data efﬁciency of training. Our model learns better navigation
policies compared to the state-of-the-art A3C methods after 100M
training frames.
to the target locations. Note that for computing the
shortest path, we have access to the full map of the
environment, while the input to our system is just an
RGB image.
3) A3C is an asynchronous advantage actor-critic
model that achieves the state-of-the-art results in Atari
games. Empirical results show that using more threads
improves the data efﬁciency during training. We thus
evaluate A3C model in two setups, where we use 1
thread and 4 threads to train for each target.
4) One-step Q is an asynchronous variant of deep
Q-network .
5) Target-driven single branch is a variation of our
deep siamese model that does not have scene-speciﬁc
branches. In this case, all targets will use and update
the same scene-speciﬁc parameters, including two FC
layers and the policy/value output layers.
6) Target-driven ﬁnal is our deep siamese actor-critic
model introduced in Sec. IV-D.
For all learning models, we report their performance after
being trained with 100M frames (across all threads). The
performance is measured by the average trajectory length
(i.e., number of steps taken) over all targets. An episode
ends when either the agent reaches the target, or after it
takes 10,000 steps. For each target, we randomly initialize
the agent’s starting locations, and evaluate 10 episodes. The
results are listed in Table I.
PERFORMANCE OF TARGET-DRIVEN METHODS AND BASELINES
Avg. Trajectory Length
Random walk
Shortest path
Purpose-built RL
One-step Q
A3C (1 thread)
A3C (4 threads)
Target-driven RL
Single branch
We analyze the data efﬁciency of learning with the learning curves in Fig. 5. Q-learning suffers from slow convergence. A3C performs better than Q-learning; plus, increasing
the number of actor-learning threads per target from 1 to
4 improves learning efﬁciency. Our proposed target-driven
navigation model signiﬁcantly outperforms standard deep
RL models when it uses 100M frames for training. We
hypothesize that this is because both the weight sharing
scheme across targets and the asynchronous training protocol facilitate learning generalizable knowledge. In contrast,
purpose-built RL models are less data-efﬁcient, as there is
no straightforward mechanism to share information across
different scenes or targets. The average trajectory length of
the ﬁnal model is three times shorter than the one of the
single branch model. It justiﬁes the use of scene-speciﬁc
layers, as it captures particular characteristics of a scene that
may vary across scene instances.
t-SNE embeddings of observations in a living room scene. We
highlight four observation examples in the projected 2D space and their
corresponding locations in the scene (bird’s-eye view on the right). This
ﬁgure shows that our model has learned observation embeddings while
preserving their relative spatial layout.
To understand what the model learns, we examine the
embeddings learned by generic siamese layers. Fig. 6 shows
t-SNE visualization of embedding vectors computed
from observations at different locations at four different
orientations. We observe notable spatial correspondence between the spatial arrangement of these embedding vectors
and their corresponding t-SNE projections. We therefore
hypothesize that the model learns to project observation
images into the embedding space while preserving their
spatial conﬁguration. To validate this hypothesis, we compare
the distance of pairwise projected embeddings and the distance of their corresponding scene coordinates. The Pearson
correlation coefﬁcient is 0.62 with p-value less than 0.001,
indicating that the embedding space preserves information
of the original locations of observations. This means that the
model learns a rough map of the environment and has the
capability of localization with respect to this map.
B. Generalization Across Targets
In addition to the data-efﬁcient learning of our targetdriven models, our model has the built-in ability to generalize, which is a signiﬁcant advantage over the purposebuilt baseline models. We evaluate its generalization ability
in two dimensions: 1. generalizing to new targets within
one scene, and 2. generalizing to new scenes. We focus on
generalization across targets in this section, and explain scene
generalization in Sec. V-C.
number of trained targets
new target success rate
steps from new target to trained targets
Target generalization. Each histogram group reports the success
rate of navigation to new targets with certain number of trained targets. The
four bars in each group indicate the impact of adjacency between the trained
and new targets on generalization performance.
We test the model to navigate to new targets that are excluded from training. We take 10 of the largest scenes in our
dataset, each having around 15 targets. We gradually increase
the number of trained targets (from 1, 2, 4 to 8) using our
target-driven model. All models are trained with 20M frames.
During testing, we run 100 episodes for each of 10 new
targets. These new targets are randomly chosen from a set
of locations that have a constant distance (1, 2, 4 and 8 steps)
from the nearest trained targets. The results are illustrated in
Fig. 7. We use success rate (percentage of trajectories shorter
than 500 steps) to measure the performance. We choose this
metric due to the bipolar behavior of our model on new
targets – it either reaches the new targets quickly, or fails
completely. Thus, this metric is more effective than average
trajectory lengths. In Fig. 7, we observe a consistent trend of
increasing success rate, as we increase the number of trained
targets (x-axis). Inside each histogram group, the success rate
positively correlates with adjacency between trained and new
targets. It indicates that the model has a clearer understanding
of nearby regions around the trained targets than distant
locations.
C. Generalization Across Scenes
We further evaluate our model’s ability to generalize
across scenes. As the generic siamese layers are shared
over all scenes, we examine the possibility of transferring
knowledge from these layers to new scenes. Furthermore,
we study how the number of trained scenes would inﬂuence
the transferability of generic layer parameters. We gradually
increase the number of trained scenes from 1 to 16, and test
on 4 unseen scenes. We select 5 random targets from each
scene for training and testing. To adapt to unseen scenes, we
train the scene-speciﬁc layers while ﬁxing generic siamese
layers. Fig. 8 shows the results. We observe faster convergence as the number of trained scenes grows. Compared to
training from scratch, transferring generic layers signiﬁcantly
improves data efﬁciency for learning in new environments.
We also evaluate the single branch model in the same setup.
As the single branch model includes a single scene-speciﬁc
layer, we can apply a trained model (trained on 16 scenes)
to new scenes without extra training. However, it results
in worse performance than chance, indicating the importance of adapting scene-speciﬁc layers. The single branch
model leads to slightly faster convergence than training from
scratch, yet far slower than our ﬁnal model.
training frames (in millions)
average trajectory length
number of trained scenes
train from scratch
single branch (16) no ﬁnetune
single branch (16) ﬁnetune
Scene generalization. We compare the data efﬁciency for adapting
trained navigation models to unseen scenes. As the number of trained scene
instances increases, ﬁne-tuning the scene-speciﬁc layers becomes faster.
D. Continuous Space
The space discretization eliminates the need for handling
complex system dynamics, such as noise in motor control. In
this section, we show empirical results that the same learning
model is capable of coping with more challenging continuous
To illustrate this, we train the same target-driven model
for a door-ﬁnding task in a large living room scene, where
the goal is to arrive at the balcony through a door. We use
the same 4 actions as before (see Sec. IV-C); however, the
agent’s moves and turns are controlled by the physics engine.
In this case, the method should explicitly handle forces
and collisions, as the agent may be stopped by obstacles
or slide along heavy objects. Although this setting requires
signiﬁcantly more training frames (around 50M) to train
for a single target, the same model learns to reach the
door in average 15 steps, whereas random agents take 719
steps on average. We provide sample test episodes in the
supplementary video.
E. Robot Experiment
To validate the generalization of our method to real world
settings, we perform an experiment by using a SCITOS
mobile robot modiﬁed by (see Fig. 9). We train our
model in three different settings: 1) training on real images
from scratch; 2) training only scene-speciﬁc layers while
freezing generic layer parameters trained on 20 simulated
scenes; and 3) training scene-speciﬁc layers and ﬁne-tuning
generic layer parameters.
Test environment
Robot experiment setup. Our experiments are conducted on a
SCITOS mobile robot. On the left, we show a picture of the SCITOS robot.
On the right, we show the test environment and one target (microwave) that
we have used for evaluation.
We train our model (with backward action disabled) on
28 discrete locations in the scene, which are roughly 30
inches apart from each other in each dimension. At each
location, the robot takes 4 RGB images (90 degrees apart)
using its head camera. During testing, the robot moves and
turns based on the model’s predictions. We evaluate the
robot with two targets in the room: door and microwave.
Although the model is trained on a discretized space, it
exhibits robustness towards random starting points, noisy
dynamics, varying step lengths, changes in illumination and
object layouts, etc. Example test episodes are provided in the
supplementary video. All three setups converge to nearlyoptimal policy due to the small scale of the real scene.
However, we ﬁnd that transferring and ﬁne-tuning parameters
from simulation to real data offers the fastest convergence
out of these three setups (44% faster than training from
scratch). This provides supportive evidence on the value of
simulations in learning real-world interactions and shows the
possibility of generalization from simulation to real images
using a small amount of ﬁne-tuning.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
We proposed a deep reinforcement learning (DRL) framework for target-driven visual navigation. The state-of-theart DRL methods are typically applied to video games and
environments that do not mimic the distribution of natural
images. This work is a step towards more realistic settings.
The state-of-the-art DRL methods have some limitations
that prevent them from being applied to realistic settings.
In this paper, we addressed some of these limitations. We
addressed generalization across scenes and targets, improved
data efﬁciency compared to the state-of-the-art DRL methods, and provided AI2-THOR framework that enables inexpensive and efﬁcient collection of action and interaction
Our experiments showed that our method generalizes to
new targets and scenes that are not used during the endto-end training of the model. We also showed our method
converges with much fewer training samples compared to the
state-of-the-art DRL methods. Furthermore, we showed that
the method works in both discrete and continuous domains.
We also showed that a model that is trained on simulation can
be adapted to a real robot with a small amount of ﬁne-tuning.
We provided visualizations that show that our DRL method
implicitly performs localization and mapping. Finally, our
method is end-to-end trainable. Unlike the common visual
navigation methods, it does not require explicit feature
matching or 3D reconstruction of the environment.
Our future work includes increasing the number of highquality 3D scenes in our framework. Additionally, we plan to
build models that learn the physical interactions and object
manipulations in the framework.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Dieter Fox for his helpful comments,
Andrzej Pronobis and Yu Xiang for helping us with the robot
experiments, and Noah Siegel for his help with creating the video.