Diffusion models provide a framework
to analyze data from binary decisions. In comparison with
simpler approaches (e.g., ANOVAs of response time [RT]
means), there are several advantages of this kind of data
analysis: First, both RTs and error rates are entered simultaneously in one analysis. This is a great improvement over
traditional techniques that are only based on either response
times or error rates and thus might lead to misleading results (e.g., about task difficulty) in case of a speed–accuracy
trade-off. For example, it might be that the participant’s responses slow down not because a task is more difficult but
because they set themselves a more conservative response
criterion. In this case an analysis based on mean response
times would come to wrong conclusions while the effect
(adaptation of response strategy) could still be mapped by
a diffusion model analysis. Second, the diffusion model is
well suited to reflect the structure of the given information.
Results are not one-dimensional (i.e., good performance vs.
bad performance) but consist of several parameters, which
makes it possible to draw detailed conclusions about how a
task is performed. In other words, the diffusion model helps
to explain why responses are fast or slow and why few or
many errors are made. Often, psychological theories allow
deriving predictions for individual parameters of the diffusion model . Therefore,
the diffusion model is a powerful tool to test psychological
theories. These structural results are possible because of a
third advantage of the diffusion model: The degree of utilization of input data is excellent, because not only RT means
are used but the complete RT distribution is analyzed.
On the other hand, there are some problems connected
with diffusion model data analysis: First, the computation
is expensive. This problem has been recently addressed
by Voss and Voss (in press). The authors introduced a new
method (the PDE method, based on the partial differential
equation describing the diffusion model) that allows fast
computations even at high accuracy. The basic idea of the
PDE method will be sketched below. If prior distributions
for the parameters are available, a Bayesian approach
could be used instead . A
second problem of this kind of modeling is the lack of
standard software for diffusion model data analysis. So
far, diffusion model analysis was restricted to researchers capable of developing their own solutions. Only recently a MATLAB based program to estimate the parameters of Ratcliff’s diffusion model has been introduced by
Vandekerckhove and Tuerlinckx . Another solution
has been provided by Wagenmakers, van der Maas, and
Gras man : Their EZ-diffusion procedure allows
to calculate rough estimates for some model’s parameter
from RT means, standard deviations, and the percentage
of errors. However, the EZ model does not cover all parameters, and the utilization of data is not as good as in
complete estimation procedures.
In this article, we present a user-friendly, flexible, and
efficient program, fast-dm, which addresses both of the
mentioned problems. Fast-dm allows considering models
where parameters are constrained across conditions or are
fixed to predefined values. Fast-dm uses the PDE method
(Voss & Voss, in press) to compute the predicted cumulative
Copyright 2007 Psychonomic Society, Inc.
Fast-dm: A free program for
efficient diffusion model analysis
ANDREAS VOSS
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany
JOCHEN VOSS
University of Warwick, Coventry, England
In the present article, a flexible and fast computer program, called fast-dm, for diffusion model data analysis
is introduced. Fast-dm is free software that can be downloaded from the authors’ websites. The program allows
estimating all parameters of Ratcliff’s diffusion model from the empirical response time distributions of
any binary classification task. Fast-dm is easy to use: it reads input data from simple text files, while program
settings are specified by command0s in a control file. With fast-dm, complex models can be fitted, where some
parameters may vary between experimental conditions, while other parameters are constrained to be equal across
conditions. Detailed directions for use of fast-dm are presented, as well as results from three short simulation
studies exemplifying the utility of fast-dm.
Behavior Research Methods
2007, 39 (4), 767-775
A. Voss, 
768 VOSS AND VOSS
process duration, both for correct and erroneous responses,
and also small percentages of errors, whereas a drift near
zero leads to longer process durations and to more similar
probabilities of the two process outcomes. The third model
parameter regards the starting value of the process (z).
The closer the process starts to a threshold, the higher the
probability that this threshold is reached due to the random
fluctuations. Consequently, if the starting point moves toward one threshold, the percentage of responses connected
to this threshold will increase, and RTs of these responses
will decrease. The opposite is true, obviously, for the opposite threshold: Here, the process terminates less frequently
and exit times increase with increasing distance of starting
point and threshold. The fourth parameter covers the duration of all extradecisional parts of the response time. This
so-called response time constant (t0) models the time used
by processes of stimulus encoding and, in large parts, the
execution of a response.
The full model takes into account that the processing
of a task varies to a certain degree across trials of an experiment: intertrial variability is modeled for the starting
value (z), the drift rate (v), and the RT constant (t0). The
starting value in each trial is no longer assumed to equal
z, but instead follows a uniform distribution around z with
the width sz. Likewise, for the RT constant a uniform distribution with width st0 around t0 is assumed. The drift
rate is modeled as a normal distribution with mean v and
standard deviation sv. A more exhaustive description of
the interpretation of the parameters in terms of cognitive
processes might be found elsewhere .
The degree of noisiness in the model is defined by the
diffusion constant (or intratrial variability of the drift). This
diffusion constant is a scaling parameter, that is, it cannot
be estimated but is set a priori to a fixed value. Fast-dm
uses a diffusion constant of one. To compare parameter
meter values of fast-dm with solutions that are based on
other diffusion constants, all parameters values (but t0)
have to be multiplied by the desired diffusion constant.
THE PDE METHOD FOR
DIFFUSION MODEL ANALYSIS
As pointed out above, diffusion model analysis is computationally expensive. To calculate one predicted RT distribution from a set of parameters, many operations have
to be performed, and, while searching the parameter space
for an optimal set of parameters, many of these predicted
RT distributions have to be calculated. This can easily result in computation times of several hours or even days
for a complete analysis. Therefore, choice of an efficient
algorithm to compute the required CDFs is of great importance. Recently, Voss and Voss (in press) suggested the
PDE method to calculate the CDF for the RT distribution
in the diffusion model and showed that processing times
were faster by several orders of magnitude, compared to
the traditional closed form solution. In the following, we
give a very short introduction to the PDE algorithm.
Mathematically, the CDF for a given set of parameters is
found by solving a PDE associated with the diffusion prodistribution function (CDF) and it uses the Kolmogorov–
Smirnov statistic for the optimization
of parameters. The program, including the source code,
is available from the fast-dm Web site (www.psychologie
.uni-freiburg.de/Members/voss/fast-dm). Fast-dm should
be easily portable to most computer systems. It was tested
on Linux and Microsoft Windows systems.
In the following sections, we give a short description
Ratcliff’s diffusion model and of the PDE method
(Voss & Voss, in press) used in our implementation. Subsequently, details of the fast-dm algorithm and directions
of usage are presented, as well as results from simulation
DESCRIPTION OF RATCLIFF’S
DIFFUSION MODEL
The diffusion model is well suited to analyze data from
fast binary decisions. It is based on the assumption that
information available to the participant is represented as
a one-dimensional quantity. A counter on this dimension
changes as a function of time and the decisional process
continues until the counter reaches either one of two decision thresholds. In the model the dynamic behavior of
the counter is described by a Wiener diffusion process.
This process is driven by a systematic component and a
random component: The systematic component causes a
constant change over time, while the random component
adds Gaussian noise to the process.
The diffusion process is terminated as soon as it leaves
the interval delimited by the decision thresholds and the
exit point from the interval represents the binary decision.
In other words, a process termination at the lower threshold means that Decision A is reached while a termination
at the upper threshold stands for the alternate Decision B.
With a given set of parameters, the diffusion model allows
to predict RT distributions for both decisions. For a situation in which one decision might be considered correct
and the other one wrong, the RT distributions for correct
responses and errors, respectively, as well as the ratio of
both distributions are thus predicted.
There are several parameters in the diffusion model
 . In a diffusion model data
analysis these parameters are estimated so that the fit between predicted and empiric RT-distributions is optimal.1
The result of this parameter estimation procedure can then
be interpreted in terms of cognitive processes . We conclude this section by giving an account
of these model parameters. The simple diffusion model
consists of four parameters (threshold separation, starting
point, drift rate, and response-time constant), which will
be described first.
The first parameter is the width of the interval between
decision thresholds (a). If a is small, RTs are short and the
random influence on the decision process is rather large—
that is, many errors occur. On the other hand, large values
of a result in fewer error responses and long RTs. The second parameter is the strength (and direction) of the systematic influence on the diffusion process, called the drift
rate (v). Large (absolute) values of the drift cause short
FAST DIFFUSION MODEL ANALYSIS WITH FAST-DM 769
conditions. In this case the data set is split according to
the experimental conditions and CDFs are calculated and
compared for each subset separately, resulting in a different KS value for each condition. When different experimental conditions are used, fast-dm transforms the
individual KS values into probabilities values and uses the product of the p values across conditions as the optimization criterion.2
To estimate the model parameters a multidimensional
search is conducted, using a version of the simplex downhill method to optimize the fit
(i.e., to maximize p). For the parameters a, v, and t0 the
output of the EZ diffusion model is used to obtain initial values for the simplex
search. For the three intertrial variability parameters, values known as realistic from prior applications are used: In
detail, the simplex starts with sz  0.33a, sv  0.20, st 
0.15 as the initial values . Since the simplex method has
sometimes difficulties in high dimensional spaces, the
simplex algorithm is consecutively run three times with
increasingly strict stop criteria, starting each run with the
best solution of the previous run. Our tests indicate that
this procedure improves results notably.
In a diffusion model analysis, there is always a speed–
accuracy trade-off, that is, the more accurate the calculation, the slower the algorithm runs. There are several points
in the program where decisions have to be made about the
accuracy settings (e.g., the increment for the calculation
of the integrals, and for the discretization parameters of
the PDE method). The effects of these settings are not independent of each other: Increasing accuracy at a point
in the algorithm that works already well might increase
processing time without affecting accuracy because much
larger inaccuracies might be caused by another part of the
software. While developing fast-dm, a systematic search
(reusing the simplex downhill method) was performed to
optimize the speed while yielding an a priori defined level
of accuracy. This has been done for different accuracy levels. As a result, the accuracy of fast-dm can be controlled
cess, namely the Kolmogorov backward equation. There
is a well-known closed form solution for this problem that
allows calculating the CDF as a function of the models
parameters . This formula, however, contains an infinite
sum that—at least for certain parameter regions—has to be
evaluated many times before it converges satisfactorily. An
alternative approach is to solve the PDE numerically (see
Voss & Voss, in press, for details) instead of resorting to
the “closed” solution. This method, referred to as the PDE
method here, avoids the problem of the infinite sum and—
since numerical solutions to PDEs are mathematically well
understood—proven standard methods can be employed.
The solution of the Kolmogorov backward equation is
the probability that a Brownian motion with constant drift
v and start at z hits the boundary a  z before time t and
before the first visit at 0, considered as a function of the
time t and the parameter z. For the numerical solution,
both the t and the z ranges are discretized and the solution
is approximated by a function defined on the resulting
grid. The algorithm starts at time 0 with a vector containing the initial condition for the different z values on the
grid points and then, in each step, uses the approximation
for a fixed time to calculate the approximated values at a
(slightly) later time. Details of this procedure can be found
elsewhere . Smaller step sizes, in
both dimensions, increase the accuracy of the solution but,
at the same time, also increase the computational cost.
Besides avoiding the infinite sum of the closed-form
solution, the PDE method has the additional advantage
that CDFs are computed for the whole range of different starting points simultaneously. Consequently, the best
starting point can be picked out directly, thereby reducing the search space by one dimension and increasing the
speed of parameter estimation.
SOFTWARE INTERNALS:
THE FAST-DM ALGORITHM
The calculation of the predicted RT distributions in
fast-dm uses the PDE method described above. The parameter estimation procedure of fast-dm is based on the
Kolmogorov–Smirnov approach . That
is, the maximal vertical distance of the predicted and the
empirical cumulative response-time distribution (i.e., the
KS test statistic) is minimized. To get a single optimization criterion, the response time distributions from both
thresholds are merged into one distribution by equipping
all reaction times from the lower threshold with negative signs while using positive signs for the times from
the upper threshold (Figure 1). The CDF of the resulting
combined distribution conserves the original shapes of
the individual distributions (as the shapes of the function
to the left and to the right of time zero), the error rate is
represented as the value of the combined CDF at time 0.
For many psychological applications some parameters
will depend on experimental conditions (e.g., different
drift rates are assumed for different stimuli) while the
remaining parameters are assumed to be constant over
Predicted CDF
Empirical CDF
Figure 1. Example for a predicted and an empirical cumulative
distribution function (CDF). Fast-dm merges the CDFs of correct
responses and errors together by assigning negative signs to all
error responses (or, more specifically, to all responses at the lower
threshold of the model). Therefore, the value of the CDF at the
zero point of the abscissa shows the error rate. The given graph
visualizes a data set with about 30% error responses. The left side
of the graph has not the typical shape of an RT distribution because here a mirror image of the original distribution is shown.
770 VOSS AND VOSS
last command line) must be completed by a new-line character (i.e., the “return” or “enter” key has to be used). For
all other lines the first word is interpreted as a command,
the following words are used as arguments to this command. Table 1 summarizes all possible commands. Most
commands are optional and some commands may be used
more than once: For example, if several parameters depend
on experimental conditions, the command depends has
to be repeated for each affected parameter. In the control
file, commands must always follow the order as presented
in Table 1.
The command precision value defines the accuracy of the calculation of the predicted CDFs. The entered
value has to be a real number of 1.0 or above, with accuracy and computation time increasing with higher numbers (values smaller than 2 provide no useful results due to
large inaccuracies and values greater than 5 will lead to an
unreasonable long processing duration). If the command
is not used, the default value of 3.0 is employed.
To set parameters to a fixed value, the command set
parameter value has to be applied. Valid entries for parameter are a, z, v, t0, sz, sv, and st0. For value, the desired value of the parameter is entered. For example, to
set the variability of the RT constant to zero the command
set st0 0 is used. For the starting point the set command works somewhat differently; z is not set to an absolute value but to a fraction of a. Consequently, the command set z 0.5 fixes z to be equal to 0.5a—that is,
the process starts at the midpoint between both thresholds.
The set command is optional; if no set command is
provided, all parameters are estimated.
The command depends parameter condition can be
used to allow parameters to take different values in different conditions of an experiment. For the parameter argument, any parameter name can be inserted (see above for
valid parameter names). For condition, a new name has to
be defined here. The name can be chosen freely but it must
not contain any blanks. For example, the command depends v stimulus means that for each kind of stimulus, which is defined below, another drift rate is estimated.
It is also possible that a parameter depends on more than
one condition. For example, in a design with two kinds of
by a single precision parameter that internally maps to the
optimized parameter values.
USING FAST-DM
In this article, we describe fast-dm Version 25. The program, including the source-code,3 can be obtained from
www.psychologie.uni-freiburg.de/Members/voss/fast-dm.
On this site, future versions of fast-dm, and all instructions
necessary to install and use these, will be published.
Installation
To run fast-dm on Linux or Unix systems, download
the compressed source-code file (fast-dm-25.zip or fastdm-25.tar.gz, respectively; the contents of theses achieves
are identical), save it on your computer and unpack the
archive. In the resulting folder “fast-dm-25” type the following commands:
./configure
The compiler will automatically build the program fast-dm
for the parameter estimation.4 If you want to run fast-dm
on a Microsoft Windows system, you can either download
the precompiled binaries (fast-dm-25-win32.zip) or, if you
have a C compiler, you can also use the source code (see
the README file in the source-code archive for some
notes on this topic).
Experiment Control Files
An experiment control file is used to pass commands for
a specific experiment to fast-dm. The control file specifies which data files are to be read and what kind of model
should be fitted to the data. By convention control files
use the file name extension “.ctl” and by default fast-dm
tries to read the description for the analyzed experiment
from the file “experiment.ctl.” On systems supporting
command line arguments different experiment control
files can be chosen by calling fast-dm with the name of a
control file as the first argument.
Control files are evaluated line by line. Empty lines and
lines starting with “#” are ignored. All lines (including the
# block trial difficulty target RESPONSE TIME
1 1 easy 0 0 1.475
1 2 easy 1 1 0.815
1 3 hard 0 1 1.007
1 4 easy 0 0 0.906
1 5 hard 1 1 1.131
1 6 hard 1 0 0.525
1 7 hard 0 0 0.835
1 8 easy 1 1 0.722
1 9 easy 0 1 0.916
1 10 hard 0 1 1.112
1 11 hard 0 0 0.673
1 12 easy 1 1 0.775
Figure 2. Sample for the first lines of a data file. The first line is ignored by fast-dm because it starts with
“#.” Afterward, each line contains the information of one trial of an experiment. For the diffusion model
analysis, the first two columns (i.e., “block” and “trial”) can be ignored. As can be seen in the example,
information about experimental conditions of a trial can either be words or numbers.
FAST DIFFUSION MODEL ANALYSIS WITH FAST-DM 771
fit index, and the elapsed calculation time. This is done
with the save "filename" command. Like in the load
command, the use of an asterisk as wildcard is possible;
however, load and save commands must match: whenever the load command contains an asterisk, so must
save and vice versa. The save command is optional. It
can be replaced by the log command (see below).
Since individual log files are not very convenient for
further processing in most statistical analysis programs,
fast-dm offers the possibility to save all results within
one summary log file. This is done by the command log
"filename". The log file name must not contain any wildcards. The log command is optional. However, fast-dm
cannot be used without output; therefore, either save or
log has to be used.
Whenever there is a conflict between commands (e.g.,
if depends uses an identifier that is not part of the load
command), or between commands and data files (e.g., if
there are less columns in the data file than defined in the
format statement) an error message is returned, and
fast-dm is aborted. Table 2 gives examples for a very simple and for a more complex control file.
Data Files
Data files contain the participants’ responses and measured reaction times. Optionally they can also contain information about experimental conditions. Typically each
data file describes one session of one participant in an
experiment. By convention data files use the file name
extension “.dat.”
Data files are evaluated line by line. Empty lines and
lines starting with “#” are ignored. All other lines must
contain the entries given by the “format” statement in the
control file, in the order defined there and separated by
white space.
The values in the Response column must be either 0
(for the lower threshold) or 1 (for the upper threshold). In
the experiment, these values will either correspond to the
actual response (e.g., left key vs. right key) or to the success value (i.e., correct vs. error). The entries in the Time
stimuli (e.g., target vs. distractor) and two levels of difficulties (e.g., easy vs. hard) the command depends v
stimulus difficulty causes four different drift
rates to be estimated, one for easy targets, difficult targets,
easy distractors and for difficult distractors, respectively.
The depends command is optional. By default, no parameter depends on experimental conditions.
The first required command is format. It specifies the
composition of the data files (see below). Specifically, it
defines the order of information that is read from each line
of a data file. All condition names that are used by a depends command have to be specified again in the format
definition. In addition, the template RESPONSE has to be
used to indicate whether the process outcome of a line of
the data file belongs to the lower threshold (value 0) or to
the upper threshold (value 1), respectively. The template
TIME is used for the RT. Asterisks indicate that a column
of the data file is ignored for the diffusion model analysis
(e.g., the trial number). For example, the command format * * stimulus * difficulty * TIME
RESPONSE indicates that the third column of the data
file contains the information about the stimulus type, the
fifth column contains difficulty information of a trial, the
seventh column contains the reaction time in seconds and
the eights column contains the actual response.
The command load "filename" is also required. The
load command defines the names of one or more data
files. File names have to be enclosed in double quotes. An
asterisk may be included in the filename as a wildcard. In
this case, all matching files within the current directory
are load sequentially, and for each data file, a new set of
parameters is estimated. For example, load "*.dat"
is used to analyze all data files with the extension “.dat.”
Each data file has to have the same format. If the file name
does not include an asterisk, fast-dm loads only one data
There are two different ways to save the results of
fast-dm. First, it is possible to save results in individual
save files—that is, for each data file one save file can be
generated, containing the estimated parameter values, the
Commands of the Control File for a Fast-dm Experiment
Description
precision value
precision 2.0
Defines the precision of calculation (optional command; default
value is 3.0, minimum is 1.0).
set parameter value
A parameter is not estimated but fixed to the given value (optional
command; default is no constraints).
depends parameter condition
depends v stimulus
For different experimental conditions, different values for the
parameter are estimated. Asterisks indicate that the corresponding
field is ignored (optional command; by default, parameter values
do not depend on any conditions).
format RESPONSE TIME . . .
format * stim RESPONSE TIME
Defines the format of each line of the data file(s) (required
load "filename"
load "*.dat"
The load command defines the names of the data files. Wildcards (*) can be used as templates (required command).
save "filename"
save "*.out"
The save command defines the names of individual output files.
Wildcards may also be used in the same way as in the load command (optional command).
log "filename"
log "protocol"
The log command works like the save command; however, here
all results are saved within a common file (optional command).
772 VOSS AND VOSS
depends on an experimental condition, it is indexed with
the name of the condition variable.
Starting from the fifth line, information for a specific
data set (i.e., one data file) is presented. First, the name of
the data file is provided. Then, all experimental conditions
are listed: That is, if one or more parameter depends on a
condition variable, the data set is divided into subsamples;
if no dependencies are defined, only one sample is listed.
In any case, all parameters belonging to one specific condition are presented in one line. Parameters are indexed as
described in the section log files. For each condition, the
number of both responses (0 vs. 1) is specified.
Below, the best fit values ( p values) of three consecutive runs of the SIMPLEX algorithm are shown, as soon
as a processing loop is finished. Note that a run of the simplex might take some minutes, especially for high precision values, large samples and many conditions. After the
third run of the simplex, the estimates for all parameters
are shown.
APPLICATION EXAMPLES
Application Example 1: Simple Models
For Example 1, three data samples with 20, 200, and
2,000 reactions, respectively, have been simulated from the
same sets of parameter values (see note 2). The data sets
were saved to the files “sample1.dat” to “sample3.dat.” In
the control file, the following commands were used:
format RESPONSE TIME
load "sample*.dat"
save "sample*.out"
The original values used for the simulation as well as the
results of fast-dm are shown in Table 3. As can be seen,
the program can recover most parameter values well. Even
from only 20 RTs, it is possible to get a rough estimate
of the true parameter values. It is much more difficult to
reestimate the variability parameters. The reason for this
difficulty is that they have a rather small influence on the
shape of the CDF; nonetheless, including these parameters might in some cases increase model fit considerably
 .
column must be floating point numbers, giving the RT in
seconds. All other entries correspond to experimental conditions and can be either numbers or words. Figure 2 shows
an example of the first lines of a data file. The command
format * * difficulty target RESPONSE
TIME could be used in the control file to read this data.
Save Files
Save files are used by fast-dm to store the results of
the parameter estimation process. For each data file read
a separate save file is written. By convention, data files
use the file name extension “.out.” Save files are plain
text files containing the estimated (or fixed) values for all
parameters, the probability value of the KS statistic, and
the duration of the estimation procedure in seconds. If the
depends command is applied, parameters are indexed;
indices are separated by an underline from the parameter
name. As indices the number (or word, respectively) defining the experimental condition in the data file is used.
If a parameter depends on more than one condition, indices are given in the order of condition specifiers in the
depends command.
Summary Log Files
In summary log files information from different data
files can be accumulated within a single output file. The
first line of the summary log file contains the names of the
variables. Following this, the results for each data file are
saved in a new line. The summary log file is convenient
to be read by standard statistical software packages (e.g.,
R, EXCEL, or SPSS) for further interference statistical
analysis of the estimates. To get this kind of output the
log command has to be used.
Screen Output
While active, fast-dm gives direct output in a text terminal on the screen (see Figure 3 for an example). In the
first four lines, information about the experiment is given.
First, the name of the control file is presented. Then, the
chosen precision value, and the name (or the template for
the name) and format of the data files are shown, as defined by the load command. The fourth line contains a
list of all parameters that are optimized. If any parameter
Examples of Two Control Files
Content of “experiment.ctl”
Description
format RESPONSE TIME
The file exp.dat is loaded. This text file must contain two values in each line: First the response, and second the response time. All parameters (a, z, v, t0, sz, sv, st0) are estimated from
the data, and results are saved to file results.dat. For the precision, the default value 3.0 is used.
load "exp.dat"
save "results.dat"
precision 2.0
Fast-dm loads all files with the affix “.dat” from the active directory. If a file is found, parameters are estimated and saved to corresponding files with the affix “.out,” and, additionally, to
the common output file called protocol.log. The starting point is not estimated but fixed to a/2,
and the variability of t0 (i.e., st0) is not estimated but fixed to 0. For each of several different
tasks, separate values for a are estimated. Likewise, different drift rates are estimated for each
stimulus type within each task. For the sake of speed, the precision is reduced to 2.
depends a task
depends v stim task
format task * stim RESPONSE TIME
load "*.dat"
save "*.out"
log "protocol.log"
FAST DIFFUSION MODEL ANALYSIS WITH FAST-DM 773
As can be seen from Table 4, parameters are recovered
well, and the computation of this simple model is very
fast. For Data Set 2, z was constrained to a specific value
that prohibited recovering the original value: Data was
simulated for an asymmetric model—that is, a model
in which z  0.8 a. Nonetheless, for the recovery, z was
set to 0.5 a. This example should illustrate that “wrong”
constraints lead to bad statistical fit. The following commands were used:
format RESPONSE TIME
load "exp2_2.dat"
save "exp2_2.out"
The results show that estimates for the drift and for the
variability of the drift are poor. This is due to a trade-off
effect: Because the large number of responses at the upper
threshold cannot be mapped on z, it is mapped on v. Nonetheless, the predicted CDF does not fit the data well: The
significant p value of the model indicates a model misfit,
as was expected.
Application Example 3:
Constraining Parameters Across Conditions
For Example 3, a more complex data set was simulated: Four experimental conditions defined by a 2  2
design were assumed were z and v depend on conditions
whereas all other parameters were assumed to be constant
over conditions (Table 5). For each of the four cells of the
design, 200 responses were simulated, resulting in a total
Application Example 2:
Constraining Parameters to Fixed Values
Example 2 gives two examples of how to fix certain
parameters (Table 4). To analyze Data Set 1, the following
control file was used:
format RESPONSE TIME
load "sample1.dat"
save "sample1.out"
Original and Recovered Parameter Values From the
Three Data Sets of Application Example 1
Recovered Values
Data Set 1
Data Set 2
Data Set 3
(n  2,000)
Note—p, probability of the Kolmogorov–Smirnov statistic; Time, duration of the parameter estimation procedure (in seconds).
experiment experiment.ctl (1 data sets):
precision: 2
format of "data.dat": * * difficulty target RESPONSE TIME
optimised parameters: a, z, v_difficulty_target, t0, sz, sv, st0
dataset data.dat:
a, z, v_easy_0, t0, sz, sv, st0 (9+55 samples)
a, z, v_easy_1, t0, sz, sv, st0 (46+18 samples)
a, z, v_hard_0, t0, sz, sv, st0 (18+46 samples)
a, z, v_hard_1, t0, sz, sv, st0 (37+27 samples)
... p = 0.246247
... p = 0.47401
... p = 0.484875
-> z = 0.503522
-> a = 1.239615
-> v_easy_0 = -1.241465
-> t0 = 0.256393
-> sz = 0.109391
-> sv = 0.281429
-> st0 = 0.099568
-> v_easy_1 = 1.201333
-> v_hard_0 = -0.272049
-> v_hard_1 = 0.745809
1 dataset processed, total CPU time used: 33.365000s
Figure 3. Sample of the screen output of fast-dm. The output contains information about the experiment
(Lines 1–4) and about the specific data set being processed (starting from Line 5). Because there are four
stimulus types, the data set is divided in four subsamples. For example, in Subsample 1 (containing stimuli
of the type “easy_0”) there were 55 responses coded with “0” and 9 responses coded with “1.” The three
p values are the results from the three consecutive runs of the simplex algorithm. Below, the estimates for
all parameters are shown. Note that stimuli of the target type 0 have a negative drift, because these stimuli
require the Alternative Response B, which is connected to the lower threshold.
774 VOSS AND VOSS
Fast-dm is a new and flexible tool that allows for a fast and
precise diffusion model data analysis. The program uses the
PDE method recently introduced by Voss and Voss (in press)
and for the parameter estimation the Kolmogorov–Smirnov
statistic is applied . Fast-dm estimates all
parameters of Ratcliff’s diffusion model (a, z, v, t0,
sz, sv, and st0). Also, complex models can be fitted, in which
some parameters may be valid for a whole data set, while
other parameters are allowed to vary between conditions.
It is also possible to fix parameters to given values, thereby
making more simple models possible (e.g., by setting the
variability parameters to 0 or by fixing z to a/2).
Fast-dm is free software and the source code is available at www.psychologie.uni-freiburg.de/Members/voss/
fast-dm. For Microsoft Windows, we provide also executable binaries of fast-dm. The program can be used, redistributed and modified under the terms of the GNU General
Public License (see note 2 for details). For decades, the
diffusion model could only be fitted by a selected group
of insiders. The program introduced in the present article
will allow many researchers—and even students—to run
their own diffusion model analyses.
AUTHOR NOTE
The research reported in this article was supported by Grant Kl 614/31-1
from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft to Karl Christoph Klauer.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to A. Voss,
Institut für Psychologie, Universität Freiburg, D-79085 Freiburg, Germany (e-mail: ).