Understanding Convolution for Semantic Segmentation
Panqu Wang1, Pengfei Chen1, Ye Yuan2, Ding Liu3, Zehua Huang1, Xiaodi Hou1, Garrison Cottrell4
1TuSimple, 2Carnegie Mellon University, 3University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, 4UC San Diego
1{panqu.wang,pengfei.chen,zehua.huang,xiaodi.hou}@tusimple.ai, ,
 , 
Recent advances in deep learning, especially deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs), have led to signiﬁcant
improvement over previous semantic segmentation systems.
Here we show how to improve pixel-wise semantic segmentation by manipulating convolution-related operations
that are of both theoretical and practical value. First, we
design dense upsampling convolution (DUC) to generate
pixel-level prediction, which is able to capture and decode
more detailed information that is generally missing in bilinear upsampling. Second, we propose a hybrid dilated
convolution (HDC) framework in the encoding phase. This
framework 1) effectively enlarges the receptive ﬁelds (RF)
of the network to aggregate global information; 2) alleviates what we call the “gridding issue”caused by the standard dilated convolution operation. We evaluate our approaches thoroughly on the Cityscapes dataset, and achieve
a state-of-art result of 80.1% mIOU in the test set at the
time of submission.
We also have achieved state-of-theart overall on the KITTI road estimation benchmark and
the PASCAL VOC2012 segmentation task. Our source code
can be found at 
TuSimple-DUC .
1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation aims to assign a categorical label
to every pixel in an image, which plays an important role
in image understanding and self-driving systems. The recent success of deep convolutional neural network (CNN)
models has enabled remarkable progress in
pixel-wise semantic segmentation tasks due to rich hierarchical features and an end-to-end trainable framework
 . Most state-of-the-art semantic segmentation systems have three key components:1) a fullyconvolutional network (FCN), ﬁrst introduced in , replacing the last few fully connected layers by convolutional
layers to make efﬁcient end-to-end learning and inference
that can take arbitrary input size; 2) Conditional Random
Fields (CRFs), to capture both local and long-range dependencies within an image to reﬁne the prediction map; 3) dilated convolution (or Atrous convolution), which is used to
increase the resolution of intermediate feature maps in order
to generate more accurate predictions while maintaining the
same computational cost.
Since the introduction of FCN in , improvements on
fully-supervised semantic segmentation systems are generally focused on two perspectives: First, applying deeper
FCN models. Signiﬁcant gains in mean Intersection-over-
Union (mIoU) scores on PASCAL VOC2012 dataset 
were reported when the 16-layer VGG-16 model was
replaced by a 101-layer ResNet-101 model ; using 152 layer ResNet-152 model yields further improvements . This trend is consistent with the performance of
these models on ILSVRC object classiﬁcation tasks, as
deeper networks generally can model more complex representations and learn more discriminative features that better
distinguish among categories. Second, making CRFs more
powerful. This includes applying fully connected pairwise
CRFs as a post-processing step , integrating CRFs
into the network by approximating its mean-ﬁeld inference
steps to enable end-to-end training, and incorporating additional information into CRFs such as edges
 and object detections .
We are pursuing further improvements on semantic segmentation from another perspective: the convolutional operations for both decoding (from intermediate feature map
to output label map) and encoding (from input image to feature map) counterparts. In decoding, most state-of-the-art
semantic segmentation systems simply use bilinear upsampling (before the CRF stage) to get the output label map
 . Bilinear upsampling is not learnable and may
lose ﬁne details. Inspired by work in image super-resolution
 , we propose a method called dense upsampling convoarXiv:1702.08502v3 [cs.CV] 1 Jun 2018
lution (DUC), which is extremely easy to implement and
can achieve pixel-level accuracy: instead of trying to recover the full-resolution label map at once, we learn an
array of upscaling ﬁlters to upscale the downsized feature
maps into the ﬁnal dense feature map of the desired size.
DUC naturally ﬁts the FCN framework by enabling end-toend training, and it increases the mIOU of pixel-level semantic segmentation on the Cityscapes dataset signiﬁcantly, especially on objects that are relatively small.
For the encoding part, dilated convolution recently became popular , as it maintains the resolution
and receptive ﬁeld of the network by in inserting “holes”in
the convolution kernels, thus eliminating the need for downsampling (by max-pooling or strided convolution). However, an inherent problem exists in the current dilated convolution framework, which we identify as “gridding”: as
zeros are padded between two pixels in a convolutional kernel, the receptive ﬁeld of this kernel only covers an area
with checkerboard patterns - only locations with non-zero
values are sampled, losing some neighboring information.
The problem gets worse when the rate of dilation increases,
generally in higher layers when the receptive ﬁeld is large:
the convolutional kernel is too sparse to cover any local information, since the non-zero values are too far apart. Information that contributes to a ﬁxed pixel always comes from
its predeﬁned gridding pattern, thus losing a huge portion
of information. Here we propose a simple hybrid dilation
convolution (HDC) framework as a ﬁrst attempt to address
this problem: instead of using the same rate of dilation for
the same spatial resolution, we use a range of dilation rates
and concatenate them serially the same way as “blocks”in
ResNet-101 . We show that HDC helps the network to
alleviate the gridding problem. Moreover, choosing proper
rates can effectively increases the receptive ﬁeld size and
improves the accuracy for objects that are relatively big.
We design DUC and HDC to make convolution operations better serve the need of pixel-level semantic segmentation. The technical details are described in Section 3 below. Combined with post-processing by Conditional Random Fields (CRFs), we show that this approach achieves
state-of-the art performance on the Cityscapes pixel-level
semantic labeling task, KITTI road estimation benchmark,
and PASCAL VOC2012 segmentation task.
2. Related Work
Decoding of Feature Representation: In the pixel-wise
semantic segmentation task, the output label map has the
same size as the input image.
Because of the operation
of max-pooling or strided convolution in CNNs, the size
of feature maps of the last few layers of the network are
inevitably downsampled. Multiple approaches have been
proposed to decode accurate information from the downsampled feature map to label maps. Bilinear interpolation
is commonly used , as it is fast and memoryefﬁcient.
Another popular method is called deconvolution, in which the unpooling operation, using stored pooling
switches from the pooling step, recovers the information
necessary for feature visualization . In , a single
deconvolutional layer is added in the decoding stage to produce the prediction result using stacked feature maps from
intermediate layers. In , multiple deconvolutional layers
are applied to generate chairs, tables, or cars from several
attributes. Noh et al. employ deconvolutional layers
as mirrored version of convolutional layers by using stored
pooled location in unpooling step. show that coarseto-ﬁne object structures, which are crucial to recover ﬁnedetailed information, can be reconstructed along the propagation of the deconvolutional layers. Fischer at al. use
a similar mirrored structure, but combine information from
multiple deconvolutional layers and perform upsampling to
make the ﬁnal prediction.
Dilated Convolution: Dilated Convolution (or Atrous
convolution) was originally developed in algorithme `a trous
for wavelet decomposition . The main idea of dilated
convolution is to insert “holes”(zeros) between pixels in
convolutional kernels to increase image resolution, thus enabling dense feature extraction in deep CNNs. In the semantic segmentation framework, dilated convolution is also
used to enlarge the ﬁeld of convolutional kernels. Yu &
Koltun use serialized layers with increasing rates of
dilation to enable context aggregation, while design an
“atrous spatial pyramid pooling (ASPP)”scheme to capture
multi-scale objects and context information by placing multiple dilated convolution layers in parallel. More recently,
dilated convolution has been applied to a broader range of
tasks, such as object detection , optical ﬂow , and
audio generation .
3. Our Approach
3.1. Dense Upsampling Convolution (DUC)
Suppose an input image has height H, width W, and
color channels C, and the goal of pixel-level semantic segmentation is to generate a label map with size H×W where
each pixel is labeled with a category label. After feeding
the image into a deep FCN, a feature map with dimension
h × w × c is obtained at the ﬁnal layer before making predictions, where h = H/d, w = W/d, and d is the downsampling factor. Instead of performing bilinear upsampling,
which is not learnable, or using deconvolution network (as
in ), in which zeros have to be padded in the unpooling
step before the convolution operation, DUC applies convolutional operations directly on the feature maps to get the
dense pixel-wise prediction map. Figure 1 depicts the architecture of our network with a DUC layer.
The DUC operation is all about convolution, which is
Figure 1. Illustration of the architecture of ResNet-101 network with Hybrid Dilated Convolution (HDC) and Dense Upsampling Convolution (DUC) layer. HDC is applied within ResNet blocks, and DUC is applied on top of network and is used for decoding purpose.
performed on the feature map from ResNet of dimension
h × w × c to get the output feature map of dimension
h × w × (d2 × L), where L is the total number of classes
in the semantic segmentation task. Thus each layer of the
dense convolution is learning the prediction for each pixel.
The output feature map is then reshaped to H × W × L
with a softmax layer, and an elementwise argmax operator
is applied to get the ﬁnal label map. In practice, the “reshape” operation may not be necessary, as the feature map
can be collapsed directly to a vector to be fed into the softmax layer. The key idea of DUC is to divide the whole label map into equal d2 subparts which have the same height
and width as the incoming feature map. This is to say, we
transform the whole label map into a smaller label map with
multiple channels. This transformation allows us to apply
the convolution operation directly between the input feature
map and the output label maps without the need of inserting extra values in deconvolutional networks (the “unpooling”operation).
Since DUC is learnable, it is capable of capturing and
recovering ﬁne-detailed information that is generally missing in the bilinear interpolation operation. For example, if
a network has a downsample rate of 1/16, and an object
has a length or width less than 16 pixels (such as a pole or a
person far away), then it is more than likely that bilinear upsampling will not be able to recover this object. Meanwhile,
the corresponding training labels have to be downsampled
to correspond with the output dimension, which will already
cause information loss for ﬁne details. The prediction of
DUC, on the other hand, is performed at the original resolution, thus enabling pixel-level decoding. In addition, the
DUC operation can be naturally integrated into the FCN
framework, and makes the whole encoding and decoding
process end-to-end trainable.
3.2. Hybrid Dilated Convolution (HDC)
In 1-D, dilated convolution is deﬁned as:
f[i + r · l]h[l],
where f[i] is the input signal, g[i] is the output signal , h[l]
denotes the ﬁlter of length L, and r corresponds to the dilation rate we use to sample f[i]. In standard convolution,
In a semantic segmentation system, 2-D dilated convolution is constructed by inserting “holes”(zeros) between
each pixel in the convolutional kernel. For a convolution
kernel with size k × k, the size of resulting dilated ﬁlter
is kd × kd, where kd = k + (k −1) · (r −1). Dilated
convolution is used to maintain high resolution of feature
maps in FCN through replacing the max-pooling operation
or strided convolution layer while maintaining the receptive ﬁeld (or “ﬁeld of view”in ) of the corresponding
layer. For example, if a convolution layer in ResNet-101
has a stride s = 2, then the stride is reset to 1 to remove
downsampling, and the dilation rate r is set to 2 for all
convolution kernels of subsequent layers. This process is
applied iteratively through all layers that have a downsampling operation, thus the feature map in the output layer can
maintain the same resolution as the input layer. In practice,
however, dilated convolution is generally applied on feature
maps that are already downsampled to achieve a reasonable
efﬁciency/accuracy trade-off .
theoretical
above dilated convolution framework, and we call it
“gridding”(Figure 2): For a pixel p in a dilated convolutional layer l, the information that contributes to pixel p
comes from a nearby kd × kd region in layer l −1 centered
Since dilated convolution introduces zeros in the
convolutional kernel, the actual pixels that participate in
Figure 2. Illustration of the gridding problem. Left to right: the
pixels (marked in blue) contributes to the calculation of the center
pixel (marked in red) through three convolution layers with kernel
size 3 × 3. (a) all convolutional layers have a dilation rate r = 2.
(b) subsequent convolutional layers have dilation rates of r = 1,
2, 3, respectively.
the computation from the kd × kd region are just k × k,
with a gap of r −1 between them. If k = 3, r = 2, only 9
out of 25 pixels in the region are used for the computation
(Figure 2 (a)). Since all layers have equal dilation rates r,
then for pixel p in the top dilated convolution layer ltop,
the maximum possible number of locations that contribute
to the calculation of the value of p is (w′ × h′)/r2 where
w′, h′ are the width and height of the bottom dilated
convolution layer, respectively.
As a result, pixel p can
only view information in a checkerboard fashion, and lose
a large portion (at least 75% when r = 2) of information.
When r becomes large in higher layers due to additional
downsampling operations, the sample from the input can be
very sparse, which may not be good for learning because 1)
local information is completely missing; 2) the information
can be irrelevant across large distances. Another outcome
of the gridding effect is that pixels in nearby r × r regions
at layer l receive information from completely different
set of “grids” which may impair the consistency of local
information.
Here we propose a simple solution- hybrid dilated convolution (HDC), to address this theoretical issue. Suppose
we have N convolutional layers with kernel size K×K that
have dilation rates of [r1, ..., ri, ..., rn], the goal of HDC is
to let the ﬁnal size of the RF of a series of convolutional
operations fully covers a square region without any holes or
missing edges. We deﬁne the “maximum distance between
two nonzero values” as
Mi = max[Mi+1 −2ri, Mi+1 −2(Mi+1 −ri), ri], (2)
with Mn = rn. The design goal is to let M2 ≤K. For example, for kernel size K = 3, an r = pattern works
as M2 = 2; however, an r = pattern does not work
as M2 = 5. Practically, instead of using the same dilation rate for all layers after the downsampling occurs, we
use a different dilation rate for each layer. In our network,
the assignment of dilation rate follows a sawtooth wave-like
heuristic: a number of layers are grouped together to form
the “rising edge”of the wave that has an increasing dilation
rate, and the next group repeats the same pattern. For example, for all layers that have dilation rate r = 2, we form 3
succeeding layers as a group, and change their dilation rates
to be 1, 2, and 3, respectively. By doing this, the top layer
can access information from a broader range of pixels, in
the same region as the original conﬁguration (Figure 2 (b)).
This process is repeated through all layers, thus making the
receptive ﬁeld unchanged at the top layer.
Another beneﬁt of HDC is that it can use arbitrary dilation rates through the process, thus naturally enlarging the
receptive ﬁelds of the network without adding extra modules , which is important for recognizing objects that
are relatively big. One important thing to note, however, is
that the dilation rate within a group should not have a common factor relationship (like 2,4,8, etc.), otherwise the gridding problem will still hold for the top layer. This is a key
difference between our HDC approach and the atrous spatial pyramid pooling (ASPP) module in , or the context
aggregation module in , where dilation factors that have
common factor relationships are used. In addition, HDC is
naturally integrated with the original layers of the network,
without any need to add extra modules as in .
4. Experiments and Results
We report our experiments and results on three challenging semantic segmentation datasets: Cityscapes , KITTI
dataset for road estimation, and PASCAL VOC2012
 . We use ResNet-101 or ResNet-152 networks that have
been pretrained on the ImageNet dataset as a starting point
for all of our models. The output layer contains the number of semantic categories to be classiﬁed depending on the
dataset (including background, if applicable). We use the
cross-entropy error at each pixel over the categories. This is
then summed over all pixel locations of the output map, and
we optimize this objective function using standard Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD). We use MXNet to train and
evaluate all of our models on NVIDIA TITAN X GPUs.
4.1. Cityscapes Dataset
The Cityscapes Dataset is a large dataset that focuses on
semantic understanding of urban street scenes. The dataset
contains 5000 images with ﬁne annotations across 50 cities,
different seasons, varying scene layout and background.
The dataset is annotated with 30 categories, of which 19
categories are included for training and evaluation (others
are ignored). The training, validation, and test set contains
2975, 500, and 1525 ﬁne images, respectively. An additional 20000 images with coarse (polygonal) annotations
are also provided, but are only used for training.
Baseline Model
We use the DeepLab-V2 ResNet-101 framework to train
our baseline model. Speciﬁcally, the network has a downsampling rate of 8, and dilated convolution with rate of 2
and 4 are applied to res4b and res5b blocks, respectively.
An ASPP module with dilation rate of 6, 12, 18, and 24 is
added on top of the network to extract multiscale context
information. The prediction maps and training labels are
downsampled by a factor of 8 compared to the size of original images, and bilinear upsampling is used to get the ﬁnal
prediction. Since the image size in the Cityscapes dataset
is 1024 × 2048, which is too big to ﬁt in the GPU memory,
we partition each image into twelve 800×800 patches with
partial overlapping, thus augmenting the training set to have
35700 images. This data augmentation strategy is to make
sure all regions in an image can be visited. This is an improvement over random cropping, in which nearby regions
may be visited repeatedly.
We train the network using mini-batch SGD with patch
size 544×544 (randomly cropped from the 800×800 patch)
and batch size 12, using multiple GPUs. The initial learning
rate is set to 2.5 × 10−4, and a “poly”learning rate (as in
 ) with power = 0.9 is applied. Weight decay is set to
5 × 10−4, and momentum is 0.9. The network is trained for
20 epochs and achieves mIoU of 72.3% on the validation
Dense Upsampling Convolution (DUC)
We examine the effect of DUC on the baseline network. In
DUC the only thing we change is the shape of the top convolutional layer. For example, if the dimension of the top convolutional layer is 68 × 68 × 19 in the baseline model (19 is
the number of classes), then the dimension of the same layer
for a network with DUC will be 68 × 68 × (r2 × 19) where
r is the total downsampling rate of the network (r = 8
in this case). The prediction map is then reshaped to size
544×544×19. DUC will introduce extra parameters compared to the baseline model, but only at the top convolutional layer. We train the ResNet-DUC network the same
way as the baseline model for 20 epochs, and achieve a
mean IOU of 74.3% on the validation set, a 2% increase
compared to the baseline model. Visualization of the result
of ResNet-DUC and comparison with the baseline model is
shown in Figure 3
From Figure 3, we can clearly see that DUC is very helpful for identifying small objects, such as poles, trafﬁc lights,
and trafﬁc signs. Consistent with our intuition, pixel-level
dense upsampling can recover detailed information that is
generally missed by bilinear interpolation.
Ablation Studies We examine the effect of different settings of the network on the performance. Speciﬁcally, we
examine: 1) the downsampling rate of the network, which
controls the resolution of the intermediate feature map; 2)
whether to apply the ASPP module, and the number of parallel paths in the module; 3) whether to perform 12-fold data
augmentation; and 4) cell size, which determines the size of
neighborhood region (cell × cell) that one predicted pixel
projects to. Pixel-level DUC should use cell = 1; however,
since the ground-truth label generally cannot reach pixellevel precision, we also try cell = 2 in the experiments.
From Table 1 we can see that making the downsampling
rate smaller decreases the accuracy. Also it signiﬁcantly
raises the computational cost due to the increasing resolution of the feature maps. ASPP generally helps to improve
the performance, and increasing ASPP channels from 4 to
6 (dilation rate 6 to 36 with interval 6) yields a 0.2% boost.
Data augmentation helps to achieve another 1.5% improvement. Using cell = 2 yields slightly better performance
when compared with cell = 1, and it helps to reduce computational cost by decreasing the channels of the last convolutional layer by a factor of 4.
Augmentation
Table 1. Ablation studies for applying ResNet-101 on the
Cityscapes dataset. DS: Downsampling rate of the network. Cell:
neighborhood region that one predicted pixel represents.
Bigger Patch Size Since setting cell = 2 reduces GPU
memory cost for network training, we explore the effect
of patch size on the performance. Our assumption is that,
since the original images are all 1024 × 2048, the network
should be trained using patches as big as possible in order
to aggregate both local detail and global context information that may help learning. As such, we make the patch
size to be 880 × 880, and set the batch size to be 1 on
each of the 4 GPUs used in training. Since the patch size
exceeds the maximum dimension (800 × 800) in the previous 12-fold data augmentation framework, we adopt a new
7-fold data augmentation strategy: seven center locations
with x = 512, y = {256, 512, ..., 1792} are set in the original image; for each center location, a 880 × 880 patch is
obtained by randomly setting its center within a 160 × 160
rectangle area centered at each center. This strategy makes
sure that we can sample all areas in the image, including
edges. Training with a bigger patch size boosts the performance to 75.7%, a 1% improvement over the previous best
Figure 3. Effect of Dense Upsampling Convolution (DUC) on the Cityscapes validation set. From left to right: input image, ground truth
(areas with black color are ignored in evaluation), baseline model, and our ResNet-DUC model.
Compared with Deconvolution We compare our DUC
model with deconvolution, which also involves learning for
upsampling. Particularly, we compare with 1) direct deconvolution from the prediction map (dowsampled by 8) to the
original resolution; 2) deconvolution with an upsampling
factor of 2 ﬁrst, followed by an upsampling factor of 4. We
design the deconv network to have approximately the same
number of parameters as DUC. We use the ResNet-DUC
bigger patch model to train the networks. The above two
models achieve mIOU of 75.1% and 75.0%, respectively,
lower than the ResNet-DUC model (75.7% mIoU).
Conditional Random Fields (CRFs) Fully-connected
CRFs are widely used for improving semantic segmentation quality as a post-processing step of an FCN . We
follow the formation of CRFs as shown in . We perform
a grid search on parameters on the validation set, and use
σα = 15, σβ = 3, σγ = 1 , w1 = 3, and w2 = 3 for
all of our models. Applying CRFs to our best ResNet-DUC
model yields an mIoU of 76.7%, a 1% improvement over
the model does not use CRFs.
Hybrid Dilated Convolution (HDC)
We use the best 101 layer ResNet-DUC model as a starting
point of applying HDC. Speciﬁcally, we experiment with
several variants of the HDC module:
1. No dilation: For all ResNet blocks containing dilation,
we make their dilation rate r = 1 (no dilation).
2. Dilation-conv:
For all blocks contain dilation, we
group every 2 blocks together and make r = 2 for the
ﬁrst block, and r = 1 for the second block.
3. Dilation-RF: For the res4b module that contains 23
blocks with dilation rate r = 2, we group every 3
blocks together and change their dilation rates to be
1, 2, and 3, respectively. For the last two blocks, we
keep r = 2. For the res5b module which contains 3
blocks with dilation rate r = 4, we change them to 3,
4, and 5, respectively.
4. Dilation-bigger: For res4b module, we group every 4
blocks together and change their dilation rates to be 1,
2, 5, and 9, respectively. The rates for the last 3 blocks
are 1, 2, and 5. For res5b module, we set the dilation
rates to be 5, 9, and 17.
The result is summarized in Table 2. We can see that increasing receptive ﬁeld size generally yields higher accuracy. Figure 5 illustrates the effectiveness of the ResNet-
DUC-HDC model in eliminating the gridding effect. A visualization result is shown in Figure 4. We can see our
best ResNet-DUC-HDC model performs particularly well
on objects that are relatively big.
RF increased
mIoU (without CRF)
No dilation
Dilation-conv
Dilation-RF
Dilation-bigger
Table 2. Result of different variations of the HDC module. “RF
increased”is the total size of receptive ﬁeld increase along a single
dimension compared to the layer before the dilation operation.
Deeper Networks We have also tried replacing our
ResNet-101 based model with the ResNet-152 network,
which is deeper and achieves better performance on the
ILSVRC image classiﬁcation task than ResNet-101 .
Figure 4. Effect of Hybrid Dilated Convolution (HDC) on the Cityscapes validation set. From left to right: input image, ground truth, result
of the ResNet-DUC model, result of the ResNet-DUC-HDC model (Dilation-bigger).
Figure 5. Effectiveness of HDC in eliminating the gridding effect. First row: ground truth patch. Second row: prediction of the
ResNet-DUC model. A strong gridding effect is observed. Third
row: prediction of the ResNet-DUC-HDC (Dilation-RF) model.
Due to the network difference, we ﬁrst train the ResNet-152
network to learn the parameters in all batch normalization
(BN) layers for 10 epochs, and continue ﬁne-tuning the network by ﬁxing these BN parameters for another 20 epochs.
The results are summarized in Table 3. We can see that
using the deeper ResNet-152 model generally yields better
performance than the ResNet-101 model.
ResNet-101
ResNet-101
ResNet-101
ﬁne+coarse
ResNet-152
ResNet-152
ResNet-152
ﬁne+coarse
Table 3. Effect of depth of the network and upsampling method for
Cityscapes validation set (without CRF).
Test Set Results
Our results on the Cityscapes test set are summarized in
There are separate entries for models trained
using ﬁne-labels only, and using a combination of ﬁne
and coarse labels. Our ResNet-DUC-HDC model achieves
77.6% mIoU using ﬁne data only. Adding coarse data help
us achieve 78.5% mIoU.
In addition, inspired by the design of the VGG network
 , in that a single 5 × 5 convolutional layer can be decomposed into two adjacent 3×3 convolutional layers to increase the expressiveness of the network while maintaining
the receptive ﬁeld size, we replaced the 7 × 7 convolutional
layer in the original ResNet-101 network by three 3 × 3
convolutional layers. By retraining the updated network,
we achieve a mIoU of 80.1% on the test set using a single
model without CRF post-processing. Our result achieves
the state-of-the-art performance on the Cityscapes dataset
at the time of submission. Compared with the strong baseline of Chen et al. , we improve the mIoU by a signiﬁcant
margin (9.7%), which demonstrates the effectiveness of our
FCN 8s 
Dilation10 
DeepLabv2-CRF 
Adelaide context 
ResNet-DUC-HDC (ours)
LRR-4x 
ResNet-DUC-HDC-Coarse
ResNet-DUC-HDC-Coarse (better network)
Table 4. Performance on Cityscapes test set.
4.2. KITTI Road Segmentation
Dataset The KITTI road segmentation task contains images of three various categories of road scenes, including
289 training images and 290 test images. The goal is to
decide if each pixel in images is road or not. It is challenging to use neural network based methods due to the limited number of training images. In order to avoid overﬁtting, we crop patches of 320 × 320 pixels with a stride of
100 pixels from the training images, and use the ResNet-
101-DUC model pretrained from ImageNet during training.
Other training settings are the same as Cityscapes experiment. We did not apply CRFs for post-processing.
Figure 6. Examples of visualization on Kitti road segmentation test
set. The road is marked in red.
Results We achieve the state-of-the-art results at the time
of submission without using any additional information of
stereo, laser points and GPS. Speciﬁcally, our model attains
the highest maximum F1-measure in the sub-categories
of urban unmarked (UU ROAD), urban multiple marked
(UMM ROAD) and the overall category URBAN ROAD of
all sub-categories, the highest average precision across all
three sub-categories and the overall category by the time of
submission of this paper. Examples of visualization results
are shown in Figure 6. The detailed results are displayed in
Table 5 1.
URBAN ROAD
Table 5. Performance on different road scenes in KITTI test set.
MaxF: Maximum F1-measure, AP: Average precision.
4.3. PASCAL VOC2012 dataset
Dataset The PASCAL VOC2012 segmentation benchmark contains 1464 training images, 1449 validation images, and 1456 test images. Using the extra annotations provided by , the training set is augmented to have 10582
comparison
 road.php.
images. The dataset has 20 foreground object categories
and 1 background class with pixel-level annotation.
Results We ﬁrst pretrain our 152 layer ResNet-DUC
model using a combination of augmented VOC2012 training set and MS-COCO dataset , and then ﬁnetune the
pretrained network using augmented VOC2012 trainval set.
We use patch size 512×512 (zero-padded) throughout training. All other training strategies are the same as Cityscapes
experiment. We achieve mIOU of 83.1% on the test set
using a single model without any model ensemble or multiscale testing, which is the best-performing method at the
time of submission2. The detailed results are displayed in
Table 6, and the visualizations are shown in Figure 7.
Figure 7. Examples of visualization on the PASCAL VOC2012
segmentation validation set. Left to right: input image, ground
truth, our result before CRF, and after CRF.
DeepLabv2-CRF 
CentraleSupelec Deep G-CRF 
ResNet-DUC (ours)
Table 6. Performance on the Pascal VOC2012 test set.
5. Conclusion
We propose simple yet effective convolutional operations for improving semantic segmentation systems. We
designed a new dense upsampling convolution (DUC) operation to enable pixel-level prediction on feature maps,
and hybrid dilated convolution (HDC) to solve the gridding
problem, effectively enlarging the receptive ﬁelds of the network. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of
our framework on various semantic segmentation tasks.
2Result link: 
6. Acknowledgments
We thank the members of TuSimple and Gary’s Unbelievable Research Unit (GURU) for comments on this work.
GWC was supported in part by Guangzhou Science and
Technology Planning Project (201704030051) and NSF cooperative agreement SMA 1041755 to the Temporal Dynamics of Learning Center, an NSF Science of Learning