NATURE HUMAN BEHAVIOUR 1, 0021 | DOI: 10.1038/s41562-016-0021 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
PERSPECTIVE
PUBLISHED: 10 JANUARY 2017 | VOLUME: 1 | ARTICLE NUMBER: 0021
hat proportion of published research is likely to be false?
Low sample size, small effect sizes, data dredging (also
known as P-hacking), conflicts of interest, large num­
bers of scientists working competitively in silos without combin­
ing their efforts, and so on, may conspire to dramatically increase
the probability that a published finding is incorrect1. The field of
metascience — the scientific study of science itself — is flourishing
and has generated substantial empirical evidence for the existence
and prevalence of threats to efficiency in knowledge accumulation
(refs 2–7; Fig. 1).
Data from many fields suggests reproducibility is lower than is
desirable8–14; one analysis estimates that 85% of biomedical research
efforts are wasted14, while 90% of respondents to a recent survey
in Nature agreed that there is a ‘reproducibility crisis’15. Whether
‘crisis’ is the appropriate term to describe the current state or trajec­
tory of science is debatable, but accumulated evidence indicates that
there is substantial room for improvement with regard to research
practices to maximize the efficiency of the research community’s
use of the public’s financial investment in research.
Here we propose a series of measures that we believe will improve
research efficiency and robustness of scientific findings by directly
targeting specific threats to reproducible science. We argue for the
adoption, evaluation and ongoing improvement of these measures
to optimize the pace and efficiency of knowledge accumulation. The
measures are organized into the following categories16: methods,
reporting and dissemination, reproducibility, evaluation and incen­
tives. They are not intended to be exhaustive, but provide a broad,
practical and evidence-based set of actions that can be implemented
by researchers, institutions, journals and funders. The measures and
their current implementation are summarized in Table 1.
A manifesto for reproducible science
Marcus R. Munafò1,2*, Brian A. Nosek3,4, Dorothy V. M. Bishop5, Katherine S. Button6,
Christopher D. Chambers7, Nathalie Percie du Sert8, Uri Simonsohn9, Eric-Jan Wagenmakers10,
Jennifer J. Ware11 and John P. A. Ioannidis12,13,14
Improving the reliability and efficiency of scientific research will increase the credibility of the published scientific literature
and accelerate discovery. Here we argue for the adoption of measures to optimize key elements of the scientific process: meth­
ods, reporting and dissemination, reproducibility, evaluation and incentives. There is some evidence from both simulations and
empirical studies supporting the likely effectiveness of these measures, but their broad adoption by researchers, institutions,
funders and journals will require iterative evaluation and improvement. We discuss the goals of these measures, and how they
can be implemented, in the hope that this will facilitate action toward improving the transparency, reproducibility and efficiency
of scientific research.
The problem
A hallmark of scientific creativity is the ability to see novel and
unexpected patterns in data. John Snow’s identification of links
between cholera and water supply17, Paul Broca’s work on language
lateralization18 and Jocelyn Bell Burnell’s discovery of pulsars19 are
examples of breakthroughs achieved by interpreting observations in
a new way. However, a major challenge for scientists is to be open
to new and important insights while simultaneously avoiding being
misled by our tendency to see structure in randomness. The combi­
nation of apophenia (the tendency to see patterns in random data),
confirmation bias (the tendency to focus on evidence that is in line
with our expectations or favoured explanation) and hindsight bias
(the tendency to see an event as having been predictable only after
it has occurred) can easily lead us to false conclusions20. Thomas
Levenson documents the example of astronomers who became con­
vinced they had seen the fictitious planet Vulcan because their con­
temporary theories predicted its existence21. Experimenter effects
are an example of this kind of bias22.
Over-interpretation of noise is facilitated by the extent to which
data analysis is rapid, flexible and automated23. In a high-dimen­
sional dataset, there may be hundreds or thousands of reasonable
alternative approaches to analysing the same data24,25. For example,
in a systematic review of functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) studies, Carp showed that there were almost as many unique
analytical pipelines as there were studies26. If several thousand
potential analytical pipelines can be applied to high-dimensional
data, the generation of false-positive findings is highly likely. For
example, applying almost 7,000 analytical pipelines to a single fMRI
dataset resulted in over 90% of brain voxels showing significant acti­
vation in at least one analysis27.
1MRC Integrative Epidemiology Unit, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 2BN, UK. 2UK Centre for Tobacco and Alcohol Studies, School of Experimental
Psychology, University of Bristol, 12a Priory Road, Bristol BS8 1TU, UK. 3Department of Psychology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 22904,
USA. 4Center for Open Science, Charlottesville, Virginia 22903, USA. 5Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, 9 South Parks Road,
Oxford OX1 3UD, UK. 6Department of Psychology, University of Bath, Bath BS2 7AY, UK. 7Cardiff University Brain Research Imaging Centre, School of
Psychology, Cardiff University, Cardiff CF24 4HQ, UK. 8National Centre for the Replacement, Refinement and Reduction of Animals in Research (NC3Rs),
London NW1 2BE, UK. 9The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA. 10Department of Psychology, University
of Amsterdam, Amsterdam 1018 WT, Netherlands. 11CHDI Management/CHDI Foundation, New York, New York 10001, USA. 12Meta-Research Innovation
Center at Stanford (METRICS), Stanford University, Stanford 94304, California, USA. 13Stanford Prevention Research Center, Department of Medicine and
Department of Health Research and Policy, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford 94305, California, USA. 14Department of Statistics, Stanford
University School of Humanities and Sciences, Stanford 94305, California, USA.
*e-mail: 
NATURE HUMAN BEHAVIOUR 1, 0021 | DOI: 10.1038/s41562-016-0021 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
PERSPECTIVE
NATURE HUMAN BEHAVIOUR
During data analysis it can be difficult for researchers to recognize
P-hacking28 or data dredging because confirmation and hindsight
biases can encourage the acceptance of outcomes that fit expecta­
tions or desires as appropriate, and the rejection of outcomes that do
not as the result of suboptimal designs or analyses. Hypotheses may
emerge that fit the data and are then reported without indication or
recognition of their post hoc origin7. This, unfortunately, is not sci­
entific discovery, but self-deception29. Uncontrolled, it can dramati­
cally increase the false discovery rate. We need measures to counter
the natural tendency of enthusiastic scientists who are motivated by
discovery to see patterns in noise.
In this section we describe measures that can be implemented when
performing research (including, for example, study design, meth­
ods, statistics, and collaboration).
Protecting against cognitive biases. There is a substantial lit­
erature on the difficulty of avoiding cognitive biases. An effective
solution to mitigate self-deception and unwanted biases is blinding.
In some research contexts, participants and data collectors can be
blinded to the experimental condition that participants are assigned
to, and to the research hypotheses, while the data analyst can be
blinded to key parts of the data. For example, during data prepa­
ration and cleaning, the identity of experimental conditions or the
variable labels can be masked so that the output is not interpretable
in terms of the research hypothesis. In some physical sciences this
approach has been extended to include deliberate perturbations in
or masking of data to allow data preparation (for example, iden­
tification of outliers) to proceed without the analyst being able to
see the corresponding results30. Pre-registration of the study design,
primary outcome(s) and analysis plan (see ‘Promoting study preregistration’ section’, below) is a highly effective form of blinding
because the data do not exist and the outcomes are not yet known.
Improving methodological training. Research design and statis­
tical analysis are mutually dependent. Common misperceptions,
such as the interpretation of P values31, limitations of null-hypothe­
sis significance testing32, the meaning and importance of statistical
power2, the accuracy of reported effect sizes33, and the likelihood
that a sample size that generated a statistically significant finding will
also be adequate to replicate a true finding34, could all be addressed
through improved statistical training. Similarly, basic design prin­
ciples are important, such as blinding to reduce experimenter bias,
randomization or counterbalancing to control for confounding,
and the use of within-subjects designs, where possible, to maxi­
mize power. However, integrative training in research practices that
can protect oneself against cognitive biases and the effects of dis­
torted incentives is arguably more important. Moreover, statistical
and methodological best practices are under constant revision and
improvement, so that senior as well as junior researchers need con­
tinuing methodological education, not least because much training
of early-career researchers is informal and flows from their supervi­
sor or mentor. A failure to adopt advances in methodology — such
as the very slow progress in increasing statistical power35,36 — may
be partly a function of failing to inculcate a continuing professional
education and development ethic.
Without formal requirements for continuing education, the most
effective solutions may be to develop educational resources that are
accessible, easy-to-digest and immediately and effectively applicable
to research (for example, brief, web-based modules for specific top­
ics, and combinations of modules that are customized for particular
research applications). A modular approach simplifies the process of
iterative updating of those materials. Demonstration software and
hands-on examples may also make the lessons and implications par­
ticularly tangible to researchers at any career stage: the Experimental
Design Assistant ( supports research design
for whole animal experiments, while P-hacker ( 
org/apps/p-hacker/) shows just how easy it is to generate apparently
statistically significant findings by exploiting analytic flexibility.
Implementing independent methodological support. The need
for independent methodological support is well-established in some
areas — many clinical trials, for example, have multidisciplinary
trial steering committees to provide advice and oversee the design
and conduct of the trial. The need for these committees grew out of
the well-understood financial conflicts of interest that exist in many
clinical trials. The sponsor of a trial may be the company manufac­
turing the product, and any intentional or unintentional influence
can distort the study design, analysis and interpretation of results for
the ultimate financial benefit of the manufacturer at the cost of the
accuracy of the science and the health benefit to the consumers37,38.
Non-financial conflicts of interest also exist, such as the beliefs and
preconceptions of individual scientists and the stakes that research­
ers have in obtaining publishable results in order to progress their
career39,40. Including independent researchers (particularly meth­
odologists with no personal investment in a research topic) in the
design, monitoring, analysis or interpretation of research outcomes
may mitigate some of those influences, and can be done either at the
level of the individual research project or through a process facili­
tated by a funding agency (see Box 1).
Encouraging collaboration and team science. Studies of statisti­
cal power persistently find it to be below (sometimes well below)
50%, across both time and the different disciplines studied2,35,36.
Low statistical power increases the likelihood of obtaining both
false-positive and false-negative results2, meaning that it offers no
advantage if the purpose is to accumulate knowledge. Despite this,
low-powered research persists because of dysfunctional incentives,
poor understanding of the consequences of low power, and lack of
resources to improve power. Team science is a solution to the lat­
ter problem — instead of relying on the limited resources of sin­
gle investigators, distributed collaboration across many study sites
facilitates high-powered designs and greater potential for testing
generalizability across the settings and populations sampled. This
also brings greater scope for multiple theoretical and disciplinary
perspectives, and a diverse range of research cultures and experi­
ences, to be incorporated into a research project.
Design study
Interpret results
Publication bias
Poor quality control
Failure to control for bias
Low statistical power
Generate and
specify hypothesis
Conduct study and
collect data
Analyse data and
test hypothesis
Publish and/or
conduct next experiment
Figure 1 | Threats to reproducible science. An idealized version of the
hypothetico-deductive model of the scientific method is shown. Various
potential threats to this model exist (indicated in red), including lack of
replication5, hypothesizing after the results are known (HARKing)7, poor
study design, low statistical power2, analytical flexibility51, P-hacking4,
publication bias3 and lack of data sharing6. Together these will serve to
undermine the robustness of published research, and may also impact on
the ability of science to self-correct.
NATURE HUMAN BEHAVIOUR 1, 0021 | DOI: 10.1038/s41562-016-0021 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
PERSPECTIVE
NATURE HUMAN BEHAVIOUR
Multi-centre and collaborative efforts have a long and success­
ful tradition in fields such as randomized controlled trials in some
areas of clinical medicine, and in genetic association analyses, and
have improved the robustness of the resulting research literatures.
Multi-site collaborative projects have also been advocated for other
types of research, such as animal studies41–43, in an effort to maxi­
mize their power, enhance standardization, and optimize transpar­
ency and protection from biases. The Many Labs projects illustrate
this potential in the social and behavioural sciences, with dozens
of laboratories implementing the same research protocol to obtain
highly precise estimates of effect sizes, and evaluate variability
across samples and settings44,45. It is also possible, and desirable, to
incorporate a team science ethos into student training (see Box 2).
Reporting and dissemination
In this section we describe measures that can be implemented when
communicating research (including, for example, reporting stand­
ards, study pre-registration, and disclosing conflicts of interest).
Promoting study pre-registration. Pre-registration of study pro­
tocols for randomized controlled trials in clinical medicine has
become standard practice46. In its simplest form it may simply
comprise the registration of the basic study design, but it can also
include a detailed pre-specification of the study procedures, out­
comes and statistical analysis plan. It was introduced to address two
problems: publication bias and analytical flexibility (in particular
outcome switching in the case of clinical medicine). Publication
bias47, also known as the file drawer problem48, refers to the fact
that many more studies are conducted than published. Studies that
obtain positive and novel results are more likely to be published than
studies that obtain negative results or report replications of prior
results47,49,50. The consequence is that the published literature indi­
cates stronger evidence for findings than exists in reality. Outcome
switching refers to the possibility of changing the outcomes of inter­
est in the study depending on the observed results. A researcher
may include ten variables that could be considered outcomes of
the research, and — once the results are known — intentionally or
unintentionally select the subset of outcomes that show statistically
significant results as the outcomes of interest. The consequence
is an increase in the likelihood that reported results are spurious
by leveraging chance, while negative evidence gets ignored. This
is one of several related research practices that can inflate spuri­
ous findings when analysis decisions are made with knowledge of
the observed data, such as selection of models, exclusion rules and
covariates. Such data-contingent analysis decisions constitute what
has become known as P-hacking51, and pre-registration can protect
against all of these.
The strongest form of pre-registration involves both register­
ing the study (with a commitment to make the results public) and
closely pre-specifying the study design, primary outcome and anal­
ysis plan in advance of conducting the study or knowing the out­
comes of the research. In principle, this addresses publication bias
by making all research discoverable, whether or not it is ultimately
published, allowing all of the evidence about a finding to be obtained
and evaluated. It also addresses outcome switching, and P-hacking
more generally, by requiring the researcher to articulate analytical
decisions prior to observing the data, so that these decisions remain
data-independent. Critically, it also makes clear the distinction
Table 1 | A manifesto for reproducible science.
Examples of initiatives/potential solutions
(extent of current adoption)
Stakeholder(s)
Protecting against cognitive biases
All of the initiatives listed below (* to ****)
Blinding (**)
Improving methodological training
Rigorous training in statistics and research methods for
future researchers (*)
Rigorous continuing education in statistics and methods for
researchers (*)
Independent methodological support
Involvement of methodologists in research (**)
Independent oversight (*)
Collaboration and team science
Multi-site studies/distributed data collection (*)
Team-science consortia (*)
Reporting and
dissemination
Promoting study pre-registration
Registered Reports (*)
Open Science Framework (*)
Improving the quality of reporting
Use of reporting checklists (**)
Protocol checklists (*)
Protecting against conflicts of interest
Disclosure of conflicts of interest (***)
Exclusion/containment of financial and non-financial
conflicts of interest (*)
Reproducibility
Encouraging transparency and open
Open data, materials, software and so on (* to **)
Pre-registration (**** for clinical trials, * for other studies)
Evaluation
Diversifying peer review
 
**** in physical sciences)
Pre- and post-publication peer review, for example, Publons,
PubMed Commons (*)
Incentives
Rewarding open and reproducible
Badges (*)
Registered Reports (*)
Transparency and Openness Promotion guidelines (*)
Funding replication studies (*)
Open science practices in hiring and promotion (*)
Estimated extent of current adoption: *, <5%; **, 5–30%; ***, 30–60%; ****, >60%. Abbreviations for key stakeholders: J, journals/publishers; F, funders; I, institutions; R, regulators.
NATURE HUMAN BEHAVIOUR 1, 0021 | DOI: 10.1038/s41562-016-0021 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
PERSPECTIVE
NATURE HUMAN BEHAVIOUR
between data-independent confirmatory research that is important
for testing hypotheses, and data-contingent exploratory research
that is important for generating hypotheses.
While pre-registration is now common in some areas of clinical
medicine (due to requirements by journals and regulatory bodies,
such as the Food and Drug Administration in the United States and
the European Medicines Agency in the European Union), it is rare
in the social and behavioural sciences. However, support for study
pre-registration is increasing; websites such as the Open Science
Framework ( and AsPredicted ( 
org/) offer services to pre-register studies, the Preregistration
Challenge offers education and incentives to conduct pre-regis­
tered research ( and journals are adopting the
Registered Reports publishing format52,53 to encourage pre-registra­
tion and add results-blind peer review (see Box 3).
Improving the quality of reporting. Pre-registration will improve
discoverability of research, but discoverability does not guarantee
usability. Poor usability reflects difficulty in evaluating what was
done, in reusing the methodology to assess reproducibility, and
in incorporating the evidence into systematic reviews and metaanalyses. Improving the quality and transparency in the report­
ing of research is necessary to address this. The Transparency and
Openness Promotion (TOP) guidelines offer standards as a basis for
journals and funders to incentivize or require greater transparency
in planning and reporting of research54. TOP provides principles
for how transparency and usability can be increased, while other
guidelines provide concrete steps for how to maximize the qual­
ity of reporting in particular areas. For example, the Consolidated
Standards of Reporting Trials (CONSORT) statement provides
guidance for clear, complete and accurate reporting of randomized
controlled trials55–57. Over 300 reporting guidelines now exist for
observational studies, prognostic studies, predictive models, diag­
nostic tests, systematic reviews and meta-analyses in humans, a
large variety of studies using different laboratory methods, and ani­
mal studies. The Equator Network ( 
org/) aggregates these guidelines to improve discoverability58. There
are also guidelines for improving the reporting of research planning;
for example, the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews
and Meta-analyses (PRISMA) statement for reporting of systematic
reviews and meta-analyses59, and PRISMA-P for protocols of sys­
tematic reviews60. The Preregistration Challenge workflow and the
pre-registration recipe for social-behavioural research61 also illus­
trate guidelines for reporting research plans.
The success of reporting guidelines depends on their adoption
and effective use. The social and behavioural sciences are behind
the biomedical sciences in their adoption of reporting guidelines for
research, although with rapid adoption of the TOP guidelines and
related developments by journals and funders that gap may be clos­
ing. However, improved reporting may be insufficient on its own
to maximize research quality. Reporting guidelines are easily per­
ceived by researchers as bureaucratic exercises rather than means
of improving research and reporting. Even with pre-registration of
clinical trials, one study observed that just 13% of trials published
outcomes completely consistent with the pre-registered commit­
ments. Most publications of the trials did not report pre-registered
outcomes and added new outcomes that were not part of the regis­
tered design (see www.COMPare-trials.org). Franco and colleagues
observed similar findings in psychology62; using protocol pre-reg­
istrations and public data from the Time-sharing Experiments for
the Social Sciences project ( they
found that 40% of published reports failed to mention one or more
of the experimental conditions of the experiments, and approxi­
mately 70% of published reports failed to mention one or more of
the outcome measures included in the study. Moreover, outcome
measures that were not included were much more likely to be nega­
tive results and associated with smaller effect sizes than outcome
measures that were included.
CHDI Foundation — a privately-funded non-profit drug-devel­
opment organization targeting Huntington’s disease — convened
a working group in 2013 to identify practical and viable steps that
could be taken to help ensure the rigor of their research76. One
concrete product of this meeting was the establishment of the
Independent Statistical Standing Committee (ISSC; 
foundation.org/independent-statistical-standing-committee/)
designed to provide independent, unbiased and objective evalu­
ation and expert advice regarding all aspects of experimental
design and statistics. CHDI has made this resource available to
the wider Huntington’s disease research community on a priority
basis. The ISSC is comprised of individuals with specific expertise
in research design and statistics. Critically, committee members
are not themselves engaged in Huntington’s disease research, and
have no investment in study results, or other conflicts of inter­
est. The committee provides a number of services, including (but
not limited to) provision of expert assistance in developing pro­
tocols and statistical analysis plans, and evaluation of prepared
study protocols. Their oversight and input, particularly at the
study design stage, may mitigate low statistical power, inadequate
study design, and flexibility in data analysis and reporting6,71. As
recently highlighted, “asking questions at the design stage can
save headaches at the analysis stage: careful data collection can
greatly simplify analysis and make it more rigorous”77.
Student assessment requirements, and limited access to popu­
lations of interest, may hinder extensive collaboration within a
single institution, but it could be achieved across multiple insti­
tutions in the form of a distributed student project. Under this
model, academics and students from several institutions would
form a consortium, collaboratively develop a research question,
protocol and analysis plan, and publicly pre-register it prior to
data collection. The protocol would be implemented by each stu­
dent at each participating centre, and the resulting data pooled
for analysis. Consortium meetings before and after data col­
lection could be used to integrate training in research design,
while offering opportunities for creative input from the students.
Conclusions based on results would be mutually agreed in prepa­
ration for wider dissemination, using inclusive authorship con­
ventions such as those adopted by genetic consortia. Students
would learn rigorous research methods through active participa­
tion in research that is sufficiently well designed and conducted
to be genuinely meaningful. Critically, collaborative team sci­
ence would be instilled at an early stage of training.
The Collaborative Replications and Education Project (CREP;
 is an example of this concept in psychology,
albeit in a more centralized form. A coordinating team identifies
recently published research that could be replicated in the context
of a semester-long undergraduate course on research methods. A
central commons provides the materials and guidance to incorpo­
rate the replications into projects or classes, and the data collected
across sites are aggregated into manuscripts for publication. The
Pipeline78 and Many Labs44,45 projects also offer opportunities to
contribute to large-scale replication efforts with coordinated data
collection across many locations simultaneously.
Box 1 | Independent oversight: the case of CHDI Foundation.
Box 2 | Distributed student projects.
NATURE HUMAN BEHAVIOUR 1, 0021 | DOI: 10.1038/s41562-016-0021 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
PERSPECTIVE
NATURE HUMAN BEHAVIOUR
The positive outcome of reporting guidelines is that they make
it possible to detect and study these behaviours and their impact.
Otherwise, these behaviours are simply unknowable in any sys­
tematic way. The negative outcome is the empirical evidence that
reporting guidelines may be necessary, but will not alone be suf­
ficient, to address reporting biases. The impact of guidelines and
how best to optimize their use and impact will be best assessed by
randomized trials (see Box 4).
Reproducibility
In this section we describe measures that can be implemented to
support verification of research (including, for example, sharing
data and methods).
Promoting transparency and open science. Science is a social
enterprise: independent and collaborative groups work to accumu­
late knowledge as a public good. The credibility of scientific claims
is rooted in the evidence supporting them, which includes the
methodology applied, the data acquired, and the process of meth­
odology implementation, data analysis and outcome interpretation.
Claims become credible by the community reviewing, critiquing,
extending and reproducing the supporting evidence. However, with­
out transparency, claims only achieve credibility based on trust in the
confidence or authority of the originator. Transparency is superior
Open science refers to the process of making the content and
process of producing evidence and claims transparent and acces­
sible to others. Transparency is a scientific ideal, and adding ‘open’
should therefore be redundant. In reality, science often lacks open­
ness: many published articles are not available to people without
a personal or institutional subscription, and most data, materials
and code supporting research outcomes are not made accessible, for
example, in a public repository (refs 63,64; Box 5).
Very little of the research process (for example, study protocols,
analysis workflows, peer review) is accessible because, historically,
there have been few opportunities to make it accessible even if one
wanted to do so. This has motivated calls for open access, open data
and open workflows (including analysis pipelines), but there are
substantial barriers to meeting these ideals, including vested finan­
cial interests (particularly in scholarly publishing) and few incen­
tives for researchers to pursue open practices. For example, current
incentive structures promote the publication of ‘clean’ narratives,
which may require the incomplete reporting of study procedures or
results. Nevertheless, change is occurring. The TOP guidelines54,65
promote open practices, while an increasing number of journals
and funders require open practices (for example, open data), with
some offering their researchers free, immediate open-access publi­
cation with transparent post-publication peer review (for example,
the Wellcome Trust, with the launch of Wellcome Open Research).
Policies to promote open science can include reporting guidelines
or specific disclosure statements (see Box 6). At the same time, com­
mercial and non-profit organizations are building new infrastruc­
ture such as the Open Science Framework to make transparency
easy and desirable for researchers.
Evaluation
In this section we describe measures that can be implemented when
evaluating research (including, for example, peer review).
Diversifying peer review. For most of the history of scientific pub­
lishing, two functions have been confounded — evaluation and dis­
semination. Journals have provided dissemination via sorting and
delivering content to the research community, and gatekeeping via
peer review to determine what is worth disseminating. However,
with the advent of the internet, individual researchers are no longer
The Registered Reports (RR) initiative seeks to eliminate various
forms of bias in hypothesis-driven research52,53, and in particular,
the evaluation of a study based on the results. Unlike conventional
journal articles, RRs split the peer review process into two stages,
before and after results are known. At the first stage, reviewers and
editors assess a detailed protocol that includes the study ration­
ale, procedure and a detailed analysis plan. Following favourable
reviews (and probably revision to meet strict methodological
standards), the journal offers in-principle acceptance: publica­
tion of study outcomes is guaranteed provided the authors adhere
to the approved protocol, the study meets pre-specified quality
checks, and conclusions are appropriately evidence-bound. Once
the study is completed, the authors resubmit a complete manu­
script that includes the results and discussion. The article is pub­
lished at the end of this two-stage process. By accepting articles
before results are known, RRs prevent publication bias. By review­
ing the hypotheses and analysis plans in advance, RRs should also
help neutralize P-hacking and HARKing (hypothesizing after the
results are known) by authors, and CARKing (critiquing after the
results are known) by reviewers with their own investments in the
research outcomes, although empirical evidence will be required
to confirm that this is the case.
Perhaps the most commonly voiced objection to RRs is that
the format somehow limits exploration or creativity by requiring
authors to adhere to a pre-specified methodology. However, RRs
place no restrictions on creative analysis practices or serendip­
ity. Authors are free to report the outcomes of any unregistered
exploratory analyses, provided such tests are clearly labelled as
post hoc. Thus, the sole requirement is that exploratory outcomes
are identified transparently as exploratory (for a list of frequently
asked questions see Of course, RRs are not
intended for research that is solely exploratory.
As of November 2016, RRs have been adopted by over 40
journals, including Nature Human Behaviour, covering a wide
range of life, social and physical sciences (for a curated list see
 The concept also opens the door to
alternative forms of research funding that place a premium on
transparency and reproducibility. For example, authors could
submit a detailed proposal before they have funding for their
research. Following simultaneous review by both the funder and
the journal, the strongest proposals would be offered financial
support by the funder and in-principle acceptance for publica­
tion by the journal ( 
In medicine there is strong evidence for the effectiveness of
CONSORT guidelines — journals that do not endorse the
CONSORT statement show poorer reporting quality compared
with endorsing journals79. For the ARRIVE (Animal Research:
Reporting of In Vivo Experiments) guidelines80, studies compar­
ing the reporting of ARRIVE items in specific fields of research
before and after the guidelines were published report mixed
results81–83. A randomized controlled trial is in progress to assess
the impact of mandating a completed ARRIVE checklist with
manuscript submissions on the quality of reporting in published
articles ( The suc­
cess of these efforts will require journals and funders to adopt
guidelines and support the community’s iterative evaluation and
improvement cycle.
Box 3 | Registered Reports.
Box 4 | Evidence for the effectiveness of reporting guidelines.
NATURE HUMAN BEHAVIOUR 1, 0021 | DOI: 10.1038/s41562-016-0021 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
PERSPECTIVE
NATURE HUMAN BEHAVIOUR
dependent on publishers to bind, print and mail their research to
subscribers. Dissemination is now easy and can be controlled by
researchers themselves. For example, preprint services (arXiv for
some physical sciences, bioRxiv and PeerJ for the life sciences,
engrXiv for engineering, PsyArXiv for psychology, and SocArXiv
and the Social Science Research Network (SSRN) for the social sci­
ences) facilitate easy sharing, sorting and discovery of research prior
to publication. This dramatically accelerates the dissemination of
information to the research community.
With increasing ease of dissemination, the role of publishers as
a gatekeeper is declining. Nevertheless, the other role of publish­
ing — evaluation — remains a vital part of the research enterprise.
Conventionally, a journal editor will select a limited number of
reviewers to assess the suitability of a submission for a particu­
lar journal. However, more diverse evaluation processes are now
emerging, allowing the collective wisdom of the scientific commu­
nity to be harnessed66. For example, some preprint services support
public comments on manuscripts, a form of pre-publication review
that can be used to improve the manuscript. Other services, such
as PubMed Commons and PubPeer, offer public platforms to com­
ment on published works facilitating post-publication peer review.
At the same time, some journals are trialling ‘results-free’ review,
where editorial decisions to accept are based solely on review of the
rationale and study methods alone (that is, results-blind)67.
Both pre- and post-publication peer review mechanisms dra­
matically accelerate and expand the evaluation process68. By shar­
ing preprints, researchers can obtain rapid feedback on their work
from a diverse community, rather than waiting several months
for a few reviews in the conventional, closed peer review process.
Using post-publication services, reviewers can make positive and
critical commentary on articles instantly, rather than relying on
the laborious, uncertain and lengthy process of authoring a com­
mentary and submitting it to the publishing journal for possible
publication, eventually.
As public forms of pre- and post-publication review, these new
services introduce the potential for new forms of credit and repu­
tation enhancement69. In the conventional model, peer review is
done privately, anonymously and purely as a service. With public
commenting systems, a reviewer that chooses to be identifiable
may gain (or lose) reputation based on the quality of review. There
are a number of possible and perceived risks of non-anonymous
reviewing that reviewers must consider and research must evalu­
ate, but there is evidence that open peer review improves the qual­
ity of reviews received70. The opportunity for accelerated scholarly
Sharing data in public repositories offers field-wide advantages
in terms of accountability, data longevity, efficiency and qual­
ity (for example, reanalyses may detect crucial mistakes or even
data fabrication)84. Unfortunately, many scientific disciplines,
including most of those devoted to the study of human behav­
iour, do not have a culture that values open data6. In the past,
data sharing has rarely been enforced or facilitated. Recent initi­
atives, however, aim to change the normative culture. Hopefully,
these initiatives will change the culture on data sharing. Once
accepted as the norm, we doubt that data sharing will ever go
out of fashion.
Transparency and Openness Promotion (TOP)
In 2015, Nosek and colleagues54 proposed author guidelines to
help journals and funders adopt transparency and reproducibil­
ity policies. As of November 2016 there were 757 journal and 64
organization signatories to the TOP guidelines. For example, the
journal Science decided to “publish papers only if the data used
in the analysis are available to any researcher for purposes of
reproducing or extending the analysis”65 and the conglomerate of
Springer Nature journals adopted similar data-sharing policies.
Badges to acknowledge open-science practices
The Center for Open Science has suggested that journals assign a
badge to articles with open data (as well as to other open practices
such as pre-registration and open materials). The main purpose
of the badges is to signal that the journal values these practices.
The journal Psychological Science has adopted these badges, and
there is evidence that the open data badge has had a positive
effect, increasing data sharing by more than tenfold (Fig. 2).
The Peer Reviewers’ Openness Initiative
Researchers who sign this initiative ( 
org) pledge that as reviewers they will not offer comprehensive
review for any manuscript that does not make data publicly
available without a clear reason85.
Requirements from funding agencies
In recent years, prominent funding agencies such as Research
Councils UK in the United Kingdom and the National Institutes
of Health (NIH) and National Science Foundation (NSF) in the
United States have increased pressure on researchers to share
data. For instance, the 2015 NIH Public Access Plan (https://
grants.nih.gov/grants/NIH-Public-Access-Plan.pdf)
“NIH intends to make public access to digital scientific data the
standard for all NIH-funded research”. Since 2010, NSF requires
submission of a data-management plan that stipulates how data
will be stored and shared.
Full disclosure refers to the process of describing in full the study
design and data collected that underlie the results reported,
rather than a curated version of the design, and/or a subset of
the data collected. The need for disclosure is clear: in order to
adequately evaluate results we need to know how they were
obtained. For example, the informational value of a depend­
ent variable exhibiting an effect of interest is different if only
one variable was collected or if fifteen were. The probability of
a single variable achieving P < 0.05 just by chance is 5%, but
the probability of one of fifteen variables achieving P < 0.05 is
54%1. It is obvious that cherry-picking one from fifteen variables
invalidates the results unless it is clear that this has happened. If
readers know, then they can adjust their interpretation accord­
ingly. From this simple fact it follows that if authors do not tell
us whether they collected one or fifteen variables readers cannot
evaluate their research51.
The simplest form of disclosure is for authors to assure read­
ers via an explicit statement in their article that they are disclos­
ing the data fully. This can be seen as a simple item of reporting
guidance where extra emphasis is placed on some aspects that
are considered most essential to disclose. For example, including
the following 21-word statement: “We report how we determined
our sample size, all data exclusions (if any), all manipulations,
and all measures in the study”86. Alternatively, a more complex,
but also more enforceable and accountable process is for jour­
nals to require explicit and specific disclosure statements. The
journal Psychological Science, for example, now requires authors
to “Confirm that (a) the total number of excluded observa­
tions and (b) the reasons for making these exclusions have been
reported in the Method section(s)”87.
Box 5 | Data sharing.
Box 6 | Disclosure.
NATURE HUMAN BEHAVIOUR 1, 0021 | DOI: 10.1038/s41562-016-0021 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
PERSPECTIVE
NATURE HUMAN BEHAVIOUR
communication may both improve the pace of discovery and diver­
sify the means of being an active contributor to scientific discourse.
Incentives
Publication is the currency of academic science and increases
the likelihood of employment, funding, promotion and tenure.
However, not all research is equally publishable. Positive, novel and
clean results are more likely to be published than negative results,
replications and results with loose ends; as a consequence, research­
ers are incentivized to produce the former, even at the cost of accu­
racy40. These incentives ultimately increase the likelihood of false
positives in the published literature71. Shifting the incentives there­
fore offers an opportunity to increase the credibility and reproduc­
ibility of published results. For example, with simulations, Munafò
and Higginson developed an optimality model that predicted
the most rational research strategy, in terms of the proportion of
research effort spent on seeking novel results rather than on con­
firmatory studies, and the amount of research effort per explora­
tory study72. This showed that, for parameter values derived from
the scientific literature, researchers acting to maximize their ‘fitness’
should spend most of their effort seeking novel results and conduct
small studies that have a statistical power of only 10–40%. Critically,
their model suggests that altering incentive structures, by consider­
ing more of a researcher’s output and giving less weight to strikingly
novel findings when making appointment and promotion decisions,
would encourage a change in researcher behaviour that would ulti­
mately improve the scientific value of research.
Funders, publishers, societies, institutions, editors, reviewers
and authors all contribute to the cultural norms that create and sus­
tain dysfunctional incentives. Changing the incentives is therefore
a problem that requires a coordinated effort by all stakeholders to
alter reward structures. There will always be incentives for innova­
tive outcomes — those who discover new things will be rewarded
more than those who do not. However, there can also be incen­
tives for efficiency and effectiveness — those who conduct rigorous,
transparent and reproducible research could be rewarded more than
those who do not. There are promising examples of effective inter­
ventions for nudging incentives. For example, journals are adopting
badges to acknowledge open practices (Fig. 2), Registered Reports
as a results-blind publishing model (see Box 3) and TOP guidelines
to promote openness and transparency. Funders are also adopt­
ing transparency requirements, and piloting funding mechanisms
to promote reproducibility such as the Netherlands Organisation
for Scientific Research (NWO) and the US National Science
Foundation’s Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences, both of which have announced funding opportunities for
replication studies. Institutions are wrestling with policy and infra­
structure adjustments to promote data sharing, and there are hints
of open-science practices becoming part of hiring and performance
evaluation (for example, Collectively, and at scale, such efforts can shift
incentives such that what is good for the scientist is also good for
science — rigorous, transparent and reproducible research practices
producing credible results.
Conclusion
The challenges to reproducible science are systemic and cultural,
but that does not mean they cannot be met. The measures we
have described constitute practical and achievable steps toward
improving rigor and reproducibility. All of them have shown some
effectiveness, and are well suited to wider adoption, evaluation
and improvement. Equally, these proposals are not an exhaustive
list; there are many other nascent and maturing ideas for making
research practices more efficient and reliable73. Offering a solution to
a problem does not guarantee its effectiveness, and making changes
to cultural norms and incentives can spur additional behavioural
changes that are difficult to anticipate. Some solutions may be inef­
fective or even harmful to the efficiency and reliability of science,
even if conceptually they appear sensible.
The field of metascience (or metaresearch) is growing rapidly,
with over 2,000 relevant publications accruing annually16. Much of
that literature constitutes the evaluation of existing practices and
the identification of alternative approaches. What was previously
taken for granted may be questioned, such as widely used statisti­
cal methods; for example, the most popular methods and software
for spatial extent analysis in fMRI imaging were recently shown to
produce unacceptably high false-positive rates74. Proposed solutions
may also give rise to other challenges; for example, while replica­
tion is a hallmark for reinforcing trust in scientific results, there is
uncertainty about which studies deserve to be replicated and what
would be the most efficient replication strategies. Moreover, a recent
simulation suggests that replication alone may not suffice to rid us
of false results71.
These cautions are not a rationale for inaction. Reproducible
research practices are at the heart of sound research and integral
to the scientific method. How best to achieve rigorous and efficient
knowledge accumulation is a scientific question; the most effective
solutions will be identified by a combination of brilliant hypothesiz­
ing and blind luck, by iterative examination of the effectiveness of
each change, and by a winnowing of many possibilities to the broadly
enacted few. True understanding of how best to structure and incen­
tivize science will emerge slowly and will never be finished. That is
how science works. The key to fostering a robust metascience that
evaluates and improves practices is that the stakeholders of science
must not embrace the status quo, but instead pursue self-examina­
tion continuously for improvement and self-correction of the scien­
tific process itself.
As Richard Feynman said, “The first principle is that you must
not fool yourself – and you are the easiest person to fool.”
CPS (N = 104)
DP (N = 634)
JEPLMC (N = 483)
JPSP (N = 419)
PSCI (N = 838)
PSCI introduces badge
for data sharing
Percentage of articles reporting available data
Figure 2 | The impact of introducing badges for data sharing. In January
2014, the journal Psychological Science (PSCI) introduced badges for
articles with open data. Immediately afterwards, the proportion of articles
with open data increased steeply, and by October 2015, 38% of articles
in Psychological Science had open data. For comparison journals (Clinical
Psychological Science (CPS), Developmental Psychology (DP), Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition (JEPLMC) and
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology (JPSP)) the proportion of articles
with open data remained uniformly low. Figure adapted from ref. 75, PLoS.
NATURE HUMAN BEHAVIOUR 1, 0021 | DOI: 10.1038/s41562-016-0021 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
PERSPECTIVE
NATURE HUMAN BEHAVIOUR