Techniques for Interpretable Machine Learning
Mengnan Du, Ninghao Liu, Xia Hu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University
{dumengnan,nhliu43,xiahu}@tamu.edu
Interpretable machine learning tackles the important problem that humans cannot understand the behaviors of complex machine learning models and how these models arrive at
a particular decision. Although many approaches have been
proposed, a comprehensive understanding of the achievements and challenges is still lacking. We provide a survey
covering existing techniques to increase the interpretability
of machine learning models. We also discuss crucial issues
that the community should consider in future work such as
designing user-friendly explanations and developing comprehensive evaluation metrics to further push forward the area
of interpretable machine learning.
INTRODUCTION
Machine learning is progressing at an astounding rate,
powered by complex models such as ensemble models and
deep neural networks (DNNs). These models have a wide
range of real-world applications, such as movie recommendations of Netﬂix, neural machine translation of Google, speech
recognition of Amazon Alexa. Despite the successes, machine learning has its own limitations and drawbacks. The
most signiﬁcant one is the lack of transparency behind their
behaviors, which leaves users with little understanding of
how particular decisions are made by these models. Consider, for instance, an advanced self-driving car equipped
with various machine learning algorithms doesn’t brake or
decelerate when confronting a stopped ﬁretruck. This unexpected behavior may frustrate and confuse users, making
them wonder why. Even worse, the wrong decisions could
cause severe consequences if the car is driving at highway
speeds and might ﬁnally crash the ﬁretruck. The concerns
about the black-box nature of complex models have hampered their further applications in our society, especially in
those critical decision-making domains like self-driving cars.
Interpretable machine learning would be an eﬀective tool
to mitigate these problems. It gives machine learning models the ability to explain or to present their behaviors in
understandable terms to humans , which is named interpretability or explainability and we use them interchange-
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
Copyright 2008 ACM 0001-0782/08/0X00 ...$5.00.
ably in this paper. Interpretability would be an indispensable part for machine learning models in order to better
serve human beings and bring beneﬁts to society. For endusers, explanation will increase their trust and encourage
them to adopt machine learning systems. From the perspective of machine learning system developers and researchers,
the provided explanation can help them better understand
the problem, the data and why a model might fail, and eventually increase the system safety. Thus there is a growing
interest among the academic and industrial community in
interpreting machine learning models and gaining insights
into their working mechanisms.
Interpretable machine learning techniques can generally
be grouped into two categories: intrinsic interpretability and
post-hoc interpretability, depending on the time when the
interpretability is obtained . Intrinsic interpretability is
achieved by constructing self-explanatory models which incorporate interpretability directly to their structures. The
family of this category includes decision tree, rule-based
model, linear model, attention model, etc. In contrast, the
post-hoc one requires creating a second model to provide
explanations for an existing model. The main diﬀerence between these two groups lies in the trade-oﬀbetween model
accuracy and explanation ﬁdelity. Inherently interpretable
models could provide accurate and undistorted explanation
but may sacriﬁce prediction performance to some extent.
The post-hoc ones are limited in their approximate nature
while keeping the underlying model accuracy intact.
Based on the above categorization, we further diﬀerentiate
two types of interpretability: global interpretability, and local interpretability. Global interpretability means that users
can understand how the model works globally by inspecting
the structures and parameters of a complex model, while local interpretability locally examines an individual prediction
of a model, trying to ﬁgure out why the model makes the
decision it makes. Using the DNN in Figure 1 as an example, global interpretability is achieved by understanding the
representations captured by the neurons at an intermediate
layer, while local interpretability is obtained by identifying
the contributions of each feature in a speciﬁc input to the
prediction made by DNN. These two types bring diﬀerent
beneﬁts. Global interpretability could illuminate the inner
working mechanisms of machine learning models and thus
can increase their transparency. Local interpretability will
help uncover the causal relations between a speciﬁc input
and its corresponding model prediction.
Those two help
users trust a model and trust a prediction, respectively.
In this article, we ﬁrst summarize current progress of three
 
New layer with
interpretable constraints
Intrinsic Explanation
（global or local ）
Global Explanation
Local Explanation
An illustration of three lines of interpretable machine learning techniques, taking DNN
for example: Intrinsic explanation, Post-hoc global
explanation of a model, and Post-hoc local explanation of a prediction.
lines of research for interpretable machine learning: designing inherently interpretable models (including globally and
locally), post-hoc global explanation, and post-hoc local explanation. We proceed by introducing applications and challenges of current techniques. Finally, we present limitations
of current explanations and propose directions towards more
human-friendly explanations.
INTRINSIC INTERPRETABLE MODEL
Intrinsic interpretability can be achieved by designing selfexplanatory models which incorporate interpretability directly into the model structures. These constructed interpretable models either are globally interpretable or could
provide explanations when they make individual predictions.
Globally Interpretable Model
Globally interpretable models can be constructed in two
ways: directly trained from data as usual but with interpretability constraints, and being extracted from a complex
and opaque model.
Adding Interpretability Constraints
The interpretability of a model could be promoted by
incorporating interpretability constraints.
Some representative examples include enforcing sparsity terms or imposing semantic monotonicity constraints in classiﬁcation models . Here sparsity means that a model is encouraged to
use relatively fewer features for prediction, while monotonicity enables the features to have monotonic relations with the
prediction. Similarly, decision trees are pruned by replacing
subtrees with leaves to encourage long and deep trees rather
than wide and more balanced trees . These constraints
make a model simpler and could increase the model’s comprehensibility by users.
Besides, more semantically meaningful constraints could
be added to a model to further improve interpretability. For
instance, interpretable convolutional neural networks (CNN)
add a regularization loss to higher convolutional layers of
CNN to learn disentangled representations, resulting in ﬁlters that could detect semantically meaningful natural objects . Another work combines novel neural units, called
capsules, to construct a capsule network . The activation
vectors of an active capsule can represent various semanticaware concepts like position and pose of a particular object.
This nice property makes capsule network more comprehensible for humans.
However, there are often trade-oﬀs between prediction accuracy and interpretability when constraints are directly incorporated into models. The more interpretable models may
result in reduced prediction accuracy comparing the less interpretable ones.
Interpretable Model Extraction
An alternative is to apply interpretable model extraction,
also referred as mimic learning , which may not have to
sacriﬁce the model performance too much. The motivation
behind mimic learning is to approximate a complex model
using an easily interpretable model such as a decision tree,
rule-based model, or linear model. As long as the approximation is suﬃciently close, the statistical properties of the
complex model will be reﬂected in the interpretable model.
Eventually, we obtain a model with comparable prediction
performance, and the behavior of which is much easier to
understand. For instance, the tree ensemble model is transformed into a single decision tree . Moreover, a DNN
is utilized to train a decision tree which mimics the inputoutput function captured by the neural network so that the
knowledge encoded in DNN is transferred to the decision
tree . To avoid the overﬁtting of the decision tree, active
learning is applied for training. These techniques convert the
original model to a decision tree with better interpretability and maintain comparable predictive performance at the
same time.
Locally Interpretable Model
Locally interpretable models are usually achieved by designing more justiﬁed model architectures that could explain why a speciﬁc decision is made.
Diﬀerent from the
globally interpretable models that oﬀer a certain extent of
transparency about what is going on inside a model, locally
interpretable models provide users understandable rationale
for a speciﬁc prediction.
A representative scheme is employing attention mechanism , which is widely utilized to explain predictions
made by sequential models, e.g., Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs). Attention mechanism is advantageous in that it
gives users the ability to interpret which parts of the input
are attended by the model through visualizing the attention
weight matrix for individual predictions. Attention mechanism has been used to solve the problem of generating image
caption . In this case, a CNN is adopted to encode an
input image to a vector, and an RNN with attention mechanisms is utilized to generate descriptions. When generating
each word, the model changes its attention to reﬂect the
relevant parts of the image. The ﬁnal visualization of the
attention weights could tell human what the model is looking
at when generating a word. Similarly, attention mechanism
has been incorporated in machine translation .
At decoding stage, the neural attention module added to neural
machine translation (NMT) model assigns diﬀerent weights
to the hidden states of the decoder, which allows the decoder
to selectively focus on diﬀerent parts of the input sentence at
each step of the output generation. Through visualizing the
attention scores, users could understand how words in one
language depend on words in another language for correct
translation.
Feature engineering
Traditional ML model
DNN based representation learning
Traditional machine learning
Deep learning
Figure 2: A traditional machine learning pipeline using feature engineering, and a deep learning pipeline
using DNN based representation learning.
POST-HOC GLOBAL EXPLANATION
Machine learning models automatically learn useful patterns from a huge amount of training data and retain the
learned knowledge into model structures and parameters.
Post-hoc global explanation aims to provide a global understanding about what knowledge has been acquired by
these pre-trained models, and illuminate the parameters or
learned representations in an intuitive manner to humans.
We classify existing models into two categories: traditional
machine learning and deep learning pipelines (see Figure 2),
since we are capable of extracting some similar explanation
paradigms from each category. We introduce below how to
provide explanation for these two types of pipelines.
Traditional ML Explanation
Traditional machine learning pipelines mostly rely on feature engineering, which transforms raw data into features
that better represent the predictive task, as shown in Figure 2. The features are generally interpretable and the role
of machine learning is to map the representation to output.
We consider a simple yet eﬀective explanation measure which is applicable to most of the models belonging to
traditional pipeline, called feature importance, which indicates statistical contribution of each feature to the underlying model when making decisions.
Model-agnostic Explanation
Model-agnostic feature importance is broadly applicable
to various machine learning models. It treats a model as a
black-box and does not inspect internal model parameters.
A representative approach is Permutation Feature Importance . The key idea is that the importance of a speciﬁc
feature to the overall performance of a model can be determined by calculating how the model prediction accuracy
deviates after permuting the values of that feature. More
speciﬁcally, given a pre-trained model with n features and
a test set, the average prediction score of the model on the
test set is p, which is also the baseline accuracy. We shuﬄe
the values of a feature on the test set and compute the average prediction score of the model on the modiﬁed dataset.
This process is iteratively performed for each feature and
eventually n prediction scores are obtained for n features
respectively.
We then rank the importance of the n features according to the reductions of their score comparing
to baseline accuracy p. There are several advantages for this
approach. First, we do not need to normalize the values of
the hand-crafted features. Second, it can be generalized to
nearly any machine learning models with hand-crafted features as input. Third, this strategy has been proved to be
robust and eﬃcient of implementation.
Model-speciﬁc Explanation
There also exists explanation methods speciﬁcally designed
for diﬀerent models. Model-speciﬁc methods usually derive
explanations by examining internal model structures and parameters. We introduce below how to provide feature importance for two families of machine learning models.
Generalized linear models GLM is constituted of a series of models which are linear combination of input features and model parameters followed by feeding to some
transformation function (often nonlinear) .
of GLM includes linear regression, logistic regression, etc.
The weights of a GLM directly reﬂect feature importance,
so users can understand how the model works by checking
their weights and visualizing them. However, the weights
may not be reliable when diﬀerent features are not appropriately normalized and vary in their scale of measurement.
Besides, the interpretability of an explanation will decrease
when the feature dimensions become too large, which may
be beyond the comprehension ability of humans.
Tree-based ensemble models Tree-based ensemble models, such as gradient boosting machines, random forests and
XGBoost , are typically inscrutable to humans. There are
several ways to measure the contribution of each feature.
The ﬁrst approach is to calculate the accuracy gain when a
feature is used in tree branches. The rationale behind is that
without adding a new split to a branch for a feature, there
may be some misclassiﬁed elements, while after adding the
new branch, there are two branches and each one is more accurate. The second approach measures the feature coverage,
i.e., calculating the relative quantity of observations related
to a feature. The third approach is to count the number of
times that a feature is used to split the data.
DNN Representation Explanation
DNNs, in contrast to traditional models, not only discover
the mapping from representation to output, but also learn
representations from raw data , as illustrated in Figure 2.
The learned deep representations are usually not human interpretable , hence the explanation for DNNs mainly focuses on understanding the representations captured by the
neurons at intermediate layers of DNNs. In the following,
we introduce explanation methods for two major categories
of DNN, i.e., CNN and RNN.
Explanation of CNN Representation
There has been a growing interest to understand the inscrutable representations at diﬀerent layers of CNN. Among
diﬀerent strategies to understand CNN representations, the
most eﬀective and widely utilized one is through ﬁnding the
preferred inputs for neurons at a speciﬁc layer. This is generally formulated in the activation maximization (AM) framework , which can be formulated as:
x∗= argmax
fl(x) −R(x),
where fl(x) is the activation value of a neuron at layer l for
input x, and R(x) is a regularizer. Starting from random
initialization, we optimize an image to maximally activate a
neuron. Through iterative optimization, the derivatives of
the neuron activation value with respect to the image is utilized to tweak the image. Eventually, the visualization of the
generated image could tell what individual neuron is looking
for in its receptive ﬁeld. We can in fact do this for arbitrary
neurons, ranging from neurons at the ﬁrst layer all the way
to the output neurons at the last layer, to understand what
is encoded as representations at diﬀerent layers.
While the framework is simple, getting it to work faces
some challenges, among which the most signiﬁcant one is
the surprising artifact. The optimization process may produce unrealistic images containing noise and high-frequency
Due to the large searching space for images, if
without proper regularization, it is possible to produce images that satisfy the the optimization objective to activate
the neuron but are still unrecognizable. To tackle this problem, the optimization should be constrained using natural
image priors so as to produce synthetic images which resemble natural images. Some researchers heuristically propose
hand-crafted priors, including total variation norm, α-norm,
Gaussian blur, etc. In addition, the optimization could be
regularized using stronger natural image priors produced by
a generative model, such as GAN or VAE, which maps codes
in the latent space to the image spaces . Instead of directly optimizing the image, these methods optimize the latent space codes to ﬁnd an image which can activate a given
Experimental results have shown that the priors
produced by generative models lead to signiﬁcant improvements in visualization.
The visualization results provide several interesting observations about CNN representations. First, the network
learns representations at several levels of abstraction, transiting from general to task-speciﬁc from the ﬁrst layer to the
last layer. Take the CNN trained with the ImageNet dataset
for example. Lower-layer neurons detect small and simple
patterns, such as object corners and textures.
neurons detect object parts, such as faces, legs. Higher-layer
neurons respond to whole objects or even scenes. Interestingly, the visualization of the last layer neurons illustrates
that CNN exhibits a remarkable property to capture global
structure, local details, and contexts of an object. Second,
a neuron could respond to diﬀerent images that are related
to a semantic concept, revealing the multifaceted nature of
neurons . For instance, a face detection neuron can ﬁre
in response to both human faces and animal faces.
that this phenomenon is not conﬁned to high layer neurons,
all layers of neurons are multifaceted. The neurons at higher
layers are more multifaceted than the ones at lower layers,
indicating that higher-layer neurons become more invariant
to large changes within a class of inputs, such as colors and
poses. Third, CNN learns distributed code for objects .
Objects can be described using part-based representations
and these parts can be shared across diﬀerent categories.
Explanation of RNN Representation
Following numerous eﬀorts to interpret CNN, uncovering the abstract knowledge encoded by RNN representations
(including GRUs and LSTMs) has also attracted increasing
interest in recent years. Language modeling, which targets
to predict the next token given its previous tokens, is usually utilized to analyze the representations learned by RNN.
The studies indicate that RNN indeed learns useful representations .
First, some work examines the representations of the last
hidden layer of RNN and study the function of diﬀerent
units at that layer, by analyzing the real input tokens that
maximally activate a unit.
The studies demonstrate that
some units of RNN representations are able to capture complex language characteristics, e.g., syntax, semantics and
long-term dependencies. For instance, a study analyzes the
interpretability of RNN activation patterns using characterlevel language modeling . This work ﬁnds that although
most of the neural units are hard to ﬁnd particular meanings,
there indeed exist certain dimensions in RNN hidden representations that are able to focus on speciﬁc language structures such as quotation marks, brackets, and line lengths in
a text. In another work, a word-level language model is utilized to analyze the linguistic features encoded by individual
hidden units of RNN . The visualizations illustrate that
some units are mostly activated by certain semantic category, while some others could capture a particular syntactic class or dependency function. More interestingly, some
hidden units could carry the activation values over to subsequent time steps, which explains why RNN can learn longterm dependencies and complex linguistic features.
Second, the research ﬁnds that RNN is able to learn hierarchical representations by inspecting representations at
diﬀerent hidden layers . This observation indicates that
RNN representations bear some resemblance to their CNN
counterpart. For instance, a bidirectional language model is
constructed using a multi-layer LSTM . The analysis of
representations at diﬀerent layers of this model shows that
the lower-layer representation captures context-independent
syntactic information. In contrast, higher-layer LSTM representations encode context-dependent semantic information.
The deep contextualized representations can disambiguate
the meanings of words by utilizing their context, and thus
could be employed to perform tasks which require contextaware understanding of words.
POST-HOC LOCAL EXPLANATION
After understanding the model globally, we zoom in to the
local behavior of the model and provide local explanations
for individual predictions. Local explanations target to identify the contributions of each feature in the input towards
a speciﬁc model prediction. As local methods usually attribute a model’s decision to its input features, they are also
called attribution methods. In this section, we ﬁrst introduce model-agnostic attribution methods and then discuss
attribution methods speciﬁc to DNN-based predictions.
Model-agnostic Explanation
Model-agnostic methods allow explaining predictions of
arbitrary machine learning models independent of the implementation.
They provide a way to explain predictions
by treating the models as black-boxes, where explanations
could be generated even without access to the internal model
parameters. They bring some risks at the same time, since
we cannot guarantee that the explanation faithfully reﬂects
the decision making process of a model.
Local Approximation Based Explanation
Local approximation based explanation is based on the
assumption that the machine learning predictions around
the neighborhood of a given input can be approximated by
an interpretable white-box model. The interpretable model
does not have to work well globally, but it must approximate
the black-box model well in a small neighborhood near the
original input. Then the contribution score for each feature
can be obtained by examining the parameters of the whitebox model.
Some studies assume that the prediction around the neighborhood of an instance could be formulated as the linearly
weighted combination of its input features .
Attribution methods based on this principle ﬁrst sample the feature
space in the neighborhood of the instance to constitute an
additional training set. A sparse linear model, such as Lasso,
is then trained using the generated samples and labels. This
approximation model works the same as a black-box model
locally but is much easier to inspect. Finally, the prediction of the original model can be explained by examining
the weights of this sparse linear model instead.
Sometimes, even the local behavior of a model may be
extremely non-linear, linear explanations could lead to poor
performance. Models which could characterize non-linear relationship are thus utilized as the local approximation. For
instance, a local approximation based explanation framework can be constructed using if-then rules .
Experiments on a series of tasks show that this framework is eﬀective at capturing non-linear behaviors. More importantly,
the produced rules are not conﬁned merely to the instance
being explained and often generalize to other instances.
Perturbation Based Explanation
This line of work follows the philosophy that the contribution of a feature can be determined by measuring how
prediction score changes when the feature is altered. It tries
to answer the question: which parts of the input, if they were
not seen by the model, would most change its prediction?
Thus, the results may be called counterfactual explanations.
The perturbation is performed across features sequentially
to determine their contributions, and can be implemented
in two ways: omission and occlusion. For omission, a feature is directly removed from the input, but this is impractical in practice since few models allow setting features as
unknown. As for occlusion, the feature is replaced with a
reference value, such as zero for word embeddings or speciﬁc
gray value for image pixels. Nevertheless, occlusion raises a
new concern that new evidence may be introduced and that
can be used by the model as a side eﬀect . For instance, if
we occlude part of an image using green color and then we
may provide undesirable evidence for the grass class. Thus
we should be particularly cautious when selecting reference
values to avoid introducing extra pieces of evidence.
Model-speciﬁc Explanation
There are also explanation approaches exclusively designed
for a speciﬁc type of model.
Below we introduce DNNspeciﬁc methods, which treat the networks as white-boxes
and explicitly utilize the interior structure to derive explanations. We divide them into three major categories: backpropagation based methods in a top-down manner; perturbation based methods in a bottom-up manner; investigation
of deep representations in intermediate layers.
Back-propagation
Back-propagation based methods calculate the gradient,
or its variants, of a particular output with respect to the
input using back-propagation to derive the contribution of
features. In the simplest case, we can back-propagate the
(b) Gradient
(c) Perturbation
(d) Representation
Figure 3: Local explanation heatmaps produced by
(b) Back-propagation, (c) Mask perturbation, (d)
Investigation of representations.
gradient . The underlying hypothesis is that larger gradient magnitude represents a more substantial relevance of
a feature to a prediction. Other approaches back-propagate
diﬀerent forms of signals to the input, such as discarding negative gradient values at the back-propagation process , or
back-propagating the relevance of the ﬁnal prediction score
to the input layer . These methods are integrated into
a uniﬁed framework where all methods are reformulated
as a modiﬁed gradient function .
This uniﬁcation enables comprehensive comparison between diﬀerent methods
and facilitates eﬀective implementation under modern deep
learning libraries, such as TensorFlow and PyTorch. Backpropagation based methods are eﬃcient in terms of implementation, as they usually need a few forward and backward
calculations. On the other hand, they are limited in their
heuristic nature and may generate explanations of unsatisfactory quality, which are noisy and highlight some irrelevant
features, as shown in Figure 3 (b).
Mask Perturbation
Model-agnostic perturbation mentioned in the previous
section could be computationally very expensive when handling an instance with high dimensions, since they need to
sequentially perturb the input.
In contrast, DNN-speciﬁc
perturbation could be implemented eﬃciently through mask
perturbation and gradient descent optimization. One representative work formulates the perturbation in an optimization framework to learn a perturbation mask, which explicitly preserves the contribution values of each feature .
Note that this framework generally needs to impose various
regularizations to the mask to produce meaningful explanation rather than surprising artifacts . Although the
optimization based framework has drastically boosted the
eﬃciency, generating an explanation still needs hundreds of
forward and backward operations. To enable more computationally eﬃcient implementation, a DNN model can be
trained to predict the attribution mask . Once the mask
neural network model is obtained, it only requires a single
forward pass to yield attribution scores for an input.
Investigation of Deep Representations
Either perturbation or back-propagation based explanations ignore the intermediate layers of the DNN that might
contain rich information for interpretation. To bridge the
gap, some studies explicitly utilize the deep representations
of the input to perform attribution.
Based on the observation that deep CNN representations
capture the high-level content of input images as well as their
spatial arrangement, a guided feature inversion framework
is proposed to provide local explanations . This framework inverts the representations at higher layers of CNN to
a synthesized image, while simultaneously encodes the location information of the target object in a mask. Decomposition is another perspective to take advantage of deep DNN
representations. For instance, through modeling the information ﬂowing process of the hidden representation vectors
in RNN models, the RNN prediction is decomposed into additive contribution of each word in the input text . The
decomposition result could quantify the contribution of each
individual word to a RNN prediction. These two explanation
paradigms achieve promising results on a variety of DNN
architectures, indicating that the intermediate information
indeed contributes signiﬁcantly to the attribution. Besides,
deep representations serve as a strong regularizer, increasing
the possibility that the explanations faithfully characterize
the behaviors of DNN under normal operating conditions.
Thus it reduces the risks of generating surprising artifacts
and leads to more meaningful explanations.
APPLICATIONS
Interpretable machine learning has numerous applications.
We introduce three representative ones: model validation,
model debugging, and knowledge discovery.
Model Validation
Explanations could help to examine whether a machine
learning model has employed the true evidences instead of
biases which widely exist among training data. A post-hoc
attribution approach, for instance, analyzes three question
answering models . The attribution heatmaps show that
these models often ignore important part of the questions
and rely on irrelevant words to make decisions. They further indicate that the weakness of the models is caused by
the inadequacies of training data. Possible solutions to ﬁx
this problem include modifying training data or introducing
inductive bias when training the model. More seriously, machine learning models may rely on gender and ethnic biases
to make decisions . Interpretability could be exploited to
identify whether models have utilized these biases to ensure
models don’t violate ethical and legal requirements.
Model Debugging
Explanations also can be employed to debug and analyze
the misbehavior of models when models give wrong and unexpected predictions. A representative example is adversarial learning . Recent work demonstrated that machine
learning models, such as DNNs, can be guided into making
erroneous predictions with high conﬁdence, when processing
accidentally or deliberately crafted inputs . However,
these inputs are quite easy to be recognized by humans. In
this case, explanation facilitates humans to identify the possible model deﬁciencies and analyze why these models may
fail. More importantly, we may further take advantage of human knowledge to ﬁgure out possible solutions to promote
the performances and reasonability of models.
Knowledge Discovery
The derived explanations also allow humans to obtain new
insights from machine learning model through comprehending their decision making process.
With explanation, the
area experts and the end-users could provide realistic feedbacks. Eventually, new science and new knowledge which
are originally hidden in the data could be extracted. For instance, a rule-based interpretable model has been utilized to
predict the mortality risk for patients with pneumonia .
One of the rules from the model suggests that having asthma
could lower a patient’s risk of dying from pneumonia.
turns out to be true since patients with asthma were given
more aggressive treatments which led to better outcomes.
RESEARCH CHALLENGES
Despite recent progresses in interpretable machine learning, there are still some urgent challenges, especially on explanation method design as well as evaluation.
Explanation Method Design
The ﬁrst challenge is related to the method design, especially for post-hoc explanation. We argue that an explanation method should be restricted to truly reﬂect the model
behavior under normal operation conditions. This criterion
has two meanings. Firstly, the explanations should be faithful to the mechanism of the underlying machine learning
model . Post-hoc explanation methods propose to approximate the behavior of models. Sometimes, the approximation is not suﬃciently accurate, and the explanation may
fail to precisely reﬂect the actual operation status of the original model. For instance, an explanation method may give
an explanation that makes sense to humans, while actually,
the machine learning model works in an entirely diﬀerent
way. Second, even when explanations are of high ﬁdelity to
the underlying models, they may fail to represent the model
behavior under normal conditions. Model explanation and
surprising artifacts are often two sides of the same coin. The
explanation process could generate examples which are out
of distribution from the statistics in the training dataset,
including nonsensical inputs and adversarial examples ,
which are beyond the capability of current machine learning models. Without careful design, both global and local
explanations may trigger the artifacts of machine learning
models, rather than produce meaningful explanations.
Explanation Method Evaluation
The second challenge involves the method evaluation. We
introduce below the evaluation challenges for intrinsic explanation and post-hoc explanation.
The challenge for intrinsic explanation mainly lies in how
to quantify the interpretability. There are broad sets of interpretable models which are designed according to distinct
principles and have various forms of implementations. Take
the recommender system as an example, both interpretable
latent topic model and attention mechanism could provide
some extent of interpretability. Nevertheless, how can we
compare the interpretability between globally interpretable
model and locally interpretable model? There is still no consensus on what interpretability means and how to measure
the interpretability. Finale and Been propose three types
of metrics: application-grounded metrics, human-grounded
metrics, and functionally-grounded metrics . These metrics are complementary to each other and bring their own
pros and cons regarding the degree of validity and the cost
to perform evaluations. Adopting what metrics heavily depends on the tasks so as to make more informed evaluations.
For post-hoc explanation, comparing to evaluate its interpretability, it is equally important to assess the faithfulness
of explanation to the original model, which is often omitted by existing literature. As mentioned before, generated
explanations for a machine learning model are not always
reasonable to humans. It is extremely hard to tell whether
the unexpected explanation is caused by misbehavior of the
model or limitation of the explanation method. Therefore,
better metrics to measure the faithfulness of explanations
are needed, in order to complement existing evaluation metrics. The degree of faithfulness can determine how conﬁdent
we can trust a explanation. Nevertheless, the design of appropriate faithfulness metric remains an open problem and
deserves further investigation.
DISCUSSION
We brieﬂy introduce limitations of explanation methods
that we have surveyed and then present explanation formats
that might be more understandable and friendly to users.
Limitations of Current Explanations
A major limitation of existing work on interpretable machine learning is that the explanations are designed based
on the intuition of researchers rather than focusing on the
demands of end-users. Current local explanations are usually given in the format of feature importance vectors, which
are a complete causal attribution and a low-level explanation . This format would be satisfactory if the explanation audiences are developers and researchers, since they
can utilize the statistic analysis of the feature importance
distribution to debug the models. Nevertheless, this format
is less friendly if the explanation receivers are lay-users of
machine learning.
It describes the full decision logic of a
model, which contains huge amount of redundant information and will be overwhelming to users. The presentation
formats could be further enhanced to better promote user
satisfaction.
Towards Human-friendly Explanations
Based on ﬁndings in social sciences and human behavioural
studies , we provide some directions towards user-oriented
explanations, which might be more satisfying to humans as
a means of communication.
Contrastive Explanations They are also referred as differential explanations . They do not tell why a speciﬁc
prediction was made, but rather explain why this prediction
was made instead of another, so as to answer questions like
“Why Q rather than R?”. Here Q is the fact which requires
explanation, and R is the comparing case, which could be a
real one or virtual one. Consider, for instance, a user is declined mortgage. The user may compare with another real
case and raise question “why didn’t I get a mortgage when
my neighborhood did?”. On the other hand, the user may
ask “Why was my mortgage rejected?”. Here is an implicit
contrast case, and actually the user is requesting explanation
for a virtual case “How to get my mortgage loan approved?”.
Since it is compared to an event which has not happened,
thus the desirable explanation here can also be called counterfactual explanation .
To provide contrastive explanations for a model prediction, similar strategy could be used for both above-mentioned
comparisons.
We ﬁrst produce feature importance attri-
Interpretable Machine Learning
More faithful & accurate
Researcher-oriented
explanation
Current stage
Difficulty of Tasks
Improve ML generalization
User-friendly
Explanation
Progress of interpretable ML. Current
stage is researcher-oriented explanations.
make it more faithful and accurate, which can be further utilized to promote model generalization ability, and then develop user-friendly explanations.
bution for two instances: not-accepted case for the user,
has-accepted case of a neighbor (or would-be-accepted case
of the user), and then compare the two attribution vectors.
Note that we could resort to adversarial perturbation to ﬁnd the would-be-accepted case. Besides, it is recommended to provide a diverse set of reasons, i.e., to ﬁnd
multiple contrast cases, to make the explanation more informative. Ultimately, we generate explanations of the form
“Your mortgage is rejected because your income is lower than
your neighbor’s, your credit history is not as strong as your
neighbor’s, etc”or“Your mortgage would be accepted if your
income is raised from x to y”.
Selective Explanations Usually, users do not expect an
explanation can cover the complete cause of a decision. Instead, they wish the explanation could convey the most important information that contributes to the decision . A
sparse explanation, which includes a minimal set of features
that help justify the prediction is preferred, although incompletely. Still use the mortgage case for example. One good
explanation could be presenting users the top 2 reasons contributing to the decision, such as poor credit history, low
income to debt ratio.
Credible Explanations Good explanation might be consistent with prior knowledge of general users . Suppose
the generated top reasons for the mortgage case include marital status is single and education status is high school graduate, then it would be less trustable than an explanation
outputting poor credit history and low income to debt ratio,
since the latter two are more reasonable causes leading to rejection. Low credibility could be caused by the poor ﬁdelity
of explanation to the original model. On the other hand, the
explanations maybe faithful, however, the machine learning
model does not adopt correct evidences to make decisions.
Conversational Explanations Explanations might be delivered as a conversation between the explainer and explanation receivers . It means that we need to consider the
social context, i.e., to whom an explanation is provided ,
in order to determine the content and formats of explanations. For instance, a preferred format is verbal explanation
if it is explaining to lay-users.
Note that there are many other paths to user-friendly explanations.
We refer interested readers to the survey by
Miller for a comprehensive list of directions.
aforementioned directions serve an identical purpose that
explanation should tell users why a decision was reached in
a concise and friendly manner. More importantly, the explanation could inform users what could be possibly changed to
receive a desired decision next time. Granted, there is still a
long way to go to render explanations promote user’s satisfaction. In future, researchers from diﬀerent disciplines, including machine learning, human-computer interaction, and
social science, are encouraged to closely cooperate to design
really user-oriented and human-friendly explanations.
CONCLUSIONS
Interpretable machine learning is an open and active ﬁeld
of research, with numerous interpretation approaches continuously emerging every year. We present a clear categorization and comprehensive overview of existing techniques
for interpretable machine learning, aiming to help the community to better understand the capabilities and weaknesses
of diﬀerent interpretation approaches. Although techniques
for interpretable machine learning are advancing quickly,
some key challenges remain unsolved, and future solutions
are needed to further promote the progress of this ﬁeld.