Deep Learning via Semi-Supervised Embedding
Jason Weston1, Fr´ed´eric Ratle2, Hossein Mobahi3, and Ronan Collobert4 ⋆⋆
1 Google, New York, USA.
 ,
2 Nuance Communications, Montreal, Canada.
 
3 Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, USA.
 
4 IDIAP Research Institute, Martigny, Switzerland.
 
Abstract. We show how nonlinear embedding algorithms popular for
use with “shallow” semi-supervised learning techniques such as kernel
methods can be easily applied to deep multi-layer architectures, either as
a regularizer at the output layer, or on each layer of the architecture. This
trick provides a simple alternative to existing approaches to deep learning
whilst yielding competitive error rates compared to those methods, and
existing shallow semi-supervised techniques.
Keywords: semi-supervised learning, deep learning, embedding
Introduction
In this chapter we describe a trick for improving the generalization ability of
neural networks by utilizing unlabeled pairs of examples for semi-supervised
learning. The ﬁeld of semi-supervised learning has the
goal of improving generalization on supervised tasks using unlabeled data. One
of the tricks they use is the so-called embedding of data into a lower dimensional
space (or the related task of clustering) which are unsupervised dimensionality
reduction techniques that have been intensively studied. For example, researchers
have used nonlinear embedding or cluster representations as features for a supervised classiﬁer, with improved results. Many of those proposed architectures
are disjoint and shallow, by which we mean the unsupervised dimensionality
reduction algorithm is trained on unlabeled data separately as a ﬁrst step, and
then its results are fed to a supervised classiﬁer which has a shallow architecture such as a (kernelized) linear model. For example, several methods learn a
clustering or a distance measure based on a nonlinear manifold embedding as a
ﬁrst step . Transductive Support
⋆⋆Much of the work in this chapter was completed while Jason Weston and Ronan
Collobert were working at NEC labs, Princeton, USA, and while Fr´ed´eric Ratle was
aﬃliated with the University of Lausanne, Switzerland. See 
and for conference papers on this subject.
Vector Machines (TSVMs) (which employs a kind of clustering)
and LapSVM (which employs a kind of embedding) are
examples of methods that are joint in their use of unlabeled data and labeled
data, while their architecture is shallow. In this work we use the same embedding
trick as those researchers, but apply it to (deep) neural networks.
Deep architectures seem a natural choice in hard AI tasks which involve
several sub-tasks which can be coded into the layers of the architecture. As
argued by several researchers semisupervised learning is also natural in such a setting as otherwise one is not
likely to ever have enough data to perform well. This is both because of the
dearth of label data, and because of the diﬃculty of training the architectures.
Secondly, intuitively one would think that training on labeled and unlabeled data
jointly should help guide the best use of the unlabeled data for the labeled task
compared toa two-stage disjoint approach. (However, to our knowledge there is
no systematic evidence of the latter).
Several authors have recently proposed methods for using unlabeled data in
deep neural network-based architectures. These methods either perform a greedy
layer-wise pre-training of weights using unlabeled data alone followed by supervised ﬁne-tuning (which can be compared to the disjoint shallow techniques for
semi-supervised learning described before), or learn unsupervised encodings at
multiple levels of the architecture jointly with a supervised signal. Only considering the latter, the basic setup we advocate is simple:
1. Choose an unsupervised learning algorithm.
2. Choose a model with a deep architecture.
3. The unsupervised learning is plugged into any (or all) layers of the architecture as an auxiliary task.
4. Train supervised and unsupervised tasks using the same architecture simultaneously.
The aim is that the unsupervised method will improve accuracy on the task
at hand. In this chapter we advocate a simple way of performing deep learning by
leveraging existing ideas from semi-supervised algorithms developed in shallow
architectures. In particular, we focus on the idea of combining an embeddingbased regularizer with a supervised learner to perform semi-supervised learning,
such as is used in Laplacian SVMs . We show that this
method can be: (i) generalized to multi-layer networks and trained by stochastic
gradient descent; and (ii) is valid in the deep learning framework given above.
Experimentally, we also show that it seems to work quite well. We expect this
is due to several eﬀects: ﬁrstly, the extra embedding objective acts both as a
data-dependent regularizer but secondly also as a weakly-supervised task that is
correlated well with the supervised task of interest. Finally, adding this training
objective at multiple layers of the network helps to train all the layers rather
than just backpropagating from the ﬁnal layer as in supervised learning.
Although the core of this chapter focuses on a particular algorithm (embedding) in a joint setup, we expect the approach would also work in a disjoint
setup too, and with other unsupervised algorithms, for example the approach of
Transductive SVM has also been generalized to the deep learning case .
Semi-Supervised Embedding
Our method will adapt existing semi-supervised embedding techniques for shallow methods to neural networks. Hence, before we describe the method, let
us ﬁrst review existing semi-supervised approaches. A key assumption in many
semi-supervised algorithms is the structure assumption5: points within the same
structure (such as a cluster or a manifold) are likely to have the same label. Given
this assumption, the aim is to use unlabeled data to uncover this structure. In
order to do this many algorithms such as cluster kernels ,
LDS , label propagation and
LapSVM , to name a few, make use of regularizers that
are directly related to unsupervised embedding algorithms. To understand these
methods we will ﬁrst review some relevant approaches to linear and nonlinear
embedding.
Embedding Algorithms
We will focus on a rather general class of embedding algorithms that can be described by the following type of optimization problem: given the data x1, . . . , xU
ﬁnd an embedding f(xi) of each point xi by minimizing
L(f(xi, α), f(xj, α), Wij)
w.r.t. the learning paramaters α, subject to
Balancing constraint.
This type of optimization problem has the following main ingredients:
– f(x) ∈Rn is the embedding one is trying to learn for a given example
x ∈Rd. It is parametrized by α. In many techniques f(xi) = fi is a lookup
table where each example i is assigned an independent vector fi.
– L is a loss function between pairs of examples.
– The matrix W of weights Wij speciﬁes the similarity or dissimilarity between
examples xi and xj. This is supplied in advance and serves as a kind of label
for the loss function.
– A balancing constraint is often required for certain objective functions so
that a trivial solution is not reached.
As is usually the case for such machine learning setups, one can specify the
model type (family of functions) and the loss to get diﬀerent algorithmic variants.
Many well known methods ﬁt into this framework, we describe some pertinent
ones below.
5 This is often referred to as the cluster assumption or the manifold assumption
 .
Multidimensional scaling (MDS) is a classical algorithm that
attempts to preserve the distance between points, whilst embedding them in a
lower dimensional space, e.g. by using the loss function
L(fi, fj, Wij) = (||fi −fj|| −Wij)2
MDS is equivalent to PCA if the metric is Euclidean .
ISOMAP is a nonlinear embedding technique that
attempts to capture manifold structure in the original data. It works by deﬁning
a similarity metric that measures distances along the manifold, e.g. Wij is deﬁned
by the shortest path on the neighborhood graph. One then uses those distances
to embed using conventional MDS.
Laplacian Eigenmaps learn manifold structure by emphasizing the preservation of local distances. One deﬁnes the distance metric
between the examples by encoding them in the Laplacian ˜L = W −D, where
j Wij is diagonal. Then, the following optimization is used:
L(fi, fj, Wij) =
Wij||fi −fj||2 = f ⊤˜Lf
subject to the balancing constraint:
f ⊤Df = I and f ⊤D1 = 0.
Siamese Networks are also a classical method for nonlinear
embedding. Neural networks researchers think of such models as a network with
two identical copies of the same function, with the same weights, fed into a
“distance measuring” layer to compute whether the two examples are similar or
not, given labeled data. In fact, this is exactly the same as the formulation given
at the beginning of this section.
Several loss functions have been proposed for siamese networks, here we
describe a margin-based loss proposed by the authors of :
L(fi, fj, Wij) =
||fi −fj||2
if Wij = 1,
max(0, m −||fi −fj||2)2
if Wij = 0
which encourages similar examples to be close, and dissimilar ones to have a
distance of at least m from each other. Note that no balancing constraint is
needed with such a choice of loss as the margin constraint inhibits a trivial
solution. Compared to using constraints like (2) this is much easier to optimize
by gradient descent.
Semi-Supervised Algorithms
Several semi-supervised classiﬁcation algorithms have been proposed which take
advantage of the algorithms described in the last section. Here we assume the
setting where one is given M +U examples xi, but only the ﬁrst M have a known
Label Propagation adds a Laplacian Eigenmap type
regularization to a nearest-neighbor type classiﬁer:
||fi −yi||2 + λ
Wij||fi −fj||2
The algorithm tries to give two examples with large weighted edge Wij the same
label. The neighbors of neighbors tend to also get the same label as each other
by transitivity, hence the name label propagation.
LapSVM uses the Laplacian Eigenmaps type regularizer
with an SVM: minimize
||w||2 + γ
H(yif(xi)) + λ
Wij||f(xi) −f(xj)||2
where H(x) = max(0, 1 −x) is the hinge loss.
Other Methods In a method called graph is suggested
which combines a modiﬁed version of ISOMAP with an SVM. The authors also
suggest to combine modiﬁed ISOMAP with TSVMs rather than SVMs, and call
it Low Density Separation (LDS).
Semi-supervised Embedding for Deep Learning
We would like to use the ideas developed in semi-supervised learning for deep
learning. Deep learning consists of learning a model with several layers of nonlinear mapping. In this chapter we will consider multi-layer networks with N
layers of hidden units that give a C-dimensional output vector:
j (x) + bO,i,
i = 1, . . . , C
where wO are the weights for the output layer, and typically the kth layer is
(x) + bk,i 
xj + b1,i 
and S is a non-linear squashing function such as tanh. Here, we describe a standard fully connected multi-layer network but prior knowledge about a particular
problem could lead one to other network designs. For example in sequence and
image recognition time delay and convolutional networks (TDNNs and CNNs)
 have been very successful. In those approaches one introduces layers that apply convolutions on their input which take into account
locality information in the data, i.e. they learn features from image patches or
windows within a sequence.
The general method we propose for deep learning via semi-supervised embedding is to add a semi-supervised regularizer in deep architectures in one of three
diﬀerent modes, as shown in Figure 1:
(a) Add a semi-supervised loss (regularizer) to the supervised loss on the entire
network’s output (6):
ℓ(f(xi), yi) + λ
L(f(xi), f(xj), Wij)
This is most similar to the shallow techniques described before, e.g. equation
(b) Regularize the kth hidden layer (7) directly:
ℓ(f(xi), yi) + λ
L(f k(xi), f k(xj), Wij)
where f k(x) = (hk
1(x), . . . , hk
HUk(x)) is the output of the network up to the
kth hidden layer (HUk is the number of hidden units on layer k).
(c) Create an auxiliary network which shares the ﬁrst k layers of the original
network but has a new ﬁnal set of weights:
We train this network to embed unlabeled data simultaneously as we train
the original network on labeled data.
One can use the loss function (3) for embedding, and the hinge loss
ℓ(f(x), y) =
H(y(c)fc(x)),
for labeled examples, where y(c) = 1 if y = c and -1 otherwise. For neighboring
points, this is the same regularizer as used in LapSVM and Laplacian Eigenmaps.
For non-neighbors, where Wij = 0, this loss “pulls” points apart, thus inhibiting
trivial solutions without requiring diﬃcult constraints such as (2). To achieve
an embedding without labeled data the latter is necessary or all examples would
collapse to a single point in the embedding space. This regularizer is therefore
preferable to using (1) alone. Pseudocode of the overall approach is given in
Algorithm 1.
Some possible tricks to take into consideration are:
(a) Output
(b) Internal
(c) Auxiliary
Fig. 1. Three modes of embedding in deep architectures.
Algorithm 1 EmbedNN
Input: labeled data (xi, yi), i = 1, . . . , M, unlabeled data xi, i = M + 1, . . . , U, set
of functions f(·), and embedding functions gk(·), see Figure 1 and equations (9), (10)
Pick a random labeled example (xi, yi)
Make a gradient step to optimize ℓ(f(xi), yi)
for each embedding function gk(·) do
Pick a random pair of neighbors xi, xj.
Make a gradient step for λL(gk(xi), gk(xj), 1)
Pick a random unlabeled example xn.
Make a gradient step for λL(gk(xi), gk(xn), 0)
until stopping criteria is met.
– The hyperparameter λ: in most of our experiments we simply set this to
λ = 1 and it worked well due to the alternating updates in Algorithm 1. Note
however if you are using many embedding loss functions they will dominate
the objective in that case.
– We note that near the end of optimization it may be advantageous to reduce the learning rate of the regularizer more than the learning rate for the
term that is minimizing the training error so that the training error can be
as low as possible on noiseless tasks (however we did not try this in our
experiments).
– If you use an internal embedding on the ﬁrst layer of your network, it is
likely that this embedding problem is harder than an internal embedding on
a later layer, so you might not want to give them all the same learning rate
or margin, but that complicates the hyperparameter choices. An alternative
idea would be to use auxiliary layers on earlier layers, or even go through
two auxiliary layers, rather than one to make the embedding task easier.
Auxiliary layers are thrown away at test time.
– Embedding on the last output layer may not always be a good idea, depending on the type of network. For example if you are using a softmax last
layer the 2-norm type embedding loss may not be appropriate for the log
probability representation in the last layer. In that case we suggest to do the
embedding on the last-but-one layer instead.
– Finally, although we did not try it, training in a disjoint fashion, i.e. doing
the embedding training ﬁrst, and then continuing training with a ﬁne tuning
step with only the labeled data, might simplify these hyperparameter choices
Labeling unlabeled data as neighbors (building the graph)
Training neural networks online using stochastic gradient descent is fast and can
scale to millions of examples. A possible bottleneck with the described approach
is computation of the matrix W, that is, computing which unlabeled examples
are neighbors and have value Wij = 1. Embedding algorithms often use k-nearest
neighbor for this task. Many methods for its fast computation do exist, for
example hashing and tree-based methods.
However, there are also many other ways of collecting neighboring unlabeled
data that do not involve computing k-nn. For example, if one has access to
unlabeled sequence data the following tricks can be used:
– For image tasks one can make use of the temporal coherence of unlabeled
video: two successive frames are very likely to contain similar content and
represent the same concept classes. Each object in the video is also likely
to be subject to small transformations, such as translation, rotation or deformation over neighboring frames. Hence, using this with semi-supervised
embedding could learn classes that are invariant to those changes. For example, one can take images from two consecutive (or close) frames of video as a
neighboring pair with Wij = 1. Such pairs are likely to have the same label,
and are collected cheaply. Frames that are far apart are assigned Wij = 0.
– For text tasks one can use documents to collect unsupervised pairs. For
example, one could consider sentences (or paragraphs) of a document as
neighbors that contain semantically similar information (they are probably
about the same topic).
– Similarly, for speech tasks it might be possible to use audio streams in the
When do we expect this approach to work?
One can see the described approach as an instance of multi-task learning using unsupervised auxiliary tasks. In common with other semisupervised learning approaches, and indeed other deep learning approaches,
given a k-nn type approach to building unlabaled pairs we only expect this
to work if p(x) is useful for the supervised task p(y|x), i.e. if the structure assumption is true. That is, if the decision rule lies in a region of low density with
respect to the distance metric chosen for k-nearest neighbors. We believe many
natural tasks have this property.
However, if the graph is built using sequence data as described in the previous
section, it is then possible that the method does not rely on the low density
assumption at all. To see this, consider uniform two-dimensional data where the
class label is positive if it is above the y-axis, and negative if it is below. A nearestneighbor graph gives no information about the class label, or equivalently there
is no margin to optimize for TSVMs. However, if sequence data (analogous to a
video) only has data points with the same class label in consecutive frames then
this would carry information. Further, no computational cost is associated with
collecting video data for computing the embedding loss, in contrast to building
neighbor graphs. Finally, note that in high dimensional spaces nearest neighbors
might also perform poorly, e.g. in the pixel space of images.
Why is this approach good?
There are a number of reasons why the deep semi-supervised embedding trick
might be useful compared to competing approaches:
– Deep embedding is very easy to optimize by gradient descent as it has a
very simple loss function. This means it can be applied to any kind of neural network architecture cheaply and eﬃciently. As well as being generally
applicable, it is also quite easy to implement.
– Compared to a reconstruction based loss function, such as used in an autoencoder, our approach can be much cheaper to do the gradient updates. In our
approach there is an encoding step, but no decoding step. That is, the loss
is measured in the usually relatively low-dimensional embedding space. For
high-dimensional input data (even if that data is sparse) e.g. text data, the
reconstruction can be very slow, e.g. a bag-of-words representation with a
dictionary of tens of thousands of words. Further, in a convolutional-pooling
network architecture it might be hard to reconstruct the original data, so
again an encoder-decoder system might be hard to do, but our method only
requires an encoder.
– Our approach does not necessarily require the so called low density assumption which most other approaches depend upon. Many methods only work
on data when that assumption is true (which we do not know in advance
in general). Our method may still work, depending on how the pair-data is
collected. This point was elaborated in the previous subsection.
Experimental Evaluation
We test the semi-supervised embedding approach on several datasets summarized in Table 1.
Table 1. Datasets used in our experiments. The ﬁrst three are small scale datasets
used in the same experimental setup as found in . The following six datasets are large scale. The Mnist
1h, 6h, 1k, 3k and 60k variants are MNIST with a labeled subset of data, following
the experimental setup in . SRL is a Semantic Role Labeling
task with one million labeled training examples and 631 million
unlabeled examples. COIL100 is an object detection dataset .
dims points labeled
COIL100 (30 objects)
30 72x72 pixels
COIL100 (100 objects)
100 72x72 pixels
Small-scale experiments
g50c, Text and Uspst are small-scale datasets often used for semi-supervised
learning experiments . We followed the same experimental setup, averaging results of ten
splits of 50 labeled examples where the rest of the data is unlabeled. In these
experiments we test the embedding regularizer on the output of a neural network
(see equation (9) and Figure 1(a)). We deﬁne a two-layer neural network (NN)
with hu hidden units. We deﬁne W so that the 10 nearest neighbors of i have
Wij = 1, and Wij = 0 otherwise. We train for 50 epochs of stochastic gradient
descent and ﬁxed λ = 1, but for the ﬁrst 5 we optimized the supervised target
alone (without the embedding regularizer). This gives two free hyperparameters:
the number of hidden units hu = {0, 5, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50} and the learning rate
lr = {0.1, 0.05, 0.01, 0.005, 0.001, 0.0005, 0.0001}.
We report the optimum choices of these values optimized both by 5-fold cross
validation and by optimizing on the test set in Table 2. Note the datasets are
very small, so cross validation is unreliable. Several methods from the literature
optimized their hyperparameters using the test set (those that are not marked
with (cv)). Our EmbedNN is competitive with state-of-the-art semi-supervised
methods based on SVMs, even outperforming them in some cases.
MNIST experiments
We compare our method in all three diﬀerent modes (Figure 1) with conventional
semi-supervised learning (TSVM) using the same data split and validation set
Table 2. Results on Small-Scale Datasets. We report the best test error over the
hyperparameters of our method, EmbedNN, as in the methodology of as well as the error when optimizing the parameters by cross-validation,
EmbedNN(cv). LDS(cv) and LapSVM(cv) also use cross-validation.
Text Uspst
8.32 18.86 23.18
5.71 17.61
LapSVM(cv)
Label propagation 17.30 11.71 21.30
8.32 10.48 16.92
10.62 15.74 25.13
5.82 15.49
EmbedNN(cv)
6.19 15.84
Table 3. Results on MNIST with 100, 600, 1000 and 3000 labels. A two-layer Neural
Network (NN) is compared to an NN with Embedding regularizer (EmbedNN) on the
output (O), ith layer (Ii) or auxiliary embedding from the ith layer (Ai) (see Figure 1).
A convolutional network (CNN) is also tested in the same way. We compare to SVMs
and TSVMs. RBM, SESM, DBN-NCA and DBN-rNCA (marked with (∗)) taken from
 are trained on a diﬀerent data
Mnst1h Mnst6h Mnst1k Mnst3k
DBN-NCA(∗) -
DBN-rNCA(∗) -
EmbedI5CNN 7.75
EmbedA5CNN 7.87
Table 4. Mnist1h dataset with deep networks of 2, 6, 8, 10 and 15 layers; each hidden
layer has 50 hidden units. We compare classical NN training with EmbedNN where we
either learn an embedding at the output layer (O) or an auxiliary embedding on all
layers at the same time (ALL).
EmbedALLNN
Table 5. Full Mnist60k dataset with deep networks of 2, 6, 8, 10 and 15 layers, using
either 50 or 100 hidden units. We compare classical NN training with EmbedALLNN
where we learn an auxiliary embedding on all layers at the same time.
NN (HUs=50)
EmbedALLNN
NN (HUs=100)
EmbedALLNN
as in . We also compare to several deep learning methods:
RBMs (Restricted Boltzmann Machines), SESM (Sparse Encoding Symmetric
Machine), DBN-NCA and DBN-rNCA (Deep Belief Nets - (regularized) Neighbourhood Components Analysis). (Note, however the latter were trained on a
diﬀerent data split). In these experiments we consider 2-layer networks (NN)
and 6-layer convolutional neural nets (CNN) for embedding. We optimize the
parameters of NN ( hu = {50, 100, 150, 200, 400} hidden units and learning rates
as before) on the validation set. The CNN architecture is ﬁxed: 5 layers of image
patch-type convolutions, followed by a linear layer of 50 hidden units, similar
to . The results given in Table 3 show the eﬀectiveness of
embedding in all three modes, with both NNs and CNNs.
Deeper MNIST experiments
We then conducted a similar set of experiments but with very deep architectures
– up to 15 layers, where each hidden layer has 50 hidden units. Using Mnist1h,
we ﬁrst compare conventional NNs to EmbedALLNN where we learn an auxiliary
nonlinear embedding (50 hidden units and a 10 dimensional embedding space)
on each layer, as well as EmbedONN where we only embed the outputs. Results are given in Table 4. When we increase the number of layers, NNs trained
with conventional backpropagation overﬁt and yield steadily worse test error
(although they are easily capable of achieving zero training error). In contrast,
EmbedALLNN improves with increasing depth due to the semi-supervised “regularization”. Embedding on all layers of the network has made deep learning
possible. EmbedONN (embedding on the outputs) also helps, but not as much.
We also conducted some experiments using the full MNIST dataset, Mnist60k.
Again using deep networks of up to 15 layers using either 50 or 100 hidden units
EmbedALLNN outperforms standard NN. Results are given in Table 5. Despite
the lack of availability of extra unlabeled data, we still the same eﬀect as in
the semi-supervised case that NN overﬁts with increasing capacity, whereas EmbedNN is more robust (even if it exhibits some overﬁtting compared to the optimal depth, it is nowhere near as pronounced.) Increasing the number of hidden
units is likely to improve these results further, e.g. using 4 layers and 500 hidden
units on each layer, one obtains 1.27% using EmbedALLNN. Overall, these results show that the regularization in EmbedNNALL is useful in settings outside
of a semi-supervised learning.
Table 6. A deep architecture for Semantic Role Labeling with no prior knowledge
outperforms state-of-the-art systems ASSERT and SENNA that incorporate knowledge
about parts-of-speech and parse trees. A convolutional network (CNN) is improved
by learning an auxiliary embedding (EmbedA1CNN) for words represented as 100dimensional vectors using the entire Wikipedia website as unlabeled data.
Test Error
ASSERT 
SENNA 
CNN [no prior knowledge]
EmbedA1CNN [no prior knowledge]
Semantic Role Labeling
The goal of semantic role labeling (SRL) is, given a sentence and a relation of
interest, to label each word with one of 16 tags that indicate that word’s semantic role with respect to the action of the relation. For example the sentence ”The
cat eats the ﬁsh in the pond” is labeled in the following way: ”TheARG0 catARG0
eatsREL theARG1 ﬁshARG1 inARGM−LOC theARGM−LOC pondARGM−LOC” where
ARG0 and ARG1 eﬀectively indicate the subject and object of the relation “eats”
and ARGM-LOC indicates a locational modiﬁer. The PropBank dataset includes
around 1 million labeled words from the Wall Street Journal. We follow the experimental setup of and train a 5-layer convolutional
neural network for this task, where the ﬁrst layer represents the input sentence
words as 50-dimensional vectors. Unlike , we do not
give any prior knowledge to our classiﬁer. In that work words were stemmed
and clustered using their parts-of-speech. Our classiﬁer is trained using only the
original input words.
We attempt to improve this system by, as before, learning an auxiliary embedding task. Our embedding is learnt using unlabeled sentences from the Wikipedia
web site, consisting of 631 million words in total using the scheme described in
Section 3. The same lookup table of word vectors as in the supervised task is
used as input to an 11 word window around a given word, yielding 550 features.
Then a linear layer projects these features into a 100 dimensional embedding
space. All windows of text from Wikipedia are considered neighbors, and nonneighbors are constructed by replacing the middle word in a sentence window
with a random word. Our lookup table indexes the most frequently used 30,000
words, and all other words are assigned index 30,001.
The results in Table 6 indicate a clear improvement when learning an auxiliary embedding. ASSERT is an SVM parser-based system
Table 7. Test Accuracy on COIL100 in various settings. Both 30 and 100 objects were
used following . The semi-supervised embedding algorithm
using temporal coherence of video (Embed CNN) on the last but one layer of an 8
layer CNN, with various choices of video, outperforms a standard (otherwise identical)
8-layer CNN and other baselines.
30 objects
100 objects
Nearest Neighbor
SpinGlass MRF
Eigen Spline
Standard CNN
with many hand-coded features, and SENNA is a NN which uses part-of-speech
information to build its word vectors. In contrast, our system is the only state-ofthe-art method that does not use prior knowledge in the form of features derived
from parts-of-speech or parse tree data. The use of neural network techniques
for this application is explored in much more detail in ,
although a diﬀerent semi-supervised technique is used in that work.
Object Recognition Using Unlabeled Video
Finally, we detail some experiments using unlabeled video for semi-supervised
embedding, more details of these experiments can be found in . We used the COIL100 image dataset which contains
color pictures of 100 objects, each 72x72 pixels. There are 72 diﬀerent views for
every object, i.e. there are 7200 images in total. The images were obtained by
placing the objects on a turntable and taking a shot for each 5 degree turn. Note
that the rotation of the objects can be viewed as an unlabeled video which we
can use in our semi-supervised embedding approach.
The setup of our experiments is as follows. First, we use a standard convolutional neural network (CNN) without utilizing any temporal information to
establish a baseline. We used an 8-layer network consisting of three sets of convolution followed by subsampling layers, a ﬁnal convolution layer and a fully
connected layer that predicts the outputs.
For comparability with the settings available from other studies on COIL100,
we choose two experimental setups. These are (i) when all 100 objects of COIL
are considered in the experiment and (ii) when only 30 labeled objects out of
100 are studied (for both training and testing). In either case, 4 out of 72 views
(at 0, 90, 180, and 270 degrees) per object are used for training, and the rest
of the 68 views are used for testing. The results are given in Table 7 compared
to some existing methods .
To use the semi-supervised embedding trick on our CNN for video, we treat
COIL100 as a continuous unlabeled video sequence of rotating objects with 72
consecutive frames per each object (after 72 frames the continuous video switches
object). We perform the embedding on the last but one layer of our 8 layer CNN,
i.e. on the representation yielded by the successive layers of the network just
before the ﬁnal softmax. For the 100 object result, the test set is hence part
of the unlabeled video (a so-called “transductive” setting). Here we obtained
92.25% accuracy (Embed CNN) which is much higher than the best alternative
method (VTU) and the standard CNN that we trained.
A natural question is what happens if we do not have access to test data
during training, i.e. the setting is a typical semi-supervised situation rather than
a “transductive” setting. To explore this, we used 30 objects as the primary
task, i.e. 4 views of each object in this set were used for training, and the rest
for test. The other 70 objects only were treated as an unlabeled video sequence
(again, images of each object were put in consecutive frames of a video sequence).
Training with 4 views of 30 objects (labeled data) and 72 views of 70 objects
(unlabeled video sequence) resulted in an accuracy of 95.03% on recognizing 68
views of the 30 objects. This is about 10% above the standard CNN performance.
Conclusion
In this chapter, we showed how one can improve supervised learning for deep
architectures if one jointly learns an embedding task using unlabeled data. Researchers using shallow architectures already showed two ways of using embedding to improve generalization: (i) embedding unlabeled data as a separate preprocessing step (i.e., ﬁrst layer training) and; (ii) using embedding as a regularizer (i.e., at the output layer). It appears similar techniques can also be used for
multi-layer neural networks as well, using the tricks described in this chapter.