In: P. Brusilovsky, A. Kobsa, W. Nejdl, eds.: The Adaptive Web: Methods and Strategies of Web
Personalization. Berlin, Heidelberg, New York: Springer Verlag, 628-670. This is the author’s version of
the work. The definitive work is DOI 10.1007/978-3-540-72079-9_4, © Springer Verlag.
Privacy-Enhanced Web Personalization
Alfred Kobsa
Donald Bren School of Information and Computer Sciences
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697-3440, U.S.A.
 
 
Abstract. Consumer studies demonstrate that online users value personalized
content. At the same time, providing personalization on websites seems quite
profitable for web vendors. This win-win situation is however marred by
privacy concerns since personalizing people's interaction entails gathering
considerable amounts of data about them. As numerous recent surveys have
consistently demonstrated, computer users are very concerned about their
privacy on the Internet. Moreover, the collection of personal data is also subject
to legal regulations in many countries and states. Both user concerns and
privacy regulations impact frequently used personalization methods. This article
analyzes the tension between personalization and privacy, and presents
approaches to reconcile the both.
21.1 Introduction
It has been tacitly acknowledged for many years that personalized interaction and user
modeling have significant privacy implications, due to the fact that large amounts of
personal information about users needs to be collected to perform personalization. For
instance, frequent users of a search engine may appreciate that their search terms
become recorded to disambiguate future queries and deliver results that are better
geared towards their interests (see Chapter 6 of this book ). They may not
appreciate though if their search history from the past few years becomes accessible
to others. Secretaries may value if the help component of their text editor can give
personalized advice based on a model of their individual word-processing skills that it
built over time by watching how they interact with the word processor . They are
however likely to be concerned if the contents of their model becomes accessible to
others, specifically if negative consequences may arise from a disclosure of the skills
they lack. Other potential privacy concerns in the context of personalized systems
include (see ): unsolicited marketing, computer “figuring things out” about the
user , fear of price discrimination, information being revealed to other users of
the same computer, unauthorized access to accounts, subpoenas by courts, and
government surveillance.
Kobsa was arguably the first to point out the tension between
personalization and privacy nearly twenty years ago, but without much impact. The
only privacy solution of these days was to ascertain that users could store their models
on a diskette (R. Oppermann, GMD) or a PCMCIA card (J. Orwant, MIT ), and
carry them with. The situation changed completely in the late 1990s, for four main
Personalized systems moved to the web. Web retailers quickly realized the enormous
potential of personalization for customer relationship management and made their
websites user-adaptive. This had significant privacy implications. While user models
were previously confined to stand-alone machines or local networks, people's profiles
were now collected on dozens if not hundreds of personalized websites. Widely
publicized security glitches and privacy breaches as well as aggressive telemarketing
led to a widespread (~60-80%) stated reluctance of Internet users to disclose personal
data and being tracked online. This reluctance however endangers the basic foundations of personalization, which highly relies on such data .
More sources of user data available. While in the 1980s the main source of user
modeling was nearly exclusively textual data entered by the user, assumptions about
users can nowadays be drawn from, e.g., their mouse movements, mouse clicks, eye
movements, facial expression, physiological data and location data. Completely new
privacy threats arose in ubiquitous computing environments where users are no longer
merely IP addresses in an abstract online space, but become identified individuals
who are being monitored and contacted by their physical surroundings.
More powerful analyses of user data available. More powerful computers, computer
networks, sensors and algorithms have made it possible to collect, connect and
analyze far more data about users than ever before. Complete digital lifetime archives
replete with personal data may soon become reality.
Restrictions imposed by privacy legislation. Many more countries, states and provinces have meanwhile introduced privacy laws, which severely affect not only
commercial websites but also experimental research on user modeling (in many cases
even when it is done "just with IP numbers", "just with our students", or "just for
testing purposes") . Areas that are specifically affected include data mining for
personalization purposes (see Chapter 3 of this book ), adaptive tutoring systems
that build learner models (see Chapter 1 of this book ), and adaptation to the
needs of people with special needs .
Consumer studies demonstrate that online users value personalized content . At the same time, providing personalization on websites seems quite profitable
for web vendors . This win-win situation is however marred by
privacy concerns since personalizing people's interaction entails gathering considerable amounts of data about them. As a consequence, the topic of "Privacy and
Personalization" has received considerable attention from industry and academia in
the past few years. Three industry conferences with this title were held in 2000-01 (in
New York, London and San Francisco) with a participation of about 150 people. The
Ubiquitous Computing conferences have held privacy workshops in the past four
years1 that address, among other topics, privacy in context-aware systems. In July
2005, twenty researchers met for a first workshop on Privacy-Enhanced Personalization at the 10th International User Modeling Conference in Edinburgh, Scotland ,
and one year later for a second workshop at the CHI-2006 conference in Montréal,
Canada .
The aim of research on privacy-enhanced personalization is to reconcile the goals
and methods of user modeling and personalization with privacy considerations, and to
strive for best possible personalization within the boundaries set by privacy. This
research field is widely interdisciplinary, with contributions coming from information
systems, marketing research, public policy, economics, computer-mediated communication, law, human-computer interaction, and the information and computer sciences.
This chapter analyzes how current research results on privacy in electronic environments relate to the aims of privacy-enhanced personalization. It first discusses the
impact of Internet users’ privacy concerns on the disclosure of personal data. Section
21.3 then reviews the current state of research on factors that contribute to alleviating
privacy concerns and to encouraging the disclosure of personal data. Section 21.4
analyzes the impact of privacy regulation on personalized systems (specifically of
privacy legislation, but also industry and company self-regulation as well as principles
of fair information practices). Section 21.5 finally describes privacy-enhancing
technical solutions that are particularly well suited for personalized systems.
As we will see throughout these discussions, there exists no magic bullet for
making personalized systems privacy-enhanced, neither technical nor legal nor social/
organizational. Instead, numerous small enhancements need to be introduced, which
depend on the application domain as well as the types of data, users and personalization goals involved. At the end of most sections and subsections, we will list the
lessons for the privacy-minded design of personalized systems that ensue from the
research results discussed in the respective section. In a concrete project, though, the
applicability of these recommendations will still need to be verified as part of the
normal interaction design and user evaluation process .
21.2 Individuals’ Privacy Concerns
21.2.1 Methodological Preliminaries
This section analyzes empirical results regarding people’s privacy-related attitudes,
and the subsequent section known motivators and deterrents for people disclosing
personal information to websites. Two principal types of empirical methods are available for identifying such attitudes, motivators and deterrents:
1. Inquiry-based methods. In this approach, the participants of an empirical study are
being asked about their privacy attitudes (“reported/perceived attitudes”), their
disclosure behavior in the past (“reported/perceived behavior”), and their antici-
1 See the links at 
pated disclosure behavior under certain privacy-related circumstances (“stated
behavioral intentions”). In the third case, these privacy-related circumstances can
be merely described to subjects, or one can try to immerse subjects in them as
much as possible (e.g. by showing them a website with characteristics that may be
important in subjects’ disclosure decisions).
2. Observation-based methods. In this approach, the privacy-related behavior of
participants is being observed during the empirical study. Subjects are put into a
situation that resembles the studied circumstances as much as possible (usually a
lab experiment, ideally a field experiment), and they have to exhibit privacy-related
behavior therein (e.g., disclose their own personal data while purchasing products)
rather than merely answer questions about their likely behavior.
Both approaches have complementary strengths and weaknesses, and mixes of both
approaches are therefore customary. Inquiry-based methods do not directly unveil
people’s actual privacy-related attitudes and disclosure behavior, but only their
perception thereof, which may not be in sync with reality. Observation-based methods
on the other hand often do not allow one to recognize people’s higher-level behavioral
patterns or rationale, which in return can be more easily accessed through inquiries. In
addition, both approaches are equally subject to various potential biases that must be
eliminated through careful experimental design (see e.g. ).
In the area of privacy, other factors also seem to come into play that may skew the
results of empirical studies. Such known or suspected factors include the following:
1. Biased self-selection. It may be the case that predominantly those people volunteer
to participate in a privacy study, or take the pains to complete it until the very end,
for whom privacy is a personal concern. This may bias the responses towards
higher concerns.
2. Socially desirable responses. It may be the case in privacy studies that subjects
tend to respond and act in ways that are deemed socially desirable. For instance, in
times of ever-increasing identity theft this bias may skew responses towards higher
concerns since not having privacy concerns might be viewed as displaying a lack
of prudence and responsibility.
3. Discrepancies between stated attitudes and observed behavior. In several privacy
studies in e-commerce contexts, discrepancies have already been observed between
users stating high privacy concerns but subsequently disclosing personal data carelessly . Several authors therefore challenge the genuineness of such
reported privacy attitudes and emphasize the need for experiments that
allow for an observation of actual online disclosure behavior .
It seems possible to eliminate the first two sources of bias through careful experimental design and post-hoc recalibration of socially desirable responses. The
discrepancies between stated privacy attitudes and observed disclosure behavior will
be discussed in more detail in Sections 21.2.5 and 21.3.5. For the time being, it seems
useful though to clearly distinguish whether an experimental finding stems from the
observation of actual human disclosure behavior in an experiment, or is based on
subjects’ reports of attitudes, past behavior or behavioral intentions. We will therefore
introduce the convention of marking findings of the first kind with an asterisk (*) in
the remainder of this chapter.2
Potential Effects of Privacy Concerns on Personalized Systems
Numerous consumer surveys and research studies have revealed that Internet users
harbor considerable privacy concerns regarding the disclosure of their personal data to
websites, and the monitoring of their Internet activities. These studies were primarily
conducted between 1998 and 2003, mostly in the United States (see for an
incomplete listing). In the following, we summarize a few important findings (the
percentage figures indicate the ratio of respondents who adopted the respective view).
For a more detailed discussion we refer to .
Personal data
1. Internet users who are concerned about the privacy or security of their personal
information online: 70% , 83% , 89.5% , 84% ;
2. People who have refused to give personal information to a web site at one time or
another: 95% , 83% , 82% ;
3. Internet users who would never provide personal information to a web site: 27%
4. Internet users who supplied false or fictitious information to a web site when asked
to register: 40% ; 34% ; 24% ; 15% more than half of the time ;
6% always, 7% often, 17% sometimes ; 48.9% never, 24.1% a quarter or less
of the time, 18% between ¼ and over ¾ of the time ; 19.4% in an experiment
(half of them multiple times) ; 39.6% in an experiment (2-3 items on average,
and the likelihood of falsification was correlated with the stated sensitivity of the
5. People who are concerned if a business shares their data for a purpose that is different from the one for which they were originally collected: 90% , 89% ;
6. Online users who believe that sites that share personal information with other sites
invade privacy: 83% .
Significant concern about the use of personal data is visible in these results, which
may cause problems for those personalized systems that depend on users disclosing
data about themselves. More than a quarter of respondents stated that they would
never consider providing personal information to a web site. Quite a few users
indicated having supplied false or fictitious information to a web site when asked to
register, which makes all personalization based on such data dubious, and may also
jeopardize cross-session identification of users as well as all personalization based
thereon. Furthermore, 80-90% of the respondents are concerned if a business shares
their information for a different than the original purpose. This may have severe
impacts on central user modeling servers that collect data from, and share them with,
different user-adaptive applications (see Chapter 4 of this book ).
2 Note that a cited article may both describe observation-based findings (which will be marked
with an asterisk) and findings that are based on subjects’ reports (which will not).
User tracking and cookies
1. People who are concerned about being tracked on the Internet: 54% , 63%
 , 62% ;
2. People who are concerned that someone might know what web sites they visited:
3. Users who feel uncomfortable being tracked across multiple web sites: 91% ;
4. Internet users who generally accept cookies: 62% ;
5. Internet users who set their computers to reject cookies: 25% , 10% ; and
6. Internet users who delete cookies periodically: 53% .
These results reveal significant user concerns about tracking and cookies, which may
have effects on the acceptance of personalization that is based on usage logs. Observations 3–6 directly affect machine-learning methods that operate on user log data
since without cookies or registration, different sessions of the same user can no longer
be linked. Observation 3 may again affect the acceptance of the above-mentioned user
modeling servers which collect user information from several websites (see Chapter 4
of this book ).
These survey results indicate that privacy concerns may indeed severely impede
the adoption of personalized web-based systems. As a consequence, personalized
systems may become less used, personalization features may become switched off if
this is an option, fewer personal information may become disclosed, and escape
strategies may be adopted such as submitting falsified data, maintaining multiple
accounts/identities, deleting cookies, etc. However, developers of personalized webbased systems should not feel completely discouraged by the abundance of stated
privacy concerns in consumer surveys. As we will see, privacy concerns are only one
of many factors that influence whether and to what extent people disclose data about
themselves and utilize personalized systems. In Section 21.3 we will discuss numerous factors that can seemingly mitigate users’ privacy concerns and prompt them to
nevertheless disclose personal data about themselves. Designers of personalized
systems will have to carefully analyze users’ privacy concerns in their application
domain and address them, but also consider those mitigating factors and ascertain that
as many of them as possible are present in the design of their systems.
21.2.3 Effect of Information Type
Not surprisingly, many surveys indicate that users’ willingness to disclose personal
information also depends on the kind of information in question. For instance,
− Ackerman et al. found that the vast majority of their respondents always or
usually felt comfortable providing information about their own preferences,
including favorite television show (82%) and favorite snack food (80%). In
contrast, only a very small number said they would usually feel comfortable
providing their credit card number (3%) or social security number (1%). The
figures decreased in all categories if the data was about subjects’ children and not
about themselves.
− Phelps found that consumers are more willing to provide marketers with
demographic and lifestyle information than with financial, purchase-related, and
personal identifier information. The vast majority of respondents were always or
somewhat willing to share their two favorite hobbies, age, marital status, occupation or type of job, and education.
− Metzger found that participants of her experiment “were most willing to
provide basic demographic information (e.g., sex, age, education level, marital
status), and slightly less willing to provide information about their actual online
behavior (past purchases time spent online), religion, political party identification,
race, hobbies/interests, and occupation. Respondents were by far most protective of
their personal contact information (telephone number and email address) and
financial information (credit card number, social security number, and income).”*
− In a different experiment, Metzger found that participants were most likely to
withhold their credit card and social security numbers. The next-most withheld
items included email address, telephone number, favorite website, hobbies/
interests, and last purchase made online, income and political party affiliation.
Participants were least likely to withhold general demographic information about
themselves, for example, their sex, race, education, marital status, time spent
online, number of people in their household, and age. Name and address were
given out most frequently, but those were required for receiving a free CD.
An experiment by Huberman et al. suggests that not only different data categories, but also different values within the same category may have different privacy
valuations*. A group of experimental subjects participated in a reverse auction for the
disclosure of certain personal information to all others (namely of individuals’ age,
weight, salary, spousal salary, credit rating and amount of savings). The anonymously
submitted asking prices for this personal data turned out to be a (largely linear)
function of the deviance of the data values from the socially desirable standard (this
holds true both for individually perceived and actual deviance)*. The results seem to
indicate that the more undesirable a trait is with respect to the group norm, the higher
is its privacy valuation.
The lesson from these findings for the design of personalized web-based systems
seems that highly sensitive data categories should never be requested without the
presence of some of the mitigating factors that will be discussed later. To lower
privacy concerns for data values that are possibly highly deviant, one-sided open
intervals should be considered whose closed boundary does not deviate too much
from the expected norm (such as “weight: 250 pounds and above” for male adults).
* An asterisk indicates that the data is based on an observation of human privacy-related
behavior in an experiment rather than a survey of stated attitudes, reported past behavior, or
stated behavioral intentions (see Section 24.2.1 for a more detailed explanation).
21.2.4 Interpersonal Differences in Privacy Attitudes
Various studies established that age , education and income are
positively associated with the degree of stated Internet privacy concern. Smith et al.
 also found that people who were victims of a perceived privacy invasion or had
heard of one had higher privacy concerns. Gender effects on Internet privacy concerns
could not be clearly established so far.
In a broad privacy survey that was first conducted in 1991 and since then
repeated several times, Harris Interactive and Alan Westin clustered respondents into
three groups, namely privacy fundamentalists, the privacy unconcerned, and privacy
pragmatists. Privacy fundamentalists generally express extreme concern about any use
of their data and unwillingness to disclose them, even when privacy protection
mechanisms would be in place. In contrast, the privacy unconcerned tend to express
mild concern for privacy only, and also mild anxiety about how other people and
organizations use information about them. Privacy pragmatists as the third group are
generally concerned about their privacy as well. In contrast to the fundamentalists
though, their privacy concerns are lower and they are far more willing to disclose
personal information, e.g. when they understand the reasons for its use, when they see
benefits for doing so, or when they see privacy protections in place.
In the latest edition of this survey in 20033, privacy fundamentalists comprise about
26% of all adults, the privacy unconcerned about 10%, and the privacy pragmatists
64% . Previous editions and other studies yield slightly different figures and/or
clusters. For instance, the clustering of the responses in resulted in 17% privacy
fundamentalists, 27% “marginally concerned”, and 56% members of the “pragmatic
majority”. Acquisti and Grossklags found four different clusters: “privacy fundamentalists with high concern toward all collection categories (26.1 percent), two
medium groups with concerns either focused on the accumulation of data belonging to
online or offline identity (23.5 percent and 20.2 percent, respectively), and a group
with low concerns in all fields (27.7 percent).” Spiekermann et al. also identified privacy fundamentalists (30%) and marginally concerned users (24%). In
addition, the authors were able to split the remaining respondents into two distinct
groups, namely ones who are concerned about revealing information such as their
names, email or mailing addresses (“identity concerned, 30%) and others who are
rather more concerned about the profiling of their interests, hobbies, health and other
personal information (“profiling averse”, 25%).
Stated Attitudes versus Reported and Observed Behavior
What are the effects of high privacy concerns? If one looks at people’s reported past
behavior or intended future behavior, the effects seem straightforward:
− Sheehan and Hoy found that people’s stated concern for privacy correlates
negatively with the reported frequency of registering with websites in the past, and
positively with providing incomplete information when they do register.
3 See for a more detailed comparison of privacy concern indicators over different years.
− Metzger more generally found that stated concern for online privacy negatively predicted reported past online information disclosure (i.e., those who
expressed high privacy concerns also tended to report less information disclosure
in the past, and vice versa).
− Smith et al. developed and validated a survey instrument for determining
individuals’ level of privacy concerns, which is composed of four subscales that
measure concerns about inappropriate collection, unauthorized secondary use,
improper access, and errors in storing. Research by Xu et al. that used this
instrument indicates that if people’s individual privacy “sub-concerns” are
addressed, their intended data disclosure rose significantly (concerns regarding
improper access and unauthorized secondary use had particularly high regression
coefficients).
− Finally, Chellappa and Sin found that users’ stated intention to use personalization services (which necessitates their willingness to disclose information about
themselves) is also negatively influenced by their individual level of privacy
Other survey results however shed doubts on whether Internet users always follow
through on their stated concerns. A large majority of people buy online (and thereby
give out personal data) despite professing privacy concerns . More paradoxically, Behrens found that 20 percent of adults who say they have placed an
order on the Internet in the past three months also say they won't put personal information such as their name and address on the Web.
If we look at observable user behavior, the discrepancy to stated privacy concerns
becomes even more apparent. The experiment of Metzger did not confirm the
hypothesis that individuals’ level of concern about online privacy and data security is
negatively related to the observed amount of personal information they disclosed to a
commercial Web site*. The experiment by Spiekermann et al. showed that
privacy fundamentalists in particular did not live up to their expressed attitudes*.
They only answered 10 percentage points fewer questions than marginally concerned
participants.
As mentioned above, a lesson from the apparent discrepancy between intended and
actual disclosure behavior of highly privacy-concerned individuals is that developers
in the area of personalized web-based systems should not feel completely discouraged
by the abundance of stated privacy concerns in consumer surveys. User experiments
and daily web practice prove that people do disclose their personal data, since other
factors are in effect at the same time that override or alleviate their privacy concerns.
Such factors will be discussed in the next few sections. Moreover, based on the
abovementioned results of Xu et al. , it seems worthwhile to address people’s
individual privacy “sub-concerns”. Section 21.5.4 will discuss methods for dealing
with privacy in a more personalized manner.
21.3 Factors Fostering the Disclosure of Personal Information
This section describes factors that have been shown to influence people’s willingness
to disclose personal data about themselves on the Internet. Those factors include the
value that people assign to personalization, their knowledge of and control over how
personal information is used, users’ trust in a website (and known antecedents thereof,
namely positive past experience, the design, operation and reputation of a website,
and the presence of privacy statements and privacy seals), as well as data disclosure
benefits other than personalization. The section also discusses consequences of these
findings for the design of web-based personalized systems. In Section 21.3.5 we will
describe how users consider these factors in a situation-specific cost-benefit analysis
when deciding on whether or not to disclose individual personal data.
21.3.1 Value of Personalization
Chellappa and Sin found that the value which Internet users assign to
personalization is a very important factor with regard to their stated intention to use
personalized websites, and that it can “override” privacy concerns: “the consumers’
value for personalization is almost two times […] more influential than the consumers’ concern for privacy in determining usage of personalization services. This
suggests that while vendors should not ignore privacy concerns, they are sure to reap
benefits by improving the quality of personalized services that they offer” . A
study by White also confirmed that users are more likely to provide personal
information when they receive personalization benefits (the opposite seems to hold
true however in the case of potentially embarrassing information in combination with
a deep relationship between consumer and business, as will be explained in more
detail in Section 21.3.3.1).
How much value, then, do Internet users assign to personalized services?
Consumer surveys from the turn of the century (i.e. from the time when personalization features became first visible on the web) suggest that a slight majority of respondents value personalization, but that about a quarter sees no value in personalization
or is not willing to disclose personal data to receive it:
1. Online users who see / do not see personalization as a good thing: 59% / 37% ;
2. People who are willing to give information to receive a personalized online experience: 51% (15% not) , 43% (39% not) ;
3. Types of information users would provide to a web site that used it to personalize/
customize their experience, compared to one that does not provide any personalization: hobbies 76% vs. 51%, address 81% vs. 60%, job title 50% vs. 32%, phone
number 45% vs. 29%, income 34% vs. 19%, name 96% vs. 85%, mother’s maiden
name 22% vs. 14%, e-mail address 95% vs. 88%, credit card number 22% vs. 19%,
social security number 6% vs. 7%.
4. Online users who find it useful if a site remembers basic information (name,
address): 73% (9% not) ;
5. Online users who find it useful if a site remembers information (preferred colors,
music, delivery options etc.): 50% (20% not) ;
6. People who are bothered if a web site asks for information one has already
provided (e.g., mailing address): 62% .
More recent surveys found the percentage of respondents who value personalization
to be significantly higher. In a 2005 study by ChoiceStream , 80% of respondents
stated that they are interested in receiving personalized content (news, books, search
results, TV/movie, music). This number is consistent with the 2004 edition of the
same survey in which 81% expressed their interest in personalized content. Young
people are slightly more interested in personalization than older people. No figures
are available on those who are not interested. 60% indicated that they would spend at
least 2 minutes answering questions about themselves and their interests in order to
receive personalized content, versus 56% in 2004. 26% agreed that they would spend
at least 6 minutes answering such questions, compared with 21% in 2004. Moreover,
59% of respondents indicated a willingness to provide information about
their personal preferences, and 46% to provide demographics. The
authors of the study attribute these decreases in people’s willingness to provide
personal data to a surge in societal privacy concerns during the intermittent year.
These findings suggest that developers of personalized web-based systems need to
make the personalization benefits of their system very clear to users, and ascertain
that those benefits are ones that people want.4 If users perceive value in the
personalization services offered, they are considerably more likely to intend to use
them and provide the required information about themselves.
Knowledge of and Control over the Use of Personal Information
Many privacy surveys indicate that Internet users find it important to know how their
personal information is being used, and to have control over this usage. In a survey of
Roy Morgan Research , 68% of respondents indicate that it was very important
(and 25% that it was important) to know how their personal info may be used. In a
survey by Turow , 94% even agree that they should have a legal right to know
everything that a web site knows about them. In a 1997 survey by Harris Interactive
 , 63% of people who had provided false information to a website or declined to
provide information said they would have supplied the information if the site provided
notice about how the information would be used prior to disclosure, and if they were
comfortable with these uses.
As far as control is concerned, 69% of subjects said in a 2003 Harris poll that
“controlling what information is collected about you” is extremely important, and
24% still regarded it as somewhat important. Likewise in a direct marketing study of
Phelps et al. , the vast majority of respondents desire more control over what
companies do with their information. Sheehan and Hoy even found that control
4 Time savings and monetary savings, and to a lesser extent pleasure, received the highest
approval in surveys conducted by Tan et al. on benefits that businesses collecting
personal information should offer. In a survey by Cyber Dialogue , customized content
provision and the remembering of preferences were quoted as the main reasons for users to
personalize websites.
(or lack of control) over the collection and usage of information is the most important
factor for people’s stated privacy concerns, explaining 32.8% of the variance.
Some empirical evidence also exists that people are more willing to disclose their
personal data if they possess knowledge of and/or control over the use of this data. In
the above-mentioned survey by Roy Morgan Research , 59% said they’d be
more likely to trust an organization if it gave them more control over how their
personal information was used (as we will see in Section 21.3.3, trust in turn is an
important factor for people’s willingness to disclose their personal data). In a 1998
survey , 73.1% indicated that they would give demographic information to a Web
site if a statement was provided regarding how the information was going to be used.
In a survey by Hoffman , 69% of Web users who do not provide data to Web sites
say it is because the sites provide no information on how the data will be used. In an
experiment by Kobsa and Teltzrow , users disclosed significantly more information about themselves when, for every requested piece of personal information, a
website explained the user benefits and the site’s privacy practices in connection with
the requested data* (the effects of these two factors were not separated in this study).
These findings suggest that personalized systems should be able to explain to users
what facts and assumptions are stored about them and how these are going to be
used.5 Moreover, users should be given ample control over the storage and usage of
this data. This is likely to increase users’ data disclosure and at the same time
complies with the rights of data subjects accorded by many privacy laws, industry and
company privacy regulations, and Principles of Fair Information Practices (see
Section 21.4).
Extensive work in this direction has been carried out by Judy Kay and her team
under the notion of “scrutability” . According to Kay, “this means that the
user can scrutinise the model to see what information the system holds about them. In
addition, it means that the user can scrutinise the processes underlying the user
modelling. These include the processes used to collect data about the user. It also
includes the processes that made inferences based on that data.” . A qualitative
evaluation was carried out which showed that “participants in the evaluation could,
generally, understand how the material was adapted and how to control that adaptation” . It was challenging for them though to determine what content was
included/excluded on a page and what caused the adaptation, and to understand how
to change their profiles to control the inclusion or exclusion of content.
5 In Section 24.3.3.4 we will see that “privacy statements” (aka “privacy policies”), which
constitute the current best practice for privacy disclosures, are not an effective medium for
providing such explanations.
21.3.3 Trust in a Website
Trust in a website is a very important motivational factor for the disclosure of personal information.6 In a survey by Hoffman et al. , nearly 63% of consumers who
declined to provide personal information to web sites stated as the reason that they do
not trust those who are collecting the data (similar responses can be found in Milne
and Boza ). Conversely, Schoenbachler and Gordon found a positive
relationship between trust in an organization and stated willingness to provide personal information. In the experiment of Metzger , Internet users' trust in a company's Web site positively influenced their information disclosure to the site*. Trust
was also found to positively affect the intended use of an e-commerce website .
Several antecedents to trust have been empirically established, and for many of
them effects on disclosure have also been verified. Such trust-inducing factors
− positive experiences in the past,
− the design of a website,
− the reputation of the website operator,
− the presence of a privacy seal, and
− the presence of a privacy statement (but not necessarily its content).
These factors will be discussed in the following subsections.
21.3.3.1 Positive Experiences in the Past
Positive experience in the past is an established factor for trust. Almost half (47%) of
the respondents in a consumer survey of the Australian privacy commissioner 
agreed that their trust in an organization with their personal information would be
based on good past experience. Pavlou found a highly significant positive effect
of good prior experience on trust for a number of existing websites.
The impact of positive experience in the past on the disclosure of personal information is well supported. In an open-ended questionnaire by Culnan and Boza ,
the number one reason that consumers gave for trusting organizations with personal
information was past experience with the company. Culnan and Armstrong found
that people who agree that their personal data be used for targeted marketing purposes
are more likely to have prior experience with direct marketing than people who do not
agree. Metzger observed what types of information subjects disclosed to an
experimental website and also asked them what types of information they had
disclosed in the past. The author found the total amount of past information disclosure
to be a good predictor for the current amount of information disclosure*.
6 A number of different definitions and conceptualizations of trust in online environments have
been proposed or used in the literature. For a discussion and critical analysis of those we refer
to .
7 Telling users how their personal data will be used and giving them control over this usage
(see Section 24.3.2) may also increase users’ trust . We refrain from listing it as a factor
for trust though since the empirical support for this claim seems insufficient to date.
Of specific importance are established, long-term relationships. Sheehan and Hoy
 prompted subjects for their privacy concerns in 15 hypothetical scenarios. They
identified three factors in these scenarios that explain the stated level of privacy
concerns, one of them including “items that suggest that the online user has an established relationship with the online entity, in which some level of communication and
interaction has already been established between the two parties.” Schoenbachler and
Gordon found a positive relationship between respondents’ perception of a
relationship with an organization and their stated willingness to provide personal
information. The same was the case in a study by White for two pieces of
information that were determined to be specifically private (namely one’s address and
telephone number). Interestingly enough, the author also found that a deeper relationship with the customer lead to a decreased willingness to disclose two other pieces of
personal information that were determined to be specifically embarrassing and might
cause a loss of face when disclosed, namely one’s purchase history of Playboy/
Playgirl magazine and of condoms.
The lesson for the design of personalized systems is not to regard the disclosure of
personal information as a one-time matter. Users of personalized websites can be
expected to become more forthcoming with personal details over time if they obtain
positive experiences with the same site or comparable sites. Personalized websites
should be designed in such a way that they can deliver satisfactory user experiences
with any amount of personal data that users chose to disclose, and allow users to add
more personal detail incrementally at later times.
21.3.3.2 Design and Operation of a Website
Various interface design elements and operational characteristics of a website have
been found to increase users’ trust in the website, such as
− the absence of errors, such as wrong information or incorrect processing of inputs
and orders ,
− the (professional) design of a site ,
− the usability of a site , specifically for information-rich sites such as
sports, portal, and e-commerce sites ,
− the presence of contact information, namely physical address, phone number or
email address ,
− links from a believable website ,
− links to outside sources and materials ,
− updated since last visit ,
− quick responses to customer service questions ,
− email confirmation for all transactions ,
− the presence of an interactive communication channel with a site, specifically
instant messaging or voice communication , and
− the presence of a photo of a “customer care person” (positive effect for sites with
low reputation, negative effect for sites with high reputation)* .
While there do not seem to be studies yet that measure directly the effect of website
design and operational characteristics on users’ willingness to disclose personal data,
the established effect of trust on user disclosure behavior (see Section 21.3.3) makes
the existence of such an effect very plausible. The lesson from the above findings for
the design of personalized websites is therefore to use personalization preferably in
professionally designed and easy-to-use websites that also possess some other of the
above-mentioned trust-increasing design elements and operational characteristics.
21.3.3.3 Reputation of the Website Operator
The reputation of the organization that operates a website is an important factor for
users’ trust in the website. Schoenbachler and Gordon found a positive relationship between the perceived reputation of a company and stated trust in the company.
Likewise, Metzger established a positive correlation between individuals’
subjective regard for a non-existing company whose fictitious website they saw, and
their stated trust in this website. Jarvenpaa et al. and Pavlou also found an
effect of reputation on trust for several existing websites (Jarvenpaa et al. 
moreover determined that perceived company size is positively associated with
consumers’ trust in these websites, though size and reputation are highly related).
Metzger varied the reputation of a website between subjects and found that the
one with higher reputation was deemed more trustworthy than the one with lower
reputation.
Not surprisingly then, reputation is positively correlated with users’ willingness to
disclose personal information. In a Canadian consumer survey , 74% indicate that
a company’s reputation would make them more comfortable with providing personal
information. In a paper-based experiment, Andrade et al. found an effect of
perceived reputation on stated concern about the disclosure of personal information
(this effect only approached statistical significance though). In the online survey of
Earp and Baumer , subjects were randomly shown one of 30 web pages from
higher traffic and lower traffic websites in different sectors. Subjects were
significantly less willing to provide personally identifiable information (specifically
their phone numbers, home and email addresses, and social security and credit card
numbers) to the lower-traffic sites (which were presumably less known to them).8
The lesson for the design of personalized systems seems to be that everything else
being equal, users’ information disclosure at sites of well-reputed companies is likely
to be higher than at sites with lower reputation. Personalization is therefore likely to
be more successful at sites with higher reputation. It may of course be possible to
compensate for the lack of reputation by putting more emphasis on other factors that
foster the disclosure of personal data. Designers should however clearly refrain from
using personalization features as a “gimmick” to increase the popularity of websites
with low reputation since based on the aforesaid, it is unlikely that users will take
much advantage of the personalization features if they have to disclose personal data
to a low-reputation website.
8 Metzger found that regard for the company had a stronger relationship with disclosure
than did trust, which is somewhat contradictory to the current view that reputation effects
disclosure indirectly via fostering trust.
21.3.3.4 Presence of a Privacy Statement
Privacy statements on websites (which are often also called “privacy policies”)
describe the privacy-related practices of these sites. Most countries that have privacy
laws enacted require that users be informed about the data being collected and the
purposes for which they are used. And even in jurisdictions where omnibus privacy
legislation does not exist, special provisions at the federal or state level or simply
public relation motives prompt many companies to publish privacy statements at their
websites.9 The comprehensibility of these disclosures for normal Internet users is
however fairly low .
There exists weak empirical evidence that the mere presence of a privacy statement
at a website fosters trust.10 For instance, 55% of the respondents in a survey of the
Australian Privacy Commissioner indicated that having a privacy statement
would help build trust. This leads to the expectation that the presence of a privacy
statement would also foster purchases and disclosure, namely via increased trust (see
Section 21.3.3), which already received some empirical confirmation. In the study of
Jensen et al. , the presence of a privacy statement proved to be one of the two best
predictors for subjects’ stated intent to buy from a website. In an experiment with
Singaporean students, Hui et al. found an effect of the presence of a privacy
statement on subjects’ willingness to completely fill in an online questionnaire with
personal information*, but this effect only approached statistical significance
(p<0.1).11 Metzger however found the opposite effect. In her experiment, 43.7%
of subjects who bought CDs from a fake online music store, or completed a
questionnaire to receive a free CD, withheld information when a privacy policy was
present. In contrast, only 15% withheld information when the privacy policy was not
present, and the difference was statistically significant* .
Not too many people seem to view and read privacy policies. As far as selfreported past behavior is concerned, the percentage of respondents who indicated
having looked at privacy policies varies between 3% (“most of the time, carefully”)
 , 4.5% (“always”) , 14.1% (“frequently”) , 31.8% (“sometimes”) ,
33% (“sometimes, carefully”) , 23.7% (“likely, at first visit”) , and 43%
(“likely, e-commerce site, before buying”) . Milne and Culnan found that
stated concern for privacy is positively associated with stated tendency to read online
privacy notices.
Observing user behavior in experiments and real life portrays a somewhat different
picture though. Jensen et al. found that subjects read privacy statements in 25.9%
of cases where they were available* . In
the experiment of Kobsa and Teltzrow , only two out of 52 subjects accessed the
privacy statement*. The most reliable figures are presumably real-world server-side
observations: only one percent of users or less click at links to a website’s privacy
statement according to Reagan , and less than 0.5% according to Kohavi .
In contrast to the above-mentioned survey results of Milne and Culnan , Jensen
et al. also found that those subjects whom they classified as privacy fundamentalists were no more likely to read privacy policies than the privacy unconcerned*.
When users do read privacy statements, the effect on users’ behavior is unclear as
yet. In an experiment by Metzger , 62.5% of the participants who clicked on the
strong version of the privacy policy disclosed some information to the website and
only 37.5% of those who clicked on the weak version, but the difference was not
statistically significant*. Likewise in the experiment of Spiekermann et al. , the
privacy protection that was promised in privacy statements did not have a statistically
significant effect on subjects’ willingness to disclose personal data* (subjects had to
sign that they had read and accepted this statement prior to shopping at the
experimental website). In contrast to these negative results, Andrade et al. did find
an effect of the length or level of detail of privacy statements: subjects who saw a 12word statement professed considerable higher concern about the disclosure of
personal information than subjects who saw a 88-word statement (a 22-word example
statement was initially presented to all subjects as being “typical”). The ecological
relevance of this experiment is however unclear since real-life privacy statements
usually comprise several pages of text and not just a few words.
The preliminary lesson for the design of personalized systems seems to be that
traditional privacy statements should not be posted in the expectation of increasing
users’ trust and/or disclosure of personal information, even when the statement
describes good company privacy practices. There may of course be other reasons for
posting such statements, such as legal or self-regulatory requirements (see Section
21.4), or demonstration of good will. Evidence is mounting though that privacyminded company practices can have such a positive effect if they are communicated
to web users in comprehensible forms, such as the following:
− Kobsa and Teltzrow found that subjects disclose significantly more information about themselves if every website does not only display a link to a privacy
policy, but if additionally every entry field for personal information is accompanied by a short summary of the website’s privacy practices regarding specifically
the solicited piece of information (and an explanation of why it is needed)*.
− Gideon at al. asked subjects to search for vendors of a given product in a
search engine and to buy the product with their own credit cards. For every site in
the result list, the color of an appended “Privacy Bird” indicated whether
the P3P encoded privacy policy of the site matches typical medium-level
privacy expectations, does not match them, or could not be parsed. If the website
had no P3P policy posted, no bird would appear. The authors of the study found
that when subjects were asked to buy a pack of condoms, they patronized websites
with conforming privacy policies significantly more often than a control group that
saw no privacy birds*. No such difference could be found when subjects had to
buy a surge protector rather than condoms.
21.3.3.5 Presence of a Privacy Seal
Privacy seals are logos of certifying agencies such as consumer organizations, data
commissioner’s offices or private companies. These agencies assert to web visitors
that websites that display their seals respect privacy to some extent. The amount of
assured privacy protection varies from seal to seal and also over time. U.S. privacy
seals originally merely asserted that a website abides to its published privacy statement, no matter how privacy-friendly this policy actually was. Meanwhile, trust
organization require minimum privacy standards such as the observance of the FTC
principles of notice, choice and consent .
A number of recent studies uncovered several problems with at least some privacy
seals though:
Insufficient scrutiny of trust organizations: Using webbots that analyze websites’
privacy practices, Edelman found that sites that used practices most Internet
users would find objectionable nevertheless received a privacy seal from TRUSTe,
the leading US trust mark. The percentage of untrustworthy sites certified by an
TRUSTe seal even significantly increased over time . Various privacy breaches at websites that carried the TRUSTe seal, and to a
much smaller extent also at sites with the BBBOnLine seal, have been reported as
well .
Negative self-selection of seal-bearing websites. Several studies came to the conclusion that websites that decide to “pay up” for certain privacy seals seem to have more
questionable privacy practices than ones that don’t. Larose and Rifon found that
sealed sites requested significantly more personal information from users than
unsealed sites. Miyazaki and Krishnamurthy reviewed 60 high-traffic websites
and found no support for the hypothesis that participation in a seal program is an
indicator of better privacy practices (Larose and Rifon made similar findings).
While these studies were all performed manually, Edelman analyzed more than
500,000 websites with web bots. He found that the ratio of untrustworthy vs. trustworthy sites certified by TRUSTe (5.4%) is more than twice as high as for noncertified sites (2.5%). In a regression model with several site characteristics, the
presence of an TRUSTe privacy seal turns out to be a statically significant negative
coefficient for site trustworthiness. In contrast, the much less frequent BBBOnLine
privacy seal that comes with a more cumbersome and restrictive certification process
does not seem to suffer from such an adverse self-selection, and seal-bearing websites
are slightly more likely to be trustworthy than a random cross-section of sites.
Seals not understood by web users: The results of a study by Portz et al. on a
specific privacy seal, WebTrust, “were mixed in terms of potential customers
correctly understanding what WebTrust signifies.” In a study by Moores , 42%
recognized the TRUSTe logo and 29% the BBBOnline logo as a privacy seal. A
whopping 15% however also mistook an officially looking fake graphic for a genuine
privacy seal.
The presence of privacy seals clearly does have an effect on web users though, despite
this confusion about what assurances they actually afford. Rifon et al. found a
positive effect on the perception of trust in a website. Miyazaki and Krishnamurthy
 found that the presence of a privacy seal resulted in more favorable consumer
perceptions regarding the privacy policies of a website. In the study of Jensen et al.
 , the presence of a privacy seal turned out to be one of the two best predictors for
subjects’ stated intent to buy from a website.
There is also empirical evidence for an effect of the presence of a privacy seal on
users’ stated willingness to disclose personal data to the website . Other studies
found that this effect was moderated by other factors, namely
− Perceived self-efficacy (i.e. confidence in one’s ability to protect one’s privacy):
Rifon et al. found that for individuals with lower self-efficacy, the presence
of a privacy seal had a positive effect on anticipated disclosure of personal data. No
such effect on subjects with high self-efficacy could be found.
− Perceived online shopping risk (when compared to transactions made at traditional
brick and mortar stores): Miyazaki and Krishnamurthy found a positive
effect of privacy seal presence on anticipated disclosure of personal information for
those subjects who experience relatively high levels of online shopping risk. No
effect on subjects with low-risk experience could be found.
It remains to be seen whether these moderating factors are independent of each other,
or rather correlated (which seems more likely). For designers of web-based personalized systems, the pragmatic conclusion at this point is to display privacy seals as long
as web users associate trust with them since doing so is likely to foster users’
disclosure behavior.
21.3.4 Benefits other than Personalization
Financial Rewards. In a consumer survey by Turow , 16% of respondents
agreed or even strongly agreed with the statement “I will give out information to a
website only if I am paid or compensated in some way”. Hann et al. found that a
financial reward of 20 Singapore dollars12 (but not of 10 or 5 dollars) had a statistically significant positive effect on intended disclosure behavior. However, this
economic benefit turned out to be relatively less important by a considerable margin
than three privacy concerns measured by the survey instrument of Smith ,
namely unauthorized internal/external secondary usage, unauthorized access, and
errors in the data. The authors calculated that monetary compensations between about
S$15.00 and S$50.00 would be needed to motivate subjects to overcome these
concerns. Financial rewards also had a statistically significant effect on observed
disclosure behavior* in an experiment by Hui et al. , even though rewards only
ranged from S$1 to S$9.
Social Adjustment Benefits. A study by Lu et al. demonstrated that social adjustment benefits, i.e. the opportunity of establishing social identity by integrating into
desired social groups , can also have an effect on intended disclosure behavior.
The three experimental conditions were (a) no benefits (control group), (b) opportu-
12 One Singapore dollar equaled 0.54 U.S. dollars in 2002.
nity of face-to-face interaction with other people (namely meetings with people
having similar interests, participation in focus groups, membership in downtown clubs
of the Internet business), and (c) opportunity of online interaction (namely access to
online chat-rooms with similar interests, exclusive membership in the online clubs of
the Internet business, access to online forums featuring focus groups). For extrovert
subjects, both treatment conditions had a statistically significant effect on their
intended disclosure of personal data, while for introvert subjects this was only the
case when online interaction was offered.
Both results seem only marginally relevant for personalized web-based systems since
those normally do not offer such benefits. In special application scenarios though, the
provision of personal data might open an opportunity for financial benefits (e.g.,
targeted advertising with special discounts) or social adjustment benefits (e.g.,
participation in discussion groups with people who have similar goals or interests).
Designers should consider taking advantage of the increase in trust and disclosure that
these benefits may entail.
21.3.5 Disclosure Behavior as the Result of a Cost-Benefit Analysis
Current privacy theory regards people’s disclosure behavior to websites as the result
of a situation-specific cost-benefit analysis, in which the potential risks of disclosing
one’s personal data are weighed against potential benefits of the data disclosure.13
Trust thereby is an important risk-mitigating factor .
This cost-benefit tradeoff explains the discrepancies between stated privacy
concerns and observed “inconsequent” data disclosure behavior that was discussed in
Section 21.2.5. While it seems true that many Internet users are privacy-concerned, it
is also a fact that most are willing to “trade off” their concerns against benefits that
they value (see Sections 21.3.1 and 21.3.4) , and become even more
swayed to do so by the presence of trust-evoking signals such as those discussed in
Section 21.3.3.
Acquisti and Grossklags point out however that Internet users often lack
sufficient information to be able to make educated privacy-related decisions (for
instance, they underestimate the probability with which they can be identified if they
disclose certain data, or are unfamiliar with a site’s privacy practices since they hardly
ever read privacy statements (see Section 21.3.3.4). Like all complex probabilistic
decisions, privacy-related decisions are moreover affected by systematic deviations
from rationality . For instance, Acquisti and Grossklags present evidence of
hyperbolic temporal discounting, which may lead to an overvaluation of small but
immediate benefits and an undervaluation of future negative privacy impacts.
An implication of users’ cost-benefit analysis for personalized systems is that
developers can work in four, and possibly even five directions to encourage more
liberal disclosure behavior, and thereby enhance the quality of the system’s personalized services. They can
13 Culnan coined the term “privacy calculus” to refer to this cost-benefit comparison (the
term dates back to Laufer et al.’s notion of “calculus of behavior”).
1. address the privacy concerns directly, as explained in Sections 21.2.5 and 21.5.4,
2. ensure that the user values the personalization benefits of the system (see Section
3. ascertain that the user trusts the website (which mitigates privacy concerns), e.g. by
establishing the trust-enhancing factors described in Sections 21.3.3.1 – 21.3.3.5,
4. ascertain that the user is made aware of, and can control, how personal information
is being used (see Section 21.3.2), and
5. if meaningful, ascertain that financial rewards and social adjustment benefits are
provided (see Section 21.3.4).
Interaction effects between these factors have not been established as yet. From the
experiment of Chellappa et al. (see Section 21.3.1) and the work of Acquisti and
Grossklags we can conclude that instant personalization benefits will be a very
important factor in the outcomes of users’ cost-benefit analyses.
21.4 Privacy Laws, Industry and Company Regulations, and
Principles of Fair Information Practices
To date, more than forty countries and numerous states have privacy laws enacted
 . Many companies and a few industry sectors additionally or alternatively
adopted self-regulatory privacy guidelines. These laws and self-regulations are often
based on more abstract principles of fair practices regarding the use of personal
information. In this section, we will analyze the effects that these regulatory instruments have, specifically on personalization in web-based systems. We will uncover
some deficits in current personalized systems, which open avenues for interesting and
challenging future research. Privacy laws, industry and company regulations and
Principles of Fair Information Practices may also impose requirements that are not
directly related to personalization but affect any system that collects personal data.
These more general implications cannot be discussed here. Readers are advised to
consult their national privacy literature.
21.4.1 Privacy laws
Since personalized systems collect personal data of individual people, they are also
subject to privacy laws and regulations if the respective individuals are in principle
identifiable. To date, more than forty countries and numerous states have privacy laws
enacted. They lay out procedural, organizational and technical requirements for the
collection, storage and processing of personal data, in order to ensure the protection of
these data as well as the data subjects to whom the data apply. These requirements
include disclosure duties (e.g. about the purpose of data processing), and conditions
for legitimate data acquisition, data transfer (e.g., to third parties or across national
borders) and the processing of personal data (e.g., their storage, modification and
deletion). Other requisites include user opt-in (e.g., asking for their consent before
collecting their data), opt-out (e.g., of data collection or data processing), and users’
right to be informed (e.g., about what personal information has been collected and
possibly how it is processed and used). Other legal stipulations establish adequate
security mechanisms (e.g., access control), and the supervision and audit of personal
data processing.
Some requirements imposed by privacy laws directly or indirectly affect the
permissibility of personalization methods. Here are some examples:
1. Value-added (e.g. personalized) services based on traffic or location data require
the anonymization of such data or the user's consent 14. This clause requires the
user’s consent for any personalization based on interaction logs if the user can be
identified.
2. Users must be able to withdraw their consent to the processing of traffic and
location data at any time . In a strict interpretation, this stipulation requires
personalized systems to immediately honor requests for the termination of all
traffic or location based personalization, i.e. even during the current session. A case
can probably be made that users should not only be able to make all-or-none
decisions, but also decisions with regard to individual aspects of traffic or location
based personalization (such as agreeing to be informed about nearby sights but
declining to receive commercial offers from nearby businesses).
3. The personalized service provider must inform the user of the type of data which
will be processed, of the purposes and duration of the processing, and whether the
data will be transmitted to a third party, prior to obtaining her consent . It is
sometimes fairly difficult for personalized service providers to specify beforehand
the particular personalized services that an individual user would receive. The
common practice is to collect as much data about the user as possible, to lay them
in stock, and then to apply those personalization methods that “fire” based on the
existing data (see, e.g., rule-based personalization or stereotype activation ).
Also, internal inference mechanisms may augment the available user information
by additional assumptions about the user, which in return may trigger additional
personalization activities. For meeting the disclosure requirements of privacy laws
in such cases of low ex-ante predictability, it should suffice to list a number of
typical personalization examples (preferably those that entail the most severe
privacy consequences) .
4. Personal data that were obtained for different purposes may not be grouped .
This limitation affects centralized user modeling servers (see Chapter 4 of this
book ), which store user information from, and supply this data to, different
personalized applications. Such servers must not return data to requesting personalized applications that was collected for a different purpose than the one for which
the data is now being sought.
5. Usage data must be erased immediately after each session (except for very limited
purposes) . This requirement could affect the use of machine learning methods
that derive additional assumptions about users (see Chapter 3 of this book ),
when the learning takes place over several user sessions.
6. No fully automated individual decisions are allowed that produce legal effects
concerning the data subject or significantly affect him and which are based solely
14 EU directives are “Europe-wide minimum standards” in the sense that all European Union
member states have to implement them in their national legislation, but are free to go beyond
on automated processing of data intended to evaluate certain personal aspects
relating to him, such as his performance at work, creditworthiness, reliability,
conduct, etc. . These provisions could affect, for example, personalized tutoring applications (see Chapter 22 of this book ), if they assign scores to users
that significantly affect them.
Besides “omnibus” privacy laws at the national or state level, there also exist various
sectorial laws. Examples in the U.S. include the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA ) for the privacy of medical data, the Gramm-
Leach-Bliley Act (GLB ) for the privacy of financial data, and the Children's
Online Privacy Protection Act (COPPA ) for protecting the privacy of children
aged 13 and younger. The HIPPA and GLB Acts would affect personalized systems
that collect or process users’ medical or financial information, and COPPA those that
have children among their users.
21.4.2 Industry and company regulations
Many companies have internal guidelines in place for dealing with personal data.
Several industry associations also developed privacy standards to which their
members must subject themselves (e.g., the Direct Marketing Association, the Online
Privacy Alliance, and the Personalization Consortium). Both company and supracompany self-regulations may affect the aims and methods of personalized systems,
as is the case for privacy legislation. For instance, the privacy principles of the
members of the U.S. Network Advertising Initiative prohibit the use of “personally identifiable information (“PII”) […] collected offline merged with PII collected
online for online preference marketing unless the consumer has been afforded robust
notice and choice about such merger before it occurs.” This stipulation thus restricts
the merger of clickstream data with data from legacy customer databases, which is a
frequently-found functionality of commercial user modeling servers (see Chapter 4 of
this book ).
21.4.3 Principles of Fair Information Practices
Over the past three decades, several collections of basic principles have been defined
for ensuring privacy when dealing with personal information. So-called Principles of
Fair Information Practices have been drafted by several countries as a foundation of
their national privacy laws , by supra-national organizations as a guidance for
their member states , and by professional societies as recommendations for
policy makers and as guidance for the professional conduct of their members .
Developers of personalized systems should also take such privacy principles into
account if those are not already indirectly considered through applicable privacy laws
and industry or company guidelines. Many guidelines have direct implications on
personalized systems. As an example, let us consider excerpts from the recommendations of the U.S. Public Policy Committee of the Association for Computing
Machinery (ACM) , the largest computer science association worldwide. These
recommendations have been strongly shaped by the 1980 OECD guidelines 15
but are more modern and concrete in their technical demands.
Minimization principles.
1. Collect and use only the personal information that is strictly required for the
purposes stated in the privacy policy.
2. Store information for only as long as it is needed for the stated purposes.
3. Implement systematic mechanisms to evaluate, reduce, and destroy unneeded and
stale personal information on a regular basis, rather than retaining it indefinitely.
4. Before deployment of new activities and technologies that might impact personal
privacy, carefully evaluate them for their necessity, effectiveness, and proportionality: the least privacy-invasive alternatives should always be sought.
Somewhat in contradiction to these requirements, a current tacit paradigm of personalized systems seems to collect as much data as possible and lay them in stock, and to
let personalization being triggered by the currently available personal data (datadriven personalization). Applications in several personalization areas16 have now
sufficiently progressed that it should be possible to determine in hindsight which of
the collected data hardly ever trigger personalization, and to forego storing these less
needed data in the future even when they would be readily available.
Consent principles.
5. Unless legally exempt, require each individual's explicit, informed consent to
collect or share his or her personal information (opt-in); or clearly provide a
readily-accessible mechanism for individuals to cause prompt cessation […]
including when appropriate, the deletion of that information (opt-out).
One implication of this requirement for personalized systems is that personalization
based on the users’ personal data must be an option that can be switched on and off at
Openness principles.
8. Whenever any personal information is collected, explicitly state the precise purpose for the collection and all the ways that the information might be used […].
10. Explicitly state how long this information will be stored and used, consistent with
the "Minimization" principle.
15 See for a discussion of the effects of the OECD principles on personalized e-commerce
16 For instance, student-adaptive tutoring systems (see Chapter 22 of this book ), customer
relationship management on the web (see and Chapter 16 of this book ), and
recommender systems (see Chapters 9-12 of this book ).
11. Make these privacy policy statements clear, concise, and conspicuous to those
responsible for deciding whether and how to provide the data.
The likely positive effect of such explanations on users’ willingness to disclose
personal data was discussed in Section 21.3.2. Some difficulties in providing a full
explanation of the personalization purposes were discussed in Section 21.4.1 (3).
Access principles.
14. Establish and support an individual's right to inspect and make corrections to her
or his stored personal information, unless legally exempted from doing so.
This principle calls for online inspection and correction mechanisms for personal data,
as discussed in Section 21.3.2.
Accuracy principles.
17. Ensure that personal information is sufficiently accurate and up-to-date for the
intended purposes.
18. Ensure that all corrections are propagated in a timely manner to all parties that
have received or supplied the inaccurate data.
So far, allowing users to verify their data seems to be the only solution for assuring
data accuracy that has been adopted in the personalization literature. Little attention
has been paid to recognizing the obsoleteness of data, and to recording the provenance
of data and propagating error and change notifications to the data sources.
Security principles.
19. Use appropriate physical, administrative, and technical measures to maintain all
personal information securely and protect it against unauthorized and inappropriate access or modification.
This principle not only entails that user information must be protected when it is
stored in a repository, but also while it is in transit (e.g. by only using secure channels
between authenticated senders and receivers). In the case of personalized systems, the
latter is currently not often considered.
21.5 Privacy-Enhancing Technology for Personalized Systems
In this section, we describe and analyze several technical approaches that may reduce
privacy risks and make privacy compliance easier. They are by no means complete
“technical solutions” to the privacy risks of personalized systems, and their presence
is also unlikely to “charm away” users’ privacy concerns. Rather, these technologies
should only be employed as additional privacy protections in the context of a useroriented system design that also takes normative aspects into account (see Section
21.4). This analysis will be restricted to technologies that are specifically intended for
personalized web-based systems. For an overview of more general privacy-enhancing
technologies that can be applied to wider classes of systems (including personalized
web-based systems in many cases), we refer to .
21.5.1 Pseudonymous users and user models
It is possible for users of personalized systems to enjoy anonymity and at the same
time receive full personalization . In an anonymization infrastructure that
supports personalization, users would need to have the following characteristics
(using the terminology of ):
− Unidentifiable. Neither the personalized system nor third parties should be able to
determine the identity of pseudonymous users;
− Linkable for the personalized system. The personalized system can link every interaction with a specific user, even across sessions (users maintain a persistent
identity);
− Unlinkable for third parties. Third parties cannot link two interaction steps of the
same user;
− Unobservable for third parties. Third parties cannot recognize that a personalized
system is being used by a given user.
To ensure their linkability, users would need to employ a “pseudonym” in all their
transactions, i.e. a unique and persistent identifier that differentiates them from all
other users. The personalized system may allow users to freely define their
pseudonyms (or pick them from a list of available pseudonyms) without disclosing
their true identities. Users may however also be required to reveal their identities to a
registrar who assigns pseudonyms to them (“escrowed identity” , “initially
nonpublic pseudonym” ). In the latter case, the pseudonym may be revoked at a
later time, by an act of the registrar alone or in tandem with the website operator
and/or user. This revocation of pseudonyms may be desirable in cases of misuse or
when the identification of the user becomes necessary for other reasons, such as nonanonymous payment and delivery scenarios.
A number of authors proposed infrastructures for pseudonymous yet personalized
user interaction with websites based on some or all of the above properties . Protecting the identity of users may not be enough, however. If user
data is stored on a user modeling server on the Internet (see Chapter 4 of this book
 ), not only the user but also the user modeling server may need to remain anonymous. User models may reside anywhere on the network, like on the user’s platform
(as is envisaged, e.g., in the P3P framework ) or on a remote server (such as in
Microsoft’s Passport architecture ). A location close to the user (such as
informatics.uci.edu or even more alfredkobsa.name) may compromise the user’s
anonymity. To safeguard it, Kobsa and Schreck extend their pseudonymity
infrastructure to also protect the anonymity of user modeling servers.
Some authors expect that Internet users are more likely to provide information
when they are not identified , which may improve the quality of personalization and the benefits that users receive from it. To date, this claim has however not
found much empirical substantiation. In an online survey from 1998 , 66.3% of
respondents strongly agreed and 21.8% somewhat agreed with the statement “I value
being able to visit sites on the Internet in an anonymous manner.” 30.5% also strongly
agreed and 22.1% somewhat agreed with the statement “I would prefer Internet
payment systems that are anonymous to those that are user identified”. The demographics of the survey respondents was however considerably skewed towards higher
education (nearly 80% had at least some college-level education) and towards fairly
advanced web skills. Ordinary consumers tend to be unfamiliar with many basic
security features, and base their perception of security rather on the company’s
reputation, their experience with the site, and recommendations from independent
third parties .
The implications of these limited findings for the design of personalized webbased systems seem a bit unclear. Designers should definitely allow for pseudonymous access and pseudonymous user models (and even allow for anonymization architectures with the above properties if one is readily available). This follows from the
data minimization and security requirements of the Principles of Fair Information
Practices that were discussed in Section 21.4.3. Some privacy laws also mandate 
or recommend the provision of pseudonymous access if it is technically possible
and not unreasonable (an interesting side effect of pseudonymous access is that in
most cases privacy laws do not apply any more when users cannot be identified with
reasonable means).
Due to a lack of relevant studies, it is unclear though whether increased anonymity
will lead to more disclosure and better personalization. Anonymity is currently also
difficult and/or tedious to preserve when payments, physical goods and non-electronic
services are being exchanged. It also harbors the risk of misuse and hinders vendors
from cross-channel marketing (e.g. sending a products catalog to a web customer by
postal mail). Finally, research shows that the anonymity of database entries ,
web trails , query terms , ratings and textual data can be surprisingly well defeated by a resourceful attacker who has identified data available that can
be partly matched with the “anonymous” data.
21.5.2 Client-Side Personalization
A number of authors have worked on personalized systems in which
users’ data are located at the client rather than the server side. Likewise, all personalization processes that rely on this data are also carried out at the client side only. From
a privacy perspective, this approach has two major advantages:
1. The privacy problem becomes smaller since very few, if any, personal data of users
will be stored on the server. In fact, if a website with client-side personalization
does not have control over any data that would allow for the identification of users
with reasonable means, it will generally not be subject to privacy laws.
2. Users may possibly be more inclined to disclose their personal data if personalization is performed locally upon locally stored data rather than remotely on remotely
stored data, since they may feel more in control of their local physical environment.17
Client-side personalization also poses a number of challenges though:
1. Popular user modeling and personalization methods that rely on an analysis of data
from the whole user population, such as collaborative filtering and stereotype
learning (see ), cannot be applied any more or will have to be radically
redesigned (see the next section).
2. Personalization processes will also have to operate at the client side since even
only a temporary or partial transmission of personal data to the server is likely to
annul the abovementioned advantages of client-side personalization. However,
program code that is used for personalization often incorporates confidential business rules or methods, and must be protected from disclosure through reverse
engineering. Trusted computing platforms will therefore have to be developed for
this purpose, similar to the one that Coroama and Langheinrich envisage to
ensure the integrity of their client-side collection of personal data.
If these drawbacks pose no problems in a specific application domain, then developers of personalized web-based systems should definitely adopt client-side personalization as soon as suitable tools become available. Doing so would constitute a great
step forward in terms of the data minimization principle (see Section 21.4.3) and is
also likely to increase users’ trust.
21.5.3 Distribution, Encrypted Aggregation, Perturbation and Obfuscation
A number of techniques have been proposed and partially also technically evaluated
that can help protect the privacy of users of recommender systems that employ
collaborative filtering (see Section 9 of this book ). Traditional collaborative
filtering systems collect large amounts of information about their users in a central
repository (e.g., users’ product ratings, purchased products or visited web pages), to
find regularities that allow for future recommendations. Such central repositories may
not always be trustworthy though, and they are also likely to constitute an attractive
target for unauthorized access. To some extent, central repositories may also be mined
for individual user data by requesting recommendations using cleverly constructed
profiles . For instance, personal websites tend to be visited by their owners more
frequently than by anyone else. In a recommender system that tracks users’ website
visits, websites that are highly correlated with personal websites are hence likely to
17 No empirical verification for this assumption seems to exist as yet. In times of global network
connectivity, this purported feeling of local control may be illusionary though. For instance,
probably not many Skype users are aware that if they are not sitting behind a firewall or
broadband gateway, but have good connectivity to the network, then they are pretty likely to
have other people's traffic flowing through their computers (and using their network
bandwidth). The pervasiveness of malware on people’s computers also does not speak for a
higher safety of locally stored personal data.
have been visited by those owners as well. Requesting a recommendation for pages to
visit using a profile that contains this home page only may therefore reveal frequently
visited web pages of its owner. Another statistical vulnerability is that correlations
between an item and others will disclose much information about the choices of its
raters if this item has very few raters only.
Client-side personalization (see Section 21.5.2) alone is not a remedy against such
privacy attacks in collaborative filtering systems. Even when all user profiles are
stored at the clients' sides, a considerable number of them (or even all) must still be
merged and compiled in order that recommendations can be generated. Below we
describe several strategies that are currently investigated to thwart such risks.
21.5.3.1 Distribution
One possible strategy to better safeguard individuals’ data is to abandon central
repositories that contain the data of all users, in favor of distributed clusters that
contain information about some users only. Distribution may also improve performance and availability of the recommender system.
For instance, in the distributed match-making system Yenta , agents representing a user continuously form clusters of like-minded agents by exchanging information about their users and referring agents to potentially similar other agents. While
this work is not explicitly aimed at protecting privacy, it does so to some extent by
virtue of the fact that at any given time, agents only maintain the data of a limited
number of like-minded agents and that a pseudonymity scheme can by added to
protect users’ identity.
The distributed PocketLens collaborative filtering algorithm goes even
further in terms of data avoidance. For each user, PocketLens first searches for neighbors in a P2P network and then incrementally updates the user’s individual item-item
similarity model by incorporating one neighbor’s ratings at a time (ratings are
immediately discarded thereafter). The recommendations produced by PocketLens
were shown to be as good as those of the best “centralized” collaborative filtering
algorithms published to date.
21.5.3.2 Aggregation of encrypted data
Canny proposed the usage of a secure multi-party computation scheme that
allows users to privately maintain their own individual ratings, and a community of
such users to compute an aggregate of their private data without disclosing them by
using homomorphic encryption and peer-to-peer communication. The aggregate (a
single-value decomposition of a user-item matrix) then allows personalized recommendations to be generated at the client side using one’s own ratings. The scheme is
however still prone to the above-mentioned statistical vulnerabilities. The PocketLens
system was also connected to a blackboard based on the same security schemes
as those used by Canny, to allow a community of users to compute a similarity model
without having to reveal their individual rankings.
21.5.3.3 Perturbation
In the perturbation approach, users’ ratings are submitted to a central server which
performs all collaborative filtering. These ratings become systematically altered
before submission though, to hide users’ true values from the server. Polat and Du
 show that adding random numbers to user ratings may still yield acceptable
recommendations. The quality of recommendation based on perturbed data improves
when the number of items and users increases and when the standard deviation of the
perturbation function decreases (the latter obviously reduces privacy). The authors
conducted a series of experiments with two databases of user rankings, namely Jester
 and MovieLens , using a privacy measure proposed by Agrawal and Agrawal
 that is based on differential entropy between the unperturbed and the perturbed
data. For the Jester database, the authors find that privacy levels of about 97% and
90% will introduce average errors of about 13% and 5%, respectively, compared with
predictions based on unperturbed data. For MovieLens, the average relative errors due
to perturbation at these privacy levels were 10% and 5%, respectively.
21.5.3.4 Obfuscation
In the obfuscation approach of Berkovsky et al. , a certain percentage of users’
ratings become replaced by different values before the ratings are submitted to a
central server for collaborative filtering. Users are supposed to be able to freely
choose which of their data should be obfuscated, and to “plausibly deny” the accuracy
of any of their data should they become compromised. In subsequent work,
Berkovsky et al. combined obfuscation with distributed recommendation generation by ad-hoc peers, which adds an additional layer of privacy protection through
distribution (see Section 21.5.3.1).
The authors performed experiments on the user ratings of the Jester , Movie-
Lens and EachMovie recommender systems. They varied the ratio of
obfuscated data in users’ submitted rankings and compared the ensuing loss of
prediction accuracy. They found that obfuscation of the true rating through replacement by the following values had the smallest impact on the prediction error (in the
range of 5-7% at an obfuscation rate of 90%): the means of the ratings scale, a
random value from the scale, and a random value from the scale taking the means and
variance of the ratings in the data set into account. In contrast, uniform replacement
by the highest or lowest scale value resulted in an about 300% increased prediction
error at a 90% obfuscation rate.
In all these experiments, the data to be obfuscated were randomly selected for each
individual user. This strategy does not take into account that users are likely to prefer
obfuscation for certain kinds of data rather than random data (see Section 21.2.3).
Such a tendency is likely to further increase the prediction error. Recent experiments
by the authors showed that obfuscating 10% of the ratings at the high end of the scale
affected the prediction error more than obfuscating 10% of mid-scale ratings .
21.5.3.5 Consequences for the design of personalized systems
Distribution, aggregation of encrypted user data, perturbation and obfuscation constitute promising privacy-protecting techniques. They can be supplemented by pseudonymity in applications where anonymity of users or their user models is additionally
desired (see Section 21.5.1). While aggregation of encrypted user data cannot defeat
attacks on statistical vulnerabilities that were discussed at the beginning of Section
21.5.3, perturbation and obfuscation may be able to thwart them (specifically if users
are aware of their “weak statistical spots” and elect to obfuscate them). Experiments
will need to determine the required level of perturbation or obfuscation that guarantees a high degree of protection.
While these techniques have so far only been investigated in the area of
recommender systems, it is likely that distribution, perturbation and obfuscation can
in principle be applied to virtually any machine learning technique that computes
aggregate data based on individual user data (learning of encrypted user data will only
be possible if a suitable homomorphic encryption can be found). The effects on the
quality of the learning results still remain to be seen, however.
21.5.4 Personalizing Privacy
Individual privacy preferences may differ between users (see Section 21.2), and
applicable privacy laws may also be different for users from different states and
countries (see Section 21.4). Different privacy preferences and laws impose different
requirements on admissible personalization methods for each user. Personalized
systems should therefore cater to the different privacy needs of individual users, i.e.
they should “personalize privacy” .
So far, there only exist two simplistic “solutions” to this problem:
1. Largest permissible common subset approach. In this approach, only those
personalization methods are used that satisfy the privacy laws and regulations of all
jurisdictions of all users of a website. The Disney website, for instance, observes
both the U.S. Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act , and the European
Union Directive . This solution is likely to run into problems if more than a
very few jurisdictions are involved, since the largest common subset of permissible
personalization methods may then become very small. The approach also does not
take users’ individual privacy preferences into account.
2. Different country/region versions. In this approach, personalized systems have
different country versions, each of which uses only those personalization methods
that are permitted in the respective country. If countries have similar privacy laws,
these countries can be pooled using the above-described largest permissible
common subset approach. For example, IBM’s German-language pages comply
with the privacy laws of Germany, Austria and Switzerland , while IBM’s U.S.
site meets the legal constraints of the U.S. only. As with the largest permissible
common subset method, this approach also does not scale well when the number of
countries/regions, and hence the number of different versions of the personalized
system, increases. It also does not take users’ individual privacy preferences into
Fig. 21.1. Dynamic privacy-enabling personalization infrastructure (from )
Wang and Kobsa developed an architecture that allows personalized
systems to provide optimal personalization benefits for each user, while at the same
time satisfying the privacy constraints that apply to each individual user (e.g., their
privacy preferences, and applicable laws and regulations). Figure 21.1 gives an overview of this architecture. The Directory Component is a repository of user models,
each of which also includes the user’s privacy constraints stemming from personal
preferences and applicable laws and regulations. The UMC Pool contains a set of
User Modeling Components, each of which encapsulates a user modeling method that
operates upon the user models in the Directory Component, such as collaborative
filtering (see Chapter 9 of this book ) or case-based recommendation (see Chapter 11 of this book ). On the left-hand side we see user-adaptive clients that
access models of their current users in order to personalize their interaction with them.
As described so far, this architecture is similar to the one presented by Fink and
Kobsa , which was also used in a commercial user modeling server. The
novel privacy enhancement consists in each user having his or her own instance of the
UMC Pool, each containing only those user modeling components that meet the
privacy requirements for the respective user (users with identical UMC Pool instances
share the same instance). To realize this, the above architecture has been implemented
as a Software Product Line (SPL) architecture , with the UMCs as optional
elements. At the beginning of the interaction with a user, a Selector verifies for every
UMC whether it is allowed to operate under the privacy constraints that apply to the
specific user, and creates an architectural instance with those permissible UMCs (or
lets the user share this instance if one already exists). The special SPL management
environment that we employ even supports dynamic runtime (re-)
configuration, which allows the Selector to react immediately should, e.g., users
change their privacy preferences during the current session. The architecture therefore
fully supports compliance with the consent principles discussed in Section 21.4.1 and
21.4.3, allowing a website to adjust its data practices to the user’s preferences in a
nuanced and highly dynamic manner.
21.6 Conclusion
A tension exists between personalization and privacy in web-based systems. On the
one hand, personalization provides benefits to both users and operators of personalized websites. On the other hand, Internet users have high concerns regarding their
privacy online, which may make them reluctant to disclose data about themselves to
personalized systems. This poses a threat to personalization, whose quality hinges
strongly on the amount of personal data supplied. The problem is exacerbated by the
fact that many countries and states have privacy laws enacted that affect the permissibility of personalization methods, and that some company and industry regulations as
well as principles of fair information practices have the same effect.
This chapter described a number of approaches that can be taken to render personalization more compatible with privacy. It first discussed measures that have proven
to increase users’ willingness to disclose data about themselves, mostly through
increased trust (one of these measures, pointedly, consists in increasing the value of
personalization as perceived by the user). It then analyzed how privacy legislation,
self-regulation and principles of fair information practices impact the usage of
personalization methods. Finally, it presented a number of technical solutions specifically intended for personalized systems that may either lessen the privacy problem in
the first place (albeit no verification through user studies seems to have taken place as
yet), or help developers of personalized systems adjust personalization individually to
users’ privacy preferences and to normative demands stemming from privacy laws,
regulations and principles.
Personalization has already made some inroads into current commercial websites
(see Chapter 16 of this book ). Given the high privacy concerns of today’s Internet users, further advances are likely to only take place if privacy plays a much more
important role in the future. Research on Privacy-Enhanced Personalization aims at
reconciling the goals and methods of user modeling and personalization with privacy
considerations, and at achieving the best possible personalization within the boundaries set by privacy. Many of the approaches described in this chapter are ready to be
deployed to practical systems, and feedback from such deployments will in turn be
very informative for research. Other approaches still need further technical development or evaluation in user experiments and may yield fruitful solutions in the future.
Acknowledgments
The preparation of this article has been supported by grant IIS 0308277 of the
National Science Foundation, by a Trans-Coop grant, and by an Alexander von
Humboldt Research Award. The author would like to thank Peter Brusilovsky, Lorrie
Cranor, Miriam Metzger, Sameer Patil, Yang Wang and the anonymous reviewers for
valuable comments on an earlier draft.