© 2005 Nature Publishing Group
*Genomics and
Bioinformatics Group,
Laboratory of Molecular
Pharmacology, Center for
Cancer Research, National
Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892,
‡Laboratory of Cell Biology,
Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA.
Correspondence to J.N.W.
e-mail: weinstein@dtpax2.
ncifcrf.gov
doi:10.1038/nrc1739
Published online
20 October 2005
BIOMARKERS IN CANCER STAGING,
PROGNOSIS AND TREATMENT
Joseph A. Ludwig*‡ and John N. Weinstein*
Abstract | Advances in genomics, proteomics and molecular pathology have generated many
candidate biomarkers with potential clinical value. Their use for cancer staging and
personalization of therapy at the time of diagnosis could improve patient care. However,
translation from bench to bedside outside of the research setting has proved more difficult than
might have been expected. Understanding how and when biomarkers can be integrated into
clinical care is crucial if we want to translate the promise into reality.
‘Water, water, everywhere,
Nor any drop to drink’
S. Coleridge, Rime of the Ancient Mariner, 1798
The formal TNM staging system1 (see Online links
box), promulgated by the American Joint Committee
on Cancer (AJCC), is based almost exclusively on the
anatomical extent of disease, which is assessed using a
combination of tumour size or depth (T), lymph node
spread (N), and presence or absence of metastases (M).
Since its inception in 1958, the TNM system has
provided a standardized, anatomical basis for staging
with several important functions. It provides a basis
for prediction of survival, choice of initial treatment,
stratification of patients in clinical trials, accurate communication among healthcare providers, and uniform
reporting of outcomes. For most tumour types, disease
burden and spread have been considered the most reliable predictors of survival and determinants of the type
and intensity of therapy to be used. Less often, tumour
grade, histological subtype or patient age has been added
to TNM staging when the AJCC became convinced
that such information would significantly improve the
prediction of survival or response to therapy.
The anatomically based TNM staging system is, of
course, most useful when local therapies (for example,
surgical resection, radiofrequency ablation or regional
radiotherapy) provide the only means of cure, as was
the case for almost all cancers when the TNM system
was established. At that time, the goals ascribed to
staging could be accomplished with a single, ordinal
parameter of TNM stage. It was prognostically better
to be stage I than stage II, better to be stage II than
stage III, and so on. The generic dictionary definition
of ‘stage’ has the same implication: it can be defined as
‘a degree of advance in a journey’ or ‘a period or step
in a process’.
The anatomically based TNM staging system
remains useful for the purposes listed above, but new
factors are both complicating the situation and providing new opportunities when it comes to predicting
survival and/or selection of therapy. First, individual
molecular markers and patterns of markers are successfully subdividing traditional tumour classes
into subsets that behave differently from each other.
Second, chemotherapeutic and biological agents are
more effective and more widely used than when TNM
staging was introduced, especially in the adjuvant setting. Third, many new targeted agents such as imatinib
(Glivec), gefitinib (Iressa), and cetuximab (Erbitux),
as well as older agents (for example, tamoxifen), are
effective only if their respective molecular markers are mutated or expressed at sufficient levels. In
breast cancer, for example, oestrogen receptor (ER)
and HER2/NEU (also known as ERBB2) status have
implications for prognosis and therapy that are
NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER
VOLUME 5 | NOVEMBER 2005 | 845
© 2005 Nature Publishing Group
independent of TNM stage. ER positivity improves
prognosis, whatever the stage, and it also makes
the tumour a candidate for therapy with a targeted
hormonal agent such as tamoxifen or an aromatase
inhibitor. Until the advent of trastuzumab (Herceptin),
which targets HER2/NEU, HER2/NEU positivity was
considered simply as a negative prognostic indicator
independent of TNM stage. Increasingly, we can expect
to see a ‘co-evolution’ of biomarkers and their respective targeted therapies.
The examples of ER and HER2/NEU biomarkers raise an immediate question: what should be the
relationship between formal TNM staging and newly
emerging biomarkers or biomarker combinations?
Should the markers be incorporated into the determination of stage or should they be thought of as supplemental features that are outside of the system but
serve the same five functions as discussed above for
TNM? In this article, we will adopt the broader perspective, thinking of biomarkers as serving the same
purposes as TNM staging but not necessarily formally
incorporated into that system. We will consider formal
TNM stage as one aspect of a snapshot of the cancer’s
status, most often taken at the time of initial diagnosis
but, in principle, taken at any time thereafter.
A second important question is: what can we
expect biomarkers to add to traditional staging? An
answer is implied in the truism that cancer stage
provides only probabilities of the course of disease or outcome for any individual patient. There
remains the mysterious heterogeneity of outcomes
for patients with cancers of apparently equivalent
type, stage and grade. Those differences in outcome
may relate, in part, to stochastic events, such as the
time at which a single cancer cell happens to undergo
all of the steps necessary for successful metastasis, or
they may relate to factors that can be reasonably well
understood at a deterministic level. Even if molecular
markers cannot eliminate the stochastic uncertainties
and enable us to predict outcome definitively, they
will almost certainly increase our accuracy at subclassifying patients and their cancers. We can expect
that biomarkers will help us towards more personalized medicine. Again, the example of ER status in
breast cancer is paradigmatic.
Although the incorporation of biomarkers into
TNM staging has been a subject of considerable discussion by both the TNM committees and the broader
biomedical community, no formal consensus has been
reached. We contend that uncertainties about the role
of biomarkers contribute to a fundamental paradox:
despite the many current and emerging markers
available in the clinical research setting, few have
been integrated into clinical practice2. In this review,
we will address the current use of both US Food and
Drug Administration (FDA)-approved and other
biomarkers available for use in clinical oncology, with
special emphasis on staging, grading, and selection of
therapy at the time of diagnosis. We will then discuss
the types of biomarkers that are emerging for use at
clinical research centres. Finally, we will consider
practical factors such as clinical validation, regulatory
approval and economics that seem to be limiting the
integration of biomarkers into clinical practice.
The biomarker paradox
Although fewer than 10% of cancers can be traced to
Mendelian inheritance, the ability of malignant cells to
proliferate and metastasize can be ascribed to genetic
alterations. Those alterations typically lead to activation
• The TNM staging system (based on a combination of tumour size or depth (T), lymph node spread (N), and
presence or absence of metastases (M)) provides a basis for prediction of survival, choice of initial treatment,
stratification of patients in clinical trials, accurate communication among healthcare providers, and uniform
reporting of the end result of cancer management.
• There is a dilemma in TNM staging: frequent revisions to include new biomarkers would undermine the value
conferred by the stability and universality of TNM, but a static formulation of TNM risks falling behind the state
of the art in diagnostic techniques, biological concepts and biomarkers.
• Biomarkers initially considered for cancer screening or risk assessment might also prove useful for cancer staging
or grading.
• A biomarker for use in staging or grading need not be as specific as it must be for screening, early detection or risk
assessment.
• As molecularly targeted cancer therapeutics become more common, assessing the intended target will more often
be deemed necessary for prediction of clinical response, independent of TNM stage. Targeted therapies and their
associated biomarkers will often ‘co-evolve’.
• The ideal biomarker assay for staging should be sensitive, specific, cost-effective, fast, and robust against interoperator and inter-institutional variability. It must also demonstrate clinical value beyond that of the other types
of information that are already available at the time of diagnosis.
• Biomarker candidates must undergo clinical validation before receiving US Food and Drug Administration
approval. For most candidate markers, that process is just beginning.
• Despite all of the potentially useful biomarkers — for example, those identified from microarray or mass
spectrometry studies — almost none have been incorporated into formal TNM staging.
846 | NOVEMBER 2005 | VOLUME 5
www.nature.com/reviews/cancer
R E V I E W S
© 2005 Nature Publishing Group
Cancer-related biomarker
publications ( )
Number of approved
plasma-protein markers ( )
SINGLENUCLEOTIDE
POLYMORPHISMS
Single-nucleotide changes in
DNA that differ among
individuals.
BCRABL TRANSLOCATION
Translocation between human
chromosomes 9 and 22
t(9q34;22q11), resulting in an
abnormal Philadephia
chromosome that codes for a
fusion protein causally linked to
chronic myelogenous
leukaemia.
MICROSATELLITE INSTABILITY
Genetic instability in diploid
tumours owing to a high
mutation rate, primarily in
short nucleotide repeats. This
phenotype is associated with
defects in DNA mismatchrepair genes.
POSITRONEMISSION
TOMOGRAPHY
Imaging technique that detects
nuclides as they decay by
positron emission. The emitted
positron collides with a free
electron, resulting in the
conversion of matter to two
γ-rays, which emerge in
opposite directions.
COMPUTERAIDED
DIAGNOSTIC SYSTEM
A computer algorithm for
interpreting digital images or
laboratory tests to provide a
diagnosis.
of proto-oncogenes, inactivation of tumour-suppressor
genes and/or inactivation of DNA repair mechanisms.
Although that genetic paradigm generally holds true,
it does not account for the molecular complexity of
cancers. It does not subsume epigenetic modulation
of mRNA expression or differences in protein expression, post-translational modification, or function. Better
appreciation of that complexity and recent advances in
high-throughput technologies have provided a large
inventory of candidate biomarkers with projected value
for risk assessment, screening, diagnosis, prognosis, and
selection and monitoring of therapy3.
The DNA-based markers include SINGLENUCLEOTIDE
POLYMORPHISMS (SNPs), chromosomal aberrations (such
as the well-known BCRABL TRANSLOCATION), changes in
DNA copy number, MICROSATELLITE INSTABILITY, and
differential promoter-region methylation. The RNAbased biomarkers include overexpressed or underexpressed transcripts, and regulatory RNAs (for example,
the microRNAs). The protein markers include cellsurface receptors such as CD20, tumour antigens
such as prostate-specific antigen (PSA), phosphorylation states, carbohydrate determinants, and peptides
released by tumours into serum, urine, sputum, nipple
aspirates or other body fluids. Patterns of markers,
particularly in serum, might prove more selective
and potentially more useful than individual markers.
Biomarkers at all of these levels are now, in principle,
detectable by functional molecular imaging modalities
based on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), POSITRON
EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY (PET) or optical imaging.
Paradoxically, however, fewer biological tests were
approved by the FDA in 2003 than during any other
year in the past decade4. As shown in FIG. 1, for example,
there has been a decrease in serum-protein biomarker
approvals despite steady increases in the literature on
potentially useful ones5. Furthermore, almost none of
the FDA-approved biomarkers TABLE 1 are used in
standard clinical practice, and only two of them have
made it into the TNM staging guidelines. None of them
were discovered through the new high-throughput
genomic or proteomic technologies or from in silico
analysis of databases. Unless listed in TABLE 1, the
clinically used markers discussed in this review have
been approved in the USA as ‘analyte-specific reagents’
(ASRs) for research purposes only. ASRs are generally
not reimbursable by governmental or private health
insurers, so few have entered standard clinical practice.
In part, this ‘thirst’ in the midst of plenty is explained
by the time necessary for any diagnostic or therapeutic
innovation to make its way through the steps required
for acceptance, but other factors, to be discussed later,
are at work as well.
Biomarker use at diagnosis
Classification. Classification of a malignancy by tissue
of origin is the first step towards predicting survival
and choosing therapy. Because a tumour’s anatomical
location usually indicates its tissue of origin, molecular
markers are rarely required. Histological examination
generally confirms the diagnosis and identifies the
tumour subtype. However, new molecular markers
might sometimes be helpful in the differential diagnosis. For example, as shown schematically in FIG. 2, we
recently used a combination of high-throughput RNA,
protein and tissue microarray technologies to identify
markers potentially useful for distinguishing colon
and ovarian abdominal carcinomas from an unknown
primary location6. Similarly, biomarkers have been
reported to distinguish primary head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) from metastatic lung
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)7, to determine the site
of origin for HNSCC of unknown primary location8
and to track genetic mutations that occur with the
progression of that tumour9.
Grade. Each anatomical site has its own histological
grading system, designed to classify malignancies by
degree of differentiation. Low-grade, well-differentiated
tumours are usually less aggressive and more favourable
in prognosis than high-grade tumours, which tend to
grow faster and metastasize earlier. However, tumour
grade is included in formal TNM staging only when
intimately linked to prognosis, as it is for soft-tissue
sarcomas, prostate cancer and primary brain malignancies. Assignment of grade is inherently subjective and
dependent on the skill and experience of the reviewing
pathologist, but several reports indicate that biomarker
patterns can correctly score tumours according to their
pathologist-assigned grades10. COMPUTERAIDED DIAGNOSTIC
SYSTEMS (CAD systems) have been approved by the FDA
for preliminary grading of cervical smears (that is, Pap
smears)11 and for assisted interpretation of radiological
images such as screening mammograms12, computerized tomography (CT) scans13 and standard X-ray
films14. CADs are generally designed to make routine
distinctions, giving the pathologist time to focus on
difficult diagnostic problems. The acceptance of CADs
has been accelerated by the fact that there had previously been extensive and rigorous standardization and
quality control of the underlying imaging technologies (for example, mammograms and chest X-rays).
Figure 1 | Numbers of publications on biomarkers and FDA approval of biomarkers.
Despite the increasing rates of publications on biomarkers, the number of US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA)-approved plasma-protein tests is decreasing. Triangles and the
associated trend line (green) represent the number of FDA-approved plasma-protein markers
per year (data taken from REF. 5). Red squares and circles indicate publications under the
Medline medical subject heading ‘biomarker’ and text word ‘biomarker’, respectively.
NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER
VOLUME 5 | NOVEMBER 2005 | 847
R E V I E W S
© 2005 Nature Publishing Group
PATTERNBASED BIOMARKER
A biomarker constructed from
a pattern of individual markers
that, when evaluated together,
can be used for risk assessment,
screening, diagnosis, staging,
selection of therapy and/or
monitoring of therapy. The
specific markers that make up
the pattern may or may not
have been identified.
SINGLEPHOTON EMISSION
COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Imaging technology in which a
photon detector array is rotated
around the body to acquire data
from many angles following the
injection of a γ-emitting
radionuclide.
The absence of analogous standardization of biomarker
platforms is an important practical problem.
If the problems can be overcome, however, the addition of either individual or PATTERNBASED BIOMARKERS in
the assessment of histological grade could increase the
utility of grading for predicting response to therapy.
That would be a natural extension of current practice as
pathologists already have considerable experience using
at least a few markers (for example, ER, the progesterone
receptor (PR) and HER2/NEU) in related contexts.
Stage. The AJCC, in collaboration with the TNM
Committee of the International Union Against
Cancer (UICC), has defined staging criteria for
most anatomical sites15. T, N and M are determined
separately and then grouped, usually to classify the
cancer into one of four main stages (stages I–IV)
and subdivisions thereof. Breast cancer staging, for
example, distils 30 possible TNM combinations into
5 main prognostic stages15. Clinical staging, which
is primarily used to guide initial therapy, integrates
information from physical examination with data
such as those from standard X-ray, CT, MRI, PET,
endoscopic examination, biopsy, and surgical exploration. Pathological staging on the basis of surgical
specimens, if acquired, complements clinical staging
with a precise determination of the extent of disease
and additional histological information.
Increasingly, imaging agents targeted at biomarkers
are being used for anatomical localization. The most
common are radioisotopes, detected by standard
nuclear medicine imaging, by SINGLEPHOTON EMISSION
COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY (SPECT) or by PET. Also under
study are fluorescent molecules, which are detected
by optical imaging, and paramagnetic particles for
enhancing MRI. The target can be any marker that
delineates the cancer or its metabolism. Some tumours
(for example, carcinoid, phaeochromocytoma, and
Table 1 | US Food and Drug Administration-approved cancer biomarkers
Cancer type
Clinical use
α-Fetoprotein
Glycoprotein
Nonseminomatous
testicular
Human chorionic
gonadotropin-β
Glycoprotein
Testicular
Carbohydrate
Pancreatic
Monitoring
Glycoprotein
Monitoring
Cervical smear
Monitoring
Epidermal growth factor
Selection of therapy
Protein (IHC)
Gastrointestinal tumour
Diagnosis and selection of therapy
Thyroglobulin
Monitoring
PSA (total)
Screening and monitoring
PSA (complex)
Screening and monitoring
PSA (free PSA %)
Benign prostatic hyperplasia versus
cancer diagnosis
Glycoprotein
Monitoring
Glycoprotein
Monitoring
Cytokeratins
Protein (IHC)
Breast tumour
Oestrogen receptor and
progesterone receptor
Protein (IHC)
Breast tumour
Selection for hormonal therapy
Protein (IHC)
Breast tumour
Prognosis and selection of therapy
Monitoring
DNA (FISH)
Breast tumour
Prognosis and selection of therapy
Chromosomes 3, 7, 9 and 17
DNA (FISH)
Screening and monitoring
Screening and monitoring
Fibrin/FDP
Monitoring
Monitoring
High molecular weight CEA
(Immunofluorescence)
Monitoring
BTA, bladder tumour-associated antigen; CA, cancer antigen; CEA, carcinoembryonic antigen; FDP, fibrin degradation protein; FISH, fluorescent in-situ hybridization;
GIST, gastrointestinal stromal tumour; IHC, immunohistochemistry; NMP22, nuclear matrix protein 22; PSA, prostate-specific antigen.
848 | NOVEMBER 2005 | VOLUME 5
www.nature.com/reviews/cancer
R E V I E W S
© 2005 Nature Publishing Group
Identification of
candidate markers
Verification
of sequence
Corroboration at
mRNA expression
Corroboration at
level of protein
expression
Prospective
validation by
screening of
clinical tumours
microarray
Oligonucleotide
(Affymetrix)
Reverse-phase
protein lysate
microarray
cancers of the prostate, thyroid and colon) can be
targeted by specific radiolabelled ligands. Carcinoid
tumours, for example, are often localized using a
radiolabelled analogue of octreotide (111-indium
pentetreotide), which avidly binds to the somatostatin
receptor, a protein commonly overexpressed in those
tumours. Nuclear medicine-based imaging modalities
are also clinically useful for evaluating tumour-related
phenomena including angiogenesis16, apoptosis17,18,
proliferation19, metabolism20,21, hypoxia22 and drug
resistance (such as P-glycoprotein function)23.
Molecularly targeted functional imaging has enormous potential for staging, as it does for other aspects
of cancer diagnosis and management, and it might
also be easier than serum biomarkers to integrate into
clinical TNM staging, given its anatomical basis.
For most solid tumours, the primary purpose of
anatomy-based staging is to discern the probability
of localized, as opposed to metastatic, disease. That
crucial distinction, in considerable part, predicts
survival and guides the choice of initial therapy.
Anatomy-based staging, however, provides only part
of the answer. A more precise picture can often be
obtained by incorporating tumour grade and histological subtype. The role that biomarkers can play is
exemplified by HER2/NEU, which is associated with
an aggressive phenotype, decreased patient survival24,25
and response to trastuzumab.
Acknowledging the potential importance of
serum-derived biomarkers for staging, the AJCC
incorporated the first such markers — serum
α-fetoprotein (AFP), human chorionic gonadotropin-β
(β-HCG, also known as CGB) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) for testicular cancer — into the TNM
system. That necessarily cautious shift in the staging
guidelines reflects the increased scientific evidence, at
least for several cancer types, of more accurate prognosis
with the addition of factors independent of anatomy and
histological grade. However, as stated previously, most
cancers are still exclusively staged by anatomic criteria,
with a few exceptions (for example, sarcomas and malignancies of the thyroid, prostate, brain and testicle).
The AJCC sometimes informally recommends
supplementation of TNM staging with information
about tumour grade, histological subtype or relevant
immunohistochemical (IHC) markers when they
have prognostic or therapeutic value. Suggested supplementary parameters for breast cancer, for example,
include those with proven value in predicting response
to therapy (ER, PR and HER2/NEU receptor status).
IHC or reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) evaluation
of sentinel lymph nodes is occasionally performed in
clinical trials when microscopic examination is negative
and, if obtained, is included as supplemental information in AJCC breast cancer staging. However, most
supplementary markers have not been clinically
validated, and the significance of lymph nodes that are
negative by standard pathological staining with haematoxylin and eosin but positive by IHC or PCR remains
unclear. The TNM system classifies nodes with cancer
cell clumps less than 0.2 mm in diameter as nodenegative, even when RT-PCR detects tumour cells.
Such small clumps of cancer cells usually lack markers
of proliferation and rarely induce a stromal reaction
that indicates tumour implantation or growth15,26.
Any updating of a system like TNM can have
advantages but also imposes a price. Ideally, one
would like to incorporate the latest supportable medical science, including new biomarkers. However, the
relatively static, stable character of the system enhances
its utility for stratifying patients in clinical trials, for
communication among physicians and for standardizing the classification of tumours among institutions
and nations. If the staging criteria were changing more
often, it would be difficult, for example, to determine
whether earlier clinical research was pertinent to
current or future patients who are, or will be, staged
differently. Furthermore, information supplemental
to TNM is often incomplete or sporadically noted in
medical records because it is not formally part of the
staging process. Adoption of a formal ‘augmented’ staging system that included both a relatively static TNM
component (updated occasionally) and a dynamic supplemental component (revised at the pace of scientific
discovery) could perhaps resolve that paradox and
allow new markers to be evaluated formally without
undermining the value of anatomical staging.
Prognosis and treatment selection. Tumour classification, stage and sometimes grade are used to assess
prognosis. However, as noted above, there would be a
cost if formal cancer staging incorporated every other
parameter able to improve prognosis. Furthermore,
stratification in clinical trials using all possible TNM
combinations would be impractical, given limitations
in patient participation and resources. Addition of
markers could similarly fragment the staging process,
thereby limiting its utility. More information is generally
better than less information, but the advantages must
be weighed against those of a stable classification with
relatively few categories.
Figure 2 | Use of multiple molecular technologies in combination to identify candidate
biomarkers. Candidate markers were initially identified from cDNA array data on the NCI-60
cancer cell line panel, then sequence-verified by re-sequencing of the clones and corroborated
using Affymetrix oligonucleotide arrays. Reverse-phase proteomic arrays later showed that the
selectivities of the candidate biomarkers held up at the protein level, and tissue arrays indicated
the same selectivity at the level of clinical tumour specimens. Candidate biomarkers to distinguish
between colon and ovarian cancers of an unknown primary location were identified and verified
in this way. Modified from REF. 6.
NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER
VOLUME 5 | NOVEMBER 2005 | 849
R E V I E W S
© 2005 Nature Publishing Group
DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEM
A computerized information
system that supports decisionmaking activities.
Biomarker expression often supplants or complements tumour classification, stage and grade
when biologically targeted therapeutics are under
consideration. Prominent examples include CD20
positivity for treatment of lymphomas with rituximab, HER2/NEU positivity for treatment of breast
cancer with trastuzumab27, BCR–ABL translocation
for treatment of chronic myelogenous leukaemia
(CML) with imatinib, and KIT or platelet-derived
growth factor receptor-α (PDGFRA) positivity
for treatment of gastrointestinal stromal tumours
(GIST) with imatinib28. As previously discussed,
ER positivity or PR positivity is a prerequisite for
treatment with tamoxifen or aromatase inhibitors.
Similarly, somatic mutations in the tyrosine-kinase
domain of the epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) have recently been shown to predict a
greater efficacy of gefitinib in patients with nonsmall-cell lung cancer (NSCLC)29,30. Some of those
markers are FDA-approved and in widespread clinical use (see TABLE 1); others have been assessed
only in the research setting. For example, ER, PR
and HER2/NEU status are routinely determined
for breast cancer, whereas EGFR mutations are usually assessed only in clinical trials. Outside of such
trials, patients with NSCLC are often given EGFRantagonists, such as gefitinib, as salvage therapy on
an empirical basis without marker studies, especially
if they are more likely to have the mutation (that is,
patients who are female, never-smokers, diagnosed
with adenocarcinoma, or Asian)31.
Both prognosis and prediction of response are
necessary for the selection of neoadjuvant or adjuvant
chemotherapy. Tissue classification, TNM staging,
molecular biomarkers, grade and other factors might
be used in combination for that purpose. The combinations of variables might not be easy to analyse
manually, but computer DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEMS (DSS)
can make the assessments automatically. For example,
Adjuvant Online (see Online links box), a DSS used for
breast cancer, estimates 10-year cancer recurrence and
survival for women, taking into account their predicted
response to adjuvant chemotherapy32. Markers can also
be used to avoid idiosyncratic drug toxicity such as the
sustained, life-threatening leukocyte suppression seen
when mercaptopurine is given to leukaemia patients
with homozygous mutations of the thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) gene33,34.
Biomarkers traditionally used for risk assessment
and screening are also available to enhance cancer
staging, refine prognosis and estimate response
to biological therapy, as summarized in BOX 1 and
FIG. 3. An important point: characteristics that suit
a molecular marker for one application might not
do so for another. For example, a marker to be used
in screening the general population must have an
extremely high specificity to minimize false positives that necessitate costly or invasive follow-up
studies and scare patients and their families needlessly. The same marker need not be so specific if
used for high-risk populations and can be even
less so once a cancer has been detected. The arguments about use of PSA for screening continue, but
its value in monitoring diagnosed prostate cancer or
its treatment would be hard to dispute.
Biomarkers on the horizon
Genomic and proteomic technologies have significantly increased the number of potential DNA, RNA
and protein biomarkers under study. Here, we will
focus on several types with promise for staging.
DNA biomarkers. Circulating DNA and tumour cells
were among the first markers evaluated for cancer
staging. Increased serum DNA concentrations are
associated with cancer (principally metastatic cancer) and with other conditions such as sepsis and
autoimmune disease35,36. A number of studies suggest circulating tumour cells in the blood37–39 or bone
marrow40,41 as indicators of systemic metastasis, but
the clinical sample sizes have been small and the
long-term survival benefit remains to be assessed42.
Mutations in oncogenes, tumour-suppressor genes,
and mismatch-repair genes can serve as DNA biomarkers. For instance, mutations in the oncogene KRAS
predict metastatic spread in various tumour types43, and
there are mutations in the gene that encodes the tumour
suppressor p53 in more than half of sporadic cancers44,45.
Germline inheritance of a TP53 mutation (Li–Fraumeni
syndrome) confers a risk of developing many of the
same cancers. Mutations in other cancer-related genes,
such as the RAS oncogene or the tumour-suppressor
genes CDKN2A (cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor A,
which encodes p16INK4A), APC (the adenomatous
Box 1 | New applications for established biomarkers
Biomarkers can play roles before cancer diagnosis (in risk assessment and screening),
at diagnosis (as discussed in the main text) and after diagnosis (in monitoring
therapy, selecting additional therapy and detecting recurrence) (FIG. 3). This review
focuses on applications at the time of diagnosis, but markers that are currently
considered for risk assessment or screening may also prove useful in cancer staging
or prediction of response at the time of diagnosis. For example, the BRCA1 (breast
cancer 1) gene can be used in breast cancer, both for risk assessment and as a
predictor of 10-year survival118. For patients with HIV/AIDS, the viral load and
CD4-positive T-cell count predict the likelihood of acquiring an AIDS-related cancer
and the probability that such a tumour will respond to highly active anti-retroviral
therapy (HAART).
For risk assessment and screening, a marker must generally be inexpensive, highly
specific and minimally invasive. Those requirements do not necessarily apply to
markers for staging or grading. As noted in the text, markers considered infeasible
for screening because they would yield too many false positives may still be useful
after diagnosis. For example, serum CEA (carcinoembryonic antigen) is increased in
colon, breast and lung cancer, but also in many benign conditions. It is, in that sense,
non-specific, but increases in the context of known colon cancer strongly suggest
recurrence of that malignancy. Similarly, although AFP (α-fetoprotein) and β-HCG
(human chorionic gonadotropin-β) can be increased for many reasons, their
reliability in assessing testicular cancer burden following diagnosis accounts for their
integration into staging. PSA (prostate-specific antigen), cancer antigen (CA) 125,
CA19-9, and other, similar markers119–124 may also prove useful in similar contexts,
but they have not been integrated into TNM staging because their expression often
fails to correlate with tumour burden.
850 | NOVEMBER 2005 | VOLUME 5
www.nature.com/reviews/cancer
R E V I E W S
© 2005 Nature Publishing Group
Mammography,
examination
Physical examination, imaging, biopsy,
nodal status, histological grade
ER, PR, HER2/NEU (IHC or FISH),
molecular subclassification, PET scanning
examination,
prevention
Guidance of local therapy or selection of
systemic therapy and prediction of response
intervention
assessment
Classification, stage, grade, biomarker expression
Monitoring for
recurrence
Threshold for initial diagnosis
Therapy or
management
Progression
Stable disease
Threshold for diagnosis of recurrence
Recurrence
b Example: breast cancer
DIFFERENTIAL DISPLAY
A gel-based technique used to
identify transcripts that are
differentially expressed between
cell or tissue samples.
SERIAL ANALYSIS OF GENE
EXPRESSION
(SAGE). A technique for
identification and quantitation
of transcript expression levels.
SAGE is based on a process in
which short oligonucleotide
‘tags’ from defined locations
within a transcript are spliced
together and sequenced for
identification of the transcript.
BEADBASED METHODS
Methods of measurement based
on small or microscopic beads
(as opposed, for example, to the
flat surfaces characteristic of
microarrays).
MICROFLUIDICS
Technology that allows the use
of very small volumes of
reagents, shortening reaction
times and facilitating scale-up
of molecular methods.
polyposis coli gene) and RB1 (the retinoblastoma gene),
also have potential as markers for prognosis or selection of therapy. As discussed previously, the efficacy of
anti-EGFR agents such as gefitinib might depend on
specific EGFR point mutations. Second EGFR mutations acquired in patients with NSCLC during therapy
have, in some cases, been reported to confer resistance
on a previously sensitive tumour, and might therefore be
useful prognostic biomarkers46.
Epigenetic regulation of transcription and translation can also be important in carcinogenesis.
Histone deacetylation, lysine-specific histone-H3
methylation, and promoter region CpG methylation
can function through transcriptional abrogation of
tumour-suppressor genes (for example, CDKN2A,
TP53, APC or the breast cancer 1 gene, BRCA1)47–50 or
DNA mismatch-repair genes (for example, MLH1
or the O6-methyl-guanine-DNA methyltransferase
gene, MGMT). They can also function through
effects on apoptosis, invasion and the cell cycle50,51.
Gene silencing by CpG methylation has received the
most attention, partly because sensitive methods of
measurement have become available36,51,52. It has been
reported, for example, that differences in methylation
can distinguish prostate cancer from benign prostatic
hyperplasia53. Shedding of hypermethylated DNA
into saliva from oral malignancies54,55, into sputum56
or bronchoalveolar lavage fluid57 from lung cancer,
and into serum from patients with lung58,59, bladder60
or colorectal cancer61,62, has also been demonstrated.
Pharmacogenomic effects of methylation silencing,
with implications for choice of therapy, have also been
shown. For example, promoter region methylation of
MGMT, an enzyme that reverses 5′-guanine alkylation, predicts the response or resistance of gliomas to
nitrosourea alkylating agents63,64. To our knowledge,
epigenetic factors have not yet been used in formal
staging, but their application to predict response to
treatment can be expected in the future, particularly
given the development of DNA-demethylating drugs
such as 5-azacytidine65 and zebularine66, as well as
novel histone-deacetylase inhibitors such as depsipeptide (FK228)67,68.
Other potential DNA biomarkers, including SNPs,
mitochondrial DNA markers and oncoviral markers,
are discussed in BOX 2.
RNA biomarkers. Whereas most DNA markers
are evaluated individually, many high-throughput
technologies have been developed to assess mRNA
expression comprehensively. Among them are
Affymetrix and NimbleGen arrays that are produced
by light-directed in situ synthesis of oligonucleotides,
Rosetta-Agilent ink-jet-printed arrays, DIFFERENTIAL
DISPLAY, SERIAL ANALYSIS OF GENE EXPRESSION (SAGE),
and BEADBASED METHODS69–71. Quantitative real-time
RT-PCR is generally considered the ‘gold standard’
against which other methods are validated, and it
can now be performed at relatively high-throughput
— for example, by using MICROFLUIDIC cards72.
Figure 3 | Schematic representation of the uses of biomarkers at different stages in the clinical evolution of cancer,
with breast cancer biomarkers as an example . a | Before diagnosis, markers might be used for risk assessment and
screening. At diagnosis, markers can assist with staging, grading, and selection of initial therapy. Later, they can be used to monitor
therapy, select additional therapy, or monitor for recurrent disease. b | Breast cancer biomarkers as an example. Genetic studies of
BRCA1 (breast cancer 1) and BRCA2 are often performed in patients with a high risk of familial breast cancer. Once the breast
cancer is diagnosed, biomarkers are used for subclassification and for prediction of response, particularly to targeted therapies.
Cancer antigen (CA) 15-3 might on rare occasions be used to monitor for recurrence. ER, oestrogen receptor; FISH, fluorescence
in situ hybridization; IHC, immunohistochemistry; PET, positron-emission tomography; PR, progesterone receptor.
NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER
VOLUME 5 | NOVEMBER 2005 | 851
R E V I E W S
© 2005 Nature Publishing Group
A way of denoting the collective
genotype of a number of closely
linked loci on a chromosome
that tend to be inherited
together in a population.
SUPERVISED ALGORITHM
A method of statistical or
machine learning in which a
model is fitted to observations.
The algorithm, in effect, learns
by example.
LASERCAPTURE
MICRODISSECTION
A laser-based technology used
to obtain materials from
selected regions of cut tissue or
tumour sections on glass slides.
The method is used, for
example, to obtain relatively
pure populations of tumour
cells from the heterogeneous
mixture of cells in a tumour.
CYTOKERATIN
A protein component of
intermediate filaments found in
epithelial cells.
Most RNA-based biomarkers undergoing clinical
evaluation consist of multi-gene molecular patterns
or ‘fingerprints’. Although such patterns can be more
accurate than single-molecule markers, choosing
which genes to include in the pattern adds an additional layer of statistical complexity, prompting new
developments in biostatistics, bioinformatics and data
visualization. Molecular markers and their patterns
have been analysed by various SUPERVISED ALGORITHMS,
most prominently by double hierarchical clustering
methods that lead to colour-coded ‘clustered image
maps’ (CIMs). We introduced CIMs in the early
1990s to illuminate patterns of similarity and difference in high-throughput DNA, mRNA, protein and
pharmacological profiling studies73, and they have
since become the most familiar visual icon of ‘postgenomic’ biology. Various supervised statistical and
machine-learning methods for classifying tumours
have also been introduced. Both the experimental
technologies and the methods of analysis have been
reviewed extensively elsewhere74,75.
Pattern-based RNA-expression analysis of
clinical breast cancers has identified previously
unknown molecular subtypes that are associated
with differences in survival76–78. That analysis has
also provided increased prognostic capability79,80,
predicted response to neoadjuvant therapy81,82, predicted the likelihood of metastasis in lymph-node
negative patients83 and correctly predicted tumour
grade from LASERCAPTURE MICRODISSECTED specimens.
The transcript levels of enzymes important for drug
metabolism have been used preclinically to predict
the response to chemotherapy in lung84 and colon85
cancers. Similar approaches have led to novel discoveries for other cancers, including melanoma86,87,
leukaemias, lymphomas88–90, and carcinomas of the
lung87,91, prostate92 and colon93. Such cancer ‘snapshots’ taken at the time of diagnosis can be expected
to further the goals of cancer staging. Extensive
validation studies will be required, however, to
move those developments from clinical research to
standard practice in staging. Several companies have
attempted to do so and have made their RT-PCRbased gene signatures available to the public for use
in predicting survival. However, these and other
RNA-based markers have not yet undergone rigorous, prospective clinical validation, and they have
not been approved by the FDA.
Protein biomarkers. As shown in TABLE 1 and mentioned before, all but a handful of the FDA-approved
cancer biomarkers in clinical use are single proteins,
and most are serum-derived. AFP, β-HCG and LDH
are used in the AJCC system to stage testicular cancer. Other proteins, although not formally used for
staging, are important for prognosis and selection of
therapy. For example, the expression of HER2/NEU
and CYTOKERATINS can be used to refine the prognosis of
breast cancers. HER2/NEU, EGFR and KIT are used
clinically to predict if breast cancers, colon cancers
or GISTs will respond to trastuzumab, cetuximab or
imatinib, respectively. Similarly, expression of ER
or PR is necessary for hormonal therapies to be effective against breast cancer.
Just as pattern-based RNA biomarkers frequently outperform single RNA markers in tumour
classification, prognosis or prediction of response
to therapy, protein-based ‘fingerprints’ may outperform individual protein markers. Technologies
such as differential in-gel electrophoresis (DIGE)94,
two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (2D-PAGE) and multidimensional proteinidentification technology (MudPIT) can be used for
higher-throughput profiling with microgram quantities of protein. Other high-throughput technologies, such as the REVERSEPHASE MICROARRAY6,95,96 (FIG. 2)
and surface-enhanced laser desorption ionization
time-of-flight (SELDI-TOF) mass spectrometry,
are more sensitive (in the femtomolar range) and
can cover more of the 12 orders of magnitude range
of serum-protein expression levels5,75,97,98. Emerging
nanotechnologies, such as IMMUNOPCR99,100, FIELD
EFFECT TRANSISTOR FETBASED PROTEIN DETECTION101 and
QUANTUM DOTS102–105, promise further increases in the
sensitivity of protein markers, but those techniques
are currently experimental.
Box 2 | DNA biomarkers under evaluation
Single-nucleotide polymorphisms
Particular single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are associated with increased
cancer risk, and HAPLOTYPE assessment can be predictive for several cancers, including
those of prostate, breast and lung. Because five well-known cancer susceptibility
genes (ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM), breast cancer 1 (BRCA1), BRCA2,
RAD51 and TP53) show low haplotype diversity within ethnicities125–131, perhaps as
few as 10% of the SNPs will have to be sequenced for useful haplotype-based risk
assessment. Genome-wide SNP analysis has been reported132,133, but SNPs are not
currently used for formal cancer staging or grading.
Oncoviral markers
Altered immune regulation in HIV/AIDS is associated with several types of virally
mediated tumours, including Kaposi sarcoma (associated with human herpesvirus 8,
HHV8), AIDS-related lymphomas (associated with HHV8 and Epstein–Barr virus,
EBV) and cervical cancer (associated with human papillomavirus, HPV)134. Links
between latent viral infection and cancer have also been noted for hepatocellular
carcinoma (associated with hepatitis B virus, HBV, and hepatitis C virus, HCV), adult
T-cell leukaemia (associated with human T-cell lymphotrophic virus type 1, HTLV1),
nasopharyngeal carcinoma (associated with EBV)135,136, Hodgkin disease (associated
with EBV) and endemic Burkitt lymphoma (associated with EBV)137. Prophylactic
immunization of women who are negative for the HPV16 L1, E6 and E7 oncoprotein
markers is reported to eliminate their risk for HPV16-related cervical intraepithelial
neoplasia138. In accordance with the goals of staging, viral markers might be used at or
after diagnosis to predict treatment response and prognosis. For example, antiviralmediated elimination of HHV8 and HIV viraemia has been associated with clinical
response of Kaposi sarcoma139.
Mitochondrial DNA aberrations
Because somatic cells contain as many as 500 mitochondria — each with multiple,
usually identical mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) molecules — the extraordinarily
high gene copy number makes cancer-associated mtDNA mutations particularly easy
to detect. Mutations in mtDNA occur in cancers of the colon140, bladder, head and
neck, lung, breast141, kidney142 and testis141,143. However, despite the promise of
mtDNA for cancer screening, its value for tumour classification, staging or grading
has yet to be determined.
852 | NOVEMBER 2005 | VOLUME 5
www.nature.com/reviews/cancer
R E V I E W S
© 2005 Nature Publishing Group
Patient sample
Biomarker identification using
microarrays, mass spectrometry, and so on
Biomarker application:
• Determination of tumour type, stage and grade
• Prediction of survival
• Prediction of response to treatment
Analytical and clinical validation
Analyte-specific reagent
(research use only)
FDA approval
'safe and effective'
Cost–benefit analysis by CMS
'reasonable and necessary'
Routine use of biomarker
for patient care
REVERSEPHASE MICROARRAY
A microarray spotted with
numerous tissue or cell lysates
and subsequently incubated
with a detection ligand (usually
an antibody) to quantitate
protein in the lysates.
IMMUNOPCR
A sensitive method for
detection of proteins using a
combination of PCR and
conventional immunodetection. A bi-specific linker
molecule with affinity for DNA
and an antibody is used to
attach a DNA marker to a
specific antigen, resulting in an
antigen–antibody–DNA
complex that can be quantified
using PCR.
FIELD EFFECT TRANSISTOR
BASED PROTEIN DETECTION
Technology for detecting
proteins based on their
completion of a circuit between
two electrodes in a transistor,
thereby resulting in a
measurable increase in current.
QUANTUM DOTS
Semiconductor particles with
size-dependent fluorescenceemission wavelengths visualized
by laser-excitation
spectrometry.
OVERFITTING
In multivariate predictive
analysis, a statistical model can
be overfitted if it has too many
free parameters for the number
and type of cases in the training
set. The result can be a model
that fits the training data set
very well but does poorly when
applied to other data.
Protein quantity by itself might not be the salient
marker parameter. Protein function is instead often
dependent on phosphorylation, glycosylation, other
post-translational modifications, location in the cell
and/or the location in the tissue. The important phosphorylation-dependent signalling cascades can be
assessed, for example, using reverse-phase arrays6,95,96.
Laser-capture microdissection and similar technologies can be used to obtain DNA, mRNA or protein
from precise locations within a tumour and thereby
distinguish markers inherent to the malignant cells
from those in other cell types within the tumour.
Microdissection has enhanced expression profiling of
breast10,106,107, ovarian108, oral109 and prostate110 cancers,
as well as other cancer types97.
Biomarker validation
Regardless of their intended use, scientifically vetted
biomarkers must clear a number of practical hurdles
before they can be considered for clinical practice (FIG. 4).
Five conceptual phases of biomarker development have
been proposed: preclinical exploratory (I), clinical assay
and validation (II), retrospective longitudinal (III),
prospective screening (IV) and cancer control (V)111,112.
The process is fraught with difficulties, and most
candidate markers are still in the early phases of
development. The clinical studies to date are generally
retrospective, and the few prospective studies that have
been conducted have often yielded inconsistent results.
Furthermore, most include too few patients, making it
problematic to alter treatment decisions based on their
results. By contrast, large therapeutic clinical trials
often include thousands of patients, and the results are
usually replicated in separate studies before integrating
their conclusions into clinical practice.
Ideally, biomarkers should be validated analogously in prospective, well-controlled clinical studies
of diverse patients across multiple institutions, with
well-established standards for all steps in the process.
Those steps include, for example, tissue collection,
purification, amplification (if necessary), hybridization
or ligand-binding, data capture, normalization, statistical analysis and scoring2. Furthermore, there should be
reliable reproducibility within and among laboratories.
However, those ideal conditions rarely apply. There is
widespread recognition that standards and standardization are required, but consensus is hard to achieve.
There is also the continuing concern that many of the
salient technologies are not yet mature enough for
standard operating procedures to be set in stone.
It is beyond the scope of this article to review
methods of data analysis for identifying and validating biomarkers, but a few cautionary words might be
in order. The multivariate statistical and machinelearning algorithms used to define markers are prone
to OVERFITTING. The more flexible and non-linear the
algorithm, the greater the danger. An algorithm may
perform well on the original sample set (that is, the
training set) but fail when applied to independent
validation samples. Careful validation is especially
important for patterns of markers113.
Multi-institutional teamwork, through participation in large collaborative oncology groups, can
advance both analytical and clinical validation by
creating standards and experimental designs that use
limited patient samples and resources most effectively. Discussions with those aims are underway in
organizations such as the Cancer Therapy Evaluation
Program (CTEP; see Online links box) of the National
Cancer Institute (NCI). The NCI’s Cancer Diagnosis
Program has established a Program for the Assessment
of Clinical Cancer Tests (PACCT)129, and the NCI’s
Early Detection Research Network (EDRN), in collaboration with the National Institute of Standards and
Technology, continues to support “coordination among
biomarker development laboratories, biomarker validation laboratories, clinical repositories, and population-screening programs”111. Analogous joint efforts
between industry and academia combine the strengths
of academic institutions (including access to archived
clinical specimens and clinical study patients) with
those of industry (including high-throughput drug
and biomarker discovery/development programmes).
The price of multi-institution studies, of course, is that
they are harder to manage and coordinate.
Figure 4 | Chronology of biomarker development.
A biomarker is first identified, then evaluated for a
particular clinical indication. Analytical and clinical
validations must be performed before submission for US
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval.
Alternatively, the marker might bypass the FDA approval
process if it is to be used for ‘research purposes only’.
Once a marker is FDA-approved, the Center for Medicaid
and Medicare Services (CMS) might determine that it is
‘reasonable and necessary’ for improved patient care and,
therefore, reimbursable. Because CMS decisions indirectly
influence coverage by private insurance carriers, a marker
is not widely used in the clinic unless all of the steps in the
process have been completed.
NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER
VOLUME 5 | NOVEMBER 2005 | 853
R E V I E W S
© 2005 Nature Publishing Group
Regulatory process. We will focus here on the situation
in the United States, recognizing that similar issues
arise elsewhere as well. As a result of the medical device
amendments of 1976, the FDA has been charged with
regulating in vitro diagnostic devices (IVDs), including
tumour markers, to ensure their ‘safety’ and ‘effectiveness’ as defined in the Code of Federal Regulations114,115.
The ‘safety and effectiveness’ of an IVD refers to the
consequences expected from reliance on it to make
‘clinically significant’ diagnostic or treatment decisions115. Unless already used to detect recurrent
disease or monitor the effectiveness of therapy, most
tumour markers require clinical studies to support a
manufacturer’s claim of effectiveness and safety before
they receive FDA approval for clinical laboratory use.
In analogy with an investigational new drug (IND)
application, which is required before trials begin with
a novel agent, a pre-investigational device exemption
(IDE) allows trials that are designed to evaluate a new
IVD116. The arduous, expensive clinical validation process is predicated on a thorough analytical validation of
all reagents and machines used.
A somewhat less onerous path for transition from
laboratory to clinic is provided by classification as an
ASR. That designation allows biomarkers to be used in
an institution’s in-house clinical laboratory for restricted
‘research-only purposes’. Rather than the FDA, the
Center for Medicaid and Medicare Services (CMS), in
accordance with the clinical laboratory improvement
amendments of 1988, monitors both the manufacture
and laboratory use of ASRs. CMS oversight helps to
ensure that biomarkers classified as ASRs are accurate,
safe for patients and laboratory personnel, and available
for research use while their potential clinical utility is
being explored before submission for FDA-approval.
Financial resources. A final hurdle to the widespread
integration of biomarkers is their medical economics.
The escalation of medical costs in the United States has
focused the nation’s attention on cost–benefit analysis
— an often difficult and controversial hurdle to overcome, even for established biomarkers such as PSA.
Some prospective benefits, such as refined prognostic
accuracy and increased patient comfort, are difficult to
place a value on objectively. Others, such as predicted
responses to treatment with biologically targeted therapies, are more easily quantified.
In the United States, the CMS determines whether
the government, through Medicare or Medicaid,
will reimburse laboratories for IVD testing using a
‘reasonable and necessary’ standard. That decision
trickles down to private insurers because most echo
Medicare’s reimbursement practices. Tumour marker
IVDs may, of course, be used without reimbursement,
but they are expensive and unlikely to be applied
widely without strong evidence of clinical benefit.
For that reason, most markers are used only in the
research setting until approved by the FDA and supported by insurers. Similarly, markers used in other
countries must successfully overcome their respective
regulatory and financial hurdles before being widely
used for patient care.
Conclusion
New high-throughput ‘omic’ technologies144,145 in postgenomic biology have yielded many potential biomarkers and biomarker patterns, some of which may prove
useful for staging and grading cancers117. The potential
is enormous. Few markers, however, have so far been
integrated into clinical practice. Metaphorically speaking, the ‘water’ is everywhere, but little is yet ready to
drink. We have considered a number of the readily
definable reasons here. Not so easy to assess or quantify
are many of the practical issues, such as the queasiness
of pharmaceutical companies about fractionation of
their markets and their medico-legal fear of generating
and possessing too much information that could later
be used to their detriment. Furthermore, acceptance
and adoption by practicing physicians and patients
can take time. But as therapies become increasingly
target specific, biomarkers will inevitably develop in
tandem to play greater roles in staging, grading, and
selection of therapy. The flood of potential biomarkers
is opening the way to a more individualized practice of
oncology, although the practical problems are many
and difficult.
Sobin, L. H. TNM: evolution and relation to other
prognostic factors. Semin. Surg. Oncol. 21, 3–7 .
Historical perspective of the TNM staging guidelines.
Hammond, M. E. & Taube, S. E. Issues and barriers to
development of clinically useful tumor markers: a
development pathway proposal. Semin. Oncol. 29,
213–221 .
Provides useful guidelines for the discovery,
evaluation and validation of clinical biomarkers.
Negm, R. S., Verma, M. & Srivastava, S. The promise of
biomarkers in cancer screening and detection. Trends
Mol. Med. 8, 288–293 .
US Department of Health & Human Services; US Food
and Drug Administration. Challenge and Opportunity on
the Critical Path of New Medical Products. 
fda.gov/oc/initiatives/criticalpath/whitepaper.html
Anderson, N. L. & Anderson, N. G. The human plasma
proteome: history, character, and diagnostic prospects.
Mol. Cell. Proteomics 1, 845–867 .
Nishizuka, S. et al. Diagnostic markers that distinguish
colon and ovarian adenocarcinomas: identification by
genomic, proteomic, and tissue array profiling. Cancer
Res. 63, 5243–5250 .
Clear demonstration that numerous genomic,
proteomic and tissue-based arrays can be used in
concert to distinguish between colon and ovarian
carcinomas.
Leong, P. P. et al. Distinguishing second primary tumors
from lung metastases in patients with head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma. J. Natl Cancer Inst. 90,
972–977 .
Califano, J. et al. Unknown primary head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma: molecular identification of the
site of origin. J. Natl Cancer Inst. 91, 599–604 .
Califano, J. et al. Genetic progression and clonal
relationship of recurrent premalignant head and neck
lesions. Clin. Cancer Res. 6, 347–352 .
10. Ma, X. et al. Gene expression profiles of human breast
cancer progression. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 100,
5974–5979 .
11. Abulafia, O. & Sherer, D. M. Automated cervical cytology:
meta-analyses of the performance of the PAPNET
system. Obst. Gynecol. Surv. 54, 253–264 .
12. Destounis, S. V. et al. Can computer-aided detection with
double reading of screening mammograms help decrease
the false-negative rate? Initial experience. Radiology 232,
578–584 .
13. Awai, K. et al. Pulmonary nodules at chest CT: effect of
computer-aided diagnosis on radiologists’ detection
performance. Radiology 230, 347–352 .
14. Erickson, B. J. & Bartholmai, B. Computer-aided
detection and diagnosis at the start of the third
millennium. J. Digit. Imaging 15, 59–68 .
15. American Joint Committee on Cancer & American Cancer
Society. AJCC Cancer Staging Handbook: from the AJCC
Cancer Staging Manual (eds Greene, F. L. et al.) .
AJCC guidelines for cancer staging.
16. McQuade, P. & Knight, L. C. Radiopharmaceuticals for
targeting the angiogenesis marker αvβ3. Q. J. Nucl. Med.
47, 209–220 .
17. Blankenberg, F. G. et al. In vivo detection and imaging
of phosphatidylserine expression during programmed
cell death. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 95, 6349–6354
854 | NOVEMBER 2005 | VOLUME 5
www.nature.com/reviews/cancer
R E V I E W S
© 2005 Nature Publishing Group
18. Kuge, Y. et al. Feasibility of 99mTc-annexin V for repetitive
detection of apoptotic tumor response to chemotherapy:
an experimental study using a rat tumor model. J. Nucl.
Med. 45, 309–312 .
19. Krohn, K. A. Evaluation of alternative approaches for
imaging cellular growth. Q. J. Nucl. Med. 45, 174–178
20. Kostakoglu, L., Agress, H. Jr & Goldsmith, S. J. Clinical
role of FDG PET in evaluation of cancer patients.
Radiographics 23, 315–340 .
21. Kostakoglu, L. & Goldsmith, S. J. 18F-FDG PET evaluation
of the response to therapy for lymphoma and for breast,
lung, and colorectal carcinoma. J. Nucl. Med. 44,
224–239 .
22. Britz-Cunningham, S. H. & Adelstein, S. J. Molecular
targeting with radionuclides: state of the science. J. Nucl.
Med. 44, 1945–1961 .
23. Agrawal, M. et al. Increased 99mTc-sestamibi
accumulation in normal liver and drug-resistant tumors
after the administration of the glycoprotein inhibitor,
XR9576. Clin. Cancer Res. 9, 650–656 .
24. Revillion, F., Bonneterre, J. & Peyrat, J. P. ERBB2
oncogene in human breast cancer and its clinical
significance. Eur. J. Cancer 34, 791–808 .
25. Press, M. F. et al. Amplification and overexpression of
HER-2/neu in carcinomas of the salivary gland:
correlation with poor prognosis. Cancer Res. 54,
5675–5682 .
26. Singletary, S. E. et al. Revision of the American Joint
Committee on Cancer staging system for breast cancer.
J. Clin. Oncol. 20, 3628–3636 .
27. Druker, B. J. et al. Activity of a specific inhibitor of the
BCR–ABL tyrosine kinase in the blast crisis of chronic
myeloid leukemia and acute lymphoblastic leukemia with
the Philadelphia chromosome. N. Engl. J. Med. 344,
1038–1042 .
28. Balmain, A., Gray, J. & Ponder, B. The genetics and
genomics of cancer. Nature Genet. 33 (Suppl.), 238–244
29. Lynch, T. J. et al. Activating mutations in the epidermal
growth factor receptor underlying responsiveness of nonsmall-cell lung cancer to gefitinib. N. Engl. J. Med. 350,
2129–2139 .
30. Paez, J. G. et al. EGFR mutations in lung cancer:
correlation with clinical response to gefitinib therapy.
Science 304, 1497–1500 .
Evidence that subtle mutations in EGFR can affect
the clinical response to gefitinib.
31. Kaneda, H. et al. Retrospective analysis of the predictive
factors associated with the response and survival benefit
of gefitinib in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung
cancer. Lung Cancer 46, 247–254 .
32. Ravdin, P. M. et al. Computer program to assist in making
decisions about adjuvant therapy for women with early
breast cancer. J. Clin. Oncol. 19, 980–991 .
33. Relling, M. & Dervieux, T. Pharmacogenetics and cancer
therapy. Nature Rev. Cancer 1, 99–108 .
34. Lenz, H. J. The use and development of germline
polymorphisms in clinical oncology. J. Clin. Oncol. 22,
2519–2521 .
35. Leon, S. A., Shapiro, B., Sklaroff, D. M. & Yaros, M. J.
Free DNA in the serum of cancer patients and the effect of
therapy. Cancer Res. 37, 646–650 .
36. Sidransky, D. Emerging molecular markers of cancer.
Nature Rev. Cancer 2, 210–219 .
In-depth review of diverse biomarkers undergoing
clinical evaluation.
37. Kahn, H. J. et al. Enumeration of circulating tumor cells in
the blood of breast cancer patients after filtration
enrichment: correlation with disease stage. Breast Cancer
Res. Treat. 86, 237–247 .
38. Stathopoulou, A. et al. Real-time quantification of CK-19
mRNA-positive cells in peripheral blood of breast cancer
patients using the lightcycler system. Clin. Cancer Res. 9,
5145–5151 .
39. Hoon, D. S. et al. Molecular markers in blood as surrogate
prognostic indicators of melanoma recurrence. Cancer
Res. 60, 2253–2257 .
40. Muller, V. & Pantel, K. Bone marrow micrometastases and
circulating tumor cells: current aspects and future
perspectives. Breast Cancer Res. 6, 258–261 .
41. Pantel, K. & Brakenhoff, R. H. Dissecting the metastatic
cascade. Nature Rev. Cancer 4, 448–456 .
42. Meng, S. et al. Circulating tumor cells in patients with
breast cancer dormancy. Clin. Cancer Res. 10,
8152–8162 .
43. Brennon, J. A. et al. Molecular assesment of
histopathological staging in squamous-cell carcinoma of
the head and neck. N. Engl. J. Med. 332, 429–435 .
44. Levine, A. J. p53, the cellular gatekeeper for growth and
division. Cell 88, 323–331 .
45. Nigro, J. M., et al. Mutations in the p53 gene occur in
diverse tumor types. Nature 342, 705–708 .
46. Kobayashi, S. et al. EGFR mutation and resistance of nonsmall-cell lung cancer to gefitinib. N. Engl. J. Med. 352,
786–792 .
47. Merlo, A. et al. 5′ CpG island methylation is associated
with transcriptional silencing of the tumour suppressor
p16/CDKN2/MTS1 in human cancers. Nature Med. 1,
686–692 .
48. Herman, J. G. et al. Silencing of the VHL tumor-suppressor
gene by DNA methylation in renal carcinoma. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA 91, 9700–9704 .
49. Jenuwein, T. & Allis, C. Translating the histone code.
Science 293, 1074–1080 .
50. Esteller, M., Corn, P. G., Baylin, S. B. & Herman, J. G.
A gene hypermethylation profile of human cancer. Cancer
Res. 61, 3225–3229 .
51. Herman, J. G., Graff, J. R., Myohanen, S., Nelkin, B. D. &
Baylin, S. B. Methylation-specific PCR: a novel PCR assay
for methylation status of CpG islands. Proc. Natl Acad.
Sci. USA 93, 9821–9826 .
52. Frommer, M. et al. A genomic sequencing protocol that
yields a positive display of 5-methylcytosine residues in
individual dna strands. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 89,
1827–1831 .
53. Jeronimo, C. et al. Quantitation of GTSP1 methylation in
non-neoplastic prostatic tissue and organ-confined
prostate adenocarcinoma. J. Natl Cancer Inst. 93,
1747–1752 .
54. Rosas, S. L. et al. Promoter hypermethylation patterns of
p16, o6-methylguanine-DNA-methyltransferase, and deathassociated protein kinase in tumors and saliva of head and
neck cancer patients. Cancer Res. 61, 939–942 .
55. Belinsky, S. A. et al. Aberrant methylation of p16INK4a is
an early event in lung cancer and a potential biomarker for
early diagnosis. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 95,
11891–11896 .
56. Palmisano, W. A. et al. Predicting lung cancer by detecting
aberrant promoter methylation in sputum. Cancer Res. 60,
5954–5958 .
57. Ahrendt, S. A. et al. Molecular detection of tumor cells in
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid from patients with early stage
lung cancer. J. Natl Cancer Inst. 91, 332–339 .
58. Ramirez, J. L. et al. Methylation patterns and K-ras
mutations in tumor and paired serum of resected nonsmall-cell lung cancer patients. Cancer Lett. 193, 207–216
59. Usadel, H. et al. Quantitative adenomatous polyposis coli
promoter methylation analysis in tumor tissue, serum, and
plasma DNA of patients with lung cancer. Cancer Res. 62,
371–375 .
60. Valenzuela, M. T. et al. Assessing the use of p16INK4a
promoter gene methylation in serum for detection of
bladder cancer. Eur. Urol. 42, 622–630 .
61. Nakayama, H. et al. Molecular detection of p16 promoter
methylation in the serum of recurrent colorectal cancer
patients. Intl J. Cancer 105, 491–493 .
62. Yamaguchi, S., Asao, T., Nakamura, J. I., Ide, M. &
Kuwano, H. High frequency of DAP-kinase gene promoter
methylation in colorectal cancer specimens and its
identification in serum. Cancer Lett. 194, 99–105 .
63. Esteller, M. et al. Inactivation of the DNA-repair gene
MGMT and the clinical response of gliomas to alkylating
agents. N. Engl J. Med. 343, 1350–1354 .
64. Weinstein, J. N. Pharmacogenomics — teaching old drugs
new tricks. N. Engl. J. Med. 343, 1408–1409 .
65. Esteller, M. DNA methylation and cancer therapy: new
developments and expectations. Curr. Opin. Oncol. 17,
55–60 .
66. Cheng, J. C. et al. Preferential response of cancer cells to
zebularine. Cancer Cell 6, 151–158 .
67. Piekarz, R. & Bates, S. A review of depsipeptide and other
histone deacetylase inhibitors in clinical trials. Curr. Pharm.
Des. 10, 2289–2298 .
68. Piekarz, R. L. et al. T-cell lymphoma as a model for the use of
histone deacetylase inhibitors in cancer therapy: impact of
depsipeptide on molecular markers, therapeutic targets, and
mechanisms of resistance. Blood 103, 4636–4643 .
69. Mischel, P. S., Cloughesy, T. F. & Nelson, S. F. DNAmicroarray analysis of brain cancer: molecular
classification for therapy. Nature Rev. Neurosci. 5,
782–792 .
70. Gray, J. W. & Collins, C. Genome changes and gene
expression in human solid tumors. Carcinogenesis 21,
443–452 .
71. Velculescu, V. E., Zhang, L., Vogelstein, B. & Kinzler, K. W.
Serial analysis of gene expression. Science 270, 484–487
72. Weigl, B. H., Bardell, R. L. & Cabrera, C. R. Lab-on-a-chip
for drug development. Adv. Drug. Deliv. Rev. 55, 349–377
73. Weinstein, J. N. et al. An information-intensive approach to
the molecular pharmacology of cancer. Science 275,
343–349 .
74. Papin, J. A, Hunter, T., Palsson, B. O. & Subramaniam, S.
Reconstruction of cellular signalling networks and analysis of
their properties. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 6, 99–111 .
75. Petricoin, E. F., Zoon, K. C., Kohn, E. C., Barrett, J. C. &
Liotta, L. A. Clinical proteomics: translating benchside
promise into bedside reality. Nature Rev. Drug Discov. 1,
683–695 .
Comprehensive review of clinical proteomic
technologies and associated pattern-based protein
76. Perou, C. et al. Molecular portraits of human breast
tumours. Nature 406, 747–752 .
77. Sorlie, T., Perou, C., Brown, P., Botstein, D. & Borresen-
Dale, A. Gene expression patterns of breast carcinomas
distinguish tumor subclasses with clinical implications.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 98, 10869–10874 .
78. Sotiriou, C. et al. Breast cancer classification and
prognosis based on gene expression profiles from a
population-based study. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 100,
10393–10398 .
79. van de Vijver, M. J. et al. A gene-expression signature as a
predictor of survival in breast cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 347,
1999–2009 .
80. van‘t Veer, L. J. et al. Gene expression profiling predicts
clinical outcome of breast cancer. Nature 415, 530–536
81. Chang, J. C. et al. Gene expression profiling for the
prediction of therapeutic response to docetaxel in patients
with breast cancer. Lancet 362, 362–369 .
82. Sotiriou, C. et al. Gene expression profiles derived from
fine needle aspiration correlate with response to systemic
chemotherapy in breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res. 4, R3
83. Ramaswamy, S., Ross, K., Lander, E. & Golub, T.
A molecular signature of metastasis in primary solid
tumors. Nature Genet. 33, 49–54 .
84. Rosell, R. et al. Ribonucleotide reductase messenger RNA
expression and survival in gemcitabine/cisplatin-treated
advanced non-small cell lung cancer patients. Clin. Cancer
Res. 10, 1318–1325 .
85. Salonga, D. et al. Colorectal tumors responding to
5-fluorouracil have low gene expression levels of
dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase, thymidylate synthase,
and thymidine phosphorylase. Clin. Cancer Res. 6,
1322–1327 .
86. Bittner, M. et al. Molecular classification of cutaneous
malignant melanoma by gene expression profiling. Nature
406, 536–540 .
87. Carr, K. M., Bittner, M. & Trent, J. M. Gene-expression
profiling in human cutaneous melanoma. Oncogene 22,
3076–3080 .
88. Golub, T. R. et al. Molecular classification of cancer: class
discovery and class prediction by gene expression
monitoring. Science 286, 531–537 .
89. Alizadeh, A. A. et al. Distinct types of diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma identified by gene expression profiling. Nature
403, 503–511 .
90. Lossos, I. S. et al. Transformation of follicular lymphoma to
diffuse large-cell lymphoma: alternative patterns with
increased or decreased expression of c-myc and its
regulated genes. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 99,
8886–8891 .
91. Garber, M. E. et al. Diversity of gene expression in
adenocarcinoma of the lung. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA
98, 13784–13789 .
92. Best, C. J. et al. Molecular differentiation of high- and
moderate-grade human prostate cancer by cDNA
microarray analysis. Diagn. Mol. Pathol. 12, 63–70 .
93. Zou, T. T. et al. Application of cDNA microarrays to
generate a molecular taxonomy capable of distinguishing
between colon cancer and normal colon. Oncogene 21,
4855–4862 .
94. Zhou, G. et al. 2D differential in-gel electrophoresis for the
identification of esophageal scans cell cancer-specific
protein markers. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 1, 117–124 .
95. Nishizuka, S. et al. Proteomic profiling of the NCI-60
cancer cell lines using new high-density reverse-phase
lysate microarrays. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 100,
14229–14234 .
96. Paweletz, C. P. et al. Reverse phase protein microarrays
which capture disease progression show activation of prosurvival pathways at the cancer invasion front. Oncogene
20, 1981–1989 .
97. Verma, M., Wright, G. L. Jr, Hanash, S. M., Gopal-
Srivastava, R. & Srivastava, S. Proteomic approaches
within the NCI early detection research network for the
discovery and identification of cancer biomarkers. Ann.
NY Acad. Sci. 945, 103–115 .
NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER
VOLUME 5 | NOVEMBER 2005 | 855
R E V I E W S
© 2005 Nature Publishing Group
98. Wulfkuhle, J. D., Liotta, L. A. & Petricoin, E. F. Proteomic
applications for the early detection of cancer. Nature Rev.
Cancer 3, 267–275 .
99. Sano, T., Smith, C. L. & Cantor, C. R. Immuno-PCR: very
sensitive antigen detection by means of specific antibody–
DNA conjugates. Science 258, 120–122 .
100. Nam, J. M., Thaxton, C. S. & Mirkin, C. A. Nanoparticlebased bio-bar codes for the ultrasensitive detection of
proteins. Science 301, 1884–1886 .
101. Service, R. F. American Chemical Society Meeting. Tiny
transistors scout for cancer. Science 300, 242–243 .
102. Seydel, C. Quantum dots get wet. Science 300, 80–81
103. Wu, X. et al. Immunofluorescent labeling of cancer marker
Her2 and other cellular targets with semiconductor
quantum dots. Nature Biotechnol. 21, 41–46 .
104. Ben-Ari, E. T. Nanoscale quantum dots hold promise for
cancer applications. J. Natl Cancer Inst. 95, 502–504 .
105. Igor, M. et al. Self-assembled nanoscale biosensors based on
quantum dot FRET donors. Nature Mater. 2, 630–638 .
106. Wulfkuhle, J. D. et al. Proteomics of human breast ductal
carcinoma in situ. Cancer Res. 62, 6740–6749 .
107. Wulfkuhle, J. D. et al. New approaches to proteomic
analysis of breast cancer. Proteomics 1, 1205–1215 .
108. Jones, M. B. et al. Proteomic analysis and identification of
new biomarkers and therapeutic targets for invasive
ovarian cancer. Proteomics 2, 76–84 .
109. Patel, V., Leethanakul, C. & Gutkind, J. S. New
approaches to the understanding of the molecular basis of
oral cancer. Crit. Rev. Oral Biol. Med. 12, 55–63 .
110. Ornstein, D. K. et al. Proteomic analysis of laser capture
microdissected human prostate cancer and in vitro
prostate cell lines. Electrophoresis 21, 2235–2242 .
111. Pepe, M. S. et al. Phases of biomarker development for
early detection of cancer. J. Natl Cancer Inst. 93,
1054–1061 .
112. Barker, P. E. Cancer biomarker validation: standards and
process: roles for the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST). Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 983, 142–150 .
113. Ransohoff, D. F. Rules of evidence for cancer molecular
marker discovery and validation. Nature Rev. Cancer 4,
309–314 .
Effectively summarizes the problem of data
overfitting in discovery-based research and the need
for ‘rules of evidence’ to ensure clinical validity.
114. Gutman, S. Regulatory issues in tumor marker
development. Semin. Oncol. 29, 294–300 .
Examines the regulatory environment surrounding
biomarker approval by the FDA and CMS.
115. Taube, S. E. & Freiberg, G. P. Regulatory issues related to
marker development. Urol. Oncol. 5, 214–216 .
116. Hackett, J. L. & Lesko, L. J. Microarray data — the US
FDA, industry and academia. Nature Biotechnol. 21,
742–743 .
117. Mendelsohn, A. R. & Brent, R. Postgenomic protein
analysis: the next bend in the river. Nature Biotechnol. 16,
520–521 .
118. Robson, M. E. et al. A combined analysis of outcome
following breast cancer: differences in survival based on
BRCA1/BRCA2 mutation status and administration of
adjuvant treatment. Breast Cancer Res. 6, R8–R17 .
119. Einspahr, J. G. et al. Surrogate end-point biomarkers as
measures of colon cancer risk and their use in cancer
chemoprevention trials. Cancer Epidemiol. Biomarkers
Prev. 6, 37–48 .
120. Togashi, K. Ovarian cancer: the clinical role of US, CT, and
MRI. Eur. Radiol. 13 (Suppl. 4), L87–L104 .
121. Schlieman, M. G., Ho, H. S. & Bold, R. J. Utility of tumor
markers in determining resectability of pancreatic cancer.
Arch. Surg. 138, 951–956 .
122. Depres-Brummer, P. et al. The usefulness of CA15.3,
mucin-like carcinoma-associated antigen and
carcinoembryonic antigen in determining the clinical
course in patients with metastatic breast cancer. J. Cancer
Res. Clin. Oncol. 121, 419–422 .
123. Duncan, J. L., Price, A. & Rogers, K. The use of CA15.3 as
a serum tumour marker in breast carcinoma. Eur. J. Surg.
Oncol 17, 16–19 .
124. Gion, M. et al. Tumor markers in breast cancer monitoring
should be scheduled according to initial stage and followup time: a prospective study on 859 patients. Cancer J. 7,
181–190 .
125. Chang, B. L. et al. Polymorphisms in the CYP1A1 gene are
associated with prostate cancer risk. Intl J. Cancer 106,
375–378 .
126. Lee, S. G. et al. Genetic polymorphisms of XRCC1 and
risk of gastric cancer. Cancer Lett. 187, 53–60
127. Petrij-Bosch, A. et al. BRCA1 genomic deletions are major
founder mutations in Dutch breast cancer patients. Nature
Genet. 17, 341–345 .
128. Newman, B. et al. Frequency of breast cancer attributable
to BRCA1 in a population-based series of American
women. JAMA 279, 915–921 .
129. Wu, X. et al. p53 genotypes and haplotypes associated
with lung cancer susceptibility and ethnicity. J. Natl Cancer
Inst. 94, 681–690 .
130. Bonnen, P. E., Wang, P. J., Kimmel, M., Chakraborty, R. &
Nelson, D. L. Haplotype and linkage disequilibrium
architecture for human cancer-associated genes. Genome
Res. 12, 1846–1853 .
131. Johnson, G. & Todd, J. Haplotype tagging for the
identification of common disease genes. Nature Genet.
29, 233–237 .
132. Hoque, M. O., Lee, C. C., Cairns, P., Schoenberg, M. &
Sidransky, D. Genome-wide genetic characterization of
bladder cancer: a comparison of high-density singlenucleotide polymorphism arrays and PCR-based
microsatellite analysis. Cancer Res. 63, 2216–2222
133. Janne, P. A. et al. High-resolution single-nucleotide
polymorphism array and clustering analysis of loss of
heterozygosity in human lung cancer cell lines. Oncogene
23, 2716–2726 .
134. Boshoff, C. et al. Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus infects endothelial and spindle cells.
Nature Med. 1, 1274–1278 .
135. To, E. W. H. et al. Rapid clearance of plasma Epstein-
Barr virus DNA after surgical treatment of
nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Clin. Cancer Res. 9,
3254–3259 .
136. Leung, S. F. et al. Pretherapy quantitative measurement of
circulating Epstein-Barr virus DNA is predictive of
posttherapy distant failure in patients with early-stage
nasopharyngeal carcinoma of undifferentiated type.
Cancer 98, 288–291 .
137. Mueller, N. Overview: viral agents and cancer. Environ.
Health Perspect. 103 (Suppl. 8), 259–261 .
138. Koutsky, L. A. et al. A controlled trial of a human
papillomavirus type 16 vaccine. N. Engl. J. Med. 347,
1645–1651 .
139. Pellet, C. et al. Virologic and immunologic parameters that
predict clinical response of AIDS-associated Kaposi’s
sarcoma to highly active antiretroviral therapy. J. Invest.
Dermatol. 117, 858–863 .
140. Polyak, K. et al. Somatic mutations of the mitochondrial
genome in human colorectal tumours. Nature Genet. 20,
291–293 .
141. Bianchi, N. O., Bianchi, M. S. & Richard, S. M.
Mitochondrial genome instability in human cancers. Mutat.
Res. 488, 9–23 .
142. Welter, C., Kovacs, G., Seitz, G. & Blin, N. Alteration of
mitochondrial DNA in human oncocytomas. Genes
Chromosomes Cancer 1, 79–82 .
143. Fliss, M. S. et al. Facile detection of mitochondrial DNA
mutations in tumors and bodily fluids. Science 287,
2017–2019 .
144. Weinstein, J. N. Fishing expeditions. Science 282,
628–629 .
145. Weinstein, J. N. ‘Omic’ and hypothesis-driven research in
the molecular pharmacology of cancer. Curr. Opin.
Pharmacol. 2, 361–365 .
Acknowledgements
We thank Maria Chan (FDA) for guidance regarding Table 1 and
Anna Maria Calcagno (NCI) for her constructive scientific input.
This work was supported by the Intramural Research Program
of the NIH, the National Cancer Institute and the Center for
Cancer Research. We are grateful to Anna Barker and the
reviewers whose constructive comments and suggestions significantly improved the manuscript.
Online links
The following terms in this article are linked online to:
Entrez Gene: 
fcgi?db=gene
ABL | AFP | BCR | CGB | EGFR | ER | HER2/NEU | p53 | PR |
National Cancer Institute: 
breast cancer | colon cancer | HNSCC | leukaemia | NSCLC |
lymphomas | ovarian cancer | prostate cancer | soft-tissue
sarcomas | testicular cancer
FURTHER INFORMATION
Adjuvant Online: 
Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program: 
Early Detection Research Network: 
prevention/cbrg/edrn/
National Institute of Standards and Technology:
 
NCI Genomics and Bioinformatics group:
 
Program for the Assessment of Clinical Cancer Tests:
 
TNM staging system: 
Access to this interactive links box is free online.
856 | NOVEMBER 2005 | VOLUME 5
www.nature.com/reviews/cancer
R E V I E W S