Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
and the 7th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 1681–1691,
Beijing, China, July 26-31, 2015. c⃝2015 Association for Computational Linguistics
Deep Unordered Composition Rivals Syntactic Methods
for Text Classiﬁcation
Mohit Iyyer,1 Varun Manjunatha,1 Jordan Boyd-Graber,2 Hal Daum´e III1
1University of Maryland, Department of Computer Science and UMIACS
2University of Colorado, Department of Computer Science
{miyyer,varunm,hal}@umiacs.umd.edu, 
Many existing deep learning models for
natural language processing tasks focus on
learning the compositionality of their inputs, which requires many expensive computations. We present a simple deep neural
network that competes with and, in some
cases, outperforms such models on sentiment analysis and factoid question answering tasks while taking only a fraction
of the training time. While our model is
syntactically-ignorant, we show signiﬁcant
improvements over previous bag-of-words
models by deepening our network and applying a novel variant of dropout. Moreover, our model performs better than syntactic models on datasets with high syntactic variance. We show that our model
makes similar errors to syntactically-aware
models, indicating that for the tasks we consider, nonlinearly transforming the input is
more important than tailoring a network to
incorporate word order and syntax.
Introduction
Vector space models for natural language processing (NLP) represent words using low dimensional
vectors called embeddings. To apply vector space
models to sentences or documents, one must ﬁrst
select an appropriate composition function, which
is a mathematical process for combining multiple
words into a single vector.
Composition functions fall into two classes: unordered and syntactic. Unordered functions treat input texts as bags of word embeddings, while syntactic functions take word order and sentence structure
into account. Previously published experimental
results have shown that syntactic functions outperform unordered functions on many tasks .
However, there is a tradeoff: syntactic functions
require more training time than unordered composition functions and are prohibitively expensive in
the case of huge datasets or limited computing resources. For example, the recursive neural network
(Section 2) computes costly matrix/tensor products
and nonlinearities at every node of a syntactic parse
tree, which limits it to smaller datasets that can be
reliably parsed.
We introduce a deep unordered model that obtains near state-of-the-art accuracies on a variety of
sentence and document-level tasks with just minutes of training time on an average laptop computer.
This model, the deep averaging network (DAN),
works in three simple steps:
1. take the vector average of the embeddings
associated with an input sequence of tokens
2. pass that average through one or more feedforward layers
3. perform (linear) classiﬁcation on the ﬁnal
layer’s representation
The model can be improved by applying a novel
dropout-inspired regularizer: for each training instance, randomly drop some of the tokens’ embeddings before computing the average.
We evaluate DANs on sentiment analysis and factoid question answering tasks at both the sentence
and document level in Section 4. Our model’s successes demonstrate that for these tasks, the choice
of composition function is not as important as initializing with pretrained embeddings and using a
deep network. Furthermore, DANs, unlike more
complex composition functions, can be effectively
trained on data that have high syntactic variance. A
qualitative analysis of the learned layers suggests
that the model works by magnifying tiny but meaningful differences in the vector average through
multiple hidden layers, and a detailed error analysis shows that syntactically-aware models actually
make very similar errors to those of the more na¨ıve
Unordered vs. Syntactic Composition
Our goal is to marry the speed of unordered functions with the accuracy of syntactic functions.
In this section, we ﬁrst describe a class of unordered composition functions dubbed “neural bagof-words models” (NBOW). We then explore more
complex syntactic functions designed to avoid
many of the pitfalls associated with NBOW models. Finally, we present the deep averaging network
(DAN), which stacks nonlinear layers over the traditional NBOW model and achieves performance on
par with or better than that of syntactic functions.
Neural Bag-of-Words Models
For simplicity, consider text classiﬁcation: map an
input sequence of tokens X to one of k labels. We
ﬁrst apply a composition function g to the sequence
of word embeddings vw for w ∈X. The output of
this composition function is a vector z that serves
as input to a logistic regression function.
In our instantiation of NBOW, g averages word
embeddings1
z = g(w ∈X) =
Feeding z to a softmax layer induces estimated
probabilities for each output label
ˆy = softmax(Ws · z + b),
where the softmax function is
softmax(q) =
j=1 exp qj
Ws is a k × d matrix for a dataset with k output
labels, and b is a bias term.
We train the NBOW model to minimize crossentropy error, which for a single training instance
with ground-truth label y is
yp log(ˆyp).
1Preliminary experiments indicate that averaging outperforms the vector sum used in NBOW from Kalchbrenner et al.
Before we describe our deep extension of the
NBOW model, we take a quick detour to discuss
syntactic composition functions. Connections to
other representation frameworks are discussed further in Section 4.
Considering Syntax for Composition
Given a sentence like “You’ll be more entertained
getting hit by a bus”, an unordered model like
NBOW might be deceived by the word “entertained”
to return a positive prediction. In contrast, syntactic composition functions rely on the order and
structure of the input to learn how one word or
phrase affects another, sacriﬁcing computational
efﬁciency in the process. In subsequent sections,
we argue that this complexity is not matched by a
corresponding gain in performance.
Recursive neural networks (RecNNs) are syntactic functions that rely on natural language’s inherent structure to achieve state-of-the-art accuracies
on sentiment analysis tasks . As in
NBOW, each word type has an associated embedding. However, the composition function g now
depends on a parse tree of the input sequence. The
representation for any internal node in a binary
parse tree is computed as a nonlinear function of
the representations of its children (Figure 1, left).
A more powerful RecNN variant is the recursive
neural tensor network (RecNTN), which modiﬁes
g to include a costly tensor product ,
they require much more training time than NBOW
models. The nonlinearities and matrix/tensor products at each node of the parse tree are expensive, especially as model dimensionality increases.
RecNNs also require an error signal at every node.
One root softmax is not strong enough for the
model to learn compositional relations and leads
to worse accuracies than standard bag-of-words
models . Finally, RecNNs require relatively consistent syntax between training and test
data due to their reliance on parse trees and thus
cannot effectively incorporate out-of-domain data,
as we show in our question-answering experiments.
Kim shows that some of these issues can
be avoided by using a convolutional network instead of a RecNN, but the computational complexity increases even further (see Section 4 for runtime
comparisons).
What contributes most to the power of syntactic
masterpiece
masterpiece
h1 = f(W1 · av + b1)
h2 = f(W2 · h1 + b2)
Figure 1: On the left, a RecNN is given an input sentence for sentiment classiﬁcation. Softmax layers
are placed above every internal node to avoid vanishing gradient issues. On the right is a two-layer DAN
taking the same input. While the RecNN has to compute a nonlinear representation (purple vectors) for
every node in the parse tree of its input, this DAN only computes two nonlinear layers for every possible
functions: the compositionality or the nonlinearities? Socher et al. report that removing the
nonlinearities from their RecNN models drops performance on the Stanford Sentiment Treebank by
over 5% absolute accuracy. Most unordered functions are linear mappings between bag-of-words
features and output labels, so might they suffer
from the same issue? To isolate the effects of syntactic composition from the nonlinear transformations that are crucial to RecNN performance, we
investigate how well a deep version of the NBOW
model performs on tasks that have recently been
dominated by syntactically-aware models.
Deep Averaging Networks
The intuition behind deep feed-forward neural networks is that each layer learns a more abstract representation of the input than the previous one . We can apply this concept to the
NBOW model discussed in Section 2.1 with the expectation that each layer will increasingly magnify
small but meaningful differences in the word embedding average. To be more concrete, take s1 as
the sentence “I really loved Rosamund Pike’s performance in the movie Gone Girl” and generate s2
and s3 by replacing “loved” with “liked” and then
again by “despised”. The vector averages of these
three sentences are almost identical, but the averages associated with the synonymous sentences s1
and s2 are slightly more similar to each other than
they are to s3’s average.
Could adding depth to NBOW make small such
distinctions as this one more apparent? In Equation 1, we compute z, the vector representation for
input text X, by averaging the word vectors vw∈X.
Instead of directly passing this representation to an
output layer, we can further transform z by adding
more layers before applying the softmax. Suppose
we have n layers, z1...n. We compute each layer
zi = g(zi−1) = f(Wi · zi−1 + bi)
and feed the ﬁnal layer’s representation, zn, to a
softmax layer for prediction (Figure 1, right).
This model, which we call a deep averaging network (DAN), is still unordered, but its depth allows
it to capture subtle variations in the input better
than the standard NBOW model. Furthermore, computing each layer requires just a single matrix multiplication, so the complexity scales with the number
of layers rather than the number of nodes in a parse
tree. In practice, we ﬁnd no signiﬁcant difference
between the training time of a DAN and that of the
shallow NBOW model.
Word Dropout Improves Robustness
Dropout regularizes neural networks by randomly
setting hidden and/or input units to zero with some
probability p . Given a neural network with n units,
dropout prevents overﬁtting by creating an ensemble of 2n different networks that share parameters,
where each network consists of some combination
of dropped and undropped units. Instead of dropping units, a natural extension for the DAN model is
to randomly drop word tokens’ entire word embeddings from the vector average. Using this method,
which we call word dropout, our network theoretically sees 2|X| different token sequences for each
We posit a vector r with |X| independent
Bernoulli trials, each of which equals 1 with probability p. The embedding vw for token w in X is
dropped from the average if rw is 0, which exponentially increases the number of unique examples
the network sees during training. This allows us to
modify Equation 1:
rw ∼Bernoulli(p)
ˆX = {w|w ∈X and rw > 0}
z = g(w ∈X) =
Depending on the choice of p, many of the
“dropped” versions of an original training instance
will be very similar to each other, but for shorter
inputs this is less likely. We might drop a very
important token, such as “horrible” in “the crab
rangoon was especially horrible”; however, since
the number of word types that are predictive of the
output labels is low compared to non-predictive
ones (e.g., neutral words in sentiment analysis), we
always see improvements using this technique.
Theoretically, word dropout can also be applied
to other neural network-based approaches. However, we observe no signiﬁcant performance differences in preliminary experiments when applying
word dropout to leaf nodes in RecNNs for sentiment analysis (dropped leaf representations are set
to zero vectors), and it slightly hurts performance
on the question answering task.
Experiments
We compare DANs to both the shallow NBOW
model as well as more complicated syntactic models on sentence and document-level sentiment analysis and factoid question answering tasks. The DAN
architecture we use for each task is almost identical, differing across tasks only in the type of output
layer and the choice of activation function. Our
results show that DANs outperform other bag-ofwords models and many syntactic models with very
little training time.2 On the question-answering
task, DANs effectively train on out-of-domain data,
while RecNNs struggle to reconcile the syntactic
differences between the training and test data.
2Code at 
Table 1: DANs achieve comparable sentiment accuracies to syntactic functions (bottom third of table)
but require much less training time (measured as
time of a single epoch on the SST ﬁne-grained task).
Asterisked models are initialized either with different pretrained embeddings or randomly.
Sentiment Analysis
Recently, syntactic composition functions have
revolutionized both ﬁne-grained and binary (positive or negative) sentiment analysis. We conduct
sentence-level sentiment experiments on the Rotten Tomatoes (RT) movie reviews dataset and its extension with phrase-level
labels, the Stanford Sentiment Treebank (SST) introduced by Socher et al. . Our model is
also effective on the document-level IMDB movie
review dataset of Maas et al. .
Neural Baselines
Most neural approaches to sentiment analysis are
variants of either recursive or convolutional networks. Our recursive neural network baselines
include standard RecNNs ,
RecNTNs, the deep recursive network (DRecNN)
proposed by ˙Irsoy and Cardie , and the
TREE-LSTM of .
Convolutional network baselines include the dynamic convolutional network and the convolutional neural network multichannel . Our other neural baselines are the sliding-window based paragraph vector 3 and
3PVEC is computationally expensive at both training and
test time and requires enough memory to store a vector for
every paragraph in the training data.
the word-representation restricted Boltzmann machine , which only
works on the document-level IMDB task.4
Non-Neural Baselines
We also compare to non-neural baselines, specifically the bigram na¨ıve Bayes (BINB) and na¨ıve
Bayes support vector machine (NBSVM-BI) models introduced by Wang and Manning , both
of which are memory-intensive due to huge feature
spaces of size |V |2.
DAN Conﬁgurations
In Table 1, we compare a variety of DAN and NBOW
conﬁgurations5 to the baselines described above. In
particular, we are interested in not only comparing
DAN accuracies to those of the baselines, but also
how initializing with pretrained embeddings and restricting the model to only root-level labels affects
performance. With this in mind, the NBOW-RAND
and DAN-RAND models are initialized with random 300-dimensional word embeddings, while the
other models are initialized with publicly-available
300-d GloVe vectors trained over the Common
Crawl . The DAN-ROOT
model only has access to sentence-level labels for
SST experiments, while all other models are trained
on labeled phrases (if they exist) in addition to sentences. We train all NBOW and DAN models using
AdaGrad .
We apply DANs to documents by averaging the
embeddings for all of a document’s tokens and
then feeding that average through multiple layers
as before. Since the representations computed by
DANs are always d-dimensional vectors regardless
of the input size, they are efﬁcient with respect to
both memory and computational cost. We ﬁnd that
the hyperparameters selected on the SST also work
well for the IMDB task.
Dataset Details
We evaluate over both ﬁne-grained and binary
sentence-level classiﬁcation tasks on the SST, and
just the binary task on RT and IMDB. In the ﬁnegrained SST setting, each sentence has a label from
zero to ﬁve where two is the neutral class. For the
binary task, we ignore all neutral sentences.6
4The WRRBM is trained using a slow Metropolis-Hastings
algorithm.
5Best hyperparameters chosen by cross-validation: three
300-d ReLu layers, word dropout probability p = 0.3, L2
regularization weight of 1e-5 applied to all parameters
6Our ﬁne-grained SST split is {train: 8,544, dev: 1,101,
test: 2,210}, while our binary split is {train: 6,920, dev:872,
The DAN achieves the second best reported result
on the RT dataset, behind only the signiﬁcantly
slower CNN-MC model. It’s also competitive with
more complex models on the SST and outperforms
the DCNN and WRRBM on the document-level
IMDB task. Interestingly, the DAN achieves good
performance on the SST when trained with only
sentence-level labels, indicating that it does not
suffer from the vanishing error signal problem that
plagues RecNNs. Since acquiring labelled phrases
is often expensive , this result is promising for large or
messy datasets where ﬁne-grained annotation is
infeasible.
Timing Experiments
DANs require less time per epoch and—in general—
require fewer epochs than their syntactic counterparts. We compare DAN runtime on the SST
to publicly-available implementations of syntactic
baselines in the last column of Table 1; the reported
times are for a single epoch to control for hyperparameter choices such as learning rate, and all
models use 300-d word vectors. Training a DAN
on just sentence-level labels on the SST takes under
ﬁve minutes on a single core of a laptop; when
labeled phrases are added as separate training instances, training time jumps to twenty minutes.7
All timing experiments were performed on a single
core of an Intel I7 processor with 8GB of RAM.
Factoid Question Answering
DANs work well for sentiment analysis, but how
do they do on other NLP tasks? We shift gears
to a paragraph-length factoid question answering
task and ﬁnd that our model outperforms other
unordered functions as well as a more complex
syntactic RecNN model. More interestingly, we
ﬁnd that unlike the RecNN, the DAN signiﬁcantly
beneﬁts from out-of-domain Wikipedia training
Quiz bowl is a trivia competition in which players are asked four-to-six sentence questions about
entities (e.g., authors, battles, or events). It is an
ideal task to evaluate DANs because there is prior
test:1,821}. Split sizes increase by an order of magnitude
when labeled phrases are added to the training set. For RT,
we do 10-fold CV over a balanced binary dataset of 10,662
sentences. Similarly, for the IMDB experiments we use the
provided balanced binary training set of 25,000 documents.
7We also ﬁnd that DANs take signiﬁcantly fewer epochs to
reach convergence than syntactic models.
QANTA-WIKI
Table 2: The DAN achieves slightly lower accuracies than the more complex QANTA in much
less training time, even at early sentence positions where compositionality plays a bigger role.
When Wikipedia is added to the training set (bottom half of table), the DAN outperforms QANTA
and achieves comparable accuracy to a state-of-theart information retrieval baseline, which highlights
a beneﬁt of ignoring word order for this task.
Dropout Probability
History QB Accuracy
Effect of Word Dropout
Figure 2: Randomly dropping out 30% of words
from the vector average is optimal for the quiz bowl
task, yielding a gain in absolute accuracy of almost
3% on the quiz bowl question dataset compared to
the same model trained with no word dropout.
work using both syntactic and unordered models
for quiz bowl question answering. In Boyd-Graber
et al. , na¨ıve Bayes bag-of-words models
(BOW-DT) and sequential language models work
well on easy questions but poorly on harder ones.
A dependency-tree RecNN called QANTA proposed
in Iyyer et al. shows substantial improvements, leading to the hypothesis that correctly modeling compositionality is crucial for answering hard
questions.
Dataset and Experimental Setup
To test this, we train a DAN over the history questions from Iyyer et al. .8 This dataset is aug-
8The training set contains 14,219 sentences over 3,761
questions. For more detail about data and baseline systems,
mented with 49,581 sentence/page-title pairs from
the Wikipedia articles associated with the answers
in the dataset. For fair comparison with QANTA,
we use a normalized tanh activation function at the
last layer instead of ReLu, and we also change the
output layer from a softmax to the margin ranking loss used in QANTA. We
initialize the DAN with the same pretrained 100d word embeddings that were used to initialize
We also evaluate the effectiveness of word
dropout on this task in Figure 2. Cross-validation
indicates that p = 0.3 works best for question answering, although the improvement in accuracy is
negligible for sentiment analysis. Finally, continuing the trend observed in the sentiment experiments,
DAN converges much faster than QANTA.
DANs Improve with Noisy Data
Table 2 shows that while DAN is slightly worse
than QANTA when trained only on question-answer
pairs, it improves when trained on additional outof-domain Wikipedia data (DAN-WIKI), reaching
performance comparable to that of a state-of-the-art
information retrieval system (IR-WIKI). QANTA,
in contrast, barely improves when Wikipedia data is
added (QANTA-WIKI) possibly due to the syntactic
differences between Wikipedia text and quiz bowl
question text.
The most common syntactic structures in quiz
bowl sentences are imperative constructions such
as “Identify this British author who wrote Wuthering Heights”, which are almost never seen in
Wikipedia. Furthermore, the subject of most quiz
bowl sentences is a pronoun or pronomial mention
referring to the answer, a property that is not true
of Wikipedia sentences (e.g., “Little of Emily’s
work from this period survives, except for poems
spoken by characters.”). Finally, many Wikipedia
sentences do not uniquely identify the title of the
page they come from, such as the following sentence from Emily Bront¨e’s page: “She does not
seem to have made any friends outside her family.”
While noisy data affect both DAN and QANTA, the
latter is further hampered by the syntactic divergence between quiz bowl questions and Wikipedia,
which may explain the lack of improvement in accuracy.
see Iyyer et al. .
Perturbation Response
underwhelming
Perturbation Response vs. Layer
Figure 3: Perturbation response (difference in 1norm) at each layer of a 5-layer DAN after replacing awesome in the ﬁlm’s performances were awesome with four words of varying sentiment polarity.
While the shallow NBOW model does not show any
meaningful distinctions, we see that as the network
gets deeper, negative sentences are increasingly
different from the original positive sentence.
Number of Layers
Binary Classification Accuracy
Effect of Depth on Sentiment Accuracy
Figure 4: Two to three layers is optimal for the
DAN on the SST binary sentiment analysis task, but
adding any depth at all is an improvement over the
shallow NBOW model.
How Do DANs Work?
In this section we ﬁrst examine how the deep layers
of the DAN amplify tiny differences in the vector average that are predictive of the output labels. Next,
we compare DANs to DRecNNs on sentences that
contain negations and contrastive conjunctions and
ﬁnd that both models make similar errors despite
the latter’s increased complexity. Finally, we analyze the predictive ability of unsupervised word
embeddings on a simple sentiment task in an effort
to explain why initialization with these embeddings
improves the DAN.
Perturbation Analysis
Following the work of ˙Irsoy and Cardie , we
examine our network by measuring the response at
each hidden layer to perturbations in an input sentence. In particular, we use the template the ﬁlm’s
performances were awesome and replace the ﬁnal word with increasingly negative polarity words
(cool, okay, underwhelming, the worst). For each
perturbed sentence, we observe how much the hidden layers differ from those associated with the
original template in 1-norm.
Figure 3 shows that as a DAN gets deeper, the differences between negative and positive sentences
become increasingly ampliﬁed. While nonexistent
in the shallow NBOW model, these differences are
visible even with just a single hidden layer, thus
explaining why deepening the NBOW improves sentiment analysis as shown in Figure 4.
Handling Negations and “but”: Where
Syntax is Still Needed
While DANs outperform other bag-of-words models, how can they model linguistic phenomena such
as negation without considering word order? To
evaluate DANs over tougher inputs, we collect 92
sentences, each of which contains at least one negation and one contrastive conjunction, from the dev
and test sets of the SST.9 Our ﬁne-grained accuracy
is higher on this subset than on the full dataset,
improving almost ﬁve percent absolute accuracy
to 53.3%. The DRecNN model of ˙Irsoy and Cardie
 obtains a similar accuracy of 51.1%, contrary to our intuition that syntactic functions should
outperform unordered functions on sentences that
clearly require syntax to understand.10
Are these sentences truly difﬁcult to classify? A
close inspection reveals that both the DAN and the
DRecNN have an overwhelming tendency to predict negative sentiment (60.9% and 55.4% of the
time for the DAN and DRecNN respectively) when
they see a negation compared to positive sentiment
(35.9% for DANs, 34.8% for DRecNNs). If we further restrict our subset of sentences to only those
with positive ground truth labels, we ﬁnd that while
both models struggle, the DRecNN obtains 41.7%
accuracy, outperforming the DAN’s 37.5%.
To understand why a negation or contrastive conjunction triggers a negative sentiment prediction,
9We search for non-neutral sentences containing not / n’t,
and but. 48 of the sentences are positive while 44 are negative.
10Both models are initialized with pretrained 300-d GloVe
embeddings for fair comparison.
Ground Truth
a lousy movie that’s not merely unwatchable , but also
unlistenable
if you’re not a prepubescent
girl , you’ll be laughing at
britney spears ’ movie-starring debut whenever it does n’t
have you impatiently squinting at your watch
blessed with immense physical prowess he may well be, but
ahola is simply not an actor
who knows what exactly godard is on about in this ﬁlm , but
his words and images do n’t have to add up to mesmerize
it’s so good that its relentless , polished wit can withstand
not only inept school productions , but even oliver parker ’s
movie adaptation
too bad , but thanks to some lovely comedic moments and
several ﬁne performances , it’s not a total loss
this movie was not good
this movie was good
this movie was bad
the movie was not bad
Table 3: Predictions of DAN and DRecNN models on real (top) and synthetic (bottom) sentences that
contain negations and contrastive conjunctions. In the ﬁrst column, words colored red individually predict
the negative label when fed to a DAN, while blue words predict positive. The DAN learns that the negators
not and n’t are strong negative predictors, which means it is unable to capture double negation as in the
last real example and the last synthetic example. The DRecNN does slightly better on the synthetic double
negation, predicting a lower negative polarity.
we show six sentences from the negation subset and
four synthetic sentences in Table 3, along with both
models’ predictions. The token-level predictions in
the table (shown as colored boxes) are computed by
passing each token through the DAN as separate test
instances. The tokens not and n’t are strongly predictive of negative sentiment. While this simpliﬁed
“negation” works for many sentences in the datasets
we consider, it prevents the DAN from reasoning
about double negatives, as in “this movie was not
bad”. The DRecNN does slightly better in this case
by predicting a lesser negative polarity than the
DAN; however, we theorize that still more powerful
syntactic composition functions (and more labelled
instances of negation and related phenomena) are
necessary to truly solve this problem.
Unsupervised Embeddings Capture
Our model consistently converges slower to a worse
solution (dropping 3% in absolute accuracy on
coarse-grained SST) when we randomly initialize
the word embeddings. This does not apply to just
DANs; both convolutional and recursive networks
do the same .
Why are initializations with these embeddings so
crucial to obtaining good performance? Is it possible that unsupervised training algorithms are already capturing sentiment?
We investigate this theory by conducting a simple experiment: given a sentiment lexicon containing both positive and negative words, we train a
logistic regression to discriminate between the associated word embeddings (without any ﬁne-tuning).
We use the lexicon created by Hu and Liu ,
which consists of 2,006 positive words and 4,783
negative words. We balance and split the dataset
into 3,000 training words and 1,000 test words.
Using 300-dimensional GloVe embeddings pretrained over the Common Crawl, we obtain over
95% accuracy on the unseen test set, supporting the
hypothesis that unsupervised pretraining over large
corpora can capture properties such as sentiment.
Intuitively, after the embeddings are ﬁne-tuned
during DAN training, we might expect a decrease
in the norms of stopwords and an increase in the
norms of sentiment-rich words like “awesome” or
“horrible”. However, we ﬁnd no signiﬁcant differences between the L2 norms of stopwords and
words in the sentiment lexicon of Hu and Liu
Related Work
Our DAN model builds on the successes of both
simple vector operations and neural network-based
models for compositionality.
There are a variety of element-wise vector operations that could replace the average used in the
DAN. Mitchell and Lapata experiment with
many of them to model the compositionality of
short phrases. Later, their work was extended to
take into account the syntactic relation between
words and
grammars . While the average works best for
the tasks that we consider, Banea et al. ﬁnd
that simply summing word2vec embeddings outperforms all other methods on the SemEval 2014
phrase-to-word and sentence-to-phrase similarity
Once we compute the embedding average in a
DAN, we feed it to a deep neural network. In contrast, most previous work on neural network-based
methods for NLP tasks explicitly model word order. Outside of sentiment analysis, RecNN-based
approaches have been successful for tasks such
as parsing , machine translation , and paraphrase detection .
Convolutional networks also model word order in local windows and
have achieved performance comparable to or better than that of RecNNs on many tasks . Meanwhile, feedforward architectures like that of the DAN have
been used for language modeling , selectional preference acquisition , and dependency parsing .
Future Work
In Section 5, we showed that the performance of
our DAN model worsens on sentences that contain lingustic phenomena such as double negation.
One promising future direction is to cascade classiﬁers such that syntactic models are used only
when a DAN is not conﬁdent in its prediction. We
can also extend the DAN’s success at incorporating
out-of-domain training data to sentiment analysis:
imagine training a DAN on labeled tweets for classiﬁcation on newspaper reviews. Another potentially interesting application is to add gated units
to a DAN,as has been done for recurrent and recursive neural networks , to drop useless words rather than
randomly-selected ones.
Conclusion
In this paper, we introduce the deep averaging network, which feeds an unweighted average of word
vectors through multiple hidden layers before classiﬁcation. The DAN performs competitively with
more complicated neural networks that explicitly
model semantic and syntactic compositionality. It
is further strengthened by word dropout, a regularizer that reduces input redundancy. DANs obtain close to state-of-the-art accuracy on both sentence and document-level sentiment analysis and
factoid question-answering tasks with much less
training time than competing methods; in fact, all
experiments were performed in a matter of minutes on a single laptop core. We ﬁnd that both
DANs and syntactic functions make similar errors
given syntactically-complex input, which motivates
research into more powerful models of compositionality.
Acknowledgments
We thank Ozan ˙Irsoy not only for many insightful discussions but also for suggesting some of
the experiments that we included in the paper.
We also thank the anonymous reviewers, Richard
Socher, Arafat Sultan, and the members of the
UMD “Thinking on Your Feet” research group for
their helpful comments. This work was supported
by NSF Grant IIS-1320538. Boyd-Graber is also
supported by NSF Grants CCF-1409287 and NCSE-
1422492. Any opinions, ﬁndings, conclusions, or
recommendations expressed here are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the view of
the sponsor.