RankIQA: Learning from Rankings for No-reference Image Quality Assessment
Xialei Liu
Computer Vision Center
Barcelona, Spain
 
Joost van de Weijer
Computer Vision Center
Barcelona, Spain
 
Andrew D. Bagdanov
MICC, University of Florence
Florence, Italy
 
We propose a no-reference image quality assessment
(NR-IQA) approach that learns from rankings (RankIQA).
To address the problem of limited IQA dataset size, we train
a Siamese Network to rank images in terms of image quality by using synthetically generated distortions for which
relative image quality is known. These ranked image sets
can be automatically generated without laborious human
We then use ﬁne-tuning to transfer the knowledge represented in the trained Siamese Network to a traditional CNN that estimates absolute image quality from single images. We demonstrate how our approach can be made
signiﬁcantly more efﬁcient than traditional Siamese Networks by forward propagating a batch of images through
a single network and backpropagating gradients derived
from all pairs of images in the batch. Experiments on the
TID2013 benchmark show that we improve the state-of-theart by over 5%. Furthermore, on the LIVE benchmark we
show that our approach is superior to existing NR-IQA techniques and that we even outperform the state-of-the-art in
full-reference IQA (FR-IQA) methods without having to resort to high-quality reference images to infer IQA.
1. Introduction
Images are everywhere in our life. Unfortunately, they
are often distorted by the processes of acquisition, transmission, storage, and external conditions like camera motion.
Image Quality Assessment (IQA) is a technique developed to automatically predict the perceptual quality of images. IQA estimates should be highly correlated with quality assessments made by a range of very many human evaluators (commonly referred to as the Mean Opinion Score
(MOS) ). IQA has been widely applied to problems
where image quality is essential, like image restoration ,
image super-resolution , and image retrieval .
IQA approaches are generally divided into three categories based on whether the undistorted image (called reference image) or information about it is available: full-
Large ranking dataset
Siamese Network
Shared weights
Small IQA dataset
Scores: 36.9
Scores: 26.7
Scores: 60.0
Fine-tuning
Normal Network
Classical approach
Our approach
Figure 1. The classical approach trains a deep CNN regressor directly on the ground-truth. Our approach trains a network from an
image ranking dataset. These ranked images can be easily generated by applying distortions of varying intensities. The network
parameters are then transferred to the regression network for ﬁnetuning. This allows for the training of deeper and wider networks.
reference IQA (FR-IQA), reduced-reference IQA (RR-
IQA), and no-reference IQA (NR-IQA). Research has
mostly focussed on the more realist scenario of NR-IQA
where the image quality of an image without any reference
image has to be estimated. In NR-IQA, many methods focus on a speciﬁc distortion , which limits the applicability of these methods. Other methods consider a range
of distortions .
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are having an
enormous impact on computer vision research and practice.
Though they have been around for decades , it wasn’t
until 2012, when Krizhevsky et al. achieved spectacular results with a CNN in the ImageNet competition, that
they achieved wide attention and adoption in the broader
computer vision community. The architectures of networks
are getting deeper and deeper with respect to the original
AlexNet, with ResNet being an example of very deep network architecture . The result of this trend is that stateof-the-art CNNs like AlexNet and ResNet have hundred of
 
millions of parameters and require massive amounts of data
to train from scratch (without overﬁtting).
The success of CNNs encouraged research exploring
their potential application to the NR-IQA problem. This
research resulted in signiﬁcant improvements compared to
previous hand-crafted approaches . The main
problems these papers had to address is the absence of large
datasets for IQA . Especially as networks grow deeper and
wider, the number of parameters increases dramatically. As
a consequence, larger and larger annotated datasets are required for training. However, the annotation process for
IQA image datasets requires multiple human annotations
for every image, and thus the collection process is extremely
labor-intensive and costly. As a results, most available IQA
datasets are too small to be effective for training CNNs.
We propose an approach to address the absence of large
datasets. The main idea (see Fig. 1) is that while humanannotated IQA data is difﬁcult to obtain, it is easy to generate images that are ranked according to their image quality. That is, we can generate image sets in which, though
we do not have an absolute quality measure for each generated image, for any pair of images we know which is
of higher quality. We call this learning from rankings approach RankIQA, and with it we learn to rank image in
terms of quality using Siamese Networks, and then we
transfer knowledge learned from ranked images to a traditional CNN ﬁne-tuned on IQA data in order to improve the
accuracy of IQA. The idea to learn IQA features from distorted reference images was proposed by Zhang et al. in a
patent . In this paper we go beyond this patent in that
we provide a detailed description of our method and experimentally verify the usefulness of pre-training networks
using ranked datasets.
As a second contribution we propose a method for ef-
ﬁcient backpropagation in Siamese networks. The method
forwards a batch of images through a single network and
then backpropagates gradients derived from all pairs in
the batch.
In extensive experiments on established IQA
datasets we show that learning from rankings signiﬁcantly
improves results, and that our efﬁcient backpropagation algorithm allows to train these networks better and faster than
other training protocols, like hard-negative mining.
supplementary material and project page are available at
 
2. Related work
We brieﬂy review the literature related to our approach.
We focus on distortion-generic NR-IQA since it is more
generally applicable than the other IQA research lines.
Traditional NR-IQA approaches.
Most traditional NR-
IQA can be classiﬁed into Natural Scene Statistics (NSS)
methods and learning-based methods.
In NSS methods,
the assumption is that images of different quality vary in
the statistics of responses to speciﬁc ﬁlters. Wavelets ,
DCT and Curvelets are commonly used to extract
the features in different sub-bands. These feature distributions are parametrized, for example with the Generalized
Gaussian Distribution . The aim of these methods is to
estimate the distributional parameters, from which a quality
assessment can be inferred. The authors of propose to
extract NSS features in the spatial domain to obtain significant speed-ups. In learning-based methods, local features
are extracted and mapped to the MOS using, for example,
Support Machine Regression or Neural Networks . The
codebook method combines different features instead of using local features directly. Datasets without MOS
can be exploited to construct the codebook by means of unsupervised learning, which is particularly important due to
of the small size of existing datasets. Saliency maps 
can be used to model human vision system and improve
precision in these methods.
Deep learning for NR-IQA. In recent years several works
have used deep learning for NR-IQA . One of
the main drawbacks of deep networks is the need for large
labeled datasets, which are currently not available for NR-
IQA research. To address this problem Kang et al. 
consider small 32 × 32 patches rather than images, thereby
greatly augmenting the number of training examples. The
authors of follow the same pipeline. In the authors design a multi-task CNN to learn the type of distortions and image quality simultaneously. Bianco at al. 
propose to use a pre-trained network to mitigate the lack
of training data. They extract features from a pre-trained
model ﬁne-tuned on an IQA dataset. These features are then
used to train an SVR model to map features to IQA scores.
In our paper, we propose a radically different approach to
address the lack of training data: we use a large number of
automatically generated rankings of image quality to train
a deep network. This allows us to train much deeper and
wider networks than other methods in NR-IQA which train
directly on absolute IQA data.
Learning to rank. These approaches learn a ranking function from ground-truth rankings by minimizing a ranking
loss . This function can then be applied to rank test objects. The authors of adapt the Stochastic Gradient Descent method to perform pairwise learning to rank. This
has been successfully applied to large datasets. Combining
ideas from ranking and CNNs, the Siamese network architecture achieves great success on the face veriﬁcation problem , and in comparing image patches . The only
other work which applies rankings in the context of NR-
IQA is in which they combine different hand-crafted
features to represent image pairs from the IQA dataset.
Our approach is different in that primarily we are not
aiming to learn rankings.
Instead we use learning from
rankings as a data augmentation technique: we use easily
obtainable datasets of ranked images to train a large network, which is then ﬁne-tuned for the task of NR-IQA.
Hard-negative mining for Siamese network training.
is well known that a naive approach to sampling pairs
to training Siamese networks is suboptimal.
To address
this problem several approaches to hard-negative mining
have been proposed. In , they propose a hard positive
and hard-negative mining strategy to forward-propagate a
set of pairs and sample the highest loss pairs with backpropagation. However, hard mining comes with a high computational cost (they report an increase of up to 80% of total
computation cost). In they propose semi-hard pair selection, arguing that selecting hardest pairs can lead to bad
local minima. The batch size used is around 1800 examples, which again leads to a considerable increase in computational cost. In the authors take a batch of pairs as
input and choose the four hardest negative samples within
the mini-batch. To solve for a bad local optimum, optimize a smooth upper bound loss function to take advantage
of all possible pairs in the mini-batch.
In contrast with these works, we propose a method for
efﬁcient Siamese backpropagation which does not depend
on hard-negative selection. Instead, it considers all possible
pairs in the mini-batch. This has the advantage that the main
computational bottleneck in training deep networks, namely
the forward-propagation of images through the network, is
optimally exploited.
3. Learning from rankings for NR-IQA
In this section we describe our approach to exploiting
synthetically generated rankings for NR-IQA. We ﬁrst lay
out a general framework for our approach, then describe
how we use a Siamese network architecture to learn from
rankings. Finally, in section 3.3 we show how backpropagation for training Siamese networks from ranked samples
can be made signiﬁcantly more efﬁcient.
3.1. Overview of our approach
The lack of large IQA datasets motivates us to propose a new strategy to take advantage of large, unlabelled
databases from which we can generate images ranked by
image quality. Our approach is based on the observation
that, given a set of arbitrary reference images, it is very
easy to apply image distortions to generate a ranking image
dataset. As an example, given a reference image we can
apply various levels of Gaussian blur. The set of images
which is thus generated can be easily ranked because we do
know that adding Gaussian blur (or any other distortion) always deteriorates the quality score. Note that in such set of
ranked images we do not have any absolute IQA scores for
any images – but we do know for any pair of images which
is of higher quality.
After learning on these ranked images, we can use ﬁnetuning on small image quality datasets in order to address
the IQA problem. The difference between our approach
and the straightforward, classical approach is shown
in Fig. 1. The standard approach trains a shallow network
directly on the IQA dataset to estimate IQA score from images. Due to the limited data only few layers can be used,
which limits accuracy. Since we have access to much larger
datasets with ranked images, we can now train deeper and
wider networks to learn a distance embedding. Next we follow this by ﬁne-tuning for domain adaptation to the absolute
IQA problem. The overall pipeline of our approach is:
1. Synthesize ranked images. Using an arbitrary set of
images, we synthetically generate deformations of these
images over a range of distortion intensities. The absolute distortion amount for each image is not used in
subsequent steps, but within each deformation type we
know, for any pair of images, which is of higher quality.
See section 4.1 for a description of the datasets used for
generating ranked images and the distortions applied.
2. Train Siamese network for ranking. Using the set of
ranked images, we train a Siamese network described in
the next section using the efﬁcient Siamese backpropagation technique proposed in section 3.3. The result is a
Siamese network that ranks images by image quality.
3. Fine-tune on IQA data. Finally, we extract a single
branch of the Siamese network (we are interested at this
point in the representation learned in the network, and
not in the ranking itself), and ﬁne-tune it on available
IQA data. This effectively calibrates the network to output IQA measurements.
3.2. Siamese networks for ranking
Here we introduce the Siamese network to learn from
image rankings, which is a network with two identical network branches and a loss module. The two branches share
weights during training. Pairs of images and labels are the
input of the network, yielding two outputs which are passed
to the loss module. The gradients of the loss function with
respect to all model parameters are computed by backpropagation and updated with the stochastic gradient method.
Speciﬁcally, given an image x as the input of the network, the output feature representation of x, denoted by
f(x; θ), is obtained by capturing the activation in the last
layer. Here θ are the network parameters, and we will use y
to denote the ground truth value for the image which for image quality assessment is its quality score. Consequently, in
our Siamese networks the output of the ﬁnal layer is always
a single scalar which we want to be indicative of the image
quality. Since our aim is to rank the images, we apply the
pairwise ranking hinge loss:
L(x1, x2; θ) = max (0, f(x2; θ) −f(x1; θ) + ε)
where ε is the margin. Here we assume without loss of
generality that the rank of x1 is higher than x2. The gradient
of the loss in Eq. 1 is given by:
if f (x2; θ) −f (x1; θ) + ε ≤0
∇θf (x2; θ) −∇θf (x1; θ)
otherwise.
In other words, when the outcome of the network is in
accordance with the ranking, the gradient is zero. When
the outcome of the network is not in accordance we decrease the gradient of the higher and add the gradient of
the lower score. Given this gradient of L with respect to
model parameters θ, we can train the Siamese network using Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD).
3.3. Efﬁcient Siamese backpropagation
One drawback of Siamese networks is the redundant
computation. Consider all possible image pairs constructed
from three images. In a standard implementation all three
images are passed twice through the network, because they
each appear in two pairs.
Since both branches of the
Siamese network are identical, we are essentially doing
twice the work necessary since any image need only be
passed once through the network. It is exactly this idea
that we exploit to render backpropagation more efﬁcient. In
fact, nothing prevents us from considering all possible pairs
in the mini-batch, without hardly any additional computation. We add a new layer to the network that generates all
possible pairs in a mini-batch at the end of the network right
before computing the loss. This eliminates the problem of
pair selection and boosts efﬁciency.
To approximate the speed-up of efﬁcient Siamese backpropagation consider the following. If we have one reference image distorted by n levels of distortions in our training set, then for a traditional implementation of the Siamese
network we would have to pass a total of n2 −n images
through the network – which is twice the number of pairs
you can generate with n images. Instead we propose to pass
all images only a single time and consider all possible pairs
only in the loss computation layer. This reduces computation to just n passes through the network. Therefore, the
speed-up is equal to: n2−n
= n −1. In the best scenario
n = M, where M is equal to the number of images in the
mini-batch, and hence the speed-up of this method would
be in the order of the mini-batch size. Due to the high correlation among the set of all pairs in a mini-batch, we expect
the ﬁnal speedup in convergence to be lower.
To simplify notation in the following, we let ˆyi
f(xi; θ), where f(xi; θ) is the output of a single branch of
the Siamese network on input xi. Now, for one pair of inputs the loss is:
L(x1, x2, l12; θ) = g(ˆy1, ˆy2, l12),
where l12 is a label indicating the relationship between image 1 and 2 (for example, for ranking it indicates whether
x1 is of higher rank than x2), and θ = {θ1, θ2, . . . , θk} are
all model parameters in the Siamese network. We omit the
θ dependency in g for simplicity. The gradient of this loss
function with respect to the model parameter θ is:
∇θL = ∂g(ˆy1, ˆy2, l12)
∇θˆy1 + ∂g(ˆy1, ˆy2, l12)
∇θˆy2. (4)
This gradient of L above is a sum since the model parameters are shared between both branches of the Siamese network and ˆy1 and ˆy2 are computed using exactly the same
parameters.
Considering all pairs in a mini-batch, the loss is:
g(ˆyi, ˆyj, lij)
The gradient of the mini-batch loss with respect to parameter θ can then be written as:
∂g(ˆyi, ˆyj, lij)
∇θˆyi + ∂g(ˆyi, ˆyj, lij)
We can now express the gradient of the loss function of
the mini-batch in matrix form as:
where 1M is the vector of all ones of length M. For a standard single-branch network, we would average the gradients for all batch samples to obtain the gradient of the minibatch. This is equivalent to setting P to the identity matrix
in Eq. 7 above. For Siamese networks where we consider
all pairs in the mini-batch we obtain Eq. 6 by setting P to:
∂g(ˆy1,ˆy2,l12)
∂g(ˆy1,ˆyM,l1M)
∂g(ˆy1,ˆy2,l12)
∂g(ˆy2,ˆyM,l2M)
∂g(ˆy1,ˆyM,l1M)
The derivation until here is valid for any Siamese loss function of the form Eq. 3. For the speciﬁc case of the ranking
hinge loss replace g in Eq. 8 with Eq. 1 and obtain:
if lij (ˆyj −ˆyi) + ε ≤0
and lij ∈{−1, 0, 1} where 1 (-1) indicates that yi > yj
(yi < yj), and 0 that yi = yj or that they cannot be compared as is the case with images corrupted with different
distortions.
The above case considered a single distortion. Suppose
instead we have D types of distortions in the training set.
We can then compute the gradient of the loss using a block
diagonal matrix as:
∇θ ˆY 1 . . . ∇θ ˆY D 
M d(M d−1)
where ˆymn refers to the network output of the nth image
with the mth distortion, d ∈{1, 2, . . . , D}, and M =
P M d where M d is the number of images with distortion
d in the mini-batch. In the deﬁnition of Ad above, the ad
are the gradient coefﬁcients as in Eq. 10.
3.4. Fine-tuning for NR-IQA
After training a Siamese network to rank distorted images, we then extract a single branch from the network
for ﬁne-tuning. Given M images in mini-batch with human IQA measurements, we denote the ground truth quality
score of the i-th image as yi, and the predicted score from
the network is ˆyi, as above. We ﬁne-tune the network using
squared Euclidean distance as the loss function in place of
the ranking loss used for the Siamese network:
L(yi, ˆyi) = 1
(yi −ˆyi)2
4. Experimental results
In this section we report on a number of experiments designed to evaluate the performance of our approach with
respect to baselines and the state-of-the-art in IQA.
4.1. Datasets
We use two types of datasets in our experiments: generic,
non-IQA datasets for generating ranked images to train
Figure 2. Siamese network output for JPEG distortion considering
6 levels. This graphs illustrate the fact that the Siamese network
successfully manages to separate the different distortion levels.
the Siamese network, and IQA datasets for ﬁne-tuning and
evaluation.
IQA datasets.
We perform experiments on two standard IQA benchmark datasets.
The LIVE consists
of 808 images generated from 29 original images by distorting them with ﬁve types of distortion: Gaussian blur
(GB), Gaussian noise (GN), JPEG compression (JPEG),
JPEG2000 compression (JP2K) and fast fading (FF). The
ground-truth Mean Opinion Score for each image is in the
range and is estimated using annotations by 161
human annotators.The TID2013 dataset consists of 25
reference images with 3000 distorted images from 24 different distortion types at 5 degradation levels. Mean Opinion Scores are in the range . Distortion types include
a range of noise, compression, and transmission artifacts.
See the original publication for the list of speciﬁc distortion
Datasets for generating ranked pairs.
To test on the
LIVE database, we generate four types of distortions which
are widely used and common : GB, GN, JPEG, and JP2K.
To test on TID2013, we generate 17 out of a total of 24
distortions (apart from #3, #4,#12, #13, #20, #21, #24). For
the distortions which we could not generate, we apply ﬁnetuning from the network trained from the other distortions.
This was found to yield satisfactory results. We use two
datasets for generating ranked image pairs.
The Waterloo dataset consists of 4,744 high quality natural images carefully chosen from the Internet. Additionally, we use the validation set of the Places2 dataset of
356 scene categories. There are 100 images per category in
the validation set, for a total 36500 images. After distortion,
we have many more distorted images for learning an image
quality ranking embedding. The aim of using this dataset
is to demonstrate that high-quality ranking embeddings can
be learned using datasets not speciﬁcally designed for the
IQA problem.
4.2. Experimental protocols
We investigate a number of network architectures and
use standard IQA metrics to evaluate performance.
Network architectures.
We evaluate three typical network architectures varying from shallow to deep. We refer
to them as: Shallow, AlexNet , and VGG-16 . The
shallow network has four convolutional layers and one fully
connected layer. For AlexNet and VGG-16 we only change
the number of outputs since our objective is to assign one
score for each distorted image.
Strategy for training and testing.
We randomly sample
sub-images from the original high resolution images. We
do this instead of scaling to avoid introducing distortions
caused by interpolation or ﬁltering. The size of sampled
images is determined by each network. However, the large
size of the input images is important since input sub-images
should be at least 1/3 of the original images in order to capture context information. This is a serious limitation of the
patch sampling approach that samples very small 32 × 32
patches from the original images. In our experiments, we
sample 227 × 227 and 224 × 224 pixel images, depending on the network. We use the Caffe framework and
train using mini-batch Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD)
with an initial learning rate of 1e-4 for efﬁcient Siamese
network training and 1e-6 for ﬁne-tuning. Training rates
are decreased by a factor of 0.1 every 10K iterations for a
total of 50K iterations. For both training phases we use ℓ2
weight decay (weight 5e-4). During training we sample a
single subimage from each training image per epoch.
When testing, we randomly sample 30 sub-images from
the original images as suggested in . The average of the
outputs of the sub-regions is the ﬁnal score for each image.
Evaluation protocols.
Two evaluation metrics are traditionally used to evaluate the performance of IQA algorithms: the Linear Correlation Coefﬁcient (LCC) and the
Spearman Rank Order Correlation Coefﬁcient (SROCC).
LCC is a measure of the linear correlation between the
ground truth and the predicted quality scores. Given N distorted images, the ground truth of i-th image is denoted by
yi, and the predicted score from the network is ˆyi. The LCC
is computed as:
i=1(yi −y)(ˆyi −ˆy)
i (yi −y)2
i (ˆyi −ˆy)2
where y and ˆy are the means of the ground truth and predicted quality scores, respectively.
Given N distorted images, the SROCC is computed as:
SROCC = 1 −6 PN
i=1 (vi −pi)2
N (N 2 −1)
Testing loss
Efficient Siamese
Standard Siamese
Hard Mining
Figure 3. Convergence of ranking loss on JPEG distortion for our
approach versus standard Siamese and hard-negative mining.
Table 1. SROCC and LCC for our approach on LIVE using different networks.
where vi is the rank of the ground-truth IQA score yi in the
ground-truth scores, and pi is the rank of ˆyi in the output
scores for all N images. The SROCC measures the monotonic relationship between ground-truth and estimated IQA.
4.3. Learning NR-IQA from rankings
We performed a number of experiments to evaluate the
ability of Siamese networks to learn to capture image distortions from a large dataset of image quality rankings. In
addition, we measure the impact of the efﬁcient Siamese
backpropagation approach described in section 3.3.
Siamese networks and IQA discrimination.
To demonstrate the ability of our ranking networks to discriminate image quality, we trained our Siamese network on the Places2
validation set (without applying ﬁne-tuning on IQA data)
corrupted with ﬁve levels of a single distortion. We then
used that network to predict image quality for syntheticallydistorted images from the Waterloo dataset corrupted using
the same ﬁve levels of the same distortion. The network
outputs are plotted as histograms in Fig. 2 for the JPEG distortion1. In the plot, we divide the observations according
to the true distortion level (indicated by the color of the histogram). The model discriminates different levels of distortions on Waterloo, even though the acquisition process and
the scenes of the two datasets are totally different.
Efﬁcient Siamese backpropagation.
The objective of
this experiment is to evaluate the efﬁciency of our Siamese
backpropagation method. We compare our method to both
standard random pair sampling, and a hard-negative mining
method similar to .2 For standard random pair sampling
1Graphs for the other distortions are in the supplementary material.
2We experimented with several hard-negative mining methods and
found this to work best.
BLIINDS-II 
BRISQUE 
CORNIA-10K 
RankIQA+FT
BLIINDS-II 
BRISQUE 
CORNIA-10K 
RankIQA+FT
Table 2. Performance evaluation (SROCC) on the entire TID2013 database. The baseline approach is VGG16 ﬁne-tuned directly on
TID2013 data without using the Siamese net, RankIQA is VGG16 only ﬁne-tuned for ranking using Siamese net on generated ranking
data, and RankIQA+FT is our learning-from-ranking approach further ﬁne-tuned on TID2013 data.
we randomly choose 36 pairs for each mini-batch from the
training sets. For the hard negative mining strategy we start
from 36 pairs in a mini-batch, and gradually increase the
number of hard pairs every 5000 iterations. For our method
we pass 72 images in each mini-batch. With these settings
the computational costs of all three methods is equal, since
at each iteration 72 images are passed through the network.
We use AlexNet for this experiment. The comparison of
convergence rates on JPEG3 is shown in Fig. 3. The ef-
ﬁcient Siamese backpropagation not only converges much
faster, but also converges to a considerably lower loss.
Network performance analysis.
Here we evaluate
whether we can learn a useful image representation from
large image ranking datasets.
We randomly split on the
original, high-quality images before distortion from the
LIVE dataset into 80% training and 20% testing samples
and compute the average LCC and SROCC scores on the
testing set after training to convergence. This process is
repeated ten times and the results are averaged.
In Table 1 we compare results for three different networks: Shallow, AlexNet and VGG-16.
We obtain the best results
with the VGG-16 network, which is also the deepest network. This indicates learning from ranking makes it possible to train very deep networks efﬁciently without over-
ﬁtting. These results are obtained by training from scratch,
however we found that initializing the weights with a network pre-trained on ImageNet further improved the results.
In the remainder of the experiments we thus use the VGG-
16 network initialized with a pre-trained weights to train the
ranking network in the following experiments.
Baseline performance analysis.
In this experiment, we
evaluate the effectiveness of using rankings to estimate image quality.
We compare tree methods: ﬁne-tuning the
3Results for the other distortions are in the supplementary material.
VGG-16 network initialized from ImageNet to obtain the
mapping from images to their predicted scores (called Baseline), our method to train VGG-16 (initialized from ImageNet) on ranking database using all ranking dataset we
generate (called RankIQA), and ﬁnally our RankIQA approach ﬁne-tuned on the TID2013 database after training
using ranked pairs of images (called RankIQA+FT).
We follow the experimental protocol used in HOSA .
The entire TID2013 database including all types of distortions is divided into 80% training images and 20% testing images according to the reference images. Thus, the
same image can never appear in both training and test sets.
The results are shown in Table 2, where ALL means testing
all distortions together. All the experiments are performed
10 times and the average SROCC is reported4. From Table 2, we can draw several conclusions. First, it is hard
to obtain good results by training a deep network directly
on IQA data. This is seen in the Baseline results and is
due to the scarcity of training data. Second, our RankIQA
method achieves superior results on almost all individual
distortions even without ever using the TID2013 dataset
– which strongly demonstrates the effectiveness of training on ranking data. Slightly better results are obtained on
ALL without comparing among different distortions during
training the ranking network. The RankIQA-trained network alone does not provide accurate IQA scores (since it
has never seen any) but does provide high correlation with
the IQA scores as measured by SROCC. After ﬁne-tuning
on the TID2013 database (RankIQA+FT), we considerably
improve the ALL score, and improve the baseline by 16%.
However, in the ﬁne-tuning process to optimize the ALL
score the network balances the various distortions, and results decrease for several distortions.
4LCC results are provided in supplementary material.
DIVINE 
BLIINDS-II 
BRISQUE 
CORNIA 
RankIQA+FT
DIVINE 
BLIINDS-II 
BRISQUE 
CORNIA 
RankIQA+FT
Table 3. LCC (above) and SROCC (below) evaluation on the LIVE
dataset. We divide approaches into Full-reference (FR-IQA) and
No-reference (IQA) techniques.
4.4. Comparison with the state-of-the-art
We compare the performance of our method using the
VGG-16 network with state-of-the-art methods. We perform experiments on the TID2013 and LIVE dataset.5
Evaluation on TID2013.
Table 2 also includes results
of state-of-the-art methods. We see that for several very
challenging distortions (14 to 18), where all other methods
fail, we obtain satisfactory results. For individual distortions, there is a huge gap between our RankIQA method and
other IQA methods on most distortions. The state-of-the-art
method HOSA performs slightly better than our methods
on 6 out of 24 distortions. For all distortions, our method
RankIQA+FT achieves about 5% higher than HOSA. Our
methods perform well on distortions which are not included
when training the ranking network, which indicates that different distortions share some common representation and
training the network jointly on all distortions.
Evaluation on LIVE.
As done in , we randomly
split the reference images on LIVE dataset into 80% training samples and 20% testing, and compute the average LCC
and SROCC scores on the testing set after training to convergence. This process is repeated ten times and the results are averaged. These results are shown in Table 3. The
best method for each dataset is indicated in bold. The column indicated with ALL means we combine all ﬁve distortions together on LIVE dataset to train and test the model.
5Results on CSIQ and MLIVE are in supplementary material.
RankIQA+FT (Waterloo)
RankIQA+FT (Places2)
RankIQA+FT (Waterloo)
RankIQA+FT (Places2)
Table 4. SROCC and LCC results of models trained on the Waterloo and Places2 datasets, testing on LIVE.
For fair comparison with the state-of-the-art, we train our
ranking model on four distortions except FF, but we ﬁnetune our model on all ﬁve distortions in the LIVE dataset to
compute ALL. Our approach achieves about 1% better than
the best results reported on ALL distortions for LCC. Similar conclusions are obtained for SROCC. This indicates that
our method outperforms existing work including the current
state-of-the-art NR-IQA method SOM and DNN ,
and also state-of-the-art FR-IQA method DCNN . To
the best of our knowledge this is the ﬁrst time that an NR-
IQA method surpasses the performance of FR-IQA methods
(which have access to the undistorted reference image) on
all LIVE distortions using the LCC and SROCC evaluation
4.5. Independence from IQA training data
This ﬁnal experiment is to demonstrate that our framework can be also trained on non-IQA datasets. In the previous experiment the network is trained from high-quality
images of the Waterloo dataset. Instead here we use the validation set of the Places2 dataset to generate ranked images
in place of the Waterloo dataset. The Places2 dataset is of
lower quality than Waterloo and is not designed for IQA research. As in the previous experiment, the ﬁnal image quality scores are predicted by ﬁne-tuning on the LIVE dataset.
The performance of this model is compared with the results
trained on Waterloo in Table 4. The SROCC and LCC values are very similar, demonstrating that our approach can
be learnt from arbitrary, non-IQA data.
5. Conclusions
To address the scarcity of IQA data we have proposed
a method which learns from ranked image datasets. Since
this data can be generated in abundance we can train deeper
and wider networks than previous work. In addition, we
have proposed a method for efﬁcient backpropagation in
Siamese networks which circumvents the need for hardnegative mining. Comparison with standard pair sampling
and hard-negative sampling shows that our method converges faster and to a lower loss.
Results on LIVE and
TID2013 datasets show that our NR-IQA approach obtains
superior results compared to existing NR-IQA techniques
and even FR-IQA methods.
Acknowledgements We acknowledge the Spanish project
TIN2016-79717-R, the CHISTERA project M2CR and the CERCA Programme / Generalitat de
Catalunya. Xialei Liu acknowledges the Chinese Scholarship Council (CSC) grant No.201506290018. We also acknowledge the generous GPU donation from NVIDIA.