HAL Id: hal-02172099
 
Submitted on 3 Jul 2019
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of scientific research documents, whether they are published or not.
The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
ASVspoof 2019: Future Horizons in Spoofed and Fake
Audio Detection
Massimiliano Todisco, Xin Wang, Ville Vestman, Md Sahidullah, Héctor
Delgado, Andreas Nautsch, Junichi Yamagishi, Nicholas Evans, Tomi
Kinnunen, Kong Aik Lee
To cite this version:
Massimiliano Todisco, Xin Wang, Ville Vestman, Md Sahidullah, Héctor Delgado, et al.. ASVspoof
2019: Future Horizons in Spoofed and Fake Audio Detection. INTERSPEECH 2019 - 20th Annual
Conference of the International Speech Communication Association, Sep 2019, Graz, Austria. ￿hal-
ASVspoof 2019: Future Horizons in Spoofed and Fake Audio Detection
Massimiliano Todisco1, Xin Wang2, Ville Vestman3,6, Md Sahidullah4, H´ector Delgado1,
Andreas Nautsch1, Junichi Yamagishi2,5, Nicholas Evans1, Tomi Kinnunen3 and Kong Aik Lee6
1EURECOM, France – 2National Institute of Informatics, Japan – 3University of Eastern Finland,
Finland – 4Inria, France – 5University of Edinburgh, UK – 6NEC Corp., Japan
 
now in its third edition,
is a series of
community-led challenges which promote the development
of countermeasures to protect automatic speaker veriﬁcation
(ASV) from the threat of spooﬁng. Advances in the 2019 edition include: (i) a consideration of both logical access (LA)
and physical access (PA) scenarios and the three major forms
of spooﬁng attack, namely synthetic, converted and replayed
speech; (ii) spooﬁng attacks generated with state-of-the-art neural acoustic and waveform models; (iii) an improved, controlled
simulation of replay attacks; (iv) use of the tandem detection
cost function (t-DCF) that reﬂects the impact of both spooﬁng
and countermeasures upon ASV reliability. Even if ASV remains the core focus, in retaining the equal error rate (EER)
as a secondary metric, ASVspoof also embraces the growing
importance of fake audio detection. ASVspoof 2019 attracted
the participation of 63 research teams, with more than half of
these reporting systems that improve upon the performance of
two baseline spooﬁng countermeasures. This paper describes
the 2019 database, protocols and challenge results. It also outlines major ﬁndings which demonstrate the real progress made
in protecting against the threat of spooﬁng and fake audio.
Index Terms:
automatic speaker veriﬁcation,
ASVspoof, presentation attack detection, fake audio.
1. Introduction
The ASVspoof initiative1 spearheads research in antispooﬁng for automatic speaker veriﬁcation (ASV). Previous
ASVspoof editions focused on the design of spooﬁng countermeasures for synthetic and converted speech and replayed speech . ASVspoof 2019 , the ﬁrst edition to
focus on all three major spooﬁng attack types, extends previous
challenges in several directions, not least in terms of adressing
two different use case scenarios: logical access (LA) and physical access (PA).
The LA scenario involves spooﬁng attacks that are injected
directly into the ASV system. Attacks in the LA scenario are
generated using the latest text-to-speech synthesis (TTS) and
voice conversion (VC) technologies. The best of these algorithms produce speech which is perceptually indistinguishable
from bona ﬁde speech. ASVspoof 2019 thus aims to determine whether the advances in TTS and VC technology pose
a greater threat to the reliability of ASV systems, as well as
spooﬁng countermeasures. For the PA scenario, speech data is
assumed to be captured by a microphone in a physical, reverberant space. Replay spooﬁng attacks are recordings of bona
ﬁde speech which are assumed to be captured, possibly surreptitiously, and then re-presented to the microphone of an ASV
1 
system using a replay device. In contrast to the 2017 edition of
ASVspoof, the 2019 edition PA database is constructed from a
far more controlled simulation of replay spooﬁng attacks that is
also relevant to the study of fake audio detection in the case of,
e.g. smart home devices.
While the equal error rate (EER) metric of previous editions is retained as a secondary metric, ASVspoof 2019 migrates to a new primary metric in the form of the ASV-centric
tandem decision cost function (t-DCF) . While the challenge
is still a stand-alone spooﬁng detection task which does not require expertise in ASV, adoption of the t-DCF ensures that scoring and ranking reﬂects the comparative impact of both spooﬁng
and countermeasures upon an ASV system.
This paper describes the ASVspoof 2019 challenge, the LA
and PA scenarios, the evaluation rules and protocols, the t-DCF
metric, the common ASV system, baseline countermeasures
and challenge results.
2. Database
The ASVspoof 2019 database2 encompasses two partitions for
the assessment of LA and PA scenarios.
Both are derived
from the VCTK base corpus3 which includes speech data captured from 107 speakers (46 males, 61 females).
and PA databases are themselves partitioned into three datasets,
namely training, development and evaluation which comprise
the speech from 20 (8 male, 12 female), 10 (4 male, 6 female)
and 48 (21 male, 27 female) speakers respectively. The three
partitions are disjoint in terms of speakers and the recording
conditions for all source data are identical. While the training
and development sets contain spooﬁng attacks generated with
the same algorithms/conditions (designated as known attacks),
the evaluation set also contains attacks generated with different algorithms/conditions (designated as unknown attacks). Reliable spooﬁng detection performance therefore calls for systems that generalise well to previously-unseen spooﬁng attacks.
With full descriptions available in the ASVspoof 2019 evaluation plan , the following presents a summary of the speciﬁc
characteristics of the LA and PA databases.
2.1. Logical access
The LA database contains bona ﬁde speech and spoofed speech
data generated using 17 different TTS and VC systems. Data
used for the training of TTS and VC systems also comes from
the VCTK database but there is no overlap with the data contained in the 2019 database. Six of these systems are designated as known attacks, with the other 11 being designated
as unknown attacks. The training and development sets contain known attacks only whereas the evaluation set contains 2
2 
3 
known and 11 unknown spooﬁng attacks. Among the 6 known
attacks there are 2 VC systems and 4 TTS systems. VC systems use a neural-network-based and spectral-ﬁltering-based
approaches . TTS systems use either waveform concatenation or neural-network-based speech synthesis using a conventional source-ﬁlter vocoder or a WaveNet-based vocoder .
The 11 unknown systems comprise 2 VC, 6 TTS and 3 hybrid
TTS-VC systems and were implemented with various waveform generation methods including classical vocoding, Grifﬁn-
Lim , generative adversarial networks , neural waveform models , waveform concatenation, waveform ﬁltering , spectral ﬁltering, and their combination.
2.2. Physical access
Inspired by work to analyse and improve ASV reliability in reverberant conditions and a similar approach used in the
study of replay reported in , both bona ﬁde data and spoofed
data contained in the PA database are generated according to a
simulation of their presentation to the microphone
of an ASV system within a reverberant acoustic environment.
Replayed speech is assumed ﬁrst to be captured with a recording
device before being replayed using a non-linear replay device.
Training and development data is created according to 27 different acoustic and 9 different replay conﬁgurations. Acoustic con-
ﬁgurations comprise an exhaustive combination of 3 categories
of room sizes, 3 categories of reverberation and 3 categories
of speaker/talker4-to-ASV microphone distances. Replay con-
ﬁgurations comprise 3 categories of attacker-to-talker recording distances, and 3 categories of loudspeaker quality. Replay
attacks are simulated with a random attacker-to-talker recording distance and a random loudspeaker quality corresponding
to the given conﬁguration category. Both bona ﬁde and replay
spooﬁng access attempts are made with a random room size,
reverberation level and talker-to-ASV microphone distance.
Evaluation data is generated in the same manner as training and development data, albeit with different, random acoustic and replay conﬁgurations.
The set of room sizes, levels
of reverberation, talker-to-ASV microphone distances, attackerto-talker recording distances and loudspeaker qualities, while
drawn from the same conﬁguration categories, are different to
those for the training and development set. Accordingly, while
the categories are the same and known a priori, the speciﬁc impulse responses and replay devices used to simulate bona ﬁde
and replay spooﬁng access attempts are different or unknown.
It is expected that reliable performance will only be obtained
by countermeasures that generalise well to these conditions, i.e.
countermeasures that are not over-ﬁtted to the speciﬁc acoustic
and replay conﬁgurations observed in training and development
3. Performance measures and baselines
ASVspoof 2019 focuses on assessment of tandem systems consisting of both a spooﬁng countermeasure (CM) (designed by
the participant) and an ASV system (provided by the organisers). The performance of the two combined systems is evaluated
via the minimum normalized tandem detection cost function
(t-DCF, for the sake of easier tractability) of the form:
norm = min
miss(s) + P cm
fa (s) } ,
4From hereon we refer to talkers in order to avoid potential confusion with loudspeakers used to mount replay spooﬁng attacks.
where β depends on application parameters (priors, costs) and
ASV performance (miss, false alarm, and spoof miss rates),
while P cm
miss(s) and P cm
fa (s) are the CM miss and false alarm rates
at threshold s. The minimum in (1) is taken over all thresholds
on given data (development or evaluation) with a known key,
corresponding to oracle calibration. While the challenge rankings are based on pooled performance in either scenario (LA or
PA), results are also presented when decomposed by attack. In
this case, β depends on the effectiveness of each attack. In particular, with everything else being constant, β is inversely proportional to the ASV false accept rate for a speciﬁc attack: the
penalty when a CM falsely rejects bona ﬁde speech is higher in
the case of less effective attacks. Likewise, the relative penalty
when a CM falsely accepts spoofs is higher for more effective
attacks. Thus, while (1) appears to be deceptively similar to
the NIST DCF, β (hence, the cost function itself) is automatically adjusted according to the effectiveness of each attack. Full
details of the t-DCF metric and speciﬁc conﬁguration parameters as concerns ASVspoof 2019 are presented in . The EER
serves as a secondary metric. The EER corresponds to a CM
operating point with equal miss and false alarm rates and was
the primary metric for previous editions of ASVspoof. Without
an explicit link to the impact of CMs upon the reliability of an
ASV system, the EER may be more appropriate as a metric for
fake audio detection, i.e. where there is no ASV system.
The common ASV system uses x-vector speaker embeddings together with a probabilistic linear discriminant
analysis (PLDA) backend. The x-vector model used to
compute ASV scores required to compute the t-DCF is pretrained5 with the Kaldi VoxCeleb recipe. The original
recipe is modiﬁed to include PLDA adaptation using disjoint,
bona ﬁde, in-domain data. Adaptation was performed separately for LA and PA scenarios since bona ﬁde recordings for
the latter contain additional simulated acoustic and recording
effects. The ASV operating point, needed in computing β in
(1), is set to the EER point based on target and nontarget scores.
ASVspoof 2019 adopted two CM baseline systems. They
use a common Gaussian mixture model (GMM) back-end classiﬁer with either constant Q cepstral coefﬁcient (CQCC) features (B01) or linear frequency cepstral coefﬁcient
(LFCC) features (B02).
4. Challenge results
Table 1 shows results6 in terms of the t-DCF and EER for primary systems, pooled over all attacks. For the LA scenario,
27 of the 48 participating teams produced systems that outperformed the best baseline B02. For the PA scenario, the performance of B01 was bettered by 32 of the 50 participating
teams. There is substantial variation in minimum t-DCF and
EER for both LA and PA scenarios. The top-performing system for the LA scenario, T05, achieved a t-DCF of 0.0069 and
EER of 0.22%. The top-performing system for the PA scenario,
T28, achieved a t-DCF of 0.0096 and EER of 0.39%. Conﬁrming observations reported in , monotonic increases in the t-
DCF that are not always mirrored by monotonic increases in the
EER show the importance of considering the performance of the
ASV and CM systems in tandem. Table 1 also shows that the
top 7 (LA) and 6 (PA) systems used neural networks whereas 9
(LA) and 10 (PA) systems used an ensemble of classiﬁers.
5 
6As for previous editions of ASVspoof, results are anonymised, with
individual teams being able to identify their position in the evaluation
rankings via an identiﬁer communicated separately to each of them.
Table 1: Primary system results. Results shown in terms of minimum t-DCF and the CM EER [%]. IDs highlighted in grey
signify systems that used neural networks in either the front- or
back-end. IDs highlighted in bold font signify systems that use
an ensemble of classiﬁers.
ASVspoof 2019 LA scenario
ASVspoof 2019 PA scenario
4.1. CM analysis
Corresponding CM detection error trade-off (DET) plots (no
combination with ASV) are illustrated for LA and PA scenarios in Fig. 1. Highlighted in both plots are proﬁles for the two
baseline systems B01 and B02, the best performing primary
systems for teams T05 and T28, and the same teams’ single
systems. Also shown are proﬁles for the overall best performing single system for the LA and PA scenarios submitted by
teams T45 and, again, T28 respectively. For the LA scenario,
very few systems deliver EERs below 5%. A dense concentration of systems deliver EERs between 5% and 10%. Of interest
is the especially low EER delivered by the primary T05 system,
which delivers a substantial improvement over the same team’s
best performing single system. Even the overall best performing
single system of T45 is some way behind, suggesting that reli-
Figure 1: CM DET proﬁles for (a) LA and (b) PA scenarios.
able performance for the LA scenario depends upon the fusion
of complementary sub-systems. This is likely due to the diversity in attack families, namely TTS, VC and hybrid TTS-VC
systems. Observations are different for the PA scenario. There
is a greater spread in EERs and the difference between the best
performing primary and single systems (both from T28) is much
narrower. That a low EER can be obtained with a single system
suggests that reliable performance is less dependent upon effective fusion strategies. This might be due to lesser variability (as
compared to that for the LA) in replay spooﬁng attacks; there is
only one family of attack which exhibits differences only in the
level of convolutional channel noise.
4.2. Tandem analysis
Fig. 2 illustrates boxplots of the t-DCF when pooled (left-most)
and when decomposed separately for each of the spooﬁng attacks in the evaluation set.
Results are shown individually
for the best performing baseline, primary and single systems
whereas the boxes illustrate the variation in performance for the
top-10 performing systems. Illustrated to the top of each boxplot are the EER of the common ASV system (when subjected
to each attack) and the median CM EER across all primary systems. The ASV system delivers baseline EERs (without spoofing attacks) of 2.48% and 6.47% for LA and PA scenarios respectively.
As shown in Fig. 2(a) for the LA scenario, attacks A10, A13
and, to a lesser extent, A18, degrade ASV performance while
being challenging to detect. They are end-to-end TTS with WaveRNN and a speaker encoder pretrained for ASV , VC
using moment matching networks and waveform ﬁltering
 , and i-vector/PLDA based VC using a DNN glottal
vocoder , respectively. Although A08, A12, and A15 also
use neural waveform models and threaten ASV, they are easier
to detect than A10. One reason may be that A08, A12, A15
are pipeline TTS and VC systems while A10 is optimized in an
end-to-end manner. Another reason may be that A10 transfers
ASV knowledge into TTS, implying that advances in ASV also
pooled A07
primary T05
single T45
primary T28
single T28
Figure 2: Boxplots of the top-10 performing LA (a) and PA (b) ASVspoof 2019 submissions. Results illustrated in terms of t-DCF
decomposed for the 13 (LA) and 9 (PA) attacks in the evaluation partion. ASV under attack and the median CM EER [%] of all the
submitted systems are shown above the boxplots. A16 and A19 are known attacks.
improve the LA attacks. A17, a VAE-based VC with waveform ﬁltering, poses little threat to the ASV system, but it is the
most difﬁcult to detect and lead to the highest t-DCF. All the
above attacks are new attacks not included in ASVspoof 2015.
More consistent trends can be observed for the PA scenario.
Fig. 2(b) shows the t-DCF when pooled and decomposed for each of the 9 replay conﬁgurations.
Each attack
is a combination of different attacker-to-talker recording distances {A,B,C}X, and replay device qualities X{A,B,C} .
When subjected to replay attacks, the EER of the ASV system increases more when the attacker-to-talker distance is low
(near-ﬁeld effect) and when the attack is performed with higher
quality replay devices (fewer channel effects). There are similar
observations for CM performance and the t-DCF; lower quality
replay attacks can be detected reliably whereas higher quality
replay attacks present more of a challenge.
5. Discussion
Care must be exercised in order that t-DCF results are interpreted correctly. The reader may ﬁnd it curious, for instance,
that LA attack A17 corresponds to the highest t-DCF while,
with an ASV EER of 3.92%, the attack is the least effective.
Conversely, attack A16 provokes an ASV EER of almost 65%7,
yet the median t-DCF is among the lowest. So, does A17 —
a weak attack — really pose a problem? The answer is afﬁrmative: A17 is problematic, as far as the t-DCF is concerned.
Further insight can be obtained from the attack-speciﬁc weights
β of (1). For A17, a value of β ≈26, indicates that the induced cost function provides 26 times higher penalty for rejecting bona ﬁde users, than it does for missed spooﬁng attacks
passed to the ASV system. The behavior of primary system
T05 in Fig. 1(a), with an aggressively tilted slope towards the
low false alarm region, may explain why the t-DCF is near an
order of magnitude better than the second best system.
6. Conclusions
ASVspoof 2019 addressed two different spooﬁng scenarios,
namely LA and PA, and also the three major forms of spooﬁng
attack: synthetic, converted and replayed speech. The LA scenario aimed to determine whether advances in countermeasure
design have kept pace with progress in TTS and VC technologies and whether, as result, today’s state-of-the-art systems pose
a threat to the reliability of ASV. While ﬁndings show that the
most recent techniques, e.g. those using neural waveform models and waveform ﬁltering, in addition to those resulting from
transfer learning (TTS and VC systems borrowing ASV techniques) do indeed provoke greater degradations in ASV performance, there is potential for their detection using countermea-
7Scores produced by spooﬁng attacks are higher than those of genuine trials.
sures that combine multiple classiﬁers. The PA scenario aimed
to assess the spooﬁng threat and countermeasure performance
via simulation with which factors inﬂuencing replay spooﬁng
attacks could be carefully controlled and studied. Simulations
consider variation in room size and reverberation time, replay
device quality and the physical separation between both talkers
and attackers (making surreptitious recordings) and talkers and
the ASV system microphone. Irrespective of the replay conﬁguration, all replay attacks degrade ASV performance, yet, reassuringly, there is promising potential for their detection.
Also new to ASVspoof 2019 and with the objective of assessing the impact of both spooﬁng and countermeasures upon
ASV reliability, is adoption of the ASV-centric t-DCF metric.
This strategy marks a departure from the independent assessment of countermeasure performance in isolation from ASV
and a shift towards cost-based evaluation. Much of the spooﬁng
attack research across different biometric modalities revolves
around the premise that spooﬁng attacks are harmful and should
be detected at any cost. That spooﬁng attacks have potential for
harm is not in dispute. It does not necessarily follow, however,
that every attack must be detected. Depending on the application, spooﬁng attempts could be extremely rare or, in some
cases, ineffective. Preparing for a worst case scenario, when
that worst case is unlikely in practice, incurs costs of its own, i.e.
degraded user convenience. The t-DCF framework enables one
to encode explicitly the relevant statistical assumptions in terms
of a well-deﬁned cost function that generalises the classic NIST
DCF. A key beneﬁt is that the t-DCF disentangles the roles of
ASV and CM developers as the error rates of the two systems
are still treated independently. As a result, ASVspoof 2019 followed the same, familiar format as previous editions, involving
a low entry barrier — participation still requires no ASV expertise and participants need submit countermeasures scores only
— the ASV system is provided by the organisers and is common
to the assessment of all submissions. With the highest number
of submissions in ASVspoof’s history, this strategy appears to
have been a resounding success.
Acknowledgements: The authors express their profound gratitude to
the 27 persons from 14 organisations who contributed to creation of the
LA database. The work was partially supported by: JST CREST Grant
No. JPMJCR18A6 (VoicePersonae project), Japan; MEXT KAKENHI
Grant Nos. (16H06302, 16K16096, 17H04687, 18H04120, 18H04112,
18KT0051), Japan; the VoicePersonae and RESPECT projects funded
by the French Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR); the Academy
of Finland (NOTCH project no. 309629); Region Grand Est, France.
The authors at the University of Eastern Finland also gratefully acknowledge the use of computational infrastructures at CSC – IT Center
for Science, and the support of NVIDIA Corporation with the donation
of a Titan V GPU used in this research.
7. References
 N. Evans, T. Kinnunen, and J. Yamagishi, “Spooﬁng and countermeasures for automatic speaker veriﬁcation,” in Proc. Interspeech, Annual Conf. of the Int. Speech Comm. Assoc., Lyon,
France, August 2013, pp. 925–929.
 Z. Wu, T. Kinnunen, N. Evans, J. Yamagishi, C. Hanilc¸i,
M. Sahidullah, and A. Sizov, “ASVspoof 2015: the ﬁrst automatic
speaker veriﬁcation spooﬁng and countermeasures challenge,” in
Proc. Interspeech, Annual Conf. of the Int. Speech Comm. Assoc.,
Dresden, Germany, September 2015, pp. 2037–2041.
 T. Kinnunen, M. Sahidullah, H. Delgado, M. Todisco, N. Evans,
J. Yamagishi, and K. Lee, “The ASVspoof 2017 challenge: Assessing the limits of replay spooﬁng attack detection,” in Proc.
Interspeech, Annual Conf. of the Int. Speech Comm. Assoc., 2017,
 ASVspoof
veriﬁcation
countermeasures
evaluation
Available:
 
asvspoof2019 evaluation plan.pdf
 T. Kinnunen, K. Lee, H. Delgado, N. Evans, M. Todisco,
M. Sahidullah, J. Yamagishi, and D. A. Reynolds, “t-DCF: a
detection cost function for the tandem assessment of spooﬁng
countermeasures and automatic speaker veriﬁcation,” in Proc.
Odyssey, Les Sables d’Olonne, France, June 2018.
 D. Matrouf, J.-F. Bonastre, and C. Fredouille, “Effect of speech
transformation on impostor acceptance,” in Proc. ICASSP, vol. 1.
IEEE, 2006, pp. 933–936.
 M. Morise, F. Yokomori, and K. Ozawa, “WORLD: A vocoderbased high-quality speech synthesis system for real-time applications,” IEICE Trans. on Information and Systems, vol. 99, no. 7,
pp. 1877–1884, 2016.
 A. v. d. Oord, S. Dieleman, H. Zen, K. Simonyan, O. Vinyals,
A. Graves, N. Kalchbrenner, A. Senior, and K. Kavukcuoglu,
“Wavenet: A generative model for raw audio,” arXiv preprint
 
 D. Grifﬁn and J. Lim, “Signal estimation from modiﬁed shorttime Fourier transform,” IEEE Trans. ASSP, vol. 32, no. 2, pp.
236–243, 1984.
 K. Tanaka, T. Kaneko, N. Hojo, and H. Kameoka, “Synthetic-tonatural speech waveform conversion using cycle-consistent adversarial networks,” in Proc. SLT.
IEEE, 2018, pp. 632–639.
 X. Wang, S. Takaki, and J. Yamagishi, “Neural source-ﬁlter-based
waveform model for statistical parametric speech synthesis,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), 2019, pp. 5916–5920.
 K. Kobayashi, T. Toda, G. Neubig, S. Sakti, and S. Nakamura,
“Statistical singing voice conversion with direct waveform modi-
ﬁcation based on the spectrum differential,” in Proc. Interspeech,
2014, pp. 2514–2518.
 T. Ko, V. Peddinti, D. Povey, M. L. Seltzer, and S. Khudanpur, “A study on data augmentation of reverberant speech for robust speech recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2017, pp. 5220–5224.
 D. Snyder, D. Garcia-Romero, G. Sell, D. Povey, and S. Khudanpur, “X-vectors: Robust DNN embeddings for speaker recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP), 2018, pp. 5329–5333.
 A. Janicki, F. Alegre, and N. Evans, “An assessment of automatic
speaker veriﬁcation vulnerabilities to replay spooﬁng attacks,” Security and Communication Networks, vol. 9, no. 15, pp. 3030–
3044, 2016.
 D. R. Campbell, K. J. Palom¨aki, and G. Brown, “A MATLAB
simulation of “shoebox” room acoustics for use in research and
teaching.” Computing and Information Systems Journal, ISSN
1352-9404, vol. 9, no. 3, 2005.
 E. Vincent. Roomsimove. [Online]. Available:
//homepages.loria.fr/evincent/software/Roomsimove 1.4.zip
 A. Novak, P. Lotton, and L. Simon, “Synchronized swept-sine:
Theory, application, and implementation,” J. Audio Eng. Soc,
pp. 786–798,
2015. [Online]. Available:
 
 S. J. Prince and J. H. Elder, “Probabilistic linear discriminant analysis for inferences about identity,” in 2007 IEEE 11th International Conference on Computer Vision.
IEEE, 2007, pp. 1–8.
 D. Povey, A. Ghoshal, G. Boulianne, L. Burget, O. Glembek,
N. Goel, M. Hannemann, P. Motlicek, Y. Qian, P. Schwarz et al.,
“The Kaldi speech recognition toolkit,” IEEE Signal Processing
Society, Tech. Rep., 2011.
 A. Nagrani,
J. S. Chung,
and A. Zisserman,
“Voxceleb:
a large-scale speaker identiﬁcation dataset,” arXiv preprint
 
 M. Todisco, H. Delgado, and N. Evans, “A new feature for automatic speaker veriﬁcation anti-spooﬁng: Constant Q cepstral coefﬁcients,” in Proc. Odyssey, Bilbao, Spain, 6 2016.
 M. Todisco, H. Delgado, and N. Evans, “Constant Q cepstral coefﬁcients: A spooﬁng countermeasure for automatic speaker veriﬁcation,” Computer Speech & Language, vol. 45, pp. 516 – 535,
 M. Sahidullah, T. Kinnunen, and C. Hanilc¸i, “A comparison of
features for synthetic speech detection,” in Proc. Interspeech, Annual Conf. of the Int. Speech Comm. Assoc., Dresden, Germany,
2015, pp. 2087–2091.
 Y. Jia, Y. Zhang, R. J. Weiss, Q. Wang, J. Shen, F. Ren, Z. Chen,
P. Nguyen, R. Pang, I. Lopez-Moreno, and Y. Wu, “Transfer learning from speaker veriﬁcation to multispeaker text-to-speech synthesis,” CoRR, vol. abs/1806.04558, 2018.
 Y. Li, K. Swersky, and R. Zemel, “Generative moment matching networks,” in International Conference on Machine Learning,
2015, pp. 1718–1727.
 T. Kinnunen, L. Juvela, P. Alku, and J. Yamagishi, “Non-parallel
voice conversion using i-vector PLDA: Towards unifying speaker
veriﬁcation and transformation,” in 2017 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP).
IEEE, 2017, pp. 5535–5539.
 L. Juvela, B. Bollepalli, X. Wang, H. Kameoka, M. Airaksinen,
J. Yamagishi, and P. Alku, “Speech waveform synthesis from
MFCC sequences with generative adversarial networks,” in 2018
IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 5679–5683.
 C.-C. Hsu, H.-T. Hwang, Y.-C. Wu, Y. Tsao, and H.-M. Wang,
“Voice conversion from unaligned corpora using variational autoencoding Wasserstein generative adversarial networks,” in Proc.
Interspeech 2017, 2017, pp. 3364–3368.