The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-19)
Character-Level Language Modeling with Deeper Self-Attention
Rami Al-Rfou,* Dokook Choe,* Noah Constant,* Mandy Guo,* Llion Jones*
1600 Amphitheatre Parkway
Mountain View, California 94043
{rmyeid, choed, nconstant, xyguo, llion}@google.com
LSTMs and other RNN variants have shown strong performance on character-level language modeling. These models
are typically trained using truncated backpropagation through
time, and it is common to assume that their success stems
from their ability to remember long-term contexts. In this
paper, we show that a deep (64-layer) transformer model
 with ﬁxed context outperforms RNN
variants by a large margin, achieving state of the art on two
popular benchmarks: 1.13 bits per character on text8 and
1.06 on enwik8. To get good results at this depth, we show
that it is important to add auxiliary losses, both at intermediate network layers and intermediate sequence positions.
Introduction
Character-level modeling of natural language text is challenging, for several reasons. First, the model must learn a
large vocabulary of words “from scratch”. Second, natural
text exhibits dependencies over long distances of hundreds
or thousands of time steps. Third, character sequences are
longer than word sequences and thus require signiﬁcantly
more steps of computation.
In recent years, strong character-level language models
typically follow a common template . A recurrent
neural net (RNN) is trained over mini-batches of text sequences, using a relatively short sequence length (e.g. 200
tokens). To capture context longer than the batch sequence
length, training batches are provided in sequential order, and
the hidden states from the previous batch are passed forward to the current batch. This procedure is known as “truncated backpropagation through time” (TBTT), because the
gradient computation doesn’t proceed further than a single
batch . A range of methods have arisen for
unbiasing and improving TBTT .
While this technique gets good results, it adds complexity to the training procedure, and recent work suggests
that models trained in this manner don’t actually make
“strong” use of long-term context. For example Khandelwal
et al. ﬁnd that a word-based LSTM language model
*Equal contribution.
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
only effectively uses around 200 tokens of context (even if
more is provided), and that word order only has an effect
within approximately the last 50 tokens.
In this paper, we show that a non-recurrent model can
achieve strong results on character-level language modeling.
Speciﬁcally, we use a network of transformer self-attention
layers with causal (backward-looking)
attention to process ﬁxed-length inputs and predict upcoming characters. The model is trained on mini-batches of sequences from random positions in the training corpus, with
no information passed from one batch to the next.
Our primary ﬁnding is that the transformer architecture is
well-suited to language modeling over long sequences and
could replace RNNs in this domain. We speculate that the
transformer’s success here is due to its ability to “quickly”
propagate information over arbitrary distances; by comparison, RNNs need to learn to pass relevant information forward step by step.
We also ﬁnd that some modiﬁcations to the basic transformer architecture are beneﬁcial in this domain. Most importantly, we add three auxiliary losses, requiring the model
to predict upcoming characters (i) at intermediate sequence
positions, (ii) from intermediate hidden representations, and
(iii) at target positions multiple steps in the future. These
losses speed up convergence, and make it possible to train
deeper networks.
Character Transformer Model
Language models assign a probability distribution over token sequences t0:L by factoring out the joint probability as
follows, where L is the sequence length:
Pr(t0:L) = P(t0)
Pr(ti|t0:i−1),
To model the conditional probability Pr(ti|t0:i−1), we
train a transformer network to process the character sequence t0:i−1. Transformer networks have recently showed
signiﬁcant gains in tasks that require processing sequences
accurately and efﬁciently.
Our character-level transformer architecture has 64 transformer layers. Following Vaswani et al. , by “transformer layer” we mean a block containing a multihead selfattention sub-layer followed by a feed-forward network of
Transformer Layers
(a) Baseline
Transformer Layers
(b) Multiple Positions
Transformer Layers
(c) Layer Losses
Transformer Layers
(d) Multiple Targets
Figure 1: (a) A character transformer network of two layers processing a four character sequence to predict t4. The causal
attention mask limits information to left-to-right ﬂow. Red arrows highlight the prediction task the network has to learn. (b)
Adding intermediate position prediction tasks to our network. Now, we predict the ﬁnal character t4 and all intermediate
characters t0:3. All of these losses contribute equally during training. (c) Adding prediction tasks for the intermediate layers.
For this example of two layers, the losses of the intermediate layer prediction tasks will be absent after ﬁnishing 25% of the
training. (d) Adding two predictions per position.
two fully connected sub-layers. For more details on the
transformer architecture, refer to Vaswani et al. and
the tensor2tensor library1.
To ensure that the model’s predictions are only conditioned on past characters, we mask our attention layers with
a causal attention, so each position can only attend leftward.
This is the same as the “masked attention” in the decoder
component of the original transformer architecture used for
sequence-to-sequence problems .
Figure 1a shows our initial model with the causal attention mask limiting information ﬂow from left to right. Each
character prediction is conditioned only on the characters
that appeared earlier.
Auxiliary Losses
Our network is, to our knowledge, deeper than any transformer network discussed in previous work. In initial experiments, we found training a network deeper than ten layers
to be challenging, with slow convergence and poor accuracy.
We were able to deepen the network to better effect through
the addition auxiliary losses, which sped up convergence of
the training signiﬁcantly.
We add several types of auxiliary losses, corresponding to intermediate positions, intermediate layers, and nonadjacent targets. We hypothesize that these losses not only
speed up convergence but also serve as an additional regularizer. During training, the auxiliary losses get added to the
1 
total loss of the network with discounted weights. Each type
of auxiliary loss has its own schedule of decay. During evaluation and inference time, only the prediction of the ﬁnal
position at the ﬁnal layer is used.
One consequence of this approach is that a number of network parameters are only used during training—speciﬁcally,
the parameters in the output classiﬁcation layers associated
with predictions made from intermediate layers and predictions over non-adjacent targets. Thus, when listing the number of parameters in our models, we distinguish between
“training parameters” and “inference parameters”.
Multiple Positions
First, we add prediction tasks for each
position in the ﬁnal layer, extending our predictions from
one per example to |L| (sequence length). Note, predicting
over all sequence positions is standard practice in RNNbased approaches. However in our case, since no information is passed forward across batches, this is forcing the
model to predict given smaller contexts—sometimes just
one or two characters. It is not obvious whether these secondary training tasks should help on the primary task of predicting with full context. However, we ﬁnd that adding this
auxiliary loss speeds up training and gives better results (see
Ablation Experiments below). Figure 1b illustrates the task
of predicting across all sequence positions. We add these
losses during training without decaying their weights.
Intermediate Layer Losses
In addition to the ﬁnal prediction layer, we add predictions made from the output of
each intermediate transformer layer. As with the ﬁnal layer,
we add predictions for all intermediate positions in the sequence (see Figure 1c). Lower layers are weighted to contribute less and less to the loss as training progresses. If there
are n layers total, then the lth intermediate layer stops contributing any loss after ﬁnishing l/2n of the training. This
schedule drops all intermediate losses after half of the training is done.
Multiple Targets
At each position in the sequence, the
model makes two (or more) predictions of future characters.
For each new target we introduce a separate classiﬁer. The
losses of the extra targets get weighted by a multiplier of 0.5
before being added to their corresponding layer loss.
Positional Embeddings
In the basic transformer network described in Vaswani et
al. , a sinusoidal timing signal is added to the input
sequence prior to the ﬁrst transformer layer. However, as our
network is deeper (64 layers), we hypothesize that the timing information may get lost during the propagation through
the layers. To address this, we replace the timing signal with
a learned per-layer positional embedding added to the input sequence before each transformer layer. Speciﬁcally, the
model learns a unique 512-dimensional embedding vector
for each of the L context positions within each of N layers,
giving a total of L × N × 512 additional parameters. We are
able to safely use positional embeddings for our task, as we
don’t require the model to generalize to longer contexts than
those seen during training.
Experimental Setup
For evaluation we focus mainly on text8 .
This dataset consists of English Wikipedia articles, with superﬂuous content removed (tables, links to foreign language
versions, citations, footnotes, markup, punctuation). The remaining text is processed to use a minimal character vocabulary of 27 unique characters—lowercase letters a through
z, and space. Digits are replaced by their spelled-out equivalents, so “20” becomes “two zero”. Character sequences
not in the range [a-zA-Z] are converted to a single space. Finally, the text is lowercased. The size of the corpus is 100M
characters. Following Mikolov et al. and Zhang et
al. , we split the data into 90M characters for train,
5M characters for dev, and 5M characters for test.
To aid in comparison with other recent approaches, we
also evaluate our model on enwik8 which
is 100M bytes of unprocessed Wikipedia text, including
markup and non-Latin characters. There are 205 unique
bytes in the dataset. Following Chung et al. , and as in
text8, we split the data into 90M, 5M and 5M for training,
dev and test respectively.
Compared to most models based on transformers , our model is very deep,
with 64 transformer layers and each layer using two attention heads. Each transformer layer has a hidden size of 512
Parameters (×106)
LSTM 
BN-LSTM 
HM-LSTM 
Recurrent Highway 
mLSTM 
T12 (ours)
T64 (ours)
mLSTM + dynamic eval 
Table 1: Comparison of various models on text8 test.
Accuracy (%)
Table 2: Bits per character (bpc) and accuracy of our best
model on text8 dev and test, for different context lengths.
and a ﬁlter size of 2048. We feed our model sequences of
length 512. Each item in the sequence represents a single
byte (or equivalently, one character in text8) which gets
replaced by its embedding, a vector of size 512. We add to
the byte embeddings a separate learned positional embedding for each of the 512 token positions, as described in the
Positional Embeddings section above. We do the same addition at each layer activation throughout the network. The
positional embeddings are not shared across the layers. With
two predictions per position, each layer learns to predict
1024 characters. Because we are primarily interested in predicting the immediately following character (one step away),
we halve the loss of predicting characters two steps away.
The prediction layers are logistic regression layers over the
full 256 outputs (the number of unique bytes). To demonstrate the generality of the model, we always train and predict over all 256 labels, even on datasets that cover a smaller
vocabulary. Despite this, we found that in practice the model
never predicted a byte value outside of the ones observed in
the training dataset.
The model has approximately 235 million parameters,
which is larger than the number of characters in the text8
training corpus. To regularize the model, we apply dropout
in the attention and ReLU layers with a probability of 0.55.
We use the momentum optimizer with 0.99 momentum. The
learning rate is ﬁxed during training to 0.003. We train our
model for 4 million steps, with each step processing a batch
of 16 randomly selected sequences. We drop the intermediate layer losses consecutively, as described in the Intermediate Layer Losses section above. Starting from the ﬁrst layer,
after every 62.5K (= 4M×
2∗64) steps, we drop the losses
introduced by the next layer. According to this schedule, after training is halfway complete, only the ﬁnal layer losses
are present.
Parameters (×106)
FS-LSTM-4 
mLSTM 
cmix v13 
T12 (ours)
T64 (ours)
mLSTM + dynamic eval 
Table 3: Comparison of various models on enwik8 test.
Evaluation
At inference time, we use the model’s prediction at the ﬁnal position of the ﬁnal layer to compute the probability of
a character given a context of 512 characters. There is no
state passed between predictions as would be the case with
RNN models, so for each character predicted we have to process the context from scratch. Because there is no reused
computation from previous steps, our model requires expensive computational resources for evaluation and inference. We measure the performance of training checkpoints
(roughly every 10,000 steps) by evaluating bits per character
(bpc) over the entire the validation set, and save the parameters that perform the best. Our best model is achieved after
around 2.5 million steps of training, which takes 175 hours
on a single Google Cloud TPU v2.
We report the performance of our best model (T64) on the
validation and test sets. Table 1 compares our models against
several recent results. On the test set, we achieve a new state
of the art, 1.13 bpc. This model is 5x larger than previous
models, which necessitated aggressive dropout rates of 0.55.
For better comparison with smaller models, we also train a
smaller model (T12) with 41M parameters. This model consists of 12 layers, and trained for 8M steps, with a reduced
dropout rate of 0.2. All other settings were left the same as
T64. Our smaller model still outperforms previous models,
achieving 1.18 bpc on the test dataset. Increasing the depth
of the network from 12 layers to 64 improved the results signiﬁcantly, with the auxiliary losses enabling the training to
better utilize the depth of the network. Note, our models do
not use dynamic evaluation , a technique
that adjusts model weights at test time by training on test
Table 2 shows the performance of our model given different context sizes. We are able to achieve state-of-the-art results once the context increases beyond 128 characters, with
the best performance of 1.06 bpc at 512 characters. As expected, the model performs better when it is given more context. However this trend levels off after 512 characters; we
do not see better results using a context of 1024.
Using the same hyperparameters and training procedure
for text8, we also train and evaluate the T12 and T64 architectures on enwik8 (see Table 3). Note, several previous
authors discuss “bits per character” on enwik8 but are in
fact reporting bits per byte. Without retuning for this dataset,
our models still achieve state-of-the-art performance.
Ablation Experiments
To better understand the relative importance of the several
modiﬁcations we proposed, we run an ablation analysis. We
start from our best model T64 and then remove one modiﬁcation at a time. For example, when we disable Multiple Positions, the model gets trained with only the last position loss
for each layer. This corresponds to calculating {L(t4 | t0:3),
L(t5 | t0:3)} in the example shown in Figure 1d for both the
ﬁrst and the second layers. When disabling Positional Embeddings, we add the default transformer sinusoidal timing
signal before the ﬁrst layer.
Description
T64 (Baseline)
T64 w/out Multiple Positions
T64 w/out Intermediate Layer Losses
T64 w/out Positional Embeddings
T64 w/out Multiple Targets
T64 w/ SGD Optimizer
Table 4: Evaluation of T64 on text8 dev with context set
to 512. Disabling each feature or loss lowers the quality of
the model. The biggest win comes from adding multiple positions and intermediate layers losses.
For the ablation experiments, we reuse the hyperparameters from our best model to avoid a prohibitively expensive
parameter search for each ablation. The only exception is
the SGD experiment, where we vary the learning rate. The
analysis shows that the biggest advantage comes from multiple positions and intermediate layers losses. Predicting all
the intermediate positions leads to signiﬁcant speed up in
convergence, since the model sees more effective training
examples per batch. Adding losses at the intermediate layers acts in the same spirit by forcing more predictions per
training step.
Finally, we replace momentum with SGD as our optimizer, using a range of learning rates (0.3, 0.1, 0.03, 0.01,
0.003, 0.001). This ablation shows that SGD produces competitive models, with learning rate 0.1 giving the best performance. Despite the depth of our network, SGD is able to
train the network efﬁciently with the help of our auxiliary
Comparison with Word-Level Models
To understand how byte-level language models perform in
comparison to word-level language models, we train T64
on the lm1b corpus . For lm1b, we
use the standard train/test split of the preprocessed corpus,
where out-of-vocab words have been replaced with UNK, to
allow comparison to previous work on word and word-piece
models. We report word perplexity (ppl) by converting bitsper-byte (bpb) into ppl2. During training we use the second shard (01) of the heldout dataset as a dev set, as the
ﬁrst shard (00) is the test. Given this is a signiﬁcantly larger
dataset than text8, we set all dropouts to zero. Table 5
2For this test set, ppl = 2bpb∗826189/159658, where 826,189 is
the number of bytes and 159,658 is the number of tokens.
J´ozefowicz et al. 
Table 5: Performance of T64 on the lm1b test set.
mary was not permitted to see them or to speak in her own
defence at the tribunal she refused to offer a written defence
unless elizabeth would guarantee a verdict of not guilty which
elizabeth would not do although the casket letters were accepted by the inquiry as genuine after a study of the handwriting and of the information contained therein and were
generally held to be certain proof of guilt if authentic the inquiry reached the conclusion that nothing was proven from
the start this could have been pr
Word Completions
proven, proved, proof, prevented, presented, problematic,
probably, provided, practical, provoked, preceded, predicted,
previously, presumed, praised, proposed, practicable, produced, present, preserved, precisely, prior, protected, probable, prompted, proofed, properly, practiced, prohibited, profound, preferable, proceeded, precise, predictable, practically, prevalent
Figure 2: A seed sequence of 512 characters taken from the
text8 test set, and all word completions assigned cumulative probability above 0.001 to follow the seed, in order from
most likely (0.529) to least likely (0.001).
shows a gap in performance between the two classes of language models. This comparison can serve as a starting point
for researching possible ways to bridge the gap.
Qualitative Analysis
To probe the strengths and weaknesses of our best model
(T64), we run the model forward, starting with the seed sequence of 512 characters in Figure 2, taken from the text8
test set. Figure 3 shows several per-character metrics for the
model’s predictions over the true continuation of this seed
text. At each position, we measure i) the model’s prediction
entropy in bits across all 256 output classes, ii) its loss—
the negative log probability of the target label, i.e. the “bits
per character” for this position, and iii) the rank of the target in the list of output classes sorted by likelihood. Unsurprisingly, the model is least certain when predicting the ﬁrst
character of a word, and becomes progressively more conﬁdent and correct as subsequent characters are seen.
To investigate the degree to which our model prefers actual English words over non-existent words, we compute the
likelihood the model assigns to all continuations after the
seed. We cut off continuations when they reach a space character, or when the total probability of the continuation falls
below 0.001. Figure 2 shows the entire set of word completions, in order of probability, where the initial pr- from the
seed is repeated for readability. Note that these are all real
or plausible (proofed) English words, and that even short
but bad continuations like prz are assigned a lower cumulative probability than long realistic word completions like
predictable.
We expect that the transformer self-attention should make
it easy for our model to copy sequences observed in the context over long distances (up to the context size of 512 characters). To test this expectation, we corrupt the seed and continuation from above by introducing a fake name zjakdmu
bmijwxn. Speciﬁcally, we change the ﬁrst occurrence of
elizabeth in the seed to zjakdmu bmijwxn, and the
second occurrence to she. Similarly, in the continuation, we
change elizabeth to zjakdmu bmijwxn. The resulting distance between the two occurrences of the fake name
is 434 characters.
Figure 4a conﬁrms that the model can successfully copy
over this long distance. While the initial z in zjakdmu is
unexpected, the model immediately chooses to copy the remainder of this word from the context, as opposed to predicting any real z- words learned during training. Similarly,
while the model is somewhat unsure whether the fake surname bmijwxn will appear (assigning the initial b a rank
of two), it immediately picks up on the correspondence after
the b is observed, correctly predicting the remainder of the
fake surname.
For comparison, Figure 4b shows how the model would
rank the targets in our fake continuation if the original seed
with elizabeth were used. This conﬁrms that the fake
name is not predictable based on knowledge gained through
training, and is indeed being copied from the preceding context.
Generation
For generating samples using our language model, we train
on a larger and less processed dataset, enwik9 . We split enwik9 into 900M, 50M and 50M for
training, dev and test. Using the dev dataset to tune our
dropout, we ﬁnd that dropout=0.1 performs the best. On the
test dataset, T64 achieves 0.85 bpb. Table 6 shows different
generated samples following the seed text, using a sampling
temperature of 1.0.
Related Work
Character-level modeling has shown promise in many areas such as sentiment analysis , question answering and classiﬁcation , and is an exciting area due to its simplicity and the
ability to easily adapt to other languages. Neural network
based language modeling has been heavily researched since
its effectiveness was shown by Bengio et al. . By far,
the most popular architecture in this area is the RNN and
variants, ﬁrst studied in Mikolov et al. .
Much of the progress in this area has been made by
mitigating the vanishing gradients problem by architectures such as LSTMs , GRU , Recurrent
Figure 3: Per-character entropy, loss and rank assigned by T64 after seeding on the 512 character sequence from Figure 2.
'''Computational neuroscience''' is an interdisciplinary
ﬁeld which draws on [[neuroscience]], [[computer science]], and [[applied mathematics]]. It most often uses
mathematical and computational techniques such as computer [[simulation]]s and [[mathematical model]]s to understand the function of the [[nervous system]].
The ﬁeld of computational neuroscience began with
the work of [[Andrew Huxley]], [[Alan Hodgkin]], and
[[David Marr]]. The results of Hodgkin and Huxley's pioneering work in developing
computational neuroscience were chronicled in
''[[Is Mathematics Anything I Could Learn?]]''.
(ISBN 0826412246). Computational
neuroscience concerned neurological auraria
and the inherited ability to communicate and respond to environmental destruction -
the model were published in 1982 and 1983 respectively, and the subsequent work on the ﬁeld
began its graduate program with [[M
the voltage clamp allowed them to develop the
ﬁrst mathematical model of the [[action potential]]. David Marr's work focuses on
Table 6: Samples generated by T64, seeded with text from
the enwik9 dev set, using a sampling temperature of 1.0.
Highway Networks , Unitary RNNs and others. This is an issue
that transformers do not have, due to attention allowing short
paths to all inputs. Methods of normalizing activation functions, such as Batch Normalization and Layer Normalization have also demonstrated improvements on language modeling tasks. As with
this work, progress has been made with discovering ways to
regularize sequential architectures, with techniques such as
Recurrent Dropout and Zoneout .
A related architecture is the Neural Cache Model , where the RNN is allowed to attend to all of its previous hidden states at each step. Another similar model is used in where
a key-value attention mechanism similar to transformers is
used. Both approaches show improvements on word level
language modeling. Memory Networks have a similarity to the transformer model
in design as it also has layers of attention for processing a
ﬁx memory representing the input document and has been
shown to be effective for language modeling in . ByteNet , which is
related but uses layers of dilated convolutions rather than
attention, showed promising results on byte level language
modeling. Gated Convolutional Networks was an early non-recurrent model to show superior
performance on word level language modeling.
Language models are usually not very deep, due to computational constraints of training RNNs, and this also limits the number of parameters. The transformer architecture allowed us to build very deep (64 layer) models with
(a) Continuing after the modiﬁed seed (including the fake name 434 characters away).
(b) Continuing after the original seed from Figure 2.
Figure 4: Per-character rank assigned by T64 to a fake continuation, after being seeded on either (a) the fake context where
elizabeth is replaced with zjakdmu bmijwxn, or (b) the original context.
a large number of parameters. A recent CNN model for
text classiﬁcation at 29 layers is
considered deep in the NLP community. A Sparsely-Gated
Mixture-of-Experts Layer allowed language modeling experiments with a greatly increased number of parameters by only accessing a small portion of parameters every time step, showing a reduction in bits per
word. In J´ozefowicz et al. , an increase in the number of parameters was achieved by mixing character-level
and word level models, using specialized softmaxes and using a large amount of computational resources to train. IndRNN uses a simpliﬁed RNN architecture
that allows deeper stacking with 21-layers, achieving near
SOTA character-level language modeling. Fast-Slow Recurrent Neural Networks also
achieved near SOTA by increasing the number of recurrent
steps for each character processed.
Conclusion
Character language modeling has been dominated by recurrent network approaches. In this paper, we show that a
network of 12 stacked transformer layers achieves state-ofthe-art results on this task. We gain further improvements
in quality by deepening the network to 64 layers, utilizing
capacity and depth efﬁciently. The use of auxiliary losses at
intermediate layers and positions is critical for reaching this
performance, and these losses allow us to train much deeper
transformer networks. Finally, we analyze the behavior of
our network and ﬁnd that it is able to exploit dependencies
in structure and content over long distances, over 400 characters apart.