Subthalamic nucleus phase–amplitude coupling correlates with motor
impairment in Parkinson’s disease
Bernadette C.M. van Wijk a,⇑, Martijn Beudel b,c,d, Ashwani Jha b, Ashwini Oswal a,c, Tom Foltynie b,e,
Marwan I. Hariz b,e, Patricia Limousin b,e, Ludvic Zrinzo b,e, Tipu Z. Aziz c,f, Alexander L. Green c,f,
Peter Brown c,g, Vladimir Litvak a
a Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, UCL Institute of Neurology, 12 Queen Square, WC1N 3BG London, United Kingdom
b Sobell Department of Motor Neuroscience and Movement Disorders, UCL Institute of Neurology, 33 Queen Square, WC1N 3BG London, United Kingdom
c Nufﬁeld Department of Clinical Neuroscience, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, OX3 9DU Oxford, United Kingdom
d University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, 9713 GZ Groningen, The Netherlands
e Unit of Functional Neurosurgery, UCL Institute of Neurology, Queen Square, WC1N 3BG London, United Kingdom
f Department of Surgical Sciences, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, OX3 9DU Oxford, United Kingdom
g Medical Research Council Brain Network Dynamics Unit at the University of Oxford, OX3 9DU Oxford, United Kingdom
a r t i c l e
Article history:
Accepted 16 January 2016
Available online 1 February 2016
Parkinson’s disease
Subthalamic nucleus
Cross-frequency coupling
Beta oscillations
Motor system
Local ﬁeld potentials
h i g h l i g h t s
 We obtained invasive subthalamic nucleus recordings in 33 Parkinson’s disease patients.
 Phase–amplitude coupling between beta band and high-frequency oscillations correlates with severity of motor impairments.
 Parkinsonian pathophysiology is more closely linked with low-beta band frequencies.
a b s t r a c t
Objective: High-amplitude beta band oscillations within the subthalamic nucleus are frequently associated with Parkinson’s disease but it is unclear how they might lead to motor impairments. Here we investigate a likely pathological coupling between the phase of beta band oscillations and the amplitude of
high-frequency oscillations around 300 Hz.
Methods: We analysed an extensive data set comprising resting-state recordings obtained from deep
brain stimulation electrodes in 33 patients before and/or after taking dopaminergic medication. We correlated mean values of spectral power and phase–amplitude coupling with severity of hemibody bradykinesia/rigidity. In addition, we used simultaneously recorded magnetoencephalography to look at
functional interactions between the subthalamic nucleus and ipsilateral motor cortex.
Results: Beta band power and phase–amplitude coupling within the subthalamic nucleus correlated positively with severity of motor impairment. This effect was more pronounced within the low-beta range,
whilst coherence between subthalamic nucleus and motor cortex was dominant in the high-beta range.
Conclusions: We speculate that the beta band might impede pro-kinetic high-frequency activity patterns
when phase–amplitude coupling is prominent. Furthermore, results provide evidence for a functional
subdivision of the beta band into low and high frequencies.
Signiﬁcance: Our ﬁndings contribute to the interpretation of oscillatory activity within the cortico-basal
ganglia circuit.
 2016 International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd. This is an
open access article under the CC BY license ( 
1. Introduction
Bradykinesia in Parkinson’s disease is typically associated with
high-amplitude beta band (13–30 Hz) oscillations within the
cortico-basal ganglia circuit . The subthalamic nucleus (STN) in particular forms one of the primary targets for deep brain stimulation
 
1388-2457/ 2016 International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.
This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( 
Abbreviations: DBS, deep brain stimulation; HFO, high-frequency oscillations;
LFP, local ﬁeld potential; MEG, magnetoencephalography; PAC, phase–amplitude
coupling; STN, subthalamic nucleus; UPDRS, Uniﬁed Parkinson’s Disease Rating
⇑Corresponding author at: Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, Institute of
Neurology, University College London, 12 Queen Square, WC1N 3BG London, United
Kingdom. Tel.: +44 20 3448 4362; fax: +44 20 7813 1420.
E-mail address: (B.C.M. van Wijk).
Clinical Neurophysiology 127 2010–2019
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Clinical Neurophysiology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/clinph
(DBS) treatment of the disease. High-frequency stimulation around
130 Hz has proven highly effective in reducing symptoms of
bradykinesia, rigidity and tremor, and in enhancing the quality of
daily life . Clinical improvement obtained
with either DBS or the administration of dopaminergic medication
seems closely related to its ability to reduce excessive beta band
oscillations observed in the STN . It
remains, however, unclear how increased levels of beta band synchronisation mechanistically lead to motor impairments.
The beta band is not the only frequency band associated with
Parkinson’s
Modulations
dopaminergic
medication have also been observed for the theta–alpha range
(4–12 Hz) and at gamma band frequencies (60–90 Hz)
 . Moreover, there are indications for altered
cross-frequency amplitude correlations between the theta and
beta/gamma band during movement and
between the beta and gamma band in spontaneous activity
 . This implies that an integral perspective
on activities throughout the entire frequency spectrum may be
necessary to fully understand parkinsonian pathophysiology.
Recently, de Hemptinne et al. revealed a pathological
instantaneous
oscillations and the amplitude of broad band gamma activity
(50–200 Hz) in the primary motor cortex. This phase–amplitude
coupling (PAC) was characteristic for Parkinson’s disease as it
was absent for dystonia and epilepsy patients, and abolished
during DBS . They observed a similar
coupling between beta band oscillations recorded from the STN
and broadband gamma activity in the primary motor cortex.
The potential importance of PAC was further underscored by
Shimamoto et al. who demonstrated that the magnitude
of locking between spike activity in the STN and beta band oscillations in the primary motor cortex correlated with bradykinesia
Local ﬁeld potential (LFP) recordings obtained from DBS electrodes in the STN often contain yet another distinct spectral peak,
falling in the range between 200 and 400 Hz . We will refer to these as high-frequency oscillations
(HFO). Its amplitude displays a clear movement-related increase
that is more pronounced after levodopa administration . A small
number of studies have shown that, during rest, ﬂuctuations in the
amplitude envelope of these HFO may be coupled to the phase of
beta band oscillations extracted from the same LFP signal . Coupling strength was
found to be higher before compared to after levodopa administration. Despite ﬁrst observations by López-Azcárate et al. of a
signiﬁcant correlation between the strength of PAC and off medication Uniﬁed Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) scores, it
remains to be established to what extent PAC contributes to the
symptoms of Parkinson’s disease.
To investigate the relation between beta/HFO PAC and severity
of motor impairment in more detail, we analysed a large cohort of
patients for whom we acquired LFP recordings from the STN in
combination with simultaneous magnetoencephalography (MEG).
Using hemibody bradykinesia/rigidity UPDRS scores, we were able
to demonstrate a signiﬁcant correlation for both beta band power
and PAC in the STN. In addition, we provide further evidence for a
functional subdivision between low- and high-beta frequencies by
comparing patterns of phase–amplitude coupling within the STN
and beta band coherence between STN and ipsilateral motor
2. Material and methods
2.1. Patients and surgery
All patients underwent STN electrode implantation for DBS
treatment of Parkinson’s disease at the National Hospital of Neurology and Neurosurgery (University College London) or the John
Radcliffe Hospital (University of Oxford) between 2007 and 2014.
Ethical approval was obtained from the local ethics committees
at University College London and University of Oxford, and 33 subjects gave written informed consent to the study, and were
recorded. All were diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease according
to the Queen Square Brain Bank Criteria .
Motor impairments of each patient were evaluated on average
approximately 5 months prior to surgery using part III of the
UPDRS after omitting all dopaminergic medication overnight, and
following administration of at least 200 mg of levodopa. For
detailed patient characteristics see Supplementary Table S1. Data
from a subset of these patients have been described in earlier publications .
The surgical procedure involved the bilateral implantation of
deep brain stimulation electrodes each with four contacts (model
3389, Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA). In one patient implantation was carried out unilaterally. In London, the intended target for
the lowermost contact (contact zero) was determined on the
stereotactic axial T2-weighted MRI scan lying at the level of the
uppermost part of the mammillothalamic tract, which corresponds
to the ventral part of the STN as visualised on the MRI . An immediate post-implantation
stereotactic T2-weighted MRI was performed to verify electrode
location (see Supplementary Fig. S1). Electrodes were connected
to an accessory kit, typically both connectors being tunnelled to
the left temporoparietal area and externalised through the frontal
region. For more details see Litvak et al. . In Oxford, the targeting was the same but was performed on a pre-operative
volume-based MRI using T2-weighted and FLAIR sequences to target the dorsolateral STN at the level of the red nucleus with
advancement of the electrode 3–5 mm caudally. The MRI was
fused to an intraoperative stereotactic CT head scan to obtain the
coordinates and a post-operative check CT scan was also fused to
the pre-operative MRI.
2.2. Data recordings and preprocessing
Simultaneous recordings were obtained from the deep brain
stimulation electrodes and 275-channel MEG (CTF/VSM MedTech,
Vancouver, Canada) for all patients between two and six days postoperatively. At this time, continuous DBS for treatment purposes
had not yet started. Data were online low-pass ﬁltered at 600 Hz,
sampled at 2400 Hz, and stored to disc. For a subset of cases
(29–33) STN–LFPs were recorded using an EEG system separate
from the MEG. MEG and LFPs were later temporally realigned
and fused using a white noise reference signal recorded on both
systems. A more comprehensive description of this methodology
is provided in Oswal et al. . Although the experiment also
involved simple movement tasks for some of the patients, we here
only analyse recordings obtained during periods of rest lasting
about 3 min. Subjects were instructed not to move during the
recordings and to focus their attention on a ﬁxation cross without
performing any explicit task. Separate experimental sessions were
B.C.M. van Wijk et al. / Clinical Neurophysiology 127 2010–2019
performed, for 13 out of 19 subjects on subsequent days, whilst the
patient was either ‘‘ON” or ‘‘OFF” their normal dose of dopaminergic medication (after overnight withdrawal for the OFF state). The
order of these sessions was counterbalanced across subjects. For a
minority of subjects we were only able to obtain ON state recordings (5 cases) or OFF state recordings (9 cases). In 17 out of 53
recording sessions subjects performed the 3-min resting block
twice, for the other sessions we had one block available.
We ﬁrst focus our account on the analyses conducted for
the LFP recordings obtained from the DBS electrodes, those for
the MEG data are described later. DBS was switched off during
the experiments, allowing for the acquisition of LFPs from all four
contact points of the STN electrodes. These were off-line converted
to a bi-polar montage between adjacent contacts, resulting in 3 channels per site. This was done to limit volume conduction of signals
form distal sources. 50 Hz line noise and its harmonics up to
600 Hz were ﬁltered out using 4th order Butterworth bandstop ﬁlters with cutoff frequencies ±0.5 Hz around the centre frequencies.
We subsequently divided the continuous time series into epochs of
3.41 s and discarded epochs where the peak-to-peak LFP amplitude
exceeded 100 lV. On average, 60 epochs (range 13–106) remained
per STN site for further analyses. We included all available data in
our analyses. This amounted to a dataset comprising recordings
from 53 hemispheres with patients OFF medication and 48 hemispheres with patients ON medication.
2.3. Measures of spectral power and phase–amplitude coupling
We computed power spectral densities up to 400 Hz to see if we
could replicate earlier ﬁndings of beta band reduction with
dopaminergic medication and whether we could observe HFO in
the recordings. Furthermore, we used the power spectra to determine if PAC could explain any variance in clinical scores independently from spectral power alone. We used Matlab’s (R2014a, The
Mathworks Inc., Natick, USA) pwelch.m function to compute power
spectral densities for each epoch (using default values of 8 Hamming windows with 50% overlap), and then averaged spectra
frequencies
harmonics were removed from the spectra in order to avoid the
inﬂuence of notch ﬁlters on summary measures of spectral power.
Power values for frequencies below 50 Hz were normalised by
dividing by the power summed over all frequencies in the entire
spectrum for each subject, condition, and bipolar STN channel individually. Values within the 150–400 Hz interval were divided by
the mean power between 400 and 500 Hz to eliminate intersubject variability in offset values in this frequency range.
For the computation of PAC we followed the parametric
approach described in Penny et al. and van Wijk et al.
 . Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst obtained low- and high-frequency
components of the LFP signals by bandpass-ﬁltering around centre
frequencies between 5 and 35 Hz with 0.5 Hz steps (ﬁlter bandwidth ±1 Hz), and between 150 and 400 Hz in steps of 2 Hz (ﬁlter
bandwidth ±35 Hz). Subsequently we extracted the instantaneous
phase for each low-frequency component via hx ¼ mod angle
Þ; 2pÞ, and amplitude of each high-frequency component
via ay ¼ abs hilbert y
Þ. To avoid ﬁlter ringing we removed the ﬁrst
and last 167 ms of each epoch. PAC was then estimated for each
low-/high-frequency pair of frequency combinations using a general linear model of the form:
ay ¼ b1 sinðhxÞ þ b2 cosðhxÞ;
where we took r ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
as the strength of PAC. We performed
this analysis in two ways for each individual STN channel: (1) with
time series concatenated across all epochs to assess the overall PAC;
(2) for each epoch individually. The latter results in a set of
b-coefﬁcients, which we used to test for signiﬁcance of the overall
PAC via an F-test. The actual PAC values reported in the paper were
estimated after concatenation of time series across epochs. More
details of this method can be found in van Wijk et al. . The
corresponding Matlab code is implemented within the opensource
 .
We were interested in the association between the severity of
motor impairment and activity within the beta band (13–30 Hz)
and HFO range (150–400 Hz). As our results suggested differential
Pairwise correlations between all variables for absolute values.
Correlation coefﬁcients r and corresponding p-values are reported. The upper triangle lists correlations amongst variables in the low-beta range (with samples for OFF and ON
combined in a single data vector), correlations between variables in the high-beta range are listed in the lower triangle. Signiﬁcant values are indicated in bold. Note that the
correlation coefﬁcient for mean PAC in the high-beta range is considerably lower compared to the low-beta range, and would not survive a Bonferroni correction for the
number of correlations performed per range (a = .05/6 = .0083).
B.C.M. van Wijk et al. / Clinical Neurophysiology 127 2010–2019
modulations for low and high frequencies within the beta band, we
decided to divide it into a range of low-beta and a range of highbeta frequencies and to consider them separately in subsequent
analyses. The cut-off frequency between low- and high-beta frequencies was determined based on the histogram of all beta band
peak and sub-peak frequencies of the power spectrum, which
showed a clear bimodal pattern. A mixture of two normal distributions was ﬁtted and the lowest point between the centre frequencies served as the cut-off frequency. As a result, the low-beta range
comprised frequencies between 13 and 20.36 Hz, and the highbeta range between 20.36 and 30 Hz. Mean power and PAC values
were obtained by averaging across all frequencies within the speciﬁed ranges for low/high-beta and/or HFO.
Due to the small spatial volume of the STN, we expect some
variability in the precise location of the contacts within the STN
with some contacts possibly even being outside the STN borders.
Nevertheless we decided not to bias results by pre-selecting the
channels with the strongest spectral power or PAC as we observed
that these could occur at different channels. We therefore averaged
all measures across all three bipolar channels for each electrode,
resulting for each subject in mean values for both left and right
STN, and ON and OFF medication conditions, when data were available. For visualisation of the grand-average power spectral densities, we employed robust averaging to eliminate the inﬂuence of
outliers .
Finally, we obtained the mean phase angle for the phase and
amplitude frequency combination at which PAC was highest
within the spectrum. We only considered the channel with the
highest peak PAC per STN in order to avoid the introduction of
additional phase lags for channels located further away from the
PAC generation site. We tested whether the distribution of phase
angles across subjects signiﬁcantly different from a uniform distribution using a Rayleigh test.
2.4. Correlation with clinical scores
Our measures of spectral power and PAC hence included: mean
low-beta power, mean high-beta power, mean low-beta/HFO PAC,
mean high-beta/HFO PAC, and mean HFO power. We were interested in their predictive value in explaining the severity of motor
impairments manifest contralateral to the STN sites. These impairments were quantiﬁed via UPDRS scores of hemibody bradykinesia
and rigidity for both ON and OFF medication states. Left/right
hemibody scores were derived as the sum of the following items:
3.3 rigidity upper extremity, 3.3 rigidity lower extremity, 3.4 ﬁnger
tapping, 3.5 hand movements, 3.6 pronation–supination movements of hands, 3.7 toe tapping, and 3.8 leg agility. We considered
left and right STN sites from individual patients as independent
samples, as well as values obtained during the ON and OFF medication state for each patient. These were combined into a single
data vector comprising 101 samples. This resulted in a large range
of UPDRS scores, which may be more suitable for revealing significant correlations in the presence of large inter-subject variability
in power and PAC values.
Pairwise correlations were computed between all variables. In
addition, given the large covariation between spectral power and
PAC, we also performed a multiple regression analysis with contralateral bradykinesia/rigidity UPDRS scores as independent variable and beta band power, HFO power, and PAC as predictors.
Analyses were repeated for the difference between OFF and ON
states (OFF–ON), meaning that we directly correlated the clinical
improvement obtained after levodopa administration with the
observed change in spectral power and PAC measures. For this,
we could only include patients with both OFF and ON recordings
available, leaving 38 STN sites from 19 subjects.
2.5. Coupling between subthalamic nucleus and motor cortex
In a subset of 13 patients we have previously reported beta
band coherence between STN and ipsilateral motor cortical areas
 . Here we investigated whether the phase of
beta band oscillations in the motor cortex was coupled to the
amplitude of HFO in the STN in these patients. We included cases
who showed signiﬁcant coherence with ipsilateral motor areas
(cases 2–7, 9–13, 15 and 16 in Supplementary Table S1). For each
subject and STN channel, we selected the MNI location of peak
coherence and extracted the source time series for this location
using a beamforming approach. This has been shown to successfully eliminate artefacts originating from the percutaneous DBS
electrode wires . A single-shell head model
was used to compute the lead ﬁelds for the forward model
 . These were constructed based on the subject’s preoperative MRI image that was normalised to a canonical template
MRI scan. Raw time series were band-pass ﬁltered between 5 and
computation
covariance
explained in we used the imaginary part
of the cross-spectral density to obtain a single time series for a
resultant dipole orientation per source. We computed the full
PAC spectrum between beta and HFO frequencies for each pair
of STN channel and corresponding cortical location using the
same settings for PAC within the STN, as described above.
In order to directly compare beta–HFO PAC with beta band
coherence, we recomputed the coherence spectra using Matlab’s
mscohere.m function with setting analogous to the computation
of spectral power (see above). Resulting spectra were grand averaged for OFF and ON medication conditions separately.
3. Results
3.1. Grand-average phase–amplitude coupling and spectral power
The majority of subjects showed clear signiﬁcant beta–HFO PAC
in either left or right STN, OFF or ON medication state. PAC averaged across all sides and subjects was higher in the OFF state compared to the ON state, due to the appearance of a high peak for
phase frequencies in the lower beta range (Fig. 1A). The frequency
of the phase modulated HFO was also lower in the OFF than ON
medication state. The same pattern can be observed when looking
at the percentage of cases showing signiﬁcant PAC (Fig. 1B), as
determined by our parametric estimation of PAC . These medication-induced modulations suggest that
both the strength of PAC and the combination of phase and amplitude frequencies at which it occurs could be important markers for
the severity of motor impairment.
Fig. 1(C) shows the proﬁle of PAC across beta band and HFO frequencies separately, i.e. when averaged across all amplitude frequencies or phase frequencies. There is a striking correspondence
between these curves and those for the power spectral densities
in the corresponding frequency ranges (Fig. 1D). In particular, there
was a spectral power peak in the low beta range that corresponded
to the peak frequency of phase modulation of HFO in the OFF medication state. This low beta activity in power and PAC was signiﬁcantly suppressed by medication. By contrast, the grand-average
spectral density demonstrated a second peak in the upper beta
band, which was not associated with phase modulation of HFO
and was less responsive to medication. At higher frequencies the
grand-average spectral densities demonstrated a peak centred at
250 Hz OFF medication, which shifted to 320 Hz ON medication.
This was roughly paralleled by changes in the frequency of phase
modulated HFO. Similar shifts in peak frequency have been
observed by .
B.C.M. van Wijk et al. / Clinical Neurophysiology 127 2010–2019
In order to substantiate the differential effects between low and
high beta band frequencies, we considered them separately in further analyses. The histogram of all beta band peak and sub-peak
frequencies in the individual power spectra showed a clear bimodal pattern (Fig. 2). The optimal ﬁt of a mixture of two normal distributions was obtained for centre frequencies at 16.65 and
24.79 Hz, with standard deviations of 1.99 and 2.81 Hz, respectively. The cut-off frequency between low- and high-beta ranges
was found to be 20.36 Hz. By comparison, the difference in Akaike
information criterion value with a ﬁt of a single normal distribution was 169, signiﬁcantly favouring the bimodal over the unimodal distribution.
3.2. Relation between PAC and spectral power
PAC and beta band power were modulated by dopaminergic
medication in a very similar way. Indeed, a strong correlation
between their mean values was found for both the low- and
high-beta range (Table 1). We next considered whether this relation also holds regarding the exact frequencies at which their peak
values occur. Most PAC involved modulation of HFOs by the phase
of the low beta band activity, and within this range the phase frequency corresponding to the highest PAC value tended to coincide
with or was close to the spectral peak frequency (Fig. 3A). Analogous histograms for the high-beta range showed less consistency
between the frequency of highest PAC and spectral peak frequencies. Similarly, the distribution of mean phase angles only signiﬁcantly differed from a uniform distribution for the low-beta
(mean = 8.8,
(Fig. 3B). These ﬁndings indicate a larger variability in PAC for
the high-beta range. Group-level PAC mainly occurred within the
low-beta range, and predominantly for frequencies close to the
peak in the power spectrum.
Regarding HFO, cases with signiﬁcant PAC were only found if
there was also a clear HFO peak observable in the power spectrum.
The amplitude frequency of maximum PAC was always relatively
close to the peak frequency of HFO power. No correlations were
found between HFO power and PAC or beta power (Table 1).
3.3. Correlations with clinical scores
We tested whether mean PAC and spectral power values could
explain some of the variability in contralateral hemibody bradykinesia/rigidity UPDRS scores. OFF and ON medication states were
combined in this analysis to increase the range of UPDRS scores.
Separate regression analyses were performed for the low- and
high-beta ranges. Results are visualised in Fig. 4 and all correlation
coefﬁcients and p-values are reported in Table 1. We found a
Fig. 1. Grand-average PAC and power spectral densities separated by OFF and ON dopaminergic states. (A) Higher PAC values were observed in the OFF state, which were
centred around frequencies in the lower beta and HFO range. (B) Percentage of cases with signiﬁcant PAC (p < .05) for all beta and HFO frequency combinations in the
spectrum. (C) PAC averaged across all HFO frequencies (left) or across all beta frequencies (right) was signiﬁcantly higher for lower beta band frequencies in the OFF (blue)
compared to ON (purple) medication state, and showed a shift in peak frequency within the HFO range. Yellow patches indicate for which 1 Hz frequency bins signiﬁcant
differences were detected between OFF and ON as determined with independent samples t-tests (p < .05). (D) The grand-average power spectral densities expressed similar
modulations as PAC. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Fig. 2. Histogram of peak frequencies within the spectral beta band. All spectral
peaks and sub-peaks within the beta band were included for all subjects,
conditions, and STN channels. This revealed a clear bimodal pattern. Overlaid in
red is the optimal ﬁt of a mixture of two normal distributions. The ﬁrst distribution
had its mean at 16.6 Hz and a standard deviation of 1.99 Hz, the second distribution
at 24.79 Hz and a standard deviation of 2.81 Hz. The lowest point between
distributions (20.36 Hz) was taken as the cut-off frequency between low- and highbeta ranges. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the
reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
B.C.M. van Wijk et al. / Clinical Neurophysiology 127 2010–2019
signiﬁcant positive correlation for PAC and spectral power in the
low-beta range, indicating higher PAC and power values with more
severe bradykinesia and rigidity symptoms. For the high-beta
range, the correlation with spectral power no longer reached signiﬁcance and the correlation with PAC did not survive a Bonferroni
correction for the number of pair-wise correlations performed.
Additional analyses revealed that correlation coefﬁcients were
highest and p-values lowest for frequency windows centred in
the low-beta range (Fig. 5). No signiﬁcant correlations were found
for HFO spectral power.
Given the strong correlation between mean PAC value and beta
power, we performed a single multiple regression analysis with
UPDRS scores as dependent variable and beta/HFO power and
PAC as predictors. Although this analysis failed to reveal a signiﬁcant independent contribution for any of the variables (Table 2),
the partial correlation for PAC was higher compared to beta power
and showed a trend towards signiﬁcance (p = .066).
Correlations between improvement in clinical scores and
changes in mean power and PAC values between OFF and ON medication states were also estimated for the two beta ranges. This
reﬂects whether individual clinical improvement was associated
with within-patient changes in power/PAC. In general, similar
trends can be observed as for the absolute values but effects were
found to be weaker (Tables 3 and 4). Although correlation coefﬁcients for PAC and spectral power in the low-beta range were
almost as high as for the absolute values, their p-values no longer
indicated a signiﬁcant relation. This is possibly due to a loss of statistical power, given the large reduction in the number of samples.
3.4. Coupling between STN and motor cortex
Finally, we investigated whether the amplitude of HFO in the STN
was also locked to the phase of beta oscillations in the motor cortex.
The grand average across all recordings is shown in Fig. 6(A). In general, PAC between STN and cortical motor areas was found to be
weaker compared to PAC within STN and distinct patterns within
the spectrum were only rarely observed. For example, we only found
1 case in which a cluster of >400 adjacent signiﬁcant points of beta/
HFO frequency combinations could be detected, compared to 13
cases for PAC within STN for this subgroup of subjects. A possible
explanation for the lack of clear STN-cortex PAC emerges when we
directly compare the within-STN PAC and the STN-cortex beta
coherence (Fig. 6B). This reveals that PAC within the STN mainly
Multiple regression results with hemibody bradykinesia/rigidity UPDRS scores as
dependent variable.
Beta Power
No signiﬁcant contributions were found.
Fig. 3. Distribution of peak frequencies and phase angles within the low- and high-beta range. (A) Histograms show the distance between peak frequencies for PAC and
corresponding power spectral densities within individual channels. Bins represent 0.5 Hz intervals. The observed number of cases for each bin was compared against 1000
surrogate histograms obtained by randomly reshufﬂing the PAC peak frequencies within the low- or high-beta ranges. Spectral peak frequencies were left at their observed
values. Bins exceeding the .05 or .95 percentiles are indicated with an asterisk. For the low-beta range (left), a signiﬁcantly large proportion of samples were found to have
PAC and spectral peaks within 0.5 Hz proximity. For visualisation, a histogram is plotted for the pair-wise distance between a large number of uniformly distributed
frequencies within the low-beta range (middle). The high-beta range did not show an exceedingly large proportion of samples with peaks in close proximity (right). (B)
Distribution of phase angles computed for the beta–HFO frequency combinations for which PAC was maximal. Only one channel per STN site was taken into account, resulting
in 101 samples considered. A signiﬁcant non-uniform distribution was found only for the low-beta range: mean angle = 8.8 (p = .022).
B.C.M. van Wijk et al. / Clinical Neurophysiology 127 2010–2019
occurs for lower beta band frequencies (17 Hz), whereas STNcortex coherence is dominated by higher beta band frequencies
(25 Hz). No signiﬁcant correlations were found between the
UPDRS scores and average STN-cortex PAC in the low-beta or highbeta band range, nor for cortical power or coherence.
4. Discussion
Using a relatively large cohort of patients, we have demonstrated
that phase–amplitude coupling between beta band activity and HFO
in the subthalamic nucleus of Parkinson’s disease patients correlates
with severity of bradykinesia/rigidity. Higher PAC values were associated with stronger motor impairment. Despite the strong correlation between PAC and beta band spectral power, results suggested
that PAC might have slightly superior predictive value in explaining
the variability in measured UPDRS scores. We found little evidence
for a coupling between HFO in the STN and beta band activity in cortical motor areas. A dissociation was made between low- and highbeta frequency ranges as medication-induced effects on PAC and
spectral power within the STN were found to be conﬁned to the former, whereas coherence between the STN and cortical motor regions
was predominant in the latter.
4.1. A pathological role for PAC
Phase–amplitude coupling has more commonly been ascribed a
functional role for information processing within the brain . Our ﬁndings indicate that PAC may also serve as
a pathological mechanism. One intriguing explanation for why
exaggerated levels of beta–HFO PAC in the STN might lead to motor
impairments is that the pro-kinetic HFO become locked by the beta
band oscillation, which prevents them from initiating ﬁring patterns underlying movement . Our partial correlations support this theory, demonstrating that UPDRS
scores were more likely to be directly linked to PAC values than
to beta power. Related to this, alpha–gamma coupling in the motor
cortex has been found to decrease in anticipation of an upcoming
cued movement . Hence the reduction
of coupling with lower frequencies could free up resources for
movement-related activity.
If a high level of beta oscillations means that neurons involved
in HFO are more constrained in their ﬁring patterns, one could
speculate that the level of PAC is a direct consequence of the amplitude of beta oscillations. Indeed, we found a highly signiﬁcant positive correlation between the two. A complicating confounding
factor in this discussion is the inﬂuence of signal-to-noise ratio,
which may affect the accuracy of beta phase estimates and, in consequence, PAC. However, beta peak frequencies for individual
power and PAC spectra did not overlap exactly. Also, permuting
the order of trials for which phase time series were extracted, as
typically done for non-parametric tests, destroyed the distinct patterns of signiﬁcant PAC (results not shown), suggesting that it is
not the level of beta power as such that leads to higher PAC estimates but its interaction with HFO.
4.2. Neurophysiology of HFO
To date, surprisingly little is known about the neuronal origins
of HFO. Although the high frequency range suggest a reﬂection of
Fig. 4. Regression analyses between hemibody bradykinesia/rigidity UPDRS scores and mean beta/HFO power and PAC separately. Samples taken from the OFF medication
state are depicted in blue, samples from the ON state in purple. Note that OFF and ON states were combined in the computation of the regression coefﬁcients. Correlation
coefﬁcients and p-values are indicated for each plot with signiﬁcant relations in bold. (A) Low-beta range; (B) High-beta range; (C) HFO. (For interpretation of the references
to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Fig. 5. Correlations between UDPRS scores and PAC/power across different
frequency ranges. Pair-wise correlations were performed between hemibody
bradykinesia/rigidity UPDRS scores and either PAC or spectral power using a
moving frequency window with 4 Hz width and centred on frequencies from 7 to
33 Hz with 1 Hz steps. Correlation coefﬁcients r were highest and p-values lowest
for centre-frequencies in the lower-beta range. Correlations ceased to be signiﬁcant
towards the theta/alpha range, as well as the higher beta band.
B.C.M. van Wijk et al. / Clinical Neurophysiology 127 2010–2019
multiunit spiking activity, the fact that a clear and relatively narrow peak can be observed in the power spectrum implies an oscillatory component. In order to resolve this issue, Yang and
colleagues simultaneously recorded single unit activity
and local ﬁeld potentials from a pair of micro- and macroelectrode
contacts during DBS surgery of the STN. Notably, both neuronal
spiking and HFO were locked to the phase of beta band oscillations
but their occurrence was uncorrelated, suggesting that spiking
activity does not directly contribute to beta/HFO as such. This
has been further corroborated by Wang et al. who showed
that the removal of spikes from the microelectrode time series
marginally affected the spectral power of HFO.
Similar HFO between 200 and 300 Hz have been found in Parkinson’s disease patients with DBS electrodes implanted in the internal
part of the globus pallidus (GPi) . Like HFO in
the STN , the amplitude of this activity increases
during movement. Also, Connolly et al. showed that PAC
between HFO and beta oscillations in the GP emerges when rhesus
macaque monkeys are rendered parkinsonian with 1-methyl-4-phe
nyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) injections. PAC gradually
increased with higher MPTP dosages, which were accompanied by
more severe parkinsonian states.
Single neurons within the STN may show bursting activity with
intraburst
 . Some of the previously reported modulations of bursting activity seem to be in line with those for HFO.
Like the spectral amplitude of HFO, the number of bursts increases
with movement . Also, bursting occurs in a
oscillatory
parkinsonian
Fig. 6. Distinct beta frequency ranges for STN activity and STN-motor cortex
interactions. (A) Grand-average PAC between HFO in the STN and beta band activity
in the motor cortex. Spectra are averaged across OFF and ON medication states and
left/right STN channels in 11 subjects, comprising a total of 128 recordings. Unlike
beta–HFO PAC in the STN, PAC between STN and motor cortex (STN-M) was found
to be weaker and large clusters of signiﬁcant beta/HFO frequency combinations
were rarely detected. (B) Differential effects in PAC and coherence within the lowand high-beta range. Beta–HFO PAC within STN was mainly strong for low beta
band frequencies, whereas beta band coherence between STN and motor cortex
centred around high beta frequencies. This might explain why no distinct PAC was
found between the phase of beta band cortical activity and HFO amplitude in the
STN. The strongest modulations in spectral power with dopaminergic treatment
were also found in the lower beta frequency range within the STN.
Pairwise correlations between all variables for changes between OFF and ON
medication states.
Correlation coefﬁcients r and corresponding p-values are reported. Signiﬁcant values are indicated in bold. Correlations were performed on the change in variables
between OFF and ON medication states. The upper triangle lists correlations within
the low-beta range, correlations for the high-beta range are listed in the lower
Multiple regression results for changes in variables between OFF and ON medication
Beta Power
No signiﬁcant contributions were found.
B.C.M. van Wijk et al. / Clinical Neurophysiology 127 2010–2019
 . However, other ﬁndings are more
difﬁcult to reconcile. For example, it is known that bursting occurs
more frequently in parkinsonian states compared to normal physiological conditions , but we did not ﬁnd a signiﬁcant
correlation between the spectral amplitude of HFO and UPDRS
scores nor did we observe a difference in mean HFO power
between ON and OFF medication states (independent t-test: t
(97) = 0.702, p = .484). Also, the intraburst frequency is higher in
the parkinsonian state ,
whereas we observed the opposite pattern (median HFO frequency
was higher for ON versus OFF medication, independent t-test: t
(97) = 3.151, p = .002). More work is needed to determine whether
HFO as observed in multiunit recordings directly relates to bursting discharge patterns of single neurons.
4.3. Differential roles for low and high beta frequencies
In a previous study using a subset of the data presented here
 , we found that dopaminergic treatment
mainly affected low-beta (15–20 Hz) spectral power in the STN.
By contrast, coherence between STN and activity in (pre)motor cortex centred around higher beta band frequencies (23–28 Hz) and
was not modulated by levodopa. Here we extend these ﬁndings
with the observation that beta–HFO PAC within the STN was largely conﬁned to the low-beta range. This further strengthens the
notion that there might be a functional subdivision within the beta
band, with beta activity at lower frequencies being more conspicuously related to the hypo-dopaminergic state of Parkinsonism
 . In
contrast, communication between STN and motor cortex seems
to be mediated by high-beta frequencies, and it is unresolved
whether this higher frequency beta activity is a marker of parkinsonian pathophysiology , leaving the possibility that it may form part of normal physiological network activity.
Although we did not ﬁnd clear evidence for PAC with beta oscillations in the motor cortex, it could be that recordings with a higher
signal-to-noise ratio, such as obtained with electrocorticography,
will be able to reveal this. However, at present we are unaware
of reports by others showing that there is such coupling.
4.4. Finding biomarkers of Parkinson’s disease
Typical observations from single unit recordings obtained from
the STN or GP in human patients with Parkinson’s disease or
parkinsonian rendered animals include an increased neuronal ﬁring rate, an increase in bursting activity, and more synchronised
spiking activity . The latter can also
readily be observed in multiunit recordings as exaggerated levels
of beta band oscillations. A recently identiﬁed biomarker is the
occurrence of beta–gamma phase–amplitude coupling within primary motor cortex . We have demonstrated that beta–HFO PAC within STN can be added to the list of
indicators of parkinsonian motor severity, albeit one that is highly
related to beta band power.
Correlation coefﬁcients with motor impairment were relatively
low (maximum value was found to be 0.33). The UPDRS scores
assessed months before surgery are unlikely to have been completely representative of the clinical state at the time of recording
due to the temporary post-operative improvement caused by the
stun effect. Tykocki et al. examined the magnitude of this
‘microlesion effect’ in a large cohort of patients (n = 74), and found
that total UPDRS III scores assessed within 48 h post-operatively
decreased by 17.9% on average (standard deviation of 15.7%). The
relatively long time period between the acquisition of the UPDRS
scores and the actual recordings may have introduced additional
variability in the relation with power and PAC measures. For these
reasons, the actual relation between PAC and motor impairment
might be stronger than we observed. On the other hand, low coef-
ﬁcients may indicate that constraining effects of the low-beta
rhythm on HFO activity patterns might be only one of several
mechanisms in which motor impairments could arise. It is also
thinkable that PAC and/or power are epiphenomenal to a more
direct neuronal cause of motor impairments. Our analyses merely
point at associations for the magnitude of PAC and beta power but
do not allow to pinpoint them as the direct cause.
The magnitude of PAC and spectral power detected in our
recorded signals might have depended on the positioning of the
electrodes with respect to the generating source. It is even possible
that beta oscillations and HFO may originate in slightly different
spatial locations . Variability across subjects in
targeting the right compartment of the STN could have inﬂuenced
both absolute and relative spectral values. PAC on the other hand,
might be less sensitive to this issue as it is a normalised measure
based on the variance of amplitude ﬂuctuations present in the signal. Given that the difference in correlations coefﬁcients for the
relation with UPDRS scores were relatively small between PAC
and beta power, the predominance of one over the other should
be carefully interpreted.
The identiﬁcation of biomarkers for Parkinson’s disease is crucial for understanding its pathophysiology, as well as for development of effective treatments. Current efforts to optimise DBS
treatment use the amplitude of beta band oscillations as a signal
feature to be controlled in an adaptive/closed-loop setting . Given that beta band power can be both more readily
picked up (due to the higher amplitude of beta activity over HFO)
with ultra-low power ampliﬁers and more readily computed from
recorded time series, we believe that it is potentially more suitable
to use in adaptive DBS applications than beta–HFO PAC. However,
our ﬁndings make important contributions to understanding the
neuronal mechanisms that might lead to movement impairments.
The robust link between low-beta power and HFO suggests that
beta band oscillations constrain the pro-kinetic HFO to stereotypic
activity patterns. Reducing low-beta power might indirectly lead to
an improvement of symptoms by facilitating the initiation of
movement-related activity.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the National Institute for Health
Research University College London Hospitals Biomedical Research
(MC_UU_12024) and the National Institute for Health Research
Oxford Biomedical Research Centre. VL is supported by the MRC/
EPSRC UK MEG Partnership award. The Wellcome Trust Centre
for Neuroimaging is supported by core funding from the Wellcome
Trust 091593/Z/10/Z. The Unit of Functional Neurosurgery is supported by the Parkinson Appeal UK, and the Monument Trust.
The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interests.
Conﬂict of interest: None of the authors have potential conﬂicts
of interest to be disclosed.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in
the online version, at