Machine Learning, 5, 197-227 
© 1990 Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston. Manufactured in The Netherlands.
The Strength of Weak Learnability
ROBERT E. SCHAPIRE
( )
MIT Laboratory for Computer Science, 545 Technology Square, Cambridge, MA 02139
Abstract. This paper addresses the problem of improving the accuracy of an hypothesis output by a learning
algorithm in the distribution-free (PAC) learning model. A concept class is learnable (or strongly leamable) if,
given access to a source of examples of the unknown concept, the learner with high probability is able to output
an hypothesis that is correct on all but an arbitrarily small fraction of the instances. The concept class is weakly
learnable if the learner can produce an hypothesis that performs only slightly better than random guessing. In
this paper, it is shown that these two notions of learnability are equivalent.
A method is described for converting a weak learning algorithm into one that achieves arbitrarily high accuracy.
This construction may have practical applications as a tool for efficiently converting a mediocre learning algorithm
into one that performs extremely well. In addition, the construction has some interesting theoretical consequences,
including a set of general upper bounds on the complexity of any strong learning algorithm as a function of the
allowed error c.
Keywords. Machine learning, learning from examples, learnability theory, PAC learning, polynomial-time
identification.
1. Introduction
Since Valiant's pioneering paper , interest has flourished in the so-called distributionfree or probably approximately correct (PAC) model of learning. In this model, the learner
tries to identify an unknown concept based on randomly chosen examples of the concept.
Examples are chosen according to a fixed but unknown and arbitrary distribution on the
space of instances. The learner's task is to find an hypothesis or prediction rule of his own
that correctly classifies new instances as positive or negative examples of the concept. With
high probability, the hypothesis must be correct for all but an arbitrarily small fraction
of the instances.
Often, the inference task includes a requirement that the output hypothesis be of a specified
form. In this paper, however, we will instead be concerned with a representation-independent
model of learning in which the learner may output any hypothesis that can be used to classify
instances in polynomial time.
A class of concepts is learnable (or strongly leamable) if there exists a polynomial-time
algorithm that achieves low error with high confidence for all concepts in the class. A
weaker model of learnability, called weak learnability, drops the requirement that the learner
be able to achieve arbitrarily high accuracy; a weak learning algorithm need only output
an hypothesis that performs slightly better (by an inverse polynomial) than random guessing.
The notion of weak learnability was introduced by Kearns and Valiant who
left open the question of whether the notions of strong and weak learnability are equivalent.
This question was termed the hypothesis boosting problem since showing the notions are
equivalent requires a method for boosting the low accuracy of a weak learning algorithm's
hypotheses.
R.E. SCHAPIRE
Kearns , considering the hypothesis boosting problem, gives a convincing argument
discrediting the natural approach of trying to boost the accuracy of a weak learning algorithm
by running the procedure many times and taking the "majority vote" of the output hypotheses. Also, Kearns and Valiant show that, under a uniform distribution on the instance
space, monotone Boolean functions are weakly, but not strongly, learnable. This shows
that strong and weak learnability are not equivalent when certain restrictions are placed
on the instance space distribution. Thus, it did not seem implausible that the strong and
weak learning models would prove to be inequivalent for unrestricted distributions as well.
Nevertheless, in this paper, the hypothesis boosting question is answered in the affirmative. The main result is a proof of the perhaps surprising equivalence of strong and weak
learnability.
This result may have significant applications as a tool for proving that a concept class
is learnable since, in the future, it will suffice to find an algorithm correct on only, say,
51% of the instances (for all distributions). Alternatively, in its negative contrapositive form,
the result says that if a concept class cannot be learned with accuracy 99.9%, then we cannot
hope to do even slightly better than guessing on the class (for some distribution).
The proof presented here is constructive; an explicit method is described for directly
converting a weak learning algorithm into one that achieves arbitrary accuracy. The construction uses filtering to modify the distribution of examples in such a way as to force
the weak learning algorithm to focus on the harder-to-learn parts of the distribution. Thus,
the distribution-free nature of the learning model is fully exploited.
An immediate corollary of the main result is the equivalence of strong and group learnability. A group-learning algorithm need only output an hypothesis capable of classifying
large groups of instances, all of which are either positive or negative. The notion of group
learnability was considered by Kearns, Li, Pitt and Valiant , and was shown to be
equivalent to weak learnability by Kearns and Valiant . The result also extends those
of Haussler, Kearns, Littlestone and Warmuth which prove the equivalence of numerous relaxations and variations on the basic PAC-learning model; both weak and group learnability are added to this class of equivalent learning models. The relevance of the main result
to a number of other learning models is also considered in this paper.
An interesting and unexpected consequence of the construction is a proof that any strong
learning algorithm outputting hypotheses whose length (and thus whose time to evaluate)
depends on the allowed error e can be modified to output hypotheses of length only polynomial in log(l/E). Thus, any learning algorithm can be converted into one whose ouptut
hypotheses do not become significantly more complex as the error tolerance is lowered.
Put in other terms, this bound implies that a sequence of labeled examples of a learnable
concept can, in a sense, be efficiently compressed into a far more compact form—that is,
into a rule or hypothesis consistent with the labels of the examples. In particular, it is shown
that a sample of size m can be compressed into a rule of size only poly-logarithmic in
m. In fact, in the discrete case, the size of the output hypothesis is entirely independent
of m. This provides a partial converse to Occam's Razor, a result of Blumer, Ehrenfeucht,
Haussler and Warmuth stating that the existence of such a compression algorithm
implies the learnability of the concept class. This also complements the results of Board
and Pitt who also provide a partial converse to Occam's Razor, but of a somewhat
different flavor. Finally, this result yields a strong bound on the sample size needed to learn
a discrete concept class.
THE STRENGTH OF WEAK LEARNABILITY
This bound on the size of the output hypothesis also implies the hardness of learning
any concept class not evaluatable by a family of small circuits. For example, this shows
that pattern languages—a class of languages considered previously by Angluin and
others—are unlearnable assuming only that NP/poly = P/poly. This is the first representationindependent hardness result not based on cryptographic assumptions. The bound also shows
that, for any function not computable by polynomial-size circuits, there exists a distribution
on the function's domain over which the function cannot be even roughly approximated
by a family of small circuits.
In addition to the bound on hypothesis size, the construction implies a set of general
bounds on the dependence on e of the time, sample and space complexity needed to efficiently
learn any learnable concept class. Most surprising is a proof that there exists for every
learnable concept class an efficient algorithm requiring space only poly-logarithmic in 1/E.
Because the size of the sample needed to learn with this accuracy is in general Q(l/E), this
means, for example, that far less space is required to learn than would be necessary to
store the entire sample. Since most of the known learning algorithms work in exactly this
manner—that is, by storing a large sample and finding an hypothesis consistent with it—
this implies a dramatic savings of memory for a whole class of algorithms (though possibly
at the cost of requiring a larger sample).
Such general complexity bounds have implications for the on-line learning model as well.
In this model, the learner is presented one instance at a time in a series of trials. As each
is received, the learner tries to predict the true classification of the new instance, attempting
to minimize the number of mistakes, or prediction errors.
Translating the bounds described above into the on-line model, it is shown that, for every
learnable concept class, there exists an on-line algorithm whose space requirements are
quite modest in comparison to the number of examples seen so far. In particular, the space
needed on the first m trials is only poly-logarithmic in m. Such space efficient on-line algorithms are of particular interest because they capture the notion of an incremental algorithm
forced by its limited memory to explicitly generalize or abstract from the data observed.
Also, these results on the space-efficiency of batch and on-line algorithms extend the work
of others interested in this problem, including Boucheron and Sallantin , Floyd ,
and Haussler . In particular, these results solve an open problem proposed by Haussler,
Littlestone and Warmuth .
An interesting bound is also derived on the expected number of mistakes made on the
first m trials. It is shown that, if a concept class is learnable, then there exists an on-line
algorithm for the class for which this expectation is bounded by a polynomial in log m.
Thus, for large m, we expect an extremely small fraction of the first m predictions to be
incorrect. This result answers another open question given by Haussler, Littlestone and
Warmuth , and significantly improves a similar bound given in their paper ) of ma for some constant a < 1.
2. Preliminaries
We begin with a description of the distribution-free learning model. A concept c is a Boolean
function on some domain of instances. A concept class C is a family of concepts. Often,
C is decomposed into subclasses Cn indexed by a parameter n. That is, C = Un>1Cn ,
R.E. SCHAPIRE
and all the concepts in Cn have a common domain Xn. We assume each instance in Xn has
encoded length bounded by a polynomial in n, and we let X = Un>1Xn. Also, we associate
with each concept c its size s, typically a measure of the length of c's representation under
some encoding scheme on the concepts in C.
For example, the concept class C might consist of all functions computed by Boolean
formulas. In this case, Cn is the set of all functions computed by a Boolean formula on
n variables, Xn is the set {0, 1}n of all assignments to the n variables, and the size of a
concept c in C is the length of the shortest Boolean formula that computes the function c.
The learner is assumed to have access to a source EX of examples. Each time oracle
EX is called, one instance is randomly and independently chosen from Xn according to
some fixed but unknown and arbitrary distribution D. The oracle returns the chosen instance
v, along with a label indicating the value c(v) of the instance under the unknown target concept c ECn. Such a labeled instance is called an example. We assume EX runs in unit time.
Given access to EX, the learning algorithm runs for a time and finally outputs an hypothesis
h, a prediction rule on Xn. In this paper, we make no restrictions on h other than that there
exist a (possibly probabilistic) polynomial time algorithm that, given h and an instance v,
computes h(v), h's prediction on v.
We write Prv€D[r(v)] to indicate the probability of predicate T holding on instances v
drawn from Xn according to distribution D. To accommodate probabilistic hypotheses, we
will find it useful to regard T(V) as a Bernoulli random variable. For example, Pr[h(v) =
c(v)] is the chance that hypothesis h (which may be randomized) will misclassify some
particular instance v. In contrast, the quantity PrvED[h(v) = c(v)] is the probability that
h will misclassify an instance v chosen at random according to distribution D. Note that
this last probability is taken over both the random choice of v, and any random bits used by h.
In general, assuming independence, we have
where D(v) is the probability of instance v being chosen under D. (Technically, this formula
is valid only when Xn is discrete. To handle general domains, the summation would need
to be replaced by an appropriate integral, and D by a probability measure on the domain.
To simplify the presentation, we will assume that Xn is discrete, and omit the extension
of these results to general domains; this extension simply mimics the discrete case.)
The probability PrvEB[h(v) = c(v)] is called the error of h on c under D; if the error
is no more than e, then we say h is e-close to the target concept c under D. The quantity
PrVED[h(v) = c(v)] is the accuracy of h on c under D.
We say that a concept class C is learnable, or strongly learnable, if there exists an algorithm A such that for all n > 1, for all target concepts c € Cn, for all distributions D on
Xn, and for all 0 < e, 6 < 1, algorithm A, given parameters n, e, 8, the size s of c, and
access to oracle EX, runs in time polynomial in n,s, 1/e and 1/6, and outputs an hypothesis
h that with probability at least 1 - 6 is e-close to c under D. There are many other equivalent
notions of learnability, including polynomial predictability . Also, note that other authors have sometimes used the term learnable
to mean something slightly different.
THE STRENGTH OF WEAK LEARNABILITY
Kearns and Valiant introduced a weaker form of learnability in which the error
e cannot necessarily be made arbitrarily small. A concept class C is weakly learnable if
there exists a polynomial p and an algorithm A such that for all n > 1, for all target concepts c € Cn, for all distributions D on Xn, and for all 0 < 6 < 1, algorithm A, given
parameters n, d, the size s of c, and access to oracle EX, runs in time polynomial in n, s
and 1/6, and outputs an hypothesis h that with probability at least 1 - 5 is (1/2 - 1/p(n, s))close to c under D. In other words, a weak learning algorithm produces a prediction rule
that performs just slightly better than random guessing.
3. The equivalence of strong and weak learnability
The main result of this paper is a proof that strong and weak learnability are equivalent
THEOREM 1. A concept class C is weakly learnable if and only if it is strongly learnable.
That strong learnability implies weak learnability is trivial. The remainder of this section
is devoted to a proof of the converse. We assume then that some concept class C is weakly
learnable and show how to build a strong learning algorithm around a weak one.
We begin with a description of a technique by which the accuracy of any algorithm can
be boosted by a small but significant amount. Later, we will show how this mechanism
can be applied recursively to make the error arbitrarily small.
3.1. The hypothesis boosting mechanism
Let A be an algorithm that produces with high-probability an hypothesis a-close to the
target concept c. We sketch an algorithm A' that simulates A on three different distributions,
and outputs an hypothesis significantly closer to c.
Let EX be the given examples oracle, and let D be the distribution on Xn induced by
EX. The algorithm A' begins by simulating A on the original distribution D1 = D, using
the given oracle EX1 = EX. Let h1 be the hypothesis output by A.
Intuitively, A has found some weak advantage on the original distribution; this advantage
is expressed by h1 . To force A to learn more about the "harder" parts of the distribution,
we must somehow destroy this advantage. To do so, A' creates a new distribution D2 under
which an instance chosen according to D2 has a roughly equal chance of being correctly
or incorrectly classified by h1. The distribution D2 is simulated by filtering the examples
chosen according to D by EX. To simulate D2, a new examples oracle EX2 is constructed.
When asked for an instance, EX2 first flips a fair coin: if the result is heads, then EX2
requests examples from EX until one is chosen for which h1(v) = c(v); otherwise, EX2
waits for an instance to be chosen for which h1,(v) = c(v). (Later we show how to prevent
EX2 from having to wait too long in either of these loops for a desired instance). The algorithm A is again simulated, this time providing A with examples chosen by EX2 according
to D2. Let h2 be the output hypothesis.
R.E. SCHAPIRE
Figure 1. A graph of the function g(x) = 3x2 - 2x3.
Finally, D3 is constructed by filtering from D those instances on which h1 and h2 agree.
That is, a third oracle EX3 simulates the choice of an instance according to D3 by requesting
instances from EX until one is found for which h1(v) = h2(v). (Again, we will later show
how to limit the time spent waiting in this loop for a desired instance.) For a third time,
algorithm A is simulated with examples drawn this time by EX3, producing hypothesis h3.
At last, A' outputs its hypothesis h: given an instance v, if h1(v) = h2(v) then h predicts
the agreed upon value; otherwise, h predicts h3(v). (In other words, h takes the "majority
vote" of h1 ,h2 and h3.) Later, we show that h's error is bounded by g(a) = 3a2 — 2a3.
This quantity is significantly smaller than the original error a, as can be seen from its
graph depicted in Figure 1. (The solid curve is the function g, and, for comparison, the
dotted line shows a graph of the identity function.)
3.2. A strong learning algorithm
An idea that follows naturally is to treat the previously described procedure as a subroutine
for recursively boosting the accuracy of weaker hypotheses. The procedure is given a desired
error bound e and a confidence parameter 6, and constructs an e-close hypothesis from
weaker, recursively computed hypotheses. If e > 1/2 - 1lp(n, s) then an assumed weak
learning algorithm can be used to find the desired hypothesis; otherwise, an e-close hypothesis is computed recursively by calling the subroutine with e set to
Unfortunately, this scheme by itself does not quite work due to a technical difficulty:
because of the way EX2 and EX3 are constructed, examples may be required from a very
small portion of the original distribution. If this happens, the time spent waiting for an
example to be chosen from this region may be great. Nevertheless, we will see that this
THE STRENGTH OF WEAK LEARNABILITY
Figure 2. A strong learning algorithm Learn.
difficulty can be overcome by explicitly checking that the errors of hypotheses h1 and h2
on D are not too small.
Figure 2 shows a detailed sketch of the resulting strong learning algorithm Lea rn. The
procedure takes an error parameter e and a confidence parameter 6, and is also provided
with an examples oracle EX. The procedure is required to return an hypothesis whose
error is at most e with probability at least 1 - 6. In the figure, p is a polynomial and
WeakLea rn(S, EX) is an assumed weak learning procedure that outputs an hypothesis (1/2
- 1/p(n, s))-close to the target concept c with probability at least 1 - 6. As above, g(a)
R.E. SCHAPIRE
is the function 3a2 - 2a3, and the variable a is set to the value g -1(E). Also, the quantities
a1, and e are estimates of the errors of h1 and h2 under the given distribution D. These
estimates are made with error tolerances T1 and T2 (defined in the figure), and are computed
in the obvious manner based on samples drawn from EX; the required size of these samples
can be determined, for instance, using Chernoff bounds. The parameters s and n are assumed
to be known globally.
Note that Lea r n is a procedure taking as one of its inputs a function (EX) and returning
as output another function (h, a hypothesis, which is treated like a procedure). Furthermore,
to simulate new example oracles, Learn must have a means of dynamically defining new
procedures (as is allowed, for instance, by most Lisp-like languages). Therefore, in the
figure, we have used the somewhat nonstandard keyword defun to denote the definition
of a new function; its syntax calls for a name for the procedure, followed by a parenthesized
list of arguments, and the body indented in braces. Static scoping is assumed.
Learn works by recursively boosting the accuracy of its hypotheses. Learn typically
calls itself three times using the three simulated example oracles described in the preceding
section. On each recursive call, the required error bound of the constructed hypotheses
comes closer to 1/2; when this bound reaches 1/2 - 1/p(n, s), the weak learning algorithm
WeakLearn can be used.
The procedure takes measures to limit the run time of the simulated oracles it provides
on recursive calls. When Learn calls itself a second time to find h2, the expected number
of iterations of EX2 to find an example depends on the error of h1, which is estimated by
a1 . If h1 already has the desired accuracy 1 — E, then there is no need to find h2 and h3
since h1 is a sufficiently good hypothesis; otherwise, if a1 = Q(e), then it can be shown
that EX2 will not loop too long to find an instance. Similarly, when Learn calls itself to
find h3 , the expected number of iterations of EX3 depends on how often h1 and h2 disagree,
which we will see is in turn a function of the error of h2 on the original distribution D.
If this error e (which is estimated by e) is small, then h2 is a good hypothesis and is returned
by Learn. Otherwise, it will be shown that EX3 also will not run for too long.
3.3. Correctness
We show in this section that the algorithm is correct in the following sense:
THEOREM 2. For 0 < e < 1/2 and for 0 < <5 < 1, the hypothesis returned by calling
Learn(e, 8, EX) is e-close to the target concept with probability at least 1 - 6.
Proof. In proving this theorem, we will find it useful to assume that nothing "goes wrong"
throughout the execution of Learn. More specifically, we will say that Learn has a good
run if every hypothesis returned by WeakLearn is indeed (1/2 - 1lp(n, s))-close to the
target concept, and if every statistical estimate (i.e., of the quantities a1 and e) is obtained
with the required accuracy. We will then argue inductively on the depth of the recursion
that if Learn has a good run then the output hypothesis is e-close to the target concept,
and furthermore, that the probability of a good run is at least 1-6. Together, these facts
clearly imply the theorem's statement.
THE STRENGTH OF WEAK LEARNABILITY
The base case that e > 1/2 - 1/p(n, s) is trivially handled using our assumptions about
WeakLearn.
In the general case, by inductive hypothesis, each of the three (or fewer) recursive calls
to Learn are good runs with probability at least 1 - 6/5. Moreover, each of the estimates
a1, and e has the desired accuracy with probability at least 1 - 8/5. Thus, the chance of
a good run is at least the chance that all five of these events occur, which is at least
It remains then only to show that on a good run the output hypothesis has error at most e.
An easy special case is that a, or e is found to be smaller than e - T1 or e - T2, respectively. In either case, it follows immediately, due to the accuracy with which a1 and e are
assumed to have been estimated, that the returned hypothesis is e-close to the target concept.
Otherwise, in the general case, all three sub-hypotheses must be found and combined.
Let ai be the error of hi under Di. Here, D is the distribution of the provided oracle EX,
and Di is the distribution induced by oracle EXi on the ith recursive call (i = 1, 2, 3).
By inductive hypothesis, each ai < a.
In the special case that all hypotheses are deterministic, the distributions D1 and D2 can
be depicted schematically as shown in Figure 3. The figure shows the portion of each distribution on which the hypotheses h1 and h2 agree with the target concept c. For each distribution, the top crosshatched bar represents the relative fraction of the instance space on which
h1 agrees with c; the bottom striped bar represents those instances on which h2 agrees with
c. Although only valid for deterministic hypotheses, this figure may be helpful for motivating
one's intuition in what follows.
Let pi(v) = Pr[hi(v) = c(v)] be the chance that some fixed instance v is misclassified
by hi. (Recall that hypotheses may be randomized, and therefore it is necessary to consider
the probability that a particular fixed instance is misclassified.) Similarly, let q(v) = Pr[h1(v)
= h2(v)] be the chance that v is classified differently by h1 and h2. Also define w, x, y,
and z as follows:
Figure 3. The distributions D1 and D2.
R.E. SCHAPIRE
and since c, h1 and h2 are Boolean,
In terms of these variables, we can express explicitly the chance that EXi returns instance v:
Equation (3) is trivial. To see that Equation (4) holds, note that the chance that the initial
coin flip comes up tails is 1/2, and the chance that instance v is the first instance misclassified
by h1 is £)(v)pi(v)la1. The case that the coin comes up heads is handled in a similar fashion,
as is the derivation of Equation (5).
From Equation (4), we have that
THE STRENGTH OF WEAK LEARNABILITY
(Note that Equation (6) could also have been derived from Figure 3 in the case of deterministic hypotheses: if B is as shown in the figure, then it is not hard to see that y = 2a1B
and x = 2(1 - a1)(l - a2 - B). These imply Equation (6).)
Combining Equations (1), (2) and (6), we see that the values of w and z can be solved
for and written explicitly in terms of y, a1 and a2:
Using these values and Equation (5), we are finally ready to compute the error of the output hypothesis h:
as desired. The inequalities here follow from the facts that each a, < a < 1/2, and that,
by Equation (2), y < a1.
This completes the proof.
3.4. Analysis
In this section, we argue that Learn runs in polynomial time. Here and throughout this
section, unless stated otherwise, polynomial refers to polynomial in n, s, 1/e and 1/6. Our
approach will be first to derive a bound on the expected running time of the procedure,
and then to use a part of the confidence 8 to bound with high-probability the actual running
R.E. SCHAPIRE
time of the algorithm. Thus, we will have shown that the procedure is probably fast and
correct, completing the proof of Theorem 1. , the procedure can easily be converted into a learning algorithm that halts
deterministically in polynomial time.)
We will be interested in bounding several quantities. First, we are of course interested
in bounding the expected running time T(t, 5) of Learn(e, 5, EX). This running time in
turn depends on the time U(e, 6) to evaluate an hypothesis returned by Learn, and on
the expected number of examples M(e, 6) needed by Learn. In addition, let t(d), u(5) and
m(S) be analogous quantities for WeakLearn(<5, EX). By assumption, t, u and m are polynomially bounded. Also, all of these functions depend implicitly on n and s.
As a technical point, we note that the expectations denoted by T and M are taken only
over good runs of Learn. That is, the expectations are computed given the assumption
that every sub-hypothesis and every estimator is successfully computed with the desired
accuracy. By Theorem 2, Learn will have a good run with probability at least 1 — 5.
It is also important to point out that T (respectively, t) is the expected running time of
Learn (WeakLearn) when called with an oracle EX that provides examples in unit time.
Our analysis will take into account the fact that the simulated oracles supplied to Learn
or WeakLearn at lower levels of the recursion do not in general run in unit time.
We will see that T, U and M are all exponential in the depth of the recursion induced
by calling Learn. We therefore begin by bounding this depth. Let B(e, p) be the smallest
integer i for which gi(l/2 — 1/p) < e. On each recursive call, e is replaced by g-1(E)•
Thus, the depth of the recursion is bounded by B(e, p(n, s)). We have:
LEMMA 1. The depth of the recursion induced by calling Learn(e, 5, EX) is at most
B(e, p(n, s)) = 0(log(p(n, s)) + log log(l/e)).
Proof. We can say B(e, p(n, s)) < b + c if gb(1/2 - 1/p(n, s)) < 1/4 and gc(1/4) < e.
Clearly, g(x) < 3x2 and so gi(x) < (3x)2i. Thus, /(1/4) < e if c = [lg log4/3)(1/E)] • Similarly, if 1/4 < x < 1/2 then 1/2 - g(x) = (1/2 - x)(1 + 2x - 2x2) > (ll/8)(l/2 - x).
This implies that 1/2 - gi(x) > (ll/8)''(l/2 - x), assuming that x, g(x), ...,
gi-1(x) are
all at least 1/4. Thus, gb(1/2 - 1/p(n, s)) < 1/4 if b = [log11/8(p(n, s)/4)| .
For the remainder of this analysis, we let p = p(n, s) and, where clear from context,
let B = B(e, p). Note that B(g - 1(e), p) = B - 1 for e < 1/2 - \lp.
We show next that U is polynomially bounded. This is important because we require
that the returned hypothesis be polynomially evaluatable.
LEMMA 2. The time to evaluate an hypothesis returned by Learn(e, 5, EX) is U(e, 6) =
0(3B • u(d/5B)).
Proof. If e > 1/2 - 1/p, then Learn returns an hypothesis computed by Weak Learn. In
this case, U(e, 6) = u(d). Otherwise, the hypothesis returned by Learn involves the computation of at most three sub-hypotheses. Thus,
THE STRENGTH OF WEAK LEARNABILITY
for some positive constant c. A straightforward induction argument shows that this recurrence
implies the bound
When an example is requested of a simulated oracle on one of Learn's recursive calls,
that oracle must itself draw several examples from its own oracle EX. For instance, on
the third recursive call, the simulated oracle must draw instances until it finds one on which
h1 and h2 disagree. Naturally, the running time of Learn depends on how many examples
must be drawn in this manner by the simulated oracle. The next lemma bounds this quantity.
LEMMA 3. Let r be the expected number of examples drawn from EX by any oracle EXi
simulated by Learn on a good run when asked to provide a single example. Then r < 4/E .
Proof. When Learn calls itself the first time (to find h1 ),the examples oracle EX it was
passed is left unchanged. In this case, r = 1.
The second time Learn calls itself, the constructed oracle EX2 loops each time it is called
until it receives a desirable example. Depending on the result of the initial coin flip, we
expect EX2 to loop l/a1 or 1/(1 — a1) times. Note that if a1 < e - 2r1 = e/3 then, based
on its estimate of a1 , Learn would have simply returned h1 instead of making a second
or third recursive call. Thus, we can assume e/3 < al < 1/2, and so r < 3/e in this case.
Finally, when Learn calls itself the third time, we expect the constructed oracle EX3
to loop 1l(w + y) times before finding a suitable example. (Here, the variables w, x, y and
z are as defined in the proof of Theorem 2.) It remains then only to show that w + y > e/4.
Note that the error e of h2 on the original distribution D is w + z. Thus, using this fact
and Equations (1), (2) and (6), we can solve explicitly for w and y in terms of e, a1 and
a2, and so find that
Regarding e and a < 1/2 as fixed, we will refer to this last function on the right hand
side of the inequality as f(a1). To lower bound w + y, we will find the minimum of fon
the interval [0, a]. The derivative of f is:
The denominator of this derivative is clearly zero only when a1 = 1/2, and the numerator,
being a parabola centered about the line a1 = 1/2, has at most one zero less than 1/2.
Thus, the function/has at most one critical point on the interval (-00, 1/2). Furthermore,
since/tends to — oo as a1 - -x, a single critical point in this range cannot possibly be
R.E. SCHAPIRE
minimal. This means that f's minimum on any closed subinterval of (-00, 1/2) is achieved
at one endpoint of the subinterval. In particular, for the subinterval of interest to us, the
function achieves its minimum either when a1 = 0 or when a, = a. Thus, w + y >
min(f-(0),f(a)).
We can assume that e > e - 2T2 = (3/4 + a/2)e; otherwise, if e were smaller than
this quantity, then Learn would have returned h2 rather than going on to compute h3. Thus,
f(0) = e > 3e/4, and, using our bound for e and the fact that e = 3a2 - 2a3,
Since 4 - 7a + 2a2 > 1 for a < 1/2,f(a) > a/4 > e/4. We conclude w + y > e/4,
completing the proof.
To bound the number of examples needed to estimate a1 and e, we will make use of
the following bounds on the tails of a binomial distribution .
LEMMA 4. (Chernoff Bounds) Consider a sequence of m independent Bernoulli trials, each
succeeding with probability p. Let 5 be the random variable describing the total number
of successes. Then for 0 < r < 1, the following hold:
LEMMA 5. On a good run, the expected number of examples M(e, 6) needed by Learn
(e, 5, EX) is
Proof. In the base case that e > 1/2 - 1/p, Learn simply calls WeakLearn, so we have
M(e, 5) = m(5). Otherwise, on each of the recursive calls, the simulated oracle is required
to provide M(g-1(E), 6/5) examples. To provide one such example, the simulated oracle
must itself draw at most an average of 4/e examples from EX. Thus, each recursive call
demands at most (4/e) • M(g-1(e), 5/5) examples on average.
THE STRENGTH OF WEAK LEARNABILITY
In addition, Learn requires some examples for making its estimates a1 and e. Using the
first bound of Lemma 4, it follows that a sample of size 0(log(l/6)/7f) suffices for each estimate. Note that Up < 1/2 - e = 1/2 - g(a) = (1/2 - a)(l + 2a - 2a2) < (3/2)(l/2 - a).
Thus, by our choice of T1 and T2 , both estimates can be made using 0( p2 log(l/6)/€2)
We thus arrive at the recurrent inequality:
for some positive constant c. To complete the proof, we argue inductively that this implies
The base case clearly satisfies this bound. In the general case, Equation (8) implies by
inductive hypothesis that
which clearly implies Equation (9). The last inequality here follows from the fect that
2 since g(a) < 3a2 for a > 0.
LEMMA 6. On a good run, the expected execution time of Learn(€, 6, EX) is given by
Proof. As in the previous lemmas, the base case that e > 1/2 — 1lp is easily handled.
In this case, T(t, d) = t(d).
Otherwise, Learn takes time 3 • T(g
- 1(e), 6/5) on its three recursive calls. In addition,
Learn spends time drawing examples to make the estimates a1 and e, and overhead time
is also spent by the simulated examples oracles passed on the three recursive calls. A typical
example that is drawn from Learn's oracle EX is evaluated on zero, one or two of the
previously computed sub-hypotheses. For instance, an example drawn for the purpose of
estimating a1 is evaluated once by h1; an example drawn for the simulated oracle EX3 is
evaluated by both h1 and h2. Thus, Learn's overhead tune is proportional to the product
R.E. SCHAPIRE
of the total number of examples needed by Learn and the time it takes to evaluate a subhypothesis on one of these examples. Therefore, the following recurrence holds:
Applying Lemmas 2 and 5, this implies
for some positive constant c. A straightforward induction argument shows that this implies:
The main result of this section follows immediately:
THEOREM 3. Let 0 < e < 1/2 and let 0 < 6 < 1. With probability at least 1 - 6, the
execution of Learn(e, 6/2, EX) halts in polynomial time and outputs an hypothesis e-close
to the target concept.
Proof. By Theorem 2, the chance that Learn does not have a good run is at most 6/2.
By Markov's inequality and Lemma 6, the chance that Learn on a good run fails to halt
in time (2/6) • T(e, 5/2) is also at most 6/2. Thus, the probability that Learn has a good
run (and so outputs an e-close hypothesis) and halts in polynomial time is at least 1 - 6.
3.5. Space complexity
Although not of immediate consequence to the proof of Theorem 3, it is worth pointing
out that Learn's space requirements are relatively modest, as proved in this section.
Let S(e, 6) be the space used by Learn(e, 6, EX); let Q(e, 6) be the space needed to
store an output hypothesis; and let R(e, 6) be the space needed to evaluate such an hypothesis.
Let s(8), q(5) and r(6) be analogous quantities for WeakLearn(6, EX). Then we have:
LEMMA 7. The space Q(e, 6) required to store an hypothesis output by Learn(e, 6, EX)
is at most O(3B • q(d/5B)). The space R(e, 6) needed to evaluate such an hypothesis is
O(B + r(6/5B)). Finally, the total space S(e, 6) required by Learn is O(3B - q(8/5B) +
s(5/5B) + B • r(6/5B)).
Proof. For t > 1/2 — 1/p, the bounds are trivial. To bound Q, note that the hypothesis
returned by Learn is a composite of three (or fewer) hypotheses. Thus,
THE STRENGTH OF WEAK LEARNABILITY
To evaluate such a composite hypothesis, each of the sub-hypotheses is evaluated one at
a time. Thus,
Finally, to bound S, note that the space required by Learn is dominated by the storage
of the sub-hypotheses, by their recursive computation, and by the space needed to evaluate
them. Since the sub-hypotheses are computed one at a time, we have:
The solutions of these three recurrences are all straightforward, and imply the stated bounds.
4. Improving Learn's time and sample complexity
In this section, we describe a modification to the construction of Section 3 that significantly
improves Learn's time and sample complexity. In particular, we will improve these complexity measures by roughly a factor of 1/e, giving bounds that are linear in 1/e (ignoring
log factors). These improved bounds will have some interesting consequences, described
in later sections.
In the original construction of Learn, much time and many examples are squandered
by the simulated oracles EXi waiting for a desirable instance to be drawn. Lemma 3 showed
that the expected time spent waiting is 0(l/e). The modification described below will reduce
this to 0(1la) = 0(l/Ve). (Here, a = g~\e) as before.)
Recall that the running time of oracle EX2 depends on the error a, of the first subhypothesis h1. In the original construction, we ensured that a1 not be too small by estimating
its value, and, if smaller than e, returning h1 instead of continuing the normal execution
of the subroutine. Since this approach only guarantees that a1 > Q(e), there does not seem
to be any way of ensuring that EY2 run for 0(l/c) time. To improve EX2s running time then,
we will instead modify h1 by deliberately increasing its error. Ironically, this intentional
injection of error will have the effect of improving Learn's worst case running time by
limiting the time spent by either EX2 or EX3 waiting for a suitable instance.
4.1. The modifications
Specifically, here is how Learn is modified. Call the new procedure Learn'. Following
the recursive computation of h1, Lea rn' estimates the error a1 of h1 , although less accurately
than Learn. Let a1 be this estimate, and choose a sample large enough that \a1 - a1
< a/4 with probability at least 1 - 6/5. Since 0 < al < a, we can assume without loss
of generality that a/4 < a1 < 3a/4.
Next, Learn' defines a new hypothesis h'1 as follows: given an instance v, h1{ first flips
a coin biased to turn up heads with probability exactly
R.E. SCHAPIRE
If the outcome is tails, then h1 evaluates h1(v) and returns the result. Otherwise, if heads,
h1 predicts the wrong answer, -c(v). Since h1[ will only be used during the training phase,
we can assume that the correct classification of v is available, and thus that h1[ can be
simulated.
This new hypothesis h1[ is now used in place of hl by EX2 and EX3. The rest of the subroutine is unmodified (aside from one other minor modification described in Lemma 8
below). In particular, the final returned hypothesis h is unchanged—that is, h1 ,not h'1, is
used by h.
4.2. Correctness
To see that Learn' is correct, we will assume as in the proof of Theorem 2 that a good
run occurs; this will be the case with probability at least 1-5.
Note first that the error
of h'1 is exactly a1 = (1 — B)al + B since the chance of error is a, on tails, and is 1 on
heads. By our choice of B, it can be verified that a/2 < a1 < a.
Let h' be the same hypothesis as h, except with h1 used in lieu of h1 . Note that h', h'1 ,
h2 and h3 are related to one another in exactly the same way that h,h1,h2 and h3 are related
in the original proof of Theorem 2. That is, if we imagine that h1 is returned on the first
recursive call of the original procedure Learn, then it is not impossible that h2 and h3
would be returned on the second and third recursive calls, in which case h' would be the
returned hypothesis. Put another way, the proof that h' has error at most g(a) = e is an
identical copy of the one given in the proof of Theorem 2, except that all occurrences of
h and h1 are replaced by h' and h'1.
Finally, we must shown that h's error is at most that of h'. Let p1'(v) = Pr[h'1(v) = c(v)],
and let pi (v) be as in Theorem 2. Then for v € Xn, we have
where the inequality follows from the observation that p'1(v) = (1 - B)p1(v) + (8 > p\(v).
This implies that the error of h is at most the error of h', which is bounded by e.
4.3. Analysis
Next, we show that Learn' runs faster using fewer examples than Learn. We use essentially the same analysis as in Section 3.4. The following three lemmas are modified versions of Lemmas 3, 5 and 6. The proofs of the other lemmas apply immediately to Learn'
with little or no modification, and so are ommitted.
THE STRENGTH OF WEAK LEARNABILITY
LEMMA 8. Let r be the expected number of examples drawn from EX by any oracle EXi
simulated by Learn' on a good run when asked to provide a single example. Then r < 4/a.
Proof. As in the original proof, r = 1 for EX1. We expect the second oracle to loop at
most 1/a'1 times on average. Since a'1 > a/2, r is at most 2/a in this case.
Finally, to bound the number of iterations of EX3, we will shown that w + y > a/4
using Equation (7) as in the original proof. To lower bound w + y, we find the minimum
of the last formula/of Equation (7) (with a1 replaced by a'1 of course) on the interval [a/2, a].
As noted previously, the function/must achieve its minimum at one endpoint of the interval. We assume as in the original proof that e > (3/4 + o/2)e. It was previously shown
that f(a) > a/4, and, by a similar argument, we can show f(a/2) > a/2 + a3 + a2/4
(1 - a) > a/2. This completes the proof.
LEMMA 9. On a good run, the expected number of examples M(e, 8) needed by Learn'
(e, 5, EX) is
Proof. The proof is nearly the same as for Lemma 5. In addition to incorporating the superior
bound given by Lemma 8 on the number of examples needed by the simulated oracles,
we must also consider the number of examples needed to estimate a1 and e. The first, a1 ,
can be estimated using a sample of size 0(log(l/S)/a2) = 0(log(l/8)/e); this can be derived
from the first bound of Lemma 4, and by noting that e = g(a) < 3a2 for a > 0. By
estimating e in a slightly different manner, we can also achieve a better bound on the sample size needed. Specifically, we can choose a sample large enough that, with probability
1 - 6/5, e<e-T2 if e < e — 2T2, and e > e - T2 if e > e. Such an estimate has
all of the properties needed by Learn', but only requires a sample of size 0(p2 log(l/6)/£)
as can be derived using the second and third bound of Lemma 4. for a detailed example of this sort of calculation.)
Thus, we arrive at the recurrence
which implies the stated bound by an argument similar to that given in the proof of Lemma 5.
LEMMA 10. On a good run, the expected execution time of Learn '(e, 6, EX) is given by
Proof. This bound follows from Equation (10), using the superior bound on M given by
R.E. SCHAPIRE
5. Variations on the learning model
Next, we consider how the main result relates to some other learning models.
5.1. Group learning
An immediate consequence of Theorem 1 concerns group learnability. In the group learning model, the learner produces a hypothesis that need only correctly classify large groups
of instances, all of which are either positive or negative examples. Kearns and Valiant 
prove the equivalence of group learning and weak learning. Thus, by Theorem 1, group
learning is also equivalent to strong learning.
5.2. Miscellaneous PAC models
Haussler, Kearns, Littlestone and Warmuth describe numerous variations on the
basic PAC model, and show that all of them are equivalent. For instance, they consider
randomized versus deterministic algorithms, algorithms for which the size s of the target
concept is known or unknown, and so on. It is not hard to see that all of their equivalence
proofs apply to weak learning algorithms as well (with one exception described below),
and so that any of these weak learning models are equivalent by Theorem 1 to the basic
PAC-learning model.
The one reduction from their paper that does not hold for weak learning algorithms concerns the equivalence of the one- and two-oracle learning models. In the one-oracle model
(used exclusively in this paper), the learner has access to a single source of positive and
negative examples. In the two-oracle model, the learner has access to one oracle that returns
only positive examples, and another returning only negative examples. The authors show
that these models are equivalent for strong learning algorithms. However, their proof apparently cannot be adapted to show that one-oracle weak learnability implies two-oracle weak
learnability (although their proof of the converse is easily and validly adapted). This is
because their proof assumes that the error e can be made arbitrarily small, clearly a bad
assumption for weak learning algorithms. Nevertheless, this is not a problem since we have
shown that one-oracle weak learnability implies one-oracle strong learnability, which in
turn implies two-oracle strong (and therefore weak) learnability. Thus, despite the inapplicability of Haussler et al.'s original proof, all four learning models are equivalent.
5.3. Fixed hypotheses
Much of the PAC-learning research has been concerned with the form or representation
of the hypotheses output by the learning algorithm. Clearly, the construction described
in Section 3 does not in general preserve the form of the hypotheses used by the weak
learning algorithm. It is natural to ask whether there exists any construction preserving
this form. That is, if concept class C is weakly learnable by an algorithm using hypotheses
THE STRENGTH OF WEAK LEARNABILITY
from a class H of representations, does there then exist a strong learning algorithm for
C that also only outputs hypotheses from H?
In general, the answer to this question is no (modulo some relatively weak complexity
assumptions). As a simple example, consider the problem of learning k-term DNF formulas
using only hypotheses represented by k-term DNF. (A formula in disjunctive normal form
(DNF) is one written as a disjunction of terms, each of which is a conjunction of literals,
a literal being either a variable or its complement.) Pitt and Valiant show that this
learning problem is infeasible if RP = NP for k as small as 2.
Nevertheless, the weak learning problem is solved by the algorithm sketched below. .) First, choose a "large" sample. If significantly
more than half of the examples in the sample are negative (positive), then output the "always
predict negative (positive)" hypothesis, and halt. Otherwise, we can assume that the distribution is roughly evenly split between positive and negative examples. Select and output the
disjunction of k or fewer literals that misclassifies none of the positive examples, and the
fewest of the negative examples.
We briefly argue that this hypothesis is, with high probability, (1/2 - f(l/nk))-close to
the target concept. First, note that the target k-term DNF formula is equivalent to some
k-CNF formula . (A formula in conjunctive normal form (CNF)
is one written as the conjunction of clauses, each clause a disjunction of literals. If each
clause consists of only k literals, then the formula is in k-CNF.) Next, we observe that
every clause is satisfied by every assignment that satisfies the entire k-CNF formula. Moreover, since the formula has at most 0(nk) clauses, by an averaging argument, there must
be one clause not satisfied by Q(l/nk) of the assignments (as weighted by the target distribution) that do not satisfy the entire formula. Thus, there exists some disjunction of k literals
that is correct for nearly all of the positive examples and for at least Q(l/nk) of the negative
examples. In particular, the output hypothesis has this property. Since the distribution is
roughly evenly divided between positive and negative examples, this implies that the output
hypothesis is roughly (1/2 - Q(l/nk))-close to the target formula.
5.4. Queries
A number of researchers have considered learning scenarios in which the learner is not
only able to passively observe randomly selected examples, but is also able to ask a "teacher"
various sorts of questions or queries about the target concept. For instance, the learner
might be allowed to ask if some particular instance is a positive or negative example. Angluin
 describes several kinds of query that might be useful to the learner. The purpose
of this section is simply to point out that the construction of Section 3 is applicable even
in the presence of most kinds of query. That is, a weak learning algorithm that depends
on the availability of certain kinds of query can be converted, using the same construction,
into a strong learning algorithm using the same query types.
5.5. Many-valued concepts
In this paper, we have only considered Boolean valued concepts, that is, concepts that classify
every instance as either a positive or a negative example. Of course, in the "real world,"
R.E. SCHAPIRE
most learning tasks require classification into one of several categories (for instance, character
recognition). How does the result generalize to handle many-valued concepts?
First of all, for learning a k-valued concept, it is not immediately clear how to define
the notion of weak learnability. An hypothesis that guesses randomly on every instance
will be correct only 1/k of the time, so one natural definition would require only that the
weak learning algorithm classify instances correctly slightly more than 1/k of the time.
Unfortunately, under this definition, strong and weak learnability are inequivalent for k
as small as three. As an informal example, consider learning a concept taking the values
0, 1 and 2, and suppose that it is "easy" to predict when the concept has the value 2, but
"hard" to predict whether the concept's value is 0 or 1. Then to weakly learn such a concept, it suffices to find an hypothesis that is correct whenever the concept is 2, and that
guesses randomly otherwise. For any distribution, this hypothesis will be correct half of
the time, achieving the weak learning criterion of accuracy significantly better than 1/3.
However, boosting the accuracy further is clearly infeasible.
Thus, a better definition of weak learnability is one requiring that the hypothesis be correct
on slightly more than half of the distribution, regardless of k. Using this definition, the
construction of Section 3 is easily modified to handle many-valued concepts.
6. General complexity bounds for PAC learning
The construction derived in Sections 3 and 4 yields some unexpected relationships between
the allowed error e and various complexity measures that might be applied to a strong learning algorithm. One of the more surprising of these is a proof that, for every learnable concept class, there exists an efficient algorithm whose output hypotheses can be evaluated
in time polynomial in log(l/e). Furthermore, such an algorithm's space requirements are
also only poly-logarithmic in 1/e—far less, for instance, than would be needed to store the
entire sample. In addition, its time and sample size requirements grow only linearly in
1/6 (disregarding log factors).
THEOREM 4. If C is a learnable concept class, then there exists an efficient learning algorithm
for C that:
• requires a sample of size p1(n,s log (1/e), log l(1/d),
.halts in time p2(n,s log (1/E), log(1/d) ,
• uses space p3(n, s, log(l/0, log(l/5)), and
• outputs hypotheses of size p4(n, s, log(l/c)), evaluatable in time p5(n, s, log(l/e))
for some polynomials p1 , p2, p3 , p4 and p5 .
Proof. Given a strong learning algorithm A for C, "hard-wire" e = 1/4, thus converting
A into a weak learning algorithm A' that outputs hypotheses 1/4-close to the target concept.
THE STRENGTH OF WEAK LEARNABILITY
Now let A" be the procedure obtained by applying the construction of Learn' with A'
plugged in for Weak Learn. As remarked previously, we can assume without loss of generality that A" halts deterministically in polynomial time. Note, by the lemmas of Sections 3
and 4 that A" "almost" achieves the resource bounds given in the theorem, the only problem
being that the bounds attained are polynomial in 1/6 rather than log(l/6) as desired.
This problem is alleviated by applying the construction of Haussler, Kearns, Littlestone
and Warmuth for converting any learning algorithm B into one running in time polynomial in log(l/6). Essentially, this construction works as follows: Given inputs n, s, e and
5, first simulate B 0(logl/6)) times, each time setting B's accuracy parameter to e/4 and
B's confidence parameter to 1/2. Save all of the computed hypotheses. Next, draw a sample
of 0(log(l/5)/e) examples, and output the one that misclassifies the fewest examples in the
sample. Haussler, et al. argue that the resulting procedure outputs an e-close hypothesis
with probability
Applying this construction to A", we obtain a final procedure that one can verify achieves
all of the stated bounds.
The remainder of this section is a discussion of some of the consequences of Theorem 4.
6.1. Improving the performance of known algorithms
These bounds can be applied immediately to a number of existing learning algorithms,
yielding improvements in time and/or space complexity (at least in terms of e). For instance,
the computation time of Blumer, Ehrenfeucht, Haussler and Warmuth's algorithm
for learning half-spaces of Rn, which involves the solution of a linear programming problem of size proportional to the sample, can be improved by a polynomial factor of 1/e.
The same is also true of Baum's algorithm for learning unions of half-spaces, which
involves finding the convex hull of a significant fraction of the sample.
There are many more algorithms for which the theorem implies improved space efficiency. This is especially true of the many known PAC algorithms that work by choosing
a large sample and then finding an hypothesis consistent with it. For instance, this is how
Rivest's decision list algorithm works, as do most of the algorithms described by
Blumer, et al., as well as Helmbold, Sloan and Warmuth's construction for learning
nested differences of learnable concepts. Since the entire sample must be stored, these
algorithms are not terribly space efficient, and so can be dramatically improved by applying
Theorem 4. Of course, these improvements typically come at the cost of requiring a somewhat larger sample (by a polynomial factor of log(l/E)). Thus, there appears to be a tradeoff between space and sample size (or time) complexity.
6.2. Data compression
Blumer, Ehrenfeucht, Haussler and Warmuth have considered the relationship
between learning and data compression. They have shown that, if any sample can be compressed—that is, represented by a prediction rule significantly smaller than the original
sample—then this compression algorithm can be converted into a PAC-learning algorithm.
R.E. SCHAPIRE
In some sense, the bound given in Theorem 4 on the size of the output hypothesis implies
the converse. In particular, suppose Cn is a learnable concept class and that we have been
given m examples (v1, c(V1)), (v2, c(v2)), . . . , (vm, c(vm)) where each vi € Xn and c is a
concept in Cn of size s. These examples need not have been chosen at random. The data
compression problem is to find a small representation for the data, that is, an hypothesis
h that is significantly smaller than the original data set with the property that h(vi) = c(vi)
for each vi. An hypothesis with this last property is said to be consistent with the sample.
Theorem 4 implies the existence of an efficient algorithm that outputs consistent hypotheses
only poly-logarithmic in the size m of the sample. This is proved by the following theorem:
THEOREM 5. Let C be a learnable concept class. Then there exists an efficient algorithm
that, given 0 < 6 < 1 and m (distinct) examples of a concept c € Cn of size s, outputs
with probability at least 1 - 6 a deterministic hypothesis consistent with the sample and
of size polynomial in n, s and log m.
Proof. Pitt and Valiant show how to convert any learning algorithm into one that
finds hypotheses consistent with a set of data points. The idea is to choose e < 1/m and
to run the learning algorithm on a (simulated) uniform distribution over the data set. Since
e is less than the weight placed on any element of the sample, the output hypothesis must
have error zero. Applying this technique to a learning algorithm A satisfying the conditions
of Theorem 4, we see that the output hypothesis has size only polynomial in n, s and
log m, and so is far smaller than the original sample for large m.
Technically, this technique requires that the learning algorithm output deterministic hypotheses. However, probabilistic hypotheses can also be handled by choosing a somewhat smaller
value for e, and by "hard-wiring" the computed probabilistic hypothesis with a sequence of
random bits. More precisely, set e = l/2m, and run A over the same distribution as before.
Assume A has a good run. Note that the output hypothesis h can be regarded as a deterministic function of an instance v and a sequence of random bits r. Let p be the chance
that, for a randomly chosen sequence r, h(., r) misclassifies one or more of the instances
in the sample. For such an r, the chance is certainly at least 1/m that an instance v is chosen
(according to the simulated uniform distribution on the sample) for which h(v, r) = c(v).
Thus, the error of h is at least p/m. By our choice of e, this implies that p < 1/2, or,
in other words, that the probability that a random sequence r is chosen for which h(., r)
correctly classifies all of the m examples is at least 1/2. Thus, choosing and testing random
sequences r, we can quickly find one for which the deterministic hypothesis h(., r) is consistent with the sample. Finally, note that the size of this output hard-wired hypothesis is
bounded by \h\ + r\, and that \r\ is bounded by the time it takes to evaluate h, which
is poly-logarithmic in m.
Naturally, the notion of size in the preceding theorem depends on the underlying model
of computation, which we have left unspecified. However, the theorem has some immediate
corollaries when the learning problem is discrete, that is, when every instance in the domain
Xn is encoded using a finite alphabet by a string of legnth bounded by a polynomial in
«, and every concept in C of size s is also encoded using a finite alphabet by a string of
length bounded by a polynomial in s.
THE STRENGTH OF WEAK LEARNABILITY
COROLLARY 1. Let C be a learnable discrete concept class. Then there exists an efficient
algorithm that, given 0 < 6 < 1 and a sample as in Theorem 5, outputs with probability
at least 1 — 6 a deterministic consistent hypothesis of size polynomial in n and s, and
independent of m.
Proof. Since we assume (without loss of generality) that all the points of the sample are
distinct, its size m cananot exceed \Xn\. Since log \Xn\ is bounded by a polynomial in n,
the corollary follows immediately.
Applying Occam's Razor of Blumer, et al. , this implies the following strong general
bound on the sample size needed to efficiently learn C. Although the bound is better than
that given by Theorem 4 (at least in terms of e), it should be pointed out that this improvement requires the sacrifice of space efficiency since the entire sample must be stored.
THEOREM 6. Let C be a learnable discrete concept class. Then there exists an efficient learning algorithm for C requiring a sample of size
for some polynomial p.
Proof. Blumer, et al. describe a technique for converting a so-called Occam algorithm
A with the property described in Corollary 1 into an efficient learning algorithm with the
stated sample complexity bound. Essentially, to make this conversion, one simply draws a
sample of the stated size (choosing p appropriately), and runs A on the sample to find a consistent hypothesis. The authors argue that the computed hypothesis, simply by virtue of its
small size and consistency with the sample, will be e-close to the target concept with high
probability. (Technically, their approach needs some minor modifications to handle, for instance, a randomized Occam algorithm; these modifications are straightforward.)
6.3. Hard functions are hard to learn
Theorem 4's bound on the size of the output hypothesis also implies that any hard-to-evaluate
concept class is unlearnable. Although this result does not sound surprising, it was previously
unclear how it might be proved: since a learning algorithm's hypotheses are technically
permitted to grow polynomially in l/E, the learnability of such classes did not seem out
of the question.
This result yields the first representation-independent hardness results not based on cryptographic assumptions. For instance, assuming P/poly = NP/poly, the class of polynomialsize, nondeterministic Boolean circuits is not learnable. (The set P/poly (NP/poly) consists
of those languages accepted by a family of polynomial-size deterministic (nondeterministic)
circuits.) Furthermore, since learning pattern languages was recently shown 
to be as hard as learning NP/poly, this result shows that pattern languages are also unlearnable under this relatively weak structural assumption.
R.E. SCHAPIRE
THEOREM 7. Suppose C is learnable, and assume that Xn = {0, 1}n. Then there exists a
polynomial p such that for all concepts c € Cn of size s, there exists a circuit of size p(n, s)
exactly computing c.
Proof. Consider the set of 2" pairs {(v, c(v)) | v € Xn}. By Corollary 1, there exists an
algorithm that, with positive probability, will output an hypothesis consistent with this set
of elements of size only polynomial in n and s. Since this hypothesis is polynomially evaluatable, it can be converted using standard techniques into a circuit of the required size.
6.4. Hard functions are hard to approximate
By a similar argument, the bound on hypothesis size implies that any function not computable by small circuits cannot even be weakly approximated by a family of small circuits,
for some distribution on the inputs.
Let fbe a Boolean function on {0, 1}*, D a distribution on {0, 1}n and C a circuit on
n variables. Then C is said to B-approximate f under D if the probability is at most B that
C(v) = f(v) on an assignment v chosen randomly from {0, 1}n according to D.
THEOREM 8. Suppose some function fcannot be computed by any family of polynomialsize circuits. Then there exists a femily of distributions D1, D2, ..., where Dn is over
the set {0, 1}n, such that for all polynomials p and q, there exist infinitely many n for
which there exists no n-variable circuit of size at most q(n) that (1/2 — l/p(n))-approximates
f under Dn.
Proof. Throughout this proof, we will assume without loss of generality that p(n) = q(n)
= nk for some integer k > 1.
Suppose first that there exists some k such that for all n and every distribution D on
{0, 1}n, there exists a circuit of size at most nk that (1/2 - l/nk)-approximates f under D.
Then f can, in a sense, be weakly learned. More precisely, there exists an (exponentialtime) procedure that, by searching exhaustively the set of all circuits of size nk, will find
one that (1/2 - l/nk)-approximates f under some given distribution D. Therefore, by Theorem 1, f is strongly learnable in a similar sense in exponential time. Applying Theorem 7
(whose validity depends only on the size of the output hypothesis, and not on the running
time), this implies that f can be exactly computed by a family of polynomial-size circuits,
contradicting the theorem's hypothesis.
Thus, for all k > 1, there exists an integer n and a distribution D on {0, 1}n such that
no circuit of size at most nk is able to (1/2 — l/nk)-approximate / under D. To complete
the proof, it suffices to show that this implies the theorem's conclusion.
Let Dn be the set of distributions D on {0, 1}n for which no circuit of size at most
nk (1/2 - l/nk)-approximates f under D. It is easy to verify that Dk 3 Dn
k+1 for all k, n.
Also, since every function can be computed by exponential size circuits, there must exist
a constant c > 0 for which Dn = 0 for all n. Let n[k] be the smallest n for which Dn = 0.
By the preceding argument, n[k] must exist. Furthermore, n[k] > k/c, which implies that
the set N = {n[k] \ k > 1} cannot have finite cardinality.
THE STRENGTH OF WEAK LEARNABILITY
To eliminate repeated elements from N, let k1 < k2 < ... be such that n[ki] = n[kj]
for i = j, and such that {n[ki] | i > 1} = N. Let Di be defined as follows: if i = n[kj]
for some j, then let Di be any distribution in Ei (which cannot be empty by our definition
of n[k]); otherwise, if i f N, then define Di arbitrarily. Then D1 , D2, ... is the desired
family of "hard" distributions. For if k is any integer, then for all ki > k, Dn(ki) € Dn(ki) .
Dn[ki]. This proves the theorem.
Informally, Theorem 8 states that any language not in the complexity class P/poly cannot
be even weakly approximated by any other language in P/poly under some "hard" family
of distributions. In fact, the theorem can easily be modified to apply to other circuit classes
as well, including monotone P/poly, and monotone or non-monotone NCk for fixed k. (The
class NCk consists of all languages accepted by polynomial-size circuits of depth at most
0(logk n), and a monotone circuit is one in which no negated variables appear.) In general,
the theorem applies to all circuit classes closed under the transformation on hypotheses
resulting from the construction of Section 3 and 4.
6.5. On-line learning
Finally, we consider implications of Theorem 4 for on-line learning algorithms. In the online learning model, the learner is presented one (randomly selected) instance at a time
in a series of trials. Before being told its correct classification, the learner must try to
predict whether the instance is a positive or negative example. An incorrect prediction is
called a mistake. In this model, the learner's goal is to minimize the number of mistakes.
Previously, Haussler, Littlestone and Warmuth have shown that a concept class
C is learnable if and only if there exists an on-line learning algorithm for C with the properties that:
* the probability of a mistake on the m-th trial is at worst linear in m-B for some constant
0 < |8 < 1, and (equivalently)
• the expected number of mistakes on the first m trials is at worst linear in ma for some
constant 0 < a < 1.
 .) Noting several examples
of learning algorithms for which this second bound only grows poly-logarithmically in m,
the authors ask if every learnable concept class has an algorithm attaining such a bound.
Theorem 8 below answers this open question affirmatively, showing that in general the
expected number of mistakes on the first m trials need only grow as a polynomial in log m.
Thus, we expect only a minute fraction of the first m predictions to be incorrect.
 . In this paper, the authors describe a general algorithm
applicable to a wide collection of concept classes, and they show that the expected number
of mistakes made by this algorithm on the first m trials is linear in log m. However, their
algorithm requires exponential computation time, even if it is known that the concept class
R.E. SCHAPIRE
is learnable. In contrast, Theorem 8 states that, if a concept class is learnable, then there
exists an efficient algorithm making poly-logarithmic in m mistakes on average on the first
m trials.)
Haussler, Littlestone and Warmuth also consider the space efficiency of on-line
learning algorithms. They define a space-efficient learning algorithm to be one whose space
requirements on the first m trials do not exceed a polynomial in n, s and log m. Thus,
a space-efficient algorithm is one using far less memory than would be required to store
explicitly all of the preceding observations. The authors describe a number of space-efficient
algorithms (though are unable to find one for learning unions of axis-parallel rectangles
in the plane), and so are led to ask whether there exist space-efficient algorithms for all
learnable concept classes. Surprisingly, this open question can also be answered afirmatively,
as proved by the theorem below.
Lastly, Theorem 8 gives a bound on the computational complexity of on-line learning
(in terms of m). In particular, the total computation time required to process the first m
examples is only proportional to m logc m, for some constant c. Thus, in a sense, the
"amortized" or "average" computation time on the m-th trial is only poly-logarithmic in m.
(In fact, a more careful analysis would show that this is also true of the worst case computation time on the m-th trial.)
THEOREM 8. Let C be a learnable concept class. Then there exists an efficient on-line learning algorithm for C with the properties that:
• the probability of a mistake on the m-th trial is at most m-1 • p1(n, s, log m),
• the expected number of mistakes on the first m trials is at most p2(n, s, log m),
• the total computation time required on the first m trials is at most m .p3(n, s, log m), and
• the space used on the first m trials is at most p4(n, s, log m),
for some polynomials p1 ,p2 , p3 , p4 .
Proof. Since C is learnable, there exists an efficient (batch) algorithm satisfying the properties of Theorem 4. Let A be such an algorithm, but with e/2 substituted for both e and
6. Then the chance that A's output hypothesis incorrectly classifies a randomly chosen instance is at most e. .)
Fix n and s, and let m(e) be the number of examples needed by A. From Theorem 4,
m(e) < (p/e) • lgc(l/e) for some constant c and some value p implicitly bounded by a polynomial in n and s. Let E(m) = (p/m) • lgc(m/p). Then it can be verified that m(E(m)) < m
for m > 2p. Thus, m examples suffice to find an hypothesis whose chance of error is at
most e(m).
To convert A into an on-line learning algorithm in a manner that preserves time and space
efficiency, imagine breaking the sequence of trials into blocks of increasing size: the first
block consists of the first 2p trials, and each new block has twice the size of the last. Thus,
in general, the i-th block has size si = 2'p, and consists of trials ai = 2(2i-1 - l)p + 1
through bi = 2(2i - l)p.
THE STRENGTH OF WEAK LEARNABILITY
On the trials of the i-th block, algorithm A is simulated to compute the i-th hypothesis
hi. Specifically, A is simulated with e set to e(si), which thus bounds the probability that
hi misclassifies a new instance. (Note that there are enough instances available in this block
for A to compute an hypothesis of the desired accuracy.) On the next block, as the (i + l)st
hypothesis is being computed, hi is used to make predictions; at the end of this block,
hi is discarded as hi+1 takes its place.
Thus, if the m-th trial occurs in the i-th block (i.e., if ai < m < bi), then the probability
of a mistake is bounded by e(si_1), the error rate of hi-1. From the definition of e( ), this
implies the desired bound on the probability of a mistake on the m-th trial, and, in turn,
on the expected number of mistakes on the first m trials.
Finally, note that on the i-th block, space is needed only to store the hypothesis from
the last block hi_1, and to simulate A's computation of block i's hypothesis. By Theorem 4,
both of these quantities grow polynomially in log(l/e). By our choice of e, this implies
the desired bound on the algorithm's space efficiency. The time complexity of the procedure
is bounded in a similar fashion.
7. Conclusions and open problems
We have shown that a model of learnability in which the learner is only required to perform
slightly better than guessing is as strong as a model in which the learner's error can be
made arbitrarily small. The proof of this result was based on the filtering of the distribution
in a manner causing the weak learning algorithm to eventually learn nearly the entire distribution. We have also shown that this proof implies a set of general bounds on the complexity
of PAC-learning (both batch and on-line), and have discussed some of the applications of
these bounds.
It is hoped that these results will open the way on a new method of algorithm design
for PAC-learning. As previously mentioned, the vast majority of currently known algorithms
work by finding a hypothesis consistent with a large sample. An alternative approach suggested by the main result is to seek instead a hypothesis covering slightly more than half
the distribution. Perhaps, such an hypothesis is easier to find, at least from the point of
view of the algorithm designer. This approach leads to algorithms with a flavor similar
to the one described for k-term DNF in Section 5.3, and it is possible to find similar algorithms for a number of other concept classes that are already known to be learnable and rank r decision trees ). To what extent will this approach be fruitful for other classes not presently known
to be learnable? This is an open question.
Another open problem concerns the robustness of the construction described in this paper.
Intuitively, it seems that there should be a close relationship between reducing the error
of the hypothesis, and overcoming noise in the data. Is this a valid intuition? Can our construction be modified to handle noise?
Finally, turning away from the theoretical side of machine learning, we can ask how well
our construction would perform in practice. Often, a learning problem (for instance, a neural
network) is designed, implemented, and found empirically to achieve a "good" error rate,
but no way is seen of improving the program further to enable it to achieve a "great" error
R.E. SCHAPIRE
rate. Suppose our construction is implemented on top of this learning program. Would
it help? This is not a theoretical question, but one that can only be answered experimentally,
and one that obviously depends on the domain and the underlying learning program. Nevertheless, it seems plausible that the construction might in some cases give good results in
Acknowledgments
This paper was prepared with support from ARO Grant DAAL03-86-K-0171, DARPA Contract N00014-89-J-1988, and a grant from the Siemens Corporation.
Thanks to Sally Goldman, Michael Kearns, and Ron Rivest for their helpful comments
and suggestions. Thanks also to the anonymous referees of this paper for their careful reading
and thoughtful comments.