+ Human Brain Mapping 2%-78 +
Functional and Effective Connectivity
in Neuroimaging: A Synthesis
Karl J. Friston
The MRC Cyclotron Unit, Hammersmith Hospital, London, England
Abstract: The brain appears to adhere to two principles of functional organization; junctional segregation
and functional intryration. The integration within and between functionally specialized areas is mediated
by functional or ejectiue connectioity. The characterization of this sort of connectivity is an important theme
in many areas of neuroscience. This article presents one approach that has been used in functional
This article reviews the basic distinction between functional and effective connectivity (as the terms are
used in neuroimaging) and their role in addressing several aspects of functional organization (e.g. the
topography of distributed systems, integration between cortical areas, time-dependent changes in
connectivity and nonlinear interactions). Emphasis is placed on the points of contact between the
apparently diverse applications of these concepts and in particular the central role of eigenimages or
spatial modes. Although the framework that has been developed is inherently linear, it has been extended
to assess nonlinear interactions among cortical areas.
Key words: functional connectivity, effective connectivity, PET, fMRI, eigenimages, spatial modes,
19% Wilg-Liss, In&-.
multidimensional scaling, word generation, visual, modulation
INTRODUCTION
In the past decade functional neuroimaging has
been extremely successful in establishing functional
segregation as a principal of organization in the
human brain. Functional segregation is usually in-
ferred by the presence of activation foci in change
score or statistical parametric maps. The nature of the
functional specialization is then attributed to the
sensorimotor or cognitive process manipulated experi-
mentally. Newer approaches have addressed the inte-
gration of functionally specialized areas through char-
acterizing neurophysiologcal activations in terms of
distributed changes [e.g., Friston et al., 1993a,b; La-
Received for publication May 5, 1994; revision accepted September
Address reprint requests to Dr. K.J. Friston, The MRC Cyclotron
Unit, Hammersmith Hospital, Du Cane Road, London W12 OHS,
greze et al., 1993; McIntosh et al., 1993; McIntosh and
Gonzalez-Lima, 1991; Horwitz et al., 1991; Horwitz,
1990; Moeller et al., 19873. We have published d series
of papers along these lines that have introduced a
number of concepts (e.g., functional and effective
connectivity, eigenimages, spatial modes, information
theory, multidimensional scaling) and their applica-
tion to issues in imaging neuroscience (e.g., functional
systems, cortical integration, associative plasticity, and
nonlinear cortical interactions) [Friston el al., 1993a,b,c,
1994a,b,c,d]. The aim of this paper is to describe d
framework that highlights the (usually simple) relation-
ships among these concepts and their application to
neuroimaging data.
In what follows, intuitive ideas about the integra-
tion of brain activity are formulated in terms of simple
mathematical expressions. Many of the techniques
presented have their origins and counterparts in the
analysis of multiunit electrode recording data and
o 1994 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
Functional and Effective Connectivity +
multichannel EEG (and MEG) data. An effort has been
made to clarify these points of contact by referring to
strategies adopted in these other modalities. The
paper begins with a brief review of two data sets that
are used to illustrate the techniques. The PET data
were obtained during an activation study of intrinsic
work generation. The fh4RI data came from a single-
subject photic stimulation study. The second section
deals with the fundamental distinction between func-
tional connectivity (tcnrpora! correlations between remote
neurophysiological events) and effective connectivity (the
influence one neural system exerts o z w another) and their
relationship to similar concepts in electrophysiology.
The remainder of the paper is divided into two parts
which focus on 1) functional connectivity and 2)
effective connectivity.
The discussion of functional connectivity starts with
a description of how patterns of activity in the brain
can be measured and how this formulation points to
eigenimages (spatial modes) as a powerful character-
ization of distributed systems. Eigenimages are usu-
ally identified using singular value decomposition
(SVD) or related techniques. SVD is introduced and
explained. Eigenimages represent a mapping of func-
tion info anatomical spacu. These eigenvector solutions
of the functional connectivity matrix can also be used
to map anatomy into afunctional space. This complemen-
tary transformation is equivalent to metric or classical
(multidimensional) scaling. These techniques are dem-
onstrated using the PET data set. The next section
extends the concept of functional connectivity to the
interactions between two anatomically distributed
systems. The identification of systems responsible for
inter-hemispheric integration during word generation
is presented as an example. These sections on func-
tional connectivity conclude by relating functional
connectivity and information theory, in terms of the
mutual information between two distributed systems.
The sections on effective connectivity begin by
contrasting functional and effective connectivity and
addressing some of the validation issues that ensue.
The more powerful applications of effective connectiv-
ity are concerned with changes in effective connectiv-
ity. This is illustrated with time-dependent changes in
effective connectivity in the PET data and characteriz-
ing nonlinear interactions between striate and extrastri-
ate cortices with fMRI data. This interaction is an
example of activity-dependent changes in effective
connectivity. On the surface these two examples
appear a world apart; however, they use identical
techniques. These sections include a discussion of
some plausible biological mechanisms that may medi-
ate the sort of effective connectivity measured with
neuroimaging.
A PET activation study of word generation
The PET data were obtained from six subjects
scanned 12 times (every 8 min) whilst performing one
of two verbal tasks. Scans were obtained with a CTI
PET camera (model 9538 CTI, Knoxville, TN, USA).
Reconstructed images had a resolution of 5.2 mm
[Townsend et al., 1992; Spinks et al., 19921. 1 5 0 was
administered intravenously as radiolabelled water
infused over 2 min. Total counts per voxel during the
buildup phase of radioactivity served as an estimate of
rCBF [Fox and Mintun, 19891. Subjects performed two
tasks in alternation. The first task was reprating a lettu
presented aurally at one per two seconds. The second
was a paced verbal fluency task, where the subjects
responded with a word that began with the letter
presented. This design ensured that the sensorimotor
components were the same for both tasks. This data is
the same as that used in Friston et al. [1993a]. To
facilitate intersubject pooling, data were stereotacti-
cally normalized [Friston et al., 1989, 1991a; Talairach
and Tournoux, 19883.
Whole brain differences were removed using AN-
COVA [Friston et al., 19901 and the resulting mean
activity (over subjects) for each voxel was used in
subsequent analyses. A subset of voxels was selected
in which a significant amount of variance, due to the
12 conditions, was observed (ANCOVA F > 3.9
P < 0.05 df 11,54). The time-series from each of these
voxels formed a data matrix M with 12 rows (one for
each condition) and 6,477 columns (one for each
voxel). Each column of M was normalized to a mean of
The fMRl data
The data were a time-series of 64 gradient-echo EPI
coronal slices (5 mm thick, with 64 x 64 voxels
2.5 x 2.5 x 5 mm) through the calcarine sulcus and
extrastriate areas. Images were obtained every 3 sec-
onds from a normal male subject using a 4.0T whole
body system, fitted with a small (27 cm diameter)
z-gradient coil (TE 25 ms, acquisition time 41 ms).
Photic stimulation (at 16 Hz) was provided by goggles
fitted with 16 light emitting diodes. The stimulation
was off for the first 10 scans (30 s), on for the second 10,
off for the third, and so on. Images were reconstructed
without phase correction. The data were interpolated
+ Friston +
to 128 x 128 voxels. Each interpolated voxel thus
represented 1.25 X 1.25 x 5 mm of cerebral tissue. The
first four scans were removed to eliminate magnetic
saturation effects.
To correct for (slight) subject movement during the
scanning session the images were translated and
rotated to minimize the sum of squares between each
image and their average (both scaled to the same
mean intensity) using the Levenberg-Marquardt
method [More, 19771. The rotation and translations
were effected using a computationally efficient cubic
convolution interpolation method [Keys, 19811. After
this correction each voxel time-series was normalized
to a mean of zero. Only the 36 x 60 voxel subpartitions
(of the original images) containing the brain were
subject to further analysis. The result was a data
matrix M with 60 rows (one for each condition) and
2,160 columns (one for each voxel).
All image manipulations and calculations were per-
formed using Matlab (Mathworks Inc, Sherborn, MA,
FUNCTIONAL AND EFFECTIVE CONNECTIVITY
Origins and definitions
In the analysis of neuroimaging time-series func-
tional connectivity is defined as the temporal correla-
tions between spatially remote neurophysiological events
[Friston et al., 1993al. This definition is operational
and provides a simple characterization of functional
interactions. The alternative is to refer explicitly to
effective connectivity (i.e., the influence one neuronal
system exerts over another) [Friston et al., 1993133. These
sorts of concepts were originated in the analysis of
separable spike trains obtained from multiunit elec-
trode recordings [e.g., Gerstein and Perkel, 1969;
Gerstein et al., 1989; Gochin, 1991; Aertsen and Preissl,
19911. Functional connectivity is simply a statement
about the observed correlations; it does not provide
any direct insight into how these correlations are
mediated. For example, at the level of multiunit
microelectrode recordings, correlations can result from
stimulus-locked transients, evoked by a common affer-
ent input, or reflect stimulus-induced oscillafions, phasic
coupling of neural assemblies, mediated by synaptic
connections [Gerstein et al., 19891. To examine the
integration within a distributed system, defined by
functional connectivity, one turns to efective connectiv-
Effective connectivity is closer to the intuitive no-
tion of a connection and can be defined as the influence
on neural system exerts over another, either at a synaptic
(cf. synaptic efficacy) or cortical level. In elcctrophysi-
ology there is a close relationship between effective
connectivity and synaptic efficacy; "It is useful to
describe the effective connectivity with a connectivity
matrix of effective synaptic weights. Matrix elements
[C,]] would represent the effective influence by neuron
j on neuron i" [Gerstein et al., 19891. It has also been
proposed that "the [electrophysiological] notion of
effective connectivity should be understood as the
experiment and time-dependent, simplest possible
circuit diagram that would replicate the observed
timing relationships between the recorded neurons"
[Aertsen and Preissl, 19911.
Although functional and effective connectivity can
be invoked at a conceptual level in both neuroimaging
and electrophysiology they differ fundamentally at a
practical level. This is because the time-scales and
nature of the neurophydological measurements are
very different (seconds vs. milliseconds and hemody-
namic vs. spike trains).
In electrophysiology it is often necessary to remove
the confounding effects of stimulus-locked transients
(which introduce correlations that are not causally
mediated by direct neuronal interactions) in order to
reveal the underlying effective connectivity. The con-
founding effect of stimulus-evoked transients is less
problematic in neuroimaging because the promulga-
tion of dynamics from primary sensory areas onwards
is mediated by neuronal connections (usually recipro-
cal and interconnecting). However it should be remem-
bered that functional connectivity is not necessarily
due to effective connectivity (e.g., common neuro-
modulatory input from ascending aminergic neuro-
transmitter systems or thalamo-cortical aff erents) and,
where it is, effective influences may be indirect (e.g.,
polysynaptic relays through multiple areas).
All the examples presented in this paper rely on
descriptive, as opposed to inferential, statistics. In
other words the objective is to characterize interac-
tions among brain areas, not to demonstrate that any
particular characterization is significant. In some appli-
cations distributional approximations do exist to com-
pare one characterization with another, but they are
not discussed here.
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY
Measuring a pattern of correlated activity
In this section we introduce a simple way of measur-
ing the amount a pattern of activity (representing a
connected brain system) contributes to the functional
connectivity or variance-covariances observed.
+ Functional and Effective Connectivity 4
Functional connectivity is defined in terms of corre-
lations or covariance (correlations are normalized
covariances). The point to point functional connectiv-
ity between one voxel and another is not usually of
great interest. The important aspects of the covariance
structure are the patterns of correlated activity, sub-
tended by (the enormous number of) pairwise covari-
ances. In measuring these patterns it is useful to
introduce the concept of a norm. Vector and matrix
norms serve the same purpose as absolute values for
scalar quantities. In other words they furnish a mea-
sure of distance. One frequently used norm is the
2-norm, which is simply the length of the vector. The
vector 2-norm can be used to measure the degree to
which a particular pattern of brain activity contributes
to the covariance structure: If a pattern is described by
a column vector (p), with an element for each voxel,
then the contribution of that pattern to the covariance
structure can be measured by the increase (or de-
crease) in length it experiences when multiplied by
the data matrix M. This measure is provided by the
2-norm of M.p = /M.pI 2. For mathematical expedi-
ency we will work with the square of the 2-norm
(T will denote transposition).
IM.p(i = pT.MT.M.p.
Put simply the 2-norm is a number which reflects the
amount of variance-covariance or functional connec-
tivity that can be accounted for by a particular distrib-
uted pattern: If the time-dependent changes occur
predominantly in the regions described by the pattern
(p) then the correlation between the pattern of activity
and p at any one time will itself vary substantially with
each successive scan. The 2-norm measures this vari-
ance in the correlation. The pattern p embodies the
functional connectivity one is interested in. For ex-
ample if one were interested in the functional connec-
tivity between the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
(DLPFC) and the left superior temporal region one
could test for this interaction using the 2-norm in
Equation (1) where p had large values in the frontal
and temporal regions of interest.
The 2-norm has been used to good effect in demon-
strating abnormal prefrontotemporal integration in
schizophrenia [Friston et al., 1Y94a,b]. The notion that
schizophrenia represents a disintegration or fraction-
ation of the psyche is as old as its name, which was
introduced by Bleuler [1Y13] to convey a ”splitting” of
mental faculties. Many of Bleuler’s primary processes,
such as ”loosening of associations,” emphasize a
fragmentation and loss of coherent integration. In
order to investigate the neurobiological basis of this
disintegration we tested for diff erences in functional
connectivity between the left DLPFC and superior
temporal cortex between normal subjects and schizo-
phrenic patients. This involved performing a word
generation activation study in one normal and three
schizophrenic groups and testing for the integrity of
prefronto-temporal integration with a prefronto-
temporal pattern (p). This pattern had high values in
the left DLPFC and negative values in the superior
temporal regions (and smaller values elsewhere). Us-
ing this approach we were able to show that profound
negative prefronto-temporal functional connectivity
prevalent in normal subjects was absent in three
groups of schizophrenic subjects (Fig. 1). In this
instance p was actually chosen to maximize the 2-norm
differences between normal subjects and schizo-
phrenic patients by applying SVD to the differences in
covariance or functional connectivity matrices . This sort of
analysis identifies differences in functional connectiv-
ity or covariance structure (a second order eflect) as
opposed to regionally specific differences in physiol-
ogy (afirst order effect). In other words the 2-norm can
be used to characterize the difference between one
subject (or subjects) and another in terms of interac-
tions (functional connectivity) among regions. The
2-norm is an example of a statistic which (in some
instances) has a simple distributional approximation
(not discussed). It should be noted, of course, that the
2-norm only measures the pattern one is interested in.
There may be many other important differences in
functional connectivity even if the 2-norms from two
time-series are similar for a particular pattern.
Eigenimages and spatial modes
In this section the concept of eigenimages or spatial
modes is introduced in terms of the patterns of activity
(p) in the previous section. In the previous section p
was chosen to investigate an interaction of interest. In
this section we show that the spatial modes are simply
those patterns which account for the most variance-
covariance (i.e., have the largest 2-norm).
Consider the ubiquitous orthogonalization device
singular value decomposition (SVD). SVD is an opera-
tion which decomposes the original time-series (M)
into two sets of orthogonal vectors (patterns in space
and patterns in time). Let M = [m’ . . . mn]
be a matrix
of the normalized data (one column vector per voxel
time-series) and:
[usv] =SVD(M}
+ Friston +
Analysis of fronto-temporal functional connectivity in normal
subjects and schizophrenic patients. The maximum intensity projec-
tions (top) depict the positive and negative components of the
pattern (p) used to test for the covariance (functional connectivity)
of interest. The 2-norm of this pattern was markedly attenuated in
three groups of schizophrenic subjects compared to normal
such that:
M = u.s.vT.
In this equation u and v are unitary orthogonal
matrices (the sum of squares of each column is unity
and all the column are uncorrelated) and s is a
diagonal matrix (only the leading diagonal has non-
zero values) of decreasing singular values. A rearrange-
ment of Equation (2) gives:
vT.MTM.v = sz.
subjects. The 2-norm was calculated according to Equation (I)
where the data matrices (M) represented the adjusted condition
means for each of the four groups studied. The schizophrenic
patients were divided into three groups according to their perfor-
mance on FAS verbal fluency (poverty of words, odd inappropriate
words, and relatively unimpaired performance).
Because MTM is the functional connectivity matrix (p
where pa = mil.mi ) the columns of v = [v' . . . v"] are
the eigenvectors of the functional connectivity matrix.
The corresponding eigenvalues are given by the lead-
ing diagonal of sz. Referring back to Equation (1)
shows that the singular value of each eigenvector (or
singular vector) is simply its 2-norm. Because SVD
maximizes the largest singular value, the first eigenvec-
tor is the pattern which accounts for the greatest
amount of the variance-covariance structure. In other
words SVD and equivalent devices are simple and
+ Functional and Effective Connectivity
powerful ways of decomposing a neuroimaging time-
series into a series of orthogonal patterns that em-
body, in a stepdown fashion, the greatest amounts of
functional connectivity. Each eigenvector defines a
distributed brain system that can be displayed as an
image. The distributed systems that ensue are called
eigenimages or spatial modes and have been used charac-
terize the spatiotemporal dynamics of neurophysiologi-
cal time-series from several modalities; including mul-
tiunit electrode recordings [Mayer-Kress et al., 19911,
EEG [Friedrich et al., 19911, MEG [Fuchs et al., 19921,
PET [Friston et al., 1993a1, and functional MRI [Friston
et al., 1993~1.
Many readers will notice that the eigenimages
associated with the functional connectivity or covari-
ance matrix are simply the principal components of
the time-series [e.g., Friston et al., 1993a1. In the EEG
literature one sometimes comes across the Karhunen-
Loeve expansion, which is employed to identify spa-
tial modes. If this expansion is in terms of the eigenvec-
tors of the p (and it usually is), then the analysis is
formally identical to the one presented above.
One might ask what the column vectors of u
correspond to in Equation (2). The vectors are the
time-dependent profiles associated with each eigenim-
age. They reflect the extent to which an eigenimage is
expressed in each experimental condition or over
time. These vectors play an important role in the
functional attribution of the distributed systems de-
fined by the eigenimages and in setting up functional
spaces of the sort used in multidimensional scaling.
These and other points will be illustrated in the next
two sections.
Mapping function into anatomical space-
an illustration
The PET data matrix M was subject to SVD as
described in the previous section. The distribution of
eigenvalues (Fig. 2 right) suggests only two spatial
modes (distributed systems) are required to account
for most of the observed variance-covariance struc-
ture. The first mode accounted for 68% and the second
16% of the variance. The first two eigenimages (v’ and
vz) are shown in Figure 3 (right) along with the
corresponding vectors in time (u’ and u2-left). The
first eigenimage (top right) has positive loadings in the
anterior cingulate (BA 24,32), the left DLPFC (BA 46),
Broca’s area (BA 44), the thalamic nuclei, and in the
cerebellum. Negative loadings were seen bitemporally
and in the posterior cingulate (although not shown
here the negative loadings were almost identical to
the top right hand panel in Figure 5). According to u1
the first mode is prevalent in the verbal fluency tasks
with negative scores in word shadowing. The second
spatial mode (Fig. 3-lower
right) had its highest
positive loadings in the anterior cingulate and bitem-
poral regions (notably Wernicke’s area on the left).
This mode appears to correspond to a highly non-
linear, monotonic time effect with greatest promi-
nence in the earlier conditions (Fig. 3-lower left).
The post hoc functional attribution of these spatial
modes is usually based on their time-dependent pro-
files (ui). The first mode may represent an intentional
system critical for the intrinsic generation of words in
the sense that the key cognitive difference between
the verbal fluency and word shadowing conditions is
the intrinsic generation of (as opposed to extrinsically
cued) word representations and implicit mnemonic
processing. The second system, which includes the
anterior cingulate, seems to be involved in habitua-
tion; possibly of attentional or perceptual set (see Wise
[198Y] for a brief discussion of set). One might infer
this from previous PET studies on attention [Petersen
et al., 1989; Pardo et al., 1990; Corbetta et al., 19911 and
other ideas relating to the distribution of attentional
systems [Posner et al., 19901.
The anterior cingulate is an interesting example of
an area that belongs, coincidentally, to two orthogonal
systems. In other words the activity of this area
increases during the verbal fluency task and declines
with time (possibly with acquisition of perceptual set).
Yet these two effects arc totally independent.
There is nothing ”biologically” important about the
particular spatial modes obtained in this fashion, in
the sense that one could “rotate” the eigenvectors
such that they were still orthogonal and yet have
different eigenimages. The uniqueness of the particu-
lar solution given by SVD is that the first eigenimage
accounts for largest amount of the variance-covari-
ance and the second for the greatest amount that
remains and so on. The reason that the eigenimages in
the example above lend themselves to such a simple
interpretation is that the variance introduced by experi-
mental design (intentional) was substantially greater
than that due to time (attentional) and both these
sources were greater than any other effect. Other
factors that ensure a parsimonious characterization of
the time-series, with small numbers of well defined
modes include 1) smoothness in the data and 2) using
only voxels that evidenced a non-trivial amount of
change during the scanning session.
-t:-o:>sve:-se
experimental variance
Experimentally introduced variance in the PET activation study of
word generation. Left: Statistical parametric map (SPM [Friston et
al., I99 I b]) of the F ratio following an ANCOVA of the six-subject,
12-condition verbal fluency study. The maximum intensity projec-
tion display format is standard and provides three views of the brain
in the stereotactic space of Talairach and Tournoux [ I9881 (from
Mapping anatomy into functional space-
multidimensional scaling
In the previous section the functional connectivity
matrix was used to define the associated eigenimages
or spatial modes. In this section functional connectiv-
ity is used in a different way: Namely to constrain the
proximity of two cortical areas in some functional
space. The objective here is to transform anatomical
space so that the distance between cortical areas is
directly related to their functional connectivity. This
transformation defines a new space whose topogra-
phy is purely functional in nature. This space is
constructed using multidimensional scaling or princi-
pal coordinates analysis [Gower, 19661.
Multidimensional scaling (MDS) is a descriptive
method for representing of the structure of a system,
on the basis of pairwise measures of similarity or
confusability [Torgerson, 1958; Shepard, 19801. The
resulting multidimensional spatial configuration of
the system's elements embody (in their proximity
relationships) the comparative similarities. The tech-
nique was developed primarily in the analysis of
eig envalue spectrum
spatial mode
the back, from the right, and from the top). Right: Eigenvalues
(singular values squared) of the functional connectivity matrix
reflecting the reiative amounts of variance accounted for by the I I
spatial modes associated with this data. Only two eigenvalues are
greater than unity and to all intents and purposes the changes
characterizing this time-series can be considered two-dimensional.
perceptual spaces. The proposal that stimuli be mod-
eled by points in space, so that perceived similarity is
represented by spatial distances, goes back to the days
of Isaac Newton . The implementation of this
idea is however relatively new [see Shepard, 19801. A
typical model underlying MDS can be summarized by:
where Fmon(.) is a decreasing monotonic function. 6,, is
the measure of similarity (functional connectivity)
between elements (voxels) i and j. d,, is the distance
between them in a Euclidean functional space. xi is the
Ith coordinate of element (voxel) i in this new space.
( z means equal, except for unspecified error terms.)
Imagine K measures from n voxels plotted as n
points in a K-dimensional space (K-space). If they have
been normalized to zero mean and unit sum of
squares, these points will fall on a K-1 dimensional
+ Functional and Effective Connectivity
singular vectors
spatial modes {eigenimages}
conditions
Spatial modes and singular vectors. Left. Time-dependent expres-
sion of the spatial modes (u') or alternatively eigenvectors of the
distribution of points in a functional space (i.e., eigenvectors of
MMT). The attribution of the corresponding spatial modes, or
direction in a functional space, depends on relating this vector to
the tasks employed during the activation. The first vector (top) is
clearly related to the difference between word generation (even-
numbered conditions) and word shadowing (odd-numbered scans).
hypersphere. The closer any two points are to each other,
then the greater their correlation or functional connectivity
(in fact the correlation is the cosine of the angle
subtended at the origin). The distribution of these
points embodies the functional topography. A view of
this distribution that reveals the greatest structure is
simply obtained by rotating the points to maximize
their apparent dispersion (variance). In other words
one looks at the subspace with the largest "volume"
This difference is the intentional or intrinsic generation of word
representations. The second vector (bottom) corresponds to
some largely monotonic time effect we have labelled attentional.
Right: The eigenimages or spatial modes corresponding to the first
two eigenvectors of the functional connectivity matrix. These
modes are the eigenvectors of MTM. The eigenimages are dis-
played as a maximum intensity projection in standard SPM format.
The color scale is arbitrary and each SPM is scaled to its maximum.
spanned by the principal axes of the n points in
K-space. These principal axes are given by the eigen-
vectors of M.MT., i.e., the column vectors of u. From
M.MT = u.s'.u'.
Let X = [x' . . . xT ]'be the matrix of desired coordinates
derived by simply projecting the original data (MT)
onto the axes defined by u:
Voxels that have a correlation of unity will occupy
the same point in the MDS space. Voxels that have
independent dynamics (p,] = 0) will be d 2 apart.
Voxels that are negatively but totally correlated
(p,] = -1) will maximally separated (by a distance of 2).
Profound negative correlations denote a functional
association that are modeled in the MDS functional
space as diametrically opposed locations on the hyper-
sphere. In other words two regions with profound
negative correlations will form two "poles" in func-
tional space.
This approach is equivalent to using the functional
connectivity (p,)
as the measure of similarity (?ill = p ],)
This can be seen by noting that the points defined
by the coordinates (xi) are an orthogonal rotation of
the original data (mk-the kth element of mi). Because
orthogonal rotation does not change Euclidean dis-
An illustration
Following normalization to unit SUVJ of squares o z w
each column M was subject to singular value decompo-
sition according to Equation (2) and the coordinates X
of the voxels in the MDS functional space computed as
in Equation (5). Recall that only two eigenvalues
exceed unity (Fig. 2-right)
suggesting the functional
space is essentially two dimensional. The locations of
voxels in this two-dimensional subspace are shown in
Figure 4 (lower row) by rendering voxels from differ-
ent regions in different colours. The anatomical re-
gions corresponding to the different colours are shown
in Figure 4 (upper row). Anatomical regions were
selected to include those parts of the brain which
showed the greatest variance during the 12 conditions
(see Fig. 2-left).
Anterior regions (Fig. 4-right)
cluded the mediodorsal thalamus (blue), the dorsolat-
era1 prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and Broca's area (red),
and the anterior cingulate (green). Posterior regions
(Fig. P l e f t ) included the superior temporal regions
(red), the posterior superior temporal regions (blue),
and the posterior cingulate (green). The correspond-
ing functional spaces (Fig. 4-lower
row) reveal a
number of things about the functional topography
elicited by this set of activation tasks. First each
anatomical regon maps into a relatively localized
portion of functional space. This preservation of local
contiguity reflects the high correlations within ana-
tomical regions, due in part to smoothness in the
original data and to high degrees of intraregional
functional connectivity. Secondly the anterior regions
are almost in juxtaposition as are the posterior regions;
however, the confluence of anterior and posterior
regions form two diametrically opposing poles (or one
axis). This configuration suggests an anterior-poste-
rior axis with prefrontotemporal and cingulocingulate
components. One might have predicted this configura-
tion by noting that the anterior regions had high
positive loadings on the first eigenimage (see top right
panel of Figure 3) while the posterior regions had high
negative loadings [see top right panel Figure 5 (which
is very similar to the negative loadings)]. Thirdly
within the anterior and posterior sets of regions
certain generic features are evident. The most striking
is particular ordering of functional interactions. For
example the functional connectivity between the pos-
terior cingulate (green) and superior temporal regions
(red} is high and similarly for the superior temporal
(red) and posterior temporal regions (blue), yet the
posterior cingulate and posterior temporal regions
show very little functional connectivity (they are d 2
apart or equivalently subtend 90" at the origin).
These results are consistent with known anatomical
connections. For example DLPFC-anterior cingulate
connections, DLPFC-temporal connections, bitempo-
ral commissural connections, and mediodorsal tha-
lamic-DLPFC projections have all been demonstrated
in nonhuman primates [e.g., Goldman-Rakic, 1986,
19881. The mediodorsal thalamic region and DLPFC
are so correlated that one is embedded within the
other (purple area). This is pleasing given the known
thalamocortical projections to the DLPFC.
At this point one might ask if absolute position in
the MDS functional space has any meaning. For
example, is the fact that the fronto-temporal axis is
horizontal (as opposed to vertical) important? The
answer is yes. Each dimension (ui) of the transformed
space has the same specific functional attribution as
the spatial mode (v'). Consequently one could desig-
nate the first horizontal dimension of the functional
space (u') as intentional (corresponding to the inten-
tional or intrinsic generation of words) and the second
+ Functional and Effective Connectivity +
Anaiomical regions
Anatomical regions
Functional space
Functional space
Classical or metric scaling analysis of the functional topography of
intrinsic word generation in normal subjects. Top: Anatomical
regions categorized according to their colour. The designation was
by reference to the atlas of Talairach and Tournoux .
Bottom: Regions plotted in a functional space following the scaling
transformation. In this space the proximity relationships reflect the
functional connectivity between regions. The colour of each voxel
corresponds to the anatomical region it belongs to. The brightness
reflects the local density of points corresponding to voxels in
anatomical space. This density was estimated by binning the
number of voxels in 0.02 ‘boxes’ and smoothing with a Gaussian
kernel of full width at half maximum of three boxes. Each colour
was scaled to its maximum brightness.
vertical dimension (u2) as attentinnal (attentional
changes or changes in perceptual set as the experi-
ment proceeds).
This perspective provides a slightly richer interpre-
tation of the functional space in the following way:
Functional connectivity (distance) between two re-
gons can be partitioned into intentional (horizontal)
and attentional (vertical) components. For example
the horizontal proximity of the DLFPC (red) and
anterior cingulate (green) is greater than their vertical
proximity. In other words the functional connectivity
between the DLPFC and anterior cingulate is domi-
nated by the intentional aspects of the tasks used to
elicit the functional interactions.
It is fortuitous that the data used to illustrate this
approach were essentially two dimensional. If the
data have a greater dimensionality then it is necessary
to provide several ”views” of the functional space to
completely capture the important relationships.
Functional connectivity between systems
Hitherto we have been dealing with the functional
connectivity between two voxels. The same notion
can, however, be extended to the functional connectiv-
ity between two systems by noting that there is no
fundamental difference between the dynamics of one
voxel and the dynamics of a distributed system or
pattern. The functional connectivity between two
systems is simply the correlation or covariance be-
tween their time-dependent activity. The time-depen-
+ Fristorr +
Systems subtending the greatest inter-hemispheric integration as
defined by SVD. Upper row: The systems associated with the
largest singular value. Lower row: The systems associated with the
second largest singular value. Left: Activity of the system depicted
on the left; right hemisphere, solid line; left hemisphere, broken
line. Right: images corresponding to the pairs of singular vectors in
Equation (10). Because each vector specifies the value of voxels in
each hemisphere the two systems can be shown in one image.
Although the bitemporal regions figure in both the first and second
pairs the first pair implicates the posterior cingulate, whereas the
second pair includes the anterior cingulate.
dent activity of a system or pattern p is gven by:
therefore:
ppq = mqT.mp = qT.MT.Mp
where pp4 is the functional connectivity between the
systems described bv vectors p and q. Note that
different spatial modes have no functional connectiv-
ity (i.e., pvivj = 0; i f j). Consider next functional con-
nectivity between two systems in separate parts of the
brain, for example the right and left hemispheres.
Here the data matrices (MP and Mq) derive from
different sets of voxels and eqii(8) becomes:
ppq = mi.rnp = qT.Mi.Mp.p.
If one wanted to identify the intra-hemispheric
systems that showed the greatest inter-hemispheric
functional connectivity one would need to identify
Functional and Effective Connectivity +
the set of vectors p and q that maximize ppq in
Equation (9). SVD finds yet another powerful applica-
tion in doing just this:
[usv] = SVD{M;.M,}
such that:
M;.M, = u.s.vT
u~.M;.M,.v = s.
The first columns of U and V represent the singular
images that correspond to two systems that evidence
the greatest amount of functional connectivity (the
singular values in the diagonal matrix S). In words
SVD of the (generally asymmetric) covariance matrix
based on the time-series from two anatomically sepa-
rate parts of the brain yields a series of paired vectors
(Ui and Vi) that, in a stepdown fashion, define pairs of
brain systems that show the greatest functional connec-
To illustrate this the data matrix M was partitioned
into a matrix that included all the voxels from the right
hemisphere (M,) and a matrix that included voxels
from the left hemisphere (MJ. These two matrices
were subject to SVD as in Equation (10) and the first
two pairs of singular vectors were rendered as images.
Because each pair of vectors (V and Vi) are non-
overlapping in space they can be displayed in the
same anatomical projection (Fig. 5-upper
and V1 and lower right U2 and V2). The corresponding
time-dependent activities (M,.Vi and M,.Ui) are plot-
ted on the left.
This analysis reveals that the first pair of systems
subtending the greatest interhemispheric integration
(Fig. 5-upper
row) are the bitemporal regions and
posterior cingulate (the negative parts of these profile
are not shown and included the left DLPFC). The
covariances mediating this integration reflect the inten-
tional aspects of the tasks and these pairs of patterns
are almost indistinguishable from the first spatial
mode. The second pair (Fig. S l o w e r row) includes
the bitemporal regions and the anterior cingulate. The
corresponding profile of activities suggests these inter-
actions could be designated as attentional (habituation
of set-cf.
the second spatial mode).
Functional connectivity and information theory
This, the final section on functional connectivity,
places functional connectivity in the context of infor-
mation theory. In the previous section we provided a
way of assessing the functional connectivity between
two single systems, each defined by a pattern or
vector. In this section we consider the functional
connectivity between two anatomical regions. The
essential difference is that the dynamics of a voxel,
system, or pattern is given by a single time-series. The
dynamics of an anatomical region containing n voxels
is given by n time-series. The extension of functional
connectivity from uni- to multidimensional time-
series requires a measure of mutual dependence called
mutual information (MI). MI is a measure of the
predictability of one set of multidimensional measure-
ments given another; it an information theoretic mea-
sure that reflects mutual dependence. More formally:
MI,, = log([ ~ M ~ . M , ~ . ~ M ~ . M ~ ~ / ~ M T . M ~ ] 1 ~ 2 )
where 1 . 1 denotes the determinant and M, and M,
denote partitions of the data matrix as above. The
determinant of a covariance matrix (e.g., /Mi. Mpl.)
can be thought of as the multidimensional equivalent
of variance. Because the determinant is unaffected by
orthogonal rotation the determinants can be simply
expressed in terms of the singular values. For example
[from Eq. (2)]:
In other words the mutual information between
two spatially extended regions is the log of the
products of singular values associated with all the
spatial modes on considering the regions separately
divided by the product obtained by considering the
two regions together. Functional connectivity and
mutual information both reflect the same thing. In the
limiting case of just two voxels (or patterns) it is easy
to show that:
where p is the functional connectivity expressed as a
correlation. MI has been used as a measure of intra-
hemispheric functional connectivity to investigate in-
terhemispheric integration in normal subjects and
schizophrenic patients with some interesting results
[Friston and Frith, 1994~1.
+ Friston +
Clearly this form of quantifying cortico-cortical inte-
gration is well suited to the characterization of puta-
tive disconnection syndromes. It should be noted that
computing the MI requires that the matrices are
nonsingular (the determinant is not equal to zero).
This requires the number of time-series be smaller
than the number of observations. In practice it is
therefore necessary to apply Equation (11) to the
dynamics of the spatial modes [Eq. (8)] as opposed to
the original voxel time-series.
EFFECTIVE CONNECTIVITY
Models and validation
Functional connectivity is an operational definition.
Effective connectivity is not. It depends on some
model of the influence one neuronal system exerts
over another. In this sense the validity of effective
connectivity reduces to the validity of the model. We
shall consider linear and nonlinear models and several
approaches to establishing validity. Perhaps the sim-
plest model of effective connectivity expresses the
hemodynamic change at one voxel as a weighted sum
of changes elsewhere. The weights or coefficients can
then be identified with effective connectivity: For
example, in matrix notation, one has:
mi = M.C' + e
where Ci is a column-vector of effective connectivities
from all locations to the one in question (i). e is an
error term that is not correlated with any voxel
time-series. If one selects a point (i) in the brain and
asks; what is the effective connection strength be-
tween the location chosen and all other locations?,
then one wants to know the values of all the elements
of Ci. The least squares solution for Ci is [Binmore,
This solution can be regarded as a simple linear
regression where the effective connectivity (C,,) re-
flects the amount of rCBF variability, at i, attributable
to rCBF changes at location j. Implicit in this interpre-
tation is a mediation of this influence by neuronal
connections with an effective strength equal to Gj.
There are three issues that deserve comment when
estimating effective connectivity from neuroimaging
data in this way. First these equations are linear,
whereas cerebral physiology is not. However the
analysis of functional connectivity (see previous sec-
tions) suggested that the linear system was a suffi-
ciently good approximation to account for observed
changes in rCBF in a fairly comprehensive and mean-
ingful way. Secondly the fact that there are only a few
observations (12 in the PET study) but many (here
6,477) voxels means the set of inconsistent linear
equations Equation (14) represents are underdeter-
mined, The problem of underdetermination is dealt
with finding a solution with the minimum 2-norm of
all minimizers [Golub and Van Loan, 19911. This is
formally equivalent to solving the equation in the
space defined by the spatial modes or eigenimages.
Herein is a fundamental mathematical link between
functional connectivity and effective connectivity when
assessed in short time-series of spatially extended
systems like images. Mathematically:
mi = M.v.ai + e
is solved for a', where Ci = v.ai. As in previous sections
v = [vl . . . v'] is a matrix of r eigenimages and M.v =
U.S. Only the r (or less) eigenvectors with non-zero (or
large) eigenvalues are used, giving:
Ci = v.s-2.vTMT.mi = v. pinv(M.v).m'
where pinv(.) denote the pseudo inverse. Although
this works mathematically, the question 'is the estima-
tion of c' a good one?' remains.
Issues of validity
Because effective connectivity is not on operational
definition (cf. functional connectivity) and is univer-
sally based on some model, issues of validity should
always be addressed. These can be seen as comments
on the validity of the model to account for the
influences one neural system can be inferred to exert
over another. In our work we separate these com-
ments into those dealing with construct validity (does
the model have validity in terms of another construct
or framework, face validity (does the model capture
what it is meant to), and predictive validity (does the
model accurately predict the system's behaviour).
To illustrate how one might address the validity of
the simple linear model above [Eq. (14)] consider
construct validity in terms of anatomical connectivity.
The premise here is that if the topography of effective
connections conform to the known anatomical effer-
ents to a particular area, one sort of construct validity
would have established. Figure 6 (lower row) presents
+ Functional and Effective Connectivity +
maximum intensity projections of (the positive values
of) c‘ where the reference region (i) was placed in the
left DLPFC (top). These estimates were derived using
Equation (17) using the first and last eight PET scans of
the word generation study (the reason for using these
subsets relates to the examination of time-dependent
changes described below). The key (darker) sources of
effective connections include contiguous and exten-
sive parts of the DLPFC, frontal operculum and
Broca’s area (BA 44), the anterior cingulate (BA 24,32),
a midline region centred on the medial dorsal tha-
lamic nuclei, the retrosplenial cortex, and a more
ventral area (including the brainstem), coextensive
laterally with the parahippocampal gyri. These connec-
tions have been demonstrated anatomically (either as
direct or indirect) in nonhuman primates [Goldman-
Raluc, 1986, 19881. Face validity can be established
using the empirical data matrix (M) and an assumed
effective connectivity (C”). These simulations involve
computing the expected rCBF (ma) in a hypothetical
repon using C”. and Equation (14), and then working
backwards to solve for C”, using only M and ma.
Clearly this would be a rather circular exercise were it
not for the underdetermination of the problem and
the effect of simulated noise (ea). Predictive validity
can be assessed as the ability to predict changes in
activity at some reference region on the basis of the
observed changes elsewhere and effective connection
strengths esfimatedfrom independent data .
Provisional experience suggests that the linear model
[Eq. (14)] can be unnaturally well behaved. One
explanation for this is that the dimensionality (the
number of things which are going on) of the physi-
ological changes over the brain can be very small. In
fact the distribution of eigenvalues associated with the
PET study suggest a dimensionality of two or three
(Fig. 2-right)
in the subset of voxels analyzed. In
other words the brain responds to simple and well
organized experiments in a simple and well organized
way. In the example presented despite having mea-
surements in 6,477 voxels there are only substantial
changes in two or three spatial modes. As there are
more than three observations the apparently underde-
termined problem is, in one sense, overdetermined.
Finally it is important to realize that effective connec-
tivity is being estimated in terms of the eigenimages
([v’ . . . vr]). If a particular pattern of connections has
nothing in common with any of the eigenimages used
in the least squares analysis, then these connections
will ”not be seen.” In other words the pattern of rCBF
correlations completely constrains the estimation of
effective connections which are, as a result, time and
experiment-dependent.
The mathematical relationship between functional
and linear effective connectivity
There is a very simple relationship between the
functional connectivity and effective connectivity ma-
trices if we are dealing with a linear model. By
substituting M for mi in Equation (17) we obtain:
effective connectivity matrix = C = v.vT.
Compare this with the equivalent expression for the
functional connectivity matrix
p = M’.M = VXV’
One way of interpreting this relationship is to note
that linear effective connectivity can be represented
by a series of orthogonal (noninteracting) spatial
modes that are all self connected with unit strength.
The functional ”self” connectivity is simply the vari-
ance of each mode, namely the eigenvalues in the
leading diagonal of h (= s2). The simplicity of effective
connectivity assessed with a linear model is reflected
in the fact that C is symmetric (C,, = C,,). Clearly the
face validity of linear effective connectivity is some-
what limited by this and points to the importance of
nonlinear models where asymmetry is allowed (see
CHANGES IN EFFECTIVE CONNECTIONS
In the next two sections we apply the concept of
effective connectivity to two neurobiologcal ques-
tions. In both examples the questions can be formu-
lated in terms of effective connection strength changes
from one set of circumstances to another. The first
example uses the PET data and shows that the changes
in C,, with time conform to those changes that would be
predicted by an associative model of synaptic plastic-
ity applied to the C, estimates. The second example
demonstrates the presence of modulatory interactions
between V2 and V l using fMRI data. In this instance
modulation is characterized by a change in “appar-
ent” C,, with activity intrinsic to the area being
nodulated. This can be seen by considering the C, in
the absence of any intrinsic activity. As there is
nothing to modulate the apparent C,, will be zero.
Although these models differ on many levels they
share a common reliance on demonstrating a change in
connection strengths and the same mathematical tech-
+ Friston +
effective connectivity (1 st 8 scans)
last 8 scans
The estimated effective connectivity to a region in the dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex (centred on x,y,z = -40,28, I 6 according to the
atlas of Talairach and Tournoux [ 19881). Top: the location of the
reference region (all voxels within I2 mrn of the reference
location). Lower right and left: The mean effective connectivity
estimated as in eqn( 17) on the basis of the first and last eight scans
of the I2 scan time-series. The gray scale is arbitrary. The main
regions highlighted include the left prefrontal cortex, midline and
thalamic structures, and the anterior cingulate.
Time-dependent changes in linear
effective connectivity
models can be applied to rCBF data and, in particular,
the changes in effective connectivity they predict.
Finally provisional evidence is presented confirming
that the predicted changes are indeed observed.
Lopez et al. have characterized associative
long term modification of the ipsilateral and contralat-
era1 synapses formed by the bilateral entorhinal corti-
cal (EC) projections to the dentate gyrus (DG) using
This section introduces the sort of electrophysiologi-
cal evidence that has been used in support of associa-
tive plasticity in the brain and relates empirically
determined equations to general rules which model
synaptic change. We then see how these associative
+ Functional and Effective Connectivity +
extracellular recording of population excitatory post-
synaptic potentials. The contingencies of associatcd
pre- and post-synaptic activation accurately prcdicted
the altered synaptic responses of both ipsilateral and
contralateral EC-DG pathways to stimulation. The
authors proposed that the simplest equation consis-
tent with these (and other electrophysiological obser-
vations) has the form:
(our notation where mt and m(, are post and pre
synaptic activity respectively). f(.) is some monotonic
function and (
j denotes averaging over time (t). This
equation is a variant of Kohonen's cquation.
Assumingf(.) is linear Equation (18) becomes a special
case of a more generic form (in matrix notion):
ACi = dMTmi - +(M,mi,Cij
used by Oja (our notation), where ACi is the
change in effective connectivity and dMTmi is an
associative or Hebbian term reflecting the correlation
between pre- (M) and post- (mi) synaptic activity.
+(M,mi,ci) is a nonassociative, decay or "forgetting"
term which does not depend on an interaction be-
tween pre- and post-synaptic activity. The variables d
and + are constants which govern the rate of associa-
tive plasticity and decay respectively.
Applying the notion of associative plasticity to rCBF
data means that one expects to see an increase in
effective connectivity between two brain regions if
their rCBF goes up and down together. In other words
if two regons have high activity at the same time, the
effective connections between them will be consoli-
dated (the mediation of this effect is discussed below).
The behavior predicted by associative or Hebbian
changes of this sort is that the connections to any brain
region will come to reflect the dominant pattern of
correlations in inputs from the rest of the brain. Thc
most dominant pattern of correlations is described by
the first spatial mode (v,). In other words the connec-
tions from the distributed brain regions defined by the
first mode will be selectively enhanced relative to any
competing pattern. The average strength of connec-
tions from the kth spatial mode is a at = v l Ci; this is
simply the dot product or "overlap" between the
mode and the pattern of afferent connection strengths.
Alternatively a; can be thought as a single virtual
conrzection from the distributed brain system defined
by vk. Associative plasticity would predict that the
changeinaa; > a; > aiand soon.
The hypothesis that changes in effective connectiv-
ity would show this behavior can be tested by measur-
ing c' at the beginning of an experiment and some
time later and estimating the change (ACi). Figure 7
(left) shows A c where the two Ci were the estimates
shown in Figure 6 (for the first and last eight scans of
the 12 scan time-series). Again this estimation is in the
space defined by the spatial modes (in this instance of
the whole time series):
= v.( pinv(Mul,.v).mi - pinv(Mul,.v).m!'
where the subscripts 1 and 2 denote different parts of
the time series (in the example presented-the
and last eight scans).
The resulting profile of time-dependent changes in
effective connectivity to the left DLPFC show in-
creased effective connectivity from the anterior cingu-
late, frontal operculum, midline (thalamic) structures,
and some temporal regions (Fig. 7-left). To see if this
profile was consistent with an associative model of
effective connectivity the connection strengths from
the first three spatial modes were computed for the
two sets of data. It can be seen that, as predicted, the
first spatial mode has increased its contribution,
whereas the second and third have reduced their
(negative) contribution (Fig. 7-right). A more compre-
hensive analysis is presented in Friston et al. [1993b];
however it should be noted that the results here and
in Friston et al. [1993b] are only used to illustrate the
idea and methodology. Clearly a proper examination
of time-dependent changes in effective connectivity
would require exhaustive empirical study and a well
validated experimental model of effective connectiv-
The relationship between synaptic
and physiological plasticity
The results in the previvus section suggest rCBF and
electrophysiological measurements can show a degree
of homology in terms of associative changes in effec-
tive connectivity. The use of a Hebbian model, to
account for changes in rCBF, implies that when two
brain regions are highly correlated, in terms of their
physiology, then the effective connectivity between
Time-dependent changes in effective connectivity. Left: Changes in
effective connectivity between the estimates presented in Figure 6.
The nature of these changes is characterized by the two graphs on
the right: These represent the average connectivity from the first
them should increase. To invoke synaptic plasticity as
the underlying mechanism presupposes that two re-
gions that have coincident high pool activity (reflected
in their rCBF) contain neurons whose activity is highly
coherent on a time scale of milliseconds: temporal
summation of two EPSPs will only occur within 15 ms
[Nelson et al., 19921. This is important because this
temporal summation may be instrumental in the
induction of short and long term potentiation (STP
Is it then reasonable to suppose that two regions
with high pool activity will share a significant number
three spatial modes (ak in text). It can be seen that the first mode
increases its contribution whereas the remaining two connectivities
are attenuated. This is predicted by an associative model of changes
in effective connectivity,
of neurons whose dynamic interactions occur within a
time frame of milliseconds? We suggest it is. There are
two lines of evidence in support of a cooperative
interaction between fast dynamic correlations and
slow covariation of pool activity: 1) Aertsen and Preissl
 have investigated the behavior of artificial
networks, analytically and using simulations. They
concluded that short term effective connectivity varies
strongly with, or is modulated by, pool activity. Pool
activity is the product of the number of neurons and
their mean firing rate. The mechanism is simple; the
efficacy of subthreshold EPSPs (excitatory post-
Functional and Effective Connectivity 4
synaptic potentials) in establishing dynamic interac-
tions is a function of postsynaptic depolarization,
which in turn depends on the tonic background of
activity. 2) The second line of evidence is experimental
and demonstrates that the presence of fast interac-
tions is associated with intermediate or long term
correlations between distant neurons or neuronal
groups. Nelson et al. I19921 have characterized effec-
tive connections between neurons or small groups of
neurons, in BA 17 and BA 18 of cat extrastriate cortex.
By cross-correlating activity they demonstrated that
the most likely temporal relationship between spikes
was a synchronous one. Furthermore the cross-
correlograms segregated into three nonoverlapping
groups with modal widths of 3 ms, 30 ms, and 400 ms.
The short term correlation structures (3 and 30 ms)
where almost always associated with the intermediate
(400 ms) correlations. These observations suggest an
interaction between short term ( < 100 ms) and interme-
diate (100-1,000 ms) effective connectivity.
In summary co-activated regions will have in-
creased rCBF and neuronal pool activity. Higher
background discharge rates augment post-synaptic
depolarization and susceptibility to fast dynamic inter-
actions, STP and LTP, both within and between the
regions co-activated. This sort of cooperative interac-
tion between neuronal populations has been pro-
posed as part of the theory of neuronal group selec-
tion [Edelman, 19781 and related work in this field
makes explicit use of fast dynamic correlations [Sporns
et al., 1989; Tononi et al., 19921.
Nonlinear models of effective connectivity
Reversible cooling experiments in monkey visual
cortex, during visual stimulation, have demonstrated
that neuronal activity in V2 depends on forward
inputs from V1. Conversely neuronal activity in V1 is
modulated by backward or reentrant connections from
V2 to V1 [Schiller and Malpeli, 1977; Sandell and
Schiller, 1982; Girard and Bullier, 19881. In this section
evidence is presented for a homologous asymmetry in
reciprocal connections between V1 and V2 in human
cortex, using physiological measurements obtained
with functional MRI.
Nonlinear interactions between VI and V2
Evidence for functional asymmetries is found in the
work of Schiller and colleagues [Schiller and Malpeli,
1977; Sandell and Schiller, 19821 on interactions be-
tween V1 and V2. Retinotopically corresponding re-
gions of V1 and V2 are reciprocally connected in the
monkey. V1 provides a crucial input to V2, in the
sense that visual activation of V2 cells depends on
input from V1. This dependency has been demon-
strated by reversibly cooling (deactivating) V1 while
recording from V2 during visual stimulation [Schiller
and Malpeli, 1977; Girard and Bullier, 19881. In con-
trast, cooling V2 has a more modulatory effect on V1
unit activity. “Most cells became less responsive to
visual stimulation, while a few became more active
during cooling.” The cells in V1 that were most
affected by V2 deactivation were in the infragranular
layers, suggesting V2 may use this pathway to modu-
late the output from V1 [Sandell and Schiller, 19821.
Similar conclusions about the return pathway be-
tween V5 and V2 were drawn by Girard and Bullier
 : because, in the absence of V1 input, these
reentrant connections do not constitute an efficient
drive to V2 cells, their role is most likely “to modulate
the information relayed through area 17” (Vl). The
term modulatory is strictly functional and can be
applied to either anatomically forward or backward
connections.
A nonlinear model of effective connectivity
To examine the interactions between V1 and V2 we
used a nonlinear model of effective connectivity,
extended to include a modulatory interaction:
This model has two terms which allow for the
activity in area i to be influenced by the activity in area
j . The first represents an effect which depends only on
afferent input from areaj. This is the activity i n j scaled
by Cf. The coefficient Cf will be referred to as an
obligafory connection strength, in the sense that a
change in area j results in an obligatory response in
area i. Conversely the second term reflects a modula-
tory influence of area j on area i. The coefficient
determining the size of this effect (Cr) will be referred
to as a modulatory connection strength, because the
overall effect depends on both the afferent input (Cy.
mi) and intrinsic activity (mk).
This equation, or model, can be interpreted from
two points of view; 1) by analogy with the nonlinear
behaviour that characterizes voltage-dependent chan-
nels in electrophysiology or 2) in terms of classical
(pharmacological) neuromodulation where post-syn-
aptic responsiveness is modulated without a direct
effect on post-synaptic membrane potential. The volt-
age-dependent analogy is obtained by considering mk
as post-synaptic potential and mk as a depolarizing
current. According to Equation (21) a high Cy reflects a
greater sensitiz7ity to changes in input at higher levels of
intrinsic actizlity. In electrophysiological terms this
translates as a change in post-synaptic depolarization,
in response to a fixed depolarizing current, which
increases with depolarization: This is a characteristic
of voltage-dependent interactions [Haberly, 19911.
This intrinsic activity-dependent effect, determined by
the value of Cy, provides an intuitive sense of how to
estimate Cy. This estimation involves measuring the
difference in sensitivity between states with high and
low intrinsic activity at the location of interest:
Imagine one were able to "fix" the activity in V1 at a
low level and measure the connectivity between V2
and V1 assuming a simple linear relationship [Eq.
(14)]: a value for the sensitivity of V1 to V2 changes
could be obtained, say C,.
Now, if the procedure were
repeated with V1 activity fixed at a high level, a
second (linear) estimate would be obtained (C2). In the
presence of a substantial modulatory interaction be-
tween V2 and V1 the second estimate will be higher
than the first. This is because the activity intrinsic to V1
is higher for the second estimate and V1 should be
more sensitive to inputs from V2. In short C2 - C,
provides an estimate of the modulatory influence of
V2 on V1. The activity of V1 can be fixed post hoc by
simply selecting a subset of data in which the Vl
activity is confined to some small range.
An estimation of the effective connection strengths
of both an obligatory and modulatory nature can be
obtained for the connections between all voxels and a
reference location in the following way; for any
reference location (i) assume that a subset of the
time-series can be selected so that m; is limited to some
small range about its mean ((m;)). For this subset
Equation (21) can be approximated by Equation (14)
(omitting error terms for clarity):
mk = Cc?.mk + (mk)Ccy.mL
= mj.(Co + (mi)CM)
Where C = Co + (mi).CM. Now assume two such
subsets are selected, one with a high mean ((mi)2) and
one with a low mean ((mi)2) giving two solutions for C
(C, and Cl), then:
CM = (C, - C,)/((mi)2 -
 . AC is computed using exactly
the same approach as in the section of time-depen-
dent changes, namely using Equation (20). In the
present application subsets 1 and 2 are subsets of the
time-series selected on the basis of intrinsic activity
(mi) being high or low. This general approach to
characterizing nonlinear systems with a piece-wise
series of locally linear models has proved a fruitful
strategy in many instances [Tsonis, 19921. See Palus et
al. for a conceptually related approach to
multichannel EEG recordings.
The hypothesis that asymmetrical nonlinear V1 -
V2 interactions would characterize cortical interac-
tions in human visual cortex can be formulated in
terms of Cy: We predicted that 1) the modulatory
component of effective connections to V1 would be
regonally specific and include V2 (C&2 would be
relatively high compared to other regions), and that 2)
the forward modulatory influences from V1 to V2
(CY2,"J would be smaller than the reciprocal influ-
ences (CY,,"J.
Regional specificity of modulatory connections to V I
A reference voxel was chosen in V1, according to the
atlas of Talairach and Tournoux , and the effec-
tive connection strengths C:!,!
and CY, were esti-
were generated for all voxels, allowing maps of
and Cv1,] to be constructed. These maps provided a
direct test of the hypothesis concerning the topogra-
phy and regional specificity of modulatory influences
on V1. The lower rows in Figure 8 are maps of C&,, and
(for a reference in V1 on the right) and reflect the
degree to which the area exerts an obligatory (left) or
modulatory (right) effect on V1 activity. These maps
have been thresholded at 1.64 after normalization to a
standard deviation of unity. This corresponds to an
uncorrected threshold of P = 0.05.
The obligatory connections to the reference voxel
derive mainly from V1 itself, both ipsilaterally and
contralaterally with a small contribution from contigu-
ous portions of V2. The effective connectivity from
contralateral V1 should not be overinterpreted given
that 1) the source of many afferents to V1 (the lateral
geniculate nuclei) where not included in the field of
view and that 2) this finding can be more parsimoni-
ously explained by "common input." As predicted,
and with remarkable regional specificity, the modula-
tory connections were most marked from ipsilateral
mated as described above. Values for C",,!
6 and Cy,,,
+ Functional and Effective Connectivity +
Maps of the estimates of obligatory and modulatory connection
strengths to VI . Top left Anatomical features of the coronal data
used. This image is a high resolution anatomical MRI scan of the
subject that corresponds to the fMRl slices. The box defines the
position of a (36 x 60 voxel) subpartition of the fMRl time-series
selected for analysis. Top right: The location of the reference
voxel designated as VI (white dot). This location is shown on a
statistical parametric map of physiological variance (calculated for
V2, dorsal and ventral to the calcarine fissure (Brod-
mann's area 18 according to the atlas of Talairach and
Tournoux ) (note that "common input" cannot
explain interactions between V1 and V2 because the
geniculate inputs are restricted to Vl).
To address the functional asymmetry hypothesis
the modulatory connection strengths between two
extended regons (two 5 x 5 voxel squares) in ipsilat-
era1 V1 and V2 were examined. The estimates of
effective connection strengths were based on hemody-
namic changes in all areas and the subset of connec-
each voxel from the time-series of 60 scans). The image has been
scaled to its maximum. Lower right and lower left: Maps of
and Cvl,,. The images have been scaled to unit variance and
thresholded at P = 0.05 (assuming, under the null hypothesis of no
effective connectivity, the estimates have a Gaussian distribution).
The reference voxel in VI is depicted by a circle. The key thing to
note is that VI is subject to modulatory influences from ipsilateral
and extensive regions of V2.
tions between the two regions were selected to com-
pare the distributions of forward and backward
modulatory influences. Figure 9 shows the location of
the two regions (this time on the right) and the
frequency distribution of the estimates for connec-
tions from the V1 box to the V2 box (broken line) and
the corresponding estimates for connections from V2
to V1 (solid line). There is a remarkable dissociation,
with backward modulatory effects (V2 to V1) being
much greater than forward effects (V1 to V2). Ths can be
considered a confirmation of the asymmetry hypothesis.
+ Friston +
physiological variance
Graphical presentation of a direct test of the hypothesis concerning
the asymmetry between forward and backward VI - V2 interac-
tions. Left: A map of physiological variance showing the positions of
two boxes defining regions in VI and V2. The broken lines
correspond (roughly) to the position of the VI /V2 border accord-
ing to the atlas of Talairach and Tournoux [ 19881. The value of Cl;:
The biological mechanisms of modulatory dynamics
The measurements used in this study were hemody-
namic in nature. This limits an interpretation at the
level of neuronal interactions. However the analogy
between the form of the nonlinear interaction be-
tween V1 and V2 activity and voltage-dependent
connections is a strong one. It is possible that the
modulatory impact of V2 on V1 is mediated by
predominantly voltage-dependent connections. The
presence of horizontal voltage-dependent connec-
tions within V1 has been established in cat striate
cortex [Hirsch and Gilbert, 19911. We know of no
direct electrophysiological evidence to suggest that
extrinsic backward V2 to V1 connections are voltage-
dependent; however our results are consistent with
this. An alternative explanation for modulatory ef-
fects, which does not necessarily involve voltage-
dependent connections, can again be found in the
work of Aertsen and Preissl cited in the previ-
ous section. Recall that they concluded effective con-
nectivity varies strongly with, or is modulated by, pool
activity. The mechanism related to the efficacy of
subthreshold EPSPs in establishing dynamic interac-
tions as a function of post-synaptic dtpolarization,
were computed for all voxels in either box and Euclidean normal-
ized to unity over the image. The frequency distribution of Cy
connecting the two regions is presented on the right. The
backward connections (V2 to VI , solid line) are clearly higher than
the corresponding forward connections (V I to V2, broken line).
which in turn depends on the tonic background of
activity. This clearly relates to the idea that sensitivity
to afferent input increases with intrinsic activity .
CONCLUSION
This paper has reviewed the basic distinction be-
tween functional and effective connectivity in neuro-
imaging. Emphasis has been placed the points of
contact between the diverse applications of these
concepts and in particular the central role of eigenim-
ages or spatial modes. The final sections demonstrate
that nonlinear interactions can be characterized using
simple extensions of linear models.
Most of the techniques presented here are both
simple and established. Many have been used in the
context of neuroimaging before. One important differ-
ence between the applications in this paper and other
applications is that analyses such as eigenvector solu-
tions, multidimensional scaling and linear regression
approaches to effective connectivity are applied here
to neuroimaging time-series. In this sense there is a
greater correspondence between the current work
+ Functional and Effective Connectivity
and the analysis of electrophysiological time-series
than between this and previous analyses of covari-
ances in neuroimaging data (where the covariance5
are across subjects not time). One might anticipate
that the time-series perspective will dominate with the
advent of functional MRI and other techniques that
allow many repeated scans in quick succession.
An important development in recent years has been
the use of structural equation modelling to examine
interactions between brain regions [see McIntosh and
Gonzalez-Lima, this issue]. In the context of the
present framework structural equation modelling can
be thought of as a (linear regression) model for
effective connectivity. Structural equation modelling
is particularly interesting in the sense that different
models can be compared statistically: Furthermore
control can be exerted over constraints on the model
by specifying the sparsity structure of the connections
and error variance.
Although a less than mature field the approach to
neuroimaging data and regional interactions dis-
cussed by the many authors in these pages is an
exciting endeavour that is starting to attract more and
more attention.