Fast, Accurate Detection of 100,000 Object Classes on a Single Machine
Thomas Dean
Mark A. Ruzon
Mark Segal
Jonathon Shlens
Sudheendra Vijayanarasimhan
Jay Yagnik†
Google, Mountain View, CA
{tld,ruzon,segal,shlens,svnaras,jyagnik}@google.com
Many object detection systems are constrained by the
time required to convolve a target image with a bank of ﬁlters that code for different aspects of an object’s appearance, such as the presence of component parts.
We exploit locality-sensitive hashing to replace the dot-product
kernel operator in the convolution with a ﬁxed number of
hash-table probes that effectively sample all of the ﬁlter responses in time independent of the size of the ﬁlter bank.
To show the effectiveness of the technique, we apply it to
evaluate 100,000 deformable-part models requiring over a
million (part) ﬁlters on multiple scales of a target image
in less than 20 seconds using a single multi-core processor
with 20GB of RAM. This represents a speed-up of approximately 20,000 times— four orders of magnitude— when
compared with performing the convolutions explicitly on the
same hardware. While mean average precision over the full
set of 100,000 object classes is around 0.16 due in large
part to the challenges in gathering training data and collecting ground truth for so many classes, we achieve a mAP
of at least 0.20 on a third of the classes and 0.30 or better
on about 20% of the classes.
1. Introduction
Many object detection and recognition systems are constrained by the computation time required to perform a large
number of convolutions across a dense array of image windows with a bank of ﬁlters.
This problem can be mitigated somewhat by using cascades and coarse-to-ﬁne architectures to deploy ﬁlters conditionally based upon previously computed thresholded responses, or by sampling
image windows with a sparse grid or only at locations determined by an interest-point detector. The former method is
inherently greedy and can require traversing a tree of ﬁlters
that is both deep and broad in order to scale to a large num-
† Corresponding author.
ber of object classes and achieve a given precision/recall target. The latter method suffers from low-level salience being
a poor guide to precise identiﬁcation of locations to sample
and thus requires that ﬁlters be invariant to small positional
changes, thereby reducing their discrimination.
We exploit locality-sensitive hashing to replace the
dot product in the kernel operator of the convolution with a
multi-band hash-table lookup. This enables us to determine
the ﬁlters with highest responses in O(1) time independent
of the number of ﬁlters. The technique is applicable to a
variety of signal processing tasks in image processing as
well as other domains. Our approach is not restricted to
any particular method or dataset; rather it provides the basis
for scaling the number of traditionally compute-intensive
signal processing operators from the hundreds or at most
thousands applied in current practice to millions. All ﬁlters
are effectively sampled in one pass over the image with a
single probe per location/image window. A descriptor generated from the image window is divided into bands, and
each band is hashed in the table associated with that band
to retrieve a list of ﬁlters potentially responding at that location. The indications from all bands are combined to come
up with a set of proposals for the ﬁlters with the largest responses, and exact responses are computed for these ﬁlters
only. We demonstrate the efﬁcacy of the approach by scaling object detection to one hundred thousand object classes
employing millions of ﬁlters representing objects and their
constituent parts across a wide range of poses and scales.
We allow ﬁlters to operate on diverse features and
achieve additional beneﬁts by embedding patches of the
resulting feature map in an ordinal space using a highdimensional sparse feature descriptor . By operating in
this ordinal space, our similarity measure becomes rank correlation instead of the linear correlation implied by the dot
product in the kernel of a traditional convolution. Rank correlation largely eliminates both linear and nonlinear scaling
effects (including local contrast normalization) and reduces
sensitivity to small perturbations in the underlying feature
space (see Figure 1). By performing this nonlinear embedding in a high-dimensional space, we are able to simplify
the hashing process and apply large-scale linear solvers in
training object models. Furthermore, this hashing scheme
can be implemented exactly in the integer domain, a desirable property for achieving high performance.
Are there really 100,000 objects to concern ourselves
Humans are able to discriminate among around
30,000 visual categories , but many more appearances
and speciﬁc instances of classes, in much the same way
as adult vocabularies are estimated to be on the order of
20,000 words for an English speaker but much larger when
one considers all the proper nouns, hyphenated words and
arcana related to speciﬁc areas of expertise and interest. Yet
visual media are mostly opaque to machines. Much of the
progress in indexing such data depends on metadata, including anchor text, captions, transcripts from audio, and usersupplied tags. Standard visual descriptors relying on features such as SIFT and HOG are semantically too low-level
to substantially complement the metadata.
If it were possible to identify a large subset of the objects in an image—their semantic categories and relative
geometries—we could apply modern document-retrieval
methods: term-frequency vectors, inverted indexes, and
common word sequences to considerably improve the ability of machines to parse visual data and search it efﬁciently.
We believe the present work will accelerate the state of
the art in object detection by increasing the number of visual categories by an order of magnitude or more while
simultaneously reducing run times by a comparable factor. We demonstrate our approach in an implementation
that achieves respectable performance on a standard benchmark for object detection, and exhibits graceful degradation
in performance with larger, automatically curated datasets
consisting of tens of thousands of classes.
2. Related Work
Traditionally, object detection is reduced to binary classiﬁcation and a sliding window classiﬁer is applied at all positions, scales and orientations of an image .
This leads to a complexity of O(LC) where L is the number
of locations or window proposals that need to be evaluated
and C is the number of classiﬁers (object classes) that are
being searched for. Most existing work on improving object
detection complexity focuses on reducing L.
Following the success of Viola and Jones , cascades
have been successfully applied to the star-structured models of in and for this purpose. Cascades work by
applying simpler tests to each hypothesized object location
in order to eliminate most of them very quickly. Felzenszwalb et al. utilize a variation on probably approximate
learning (PAC) to learn a cascade of detectors that provides
a 20-fold speedup of their earlier model, and introduce
a new coarse-to-ﬁne method that complements the approach
in , and can be combined with it to achieve up to two orders of magnitude speedup in some cases.
Alternative approaches to reducing L advocate the use
of interest points in the form of jumping windows ,
salience operators like objectness , and segmentations as cues for generating object-like window
proposals, thus pruning out most of the background regions that a naive approach like sliding window cannot
avoid. While these approaches produce similar accuracies
to sliding-window-based methods by evaluating only a fraction of the windows in an image, they are primarily used for
bag-of-words-based models that require large vocabularies
and costly sparse coding or kernel operations in order to
obtain state-of-the-art accuracies.
Very recently, consider scaling category-level
detection by learning a set of shared basis parts in the form
of steerable ﬁlters or sparselets. Using these learned basis parts, approximate part responses can be computed for a
large number of classes using a sparse matrix-vector product. They perform convolutions only for the basis part ﬁlters. While sparse products reduce the dependence of ﬁlter
convolutions on the number of classes, the overall complexity is still linear in C and it remains to be seen if these approaches can scale to hundreds of thousands of categories.
It also remains to be seen just how large the set of basis
ﬁlters has to grow in order to support a large number of
classes. We suspect it will be signiﬁcant, and that our approach will complement the sparselet work. Moreover, once
we largely eliminate the overhead of performing convolutions using a method such as ours, we expect researchers
will ﬁnd ample use for new classes of ﬁlters.
Overall, in contrast to most previous work, our approach
reduces object detection complexity by targeting its dependence on the number of object classes C. Our hashingbased framework is the ﬁrst approach to reduce object detection complexity from O(LC) to O(L).
Furthermore,
since most previous methods concentrate on reducing L,
they complement our technique and can therefore be combined with ours to further reduce computational costs.
3. Technical Details
The architecture described in this paper applies to a wide
range of feature types, e.g., histogram of oriented gradients (HOG) and locally adaptive regression kernels
(LARK) . The application and experiments presented
here make use of the deformable part model (DPM) of
Felzenszwalb et al. . Many other object detection models can be adapted to use our approach, including multiclass cascades , recursive compositional models ,
and variants of convolutional neural networks .
3.1. Winner-Take-All Hashing
Following , we compute a HOG feature pyramid by
converting each level of a standard image pyramid into a
A ≥ B ≥ C ≥ E ≥ D
In linear space: F ● G ≈ F ● H
In ordinal space: F ● G > F ● H
Figure 1. An ordinal measurement A ≥B ≥C ≥E ≥D is
robust to variations in individual ﬁlter values (top row). Ordinal
measures of similarity capture ﬁlter response differences not re-
ﬂected in linear measures (dot product) of similarity (bottom row).
HOG image using a ﬁlter roughly equivalent to the Dalal
and Triggs model . Rather than operate in the space of
HOG features, we encode each ﬁlter-sized window of the
HOG pyramid as a high-dimensional sparse binary descriptor called a winner-take-all (WTA) hash .
We restrict our attention to a subfamily of the hash functions introduced in such that each WTA hash is de-
ﬁned by a sequence of N permutations of the elements in
the ﬁxed-sized window that we use in computing ﬁlter responses in the HOG pyramid. Each permutation consists of
a list of indices into the vector obtained by ﬂattening such a
window of HOG coefﬁcients; we need only retain the ﬁrst
K indices for each of the N permutations to implement a
WTA hash function.
The term “winner take all” refers to each (N ∗K)-length
descriptor comprising N spans of length K consisting of all
zeros except the kth entry, which is set to one to encode the
index of the maximum value in the ﬁrst K entries of the
permutation. Each descriptor is compactly represented in
N ∗⌈log2 K⌉bits. For example, given N = 2 and K = 3,
the ﬂattened-window vector [0.3, 0.7, 0.2, 0.5], and the permutations and , the resulting WTA descriptor is : the ﬁrst K indices of each permutation,
 and select [0.3, 0.5, 0.2] and [0.7, 0.3, 0.5]
whose maximum values have the indices 2 and 1 encoded—
least signiﬁcant bit leftmost—in the binary vector. Note
that since the only operation involved in the entire process
is comparison, the hashing scheme can (a) be implemented
completely with integer arithmetic and (b) can be efﬁciently
coded without branching, and thus without branch prediction penalties.
Each WTA hash function deﬁnes an ordinal embedding and an associated rank-correlation similarity measure,
which offers a degree of invariance with respect to perturbations in numeric values and is well suited as a basis
for locality-sensitive hashing. These deterministic functions
are nonlinear and produce sparse descriptors that have been
shown to yield signiﬁcant improvements on VOC 2010 using simple linear classiﬁers that can be trained quickly .
Intuitively, the information stored in a WTA hash allows
one to reconstruct a partial ordering of the coefﬁcients in
the hashed vector. The top row of Figure 1 highlights how
partial-order statistics can be invariant to deformations and
perturbations of individual ﬁlter values. In an image processing domain, all three ﬁlters in the top row of Figure 1
are qualitatively similar edge ﬁlters — this qualitative property follows from all three ﬁlters obeying the same ordinal
statistic. Likewise, linear measures of similarity can be insensitive to qualitative differences easily captured by an ordinal measure of similarity. For instance, in the bottom row
of Figure 1, ﬁlter F is qualitatively more similar to ﬁlter G
than it is to ﬁlter H. A linear measure of similarity (dot
product), however, regards F to be equally similar to G and
H. An ordinal measure of similarity based on partial-order
statistics would correctly identify F to be more similar to G
3.2. Deformable Parts Models
A DPM consists of a set of part ﬁlters, a set of deformations that provide geometric information regarding the
expected placement of parts in a patch, a scoring function that provides the basis for combining the deformations
and part-ﬁlter responses, and a threshold tuned to meet a
given precision-recall target. A ﬁlter is a matrix specifying weights for subwindows of a HOG pyramid. The score
of a ﬁlter with respect to a subwindow of a HOG pyramid is the dot product of the weight vector and the features
comprising the subwindow. A deformation is a symmetric,
two-dimensional Gaussian mask superimposed on the target subwindow, with mean location speciﬁed relative to the
subwindow.
The model for a particular object class is implemented as
a mixture of DPMs, in which each component DPM is designed to capture one aspect of the class. In our implementation, each model comprises three mixture components
representing three common aspect ratios for the bounding
box of an object instance. This implies that a single model
with, say, ten parts per component could have as many as
thirty ﬁlters, requiring the same number of convolutions.
3.3. DPM with WTA
Figure 2 illustrates the basic detection and training architecture. In the results reported in this paper, we use the same
basic training method as , and so to economize on space
we focus the discussion on detection. The ﬁrst step is to
compute an image pyramid and the associated HOG pyramid for the target image. Felzenszwalb et al. employ a
Figure 2. An illustration of the key steps in detecting objects and training the models: Training takes as input examples comprising ﬁltersized subwindows of a HOG pyramid as in and produces as output a model that includes a set of ﬁlter-sized weight vectors called
part ﬁlters. We compute the WTA hash for each weight vector, decompose the resulting descriptor into M bands consisting of W spans
of length K, construct M hash tables and store each band in its respective table along with the index P of the corresponding part ﬁlter.
During detection we compute the WTA hash of each ﬁlter-sized window of the target HOG pyramid, break the hash into bands, look up
each band in its corresponding hash table, and count of how many times each part turns up in a table entry. We use these counts to identify
candidate ﬁlters for which we compute the exact dot products.
root ﬁlter in addition to the part ﬁlters. In scoring a window at a speciﬁed level in the HOG pyramid, they combine
the responses of the root ﬁlter within the selected window
at that level and the responses of the part ﬁlters in an appropriately adjusted window at a level one octave higher than
the speciﬁed level.
The contribution of a given part ﬁlter to the score of a
subwindow is obtained by convolving the ﬁlter with the selected subwindow of the HOG pyramid, multiplying it by
the deformation Gaussian mask and taking the maximum
value. Instead of a response corresponding to the dot product of the ﬁlter weights and a ﬁlter-sized block of the HOG
pyramid, we compute the WTA hash of that same ﬁltersized block of the feature map. We employ locality sensitive hashing to recover the R largest responses corresponding to what the dot products would have been had we
actually computed them.
During detection we employ hashing as a proxy for explicitly computing the dot product of the convolution subwindow with each of the weight vectors for all the part ﬁlters in all object models without actually enumerating the
ﬁlters. To do so, we employ a multi-band LSH-style hash
table to reconstruct the dot products that have a signiﬁcant
number of hash matches .
Consider the (N ∗K)-dimensional binary vectors produced by the WTA hash function. Divide the vector into
equal-sized bands of size W ∗K. For N = 2400 and
K = 16, W = 4 produces N/W = M = 600 bands,
each taking W ∗⌈log2 K⌉= 16 bits. Create one hash table for each band to accommodate the hashed subvectors of
length W ∗K. Let w be the vector of weight coefﬁcients
for a part ﬁlter and u be the binary vector corresponding to
the WTA hash of w.
Let Bm denote the mth hash table and um the mth
(W ∗K) span of weight coefﬁcients in u. The hash bin
returned from hashing um in Bm is a list of ﬁlter indices,
which we use to update a histogram of ﬁlter match scores.
After we select the ﬁlters that are above threshold, we continue with Felzenszwalb et al.’s method, spreading nowsparse ﬁlter activations into a more dense map using the
part deformation scores. Maxima in this map are our object
detections.
A limitation of our hashing approach is that all part ﬁlters
must be the same size. Because the object’s bounding box
has arbitrary aspect ratio, we cannot use a corresponding
root ﬁlter. Since hashing is inexpensive, however, we mitigate the lack of a root ﬁlter by tiling the bounding box with
part ﬁlters and obtaining activations for all of the tiles as we
slide the bounding box over the scaled array of features.
Additionally, the ﬁlter match score generated through
hashing is a lower bound on the ﬁlter response at that patch
(due to hash grouping in bands). Once a candidate part is
found, therefore, we compute the actual dot product of the
underlying image features with the associated ﬁlter and use
this in evaluating the location-based deformation. This result is combined with those of other parts for the candidate
object to obtain the object’s score, and we use this combined
score to suppress all but the best detection in a region.
It is possible to train DPM models not on HOG data as
explained in this section but rather on a hashed WTA version of the HOG data. This approach has several technical
advantages but represents a more signiﬁcant departure from
the original DPM approach than we have space to present
here. In the technical supplement associated with this paper, however, we sketch the basic algorithms for training
and applying such WTA-based models.
4. Experimental Results
In the following, we use the term baseline algorithm or
just baseline to refer to the detection algorithm described
in utilizing models generated by the training method
from the same paper. By performing several experiments,
we compare the performance of the baseline algorithm with
the hashing-based detection algorithm described in the previous section, utilizing models generated by the training
method from but sans root ﬁlters as mentioned earlier.
First, we demonstrate that the hashing-based algorithm compares favorably with the baseline algorithm on
the PASCAL VOC 2007 dataset. Second, we show that the
hashing-based algorithm can scale object detection to hundreds of thousands of object classes and provide insight into
the trade-offs involving accuracy, memory and computation
time. Finally, we show the results of training 100,000 object classes using our system and running the hashing-based
algorithm on the resulting models on a single machine.
4.1. Datasets and Implementation Details
We employed the standard benchmark detection dataset,
PASCAL VOC 2007, to test our detector. The PASCAL
dataset contains images from 20 different categories with
5000 images for training and validation and a test set of
size ∼5000. Further, to test our system at scale, we created a new dataset called ImageSearch-100k which contains
training and validation images for 100,000 object concepts.
We compiled a list of 100,000 Freebase entities from
notable types deemed to contain visual objects and queried
Google Image Search with these entities. For each query,
we downloaded at most 500 images resulting in a dataset of
32 million images with an average of 300 images per query.
We divided this dataset into a training set containing 80%
of the images and a validation set containing the other 20%.
Note that, since Image Search does not provide bounding
box annotations, this is a weakly supervised dataset, and
furthermore the dataset is noisy since the labels are based
on text accompanying the images. Hand labeling this data
even at the image level is infeasable.
For all experiments we used the extended HOG features
with three mixture components, as proposed in . All
models were trained using parts consisting of a 6×6 grid of
HOG cells. Training was carried out training in two stages
initializing the models using warped examples in the ﬁrst
iteration and computing latent variables in subsequent iterations. We ﬁxed the C parameter to 0.003 as recommended
in based on cross-validation on the PASCAL dataset.
4.2. PASCAL VOC 2007
In this section we compare the hashing-based algorithm
with the baseline algorithm. Table 1 shows the average precision scores of each category for the two algorithms. Note
that we report the results for the base system of , since
we do not use bounding box prediction or context rescoring
which were reported to provide further improvements. For
the hashing parameters in this experiment, we use K = 4
and W = 4 for 8-bit hash keys and M = 3000 hash tables.
Our hashing-based algorithm compares favorably with
the baseline with a mAP of 0.24 compared to their 0.26. We
perform better than the baseline on three categories, similar
to the baseline on eight categories and are worse on nine
categories. The lack of a root ﬁlter in our implementation
is responsible for much of the deﬁcit, especially the person category which includes many examples too small to be
captured by the high-resolution part ﬁlters. We are exploring options for restoring the root ﬁlter that would reduce
this deﬁcit with a small added computational cost.
4.3. Accuracy Versus Speed and Memory
In the previous section we showed that our hashingbased detector performs comparably to the baseline exhaustive detector using the best set of hash parameters. In this
section we illustrate how the performance, along with the
speed and memory requirements of the detector, change
with the hash parameters.
Figure 3(a) shows the mAP on the PASCAL VOC 2007
dataset for K = {2, 4, 8, 16, 64} and the different numbers
of hashes. For each case we choose W such that we obtain
comparable hash keys of 16 or 18 bits. For all values of
K we see that the accuracy increases with more hashes (as
expected) and saturates beyond a certain number of hashes.
K = 16 performs best for all values of K, which we believe
is a property of the feature dimension and the percentage of
useful dimensions.
Figure 3(b) shows the same set of results mapped onto
the amount of memory used by the system. The memory
required is a function of M, the number of hash tables. For
K = 16, performance saturates at 5 KB per ﬁlter, which
translates to 5 GB for storing 100,000 classes with 10 ﬁlters each. This demonstrates we can store ﬁlters for up to
100,000 classes on a single modestly-equipped workstation.
Figure 3(c) describes the trade-off between the accuracy
and the total computation time for detecting all 20 object
classes. At 5 seconds per image, we obtain a speed-up of
approximately 20× over the base exhaustive system, which
compares well with cascade-based approaches for speeding
up detection . Note, however, that our approach scales
arp bike bird boat bttl bus
chr cow tbl
dog hrs mbke prsn plnt shp sofa trn
0.19 0.48 0.03 0.10 0.16 0.41 0.44 0.09 0.15 0.19 0.23 0.10 0.52 0.34 0.20 0.10 0.16 0.28 0.34 0.34 0.24
 (base) 0.29 0.55 0.01 0.13 0.26 0.39 0.46 0.16 0.16 0.17 0.25 0.05 0.44 0.38 0.35 0.09 0.17 0.22 0.34 0.39 0.26
Table 1. Comparison of the hashing-based and baseline algorithms on the PASAL VOC 2007 dataset
Hashes (1000s)
Memory (KB per filter)
Time (secs)
Figure 3. Effect of hashing parameters on the accuracy, speed and memory required by the system.
constantly over the number of object classes after a ﬁxed
overhead, and, therefore, our speed-up increases with an increasing number of classes.
4.4. Training 100,000 Object Detectors
In this section we show that our hashing-based algorithm
can be used to scale object detection to 100,000 classes.
For this experiment, we train our object models using the
ImageSearch-100K training set. Since this dataset does not
contain bounding boxes we pursue a simple bootstrapping
Bootstrapping. In the ﬁrst iteration of training we initialize the model by using either the whole image as the
bounding box, or, in simple images with plain backgrounds,
by automatically cropping out any smoothly varying background regions. For most images, this is highly inaccurate.
In subsequent iterations, we ﬁrst compute a bounding box
by running the detectors on each training image.
detection score is higher than the score for the bounding
box from the previous iteration we use the newly computed
bounding box. This strategy works especially well on Image Search images, since most of the images contain the
object of the interest and there is signiﬁcantly less clutter
than in the PASCAL VOC dataset. Training was performed
using a cluster of 5000 machines for 10 iterations in under
24 hours. For detection, we use K = 16, W = 4 and
N = 2400 in order to obtain a model of size 20 GB which
can be run on a single machine.
Figure 4(a) shows a summary of the mean average precisions of 100,000 objects on the validation set for three different parameter settings that trade off speed and accuracy
for the same memory. For a speed-up of 17, 857× (5 hours
to 1 second), we obtain a mAP of 0.11 over 100,000 object classes, which is a signiﬁcant result when considering
the fact that the current state-of-the-art for object detection
speed-up 62, 500× 17, 857× 6, 580×
Number of objects with mAP > x
t = 8 secs
t = 28 secs
t = 76 secs
Figure 4. Summary of mean average precision scores over the
100,000 objects for three different parameter settings.
is at 0.40 mAP over just 20 classes . Furthermore, the
Image Search dataset frequently contains images from multiple concepts for ambiguous entities such as apple (fruit,
company), jaguar (animal, vehicle), etc.
Figure 4(b) shows the number of object classes with
mAP above different levels. As expected, this follows an
exponential trend; however, close to one-third of the objects
have a mAP of 0.20, and one-ﬁfth of the objects have a mAP
of 0.30 for comparison with results on PASCAL VOC. Finally, Figure 5 shows the top six detection results (from both
positive and negative images) for a representative set of categories for t = 8 seconds. Our detector is able to correctly
rank images containing each object concept with the highest scores despite the large size of the negative set (images
Bandurria Gherkin
Liberty Overcoat Jefferson
Figure 5. Top few detections on the validation set for a representative set of categories ordered by detection score.
from all other categories).
Hand-labeled Ground Truth.
Because our training
sets come from Google Image Search, there is considerable
noise in the data. We set a threshold at 80% precision on
the validation set and sampled a set of 545 common objects
whose detectors ﬁred on a statistically signiﬁcant number of
images out of a set of 12 million random thumbnails from
YouTube for which we had no ground truth. A number of
detections for each object were labeled by hand using Mechanical Turk operators, and the full set was used to calculate the mean average precision.
Figure 6 shows the results.
Some objects converged
on generic patterns, resulting in precision near zero, while
more than 10% have precision of at least 90%.
21 objects, including “rubber duck,” “eyeglasses,” “malamute,”
and “person,” have 100% precision. Of course, since we
cannot calculate the false negative rate of these detectors on
our test set, 100% precision means only that all true positives in the labeled set appeared before the ﬁrst false positive
when sorted by decreasing score. It does show that there are
acceptable high-precision operating points for many objects
even using weakly-labeled, noisy training data.
4.5. Revisiting VOC 2007 with 10,000 Detectors
In this section we examine the prediction accuracy of the
hashing-based detector as the number of unique objects in
the system systematically increases. Section 4.3 demonstrated the inherent trade-off between the prediction accuracy and computational resources for our object detector.
While it is theoretically possible to maintain the prediction
accuracy of the object detector by increasing the number
Number of objects
Figure 6. Histogram of mean average precisions on ground truth
data for 545 objects with signiﬁcant detection rate.
Number of distractors
Best achievable mAP
0.1−0.5 min
0.5−1.0 min
Figure 7. Increasing the number of objects gracefully degrades
prediction accuracy on PASCAL VOC 2007 for a ﬁxed computational budget.
hashes, as we vary the number of objects, this approach is
problematic in that arbitrarily increasing the number of objects will inevitably lead to impractical computational demands and unacceptably slow computation times.
To explore how a hashing-based object detector scales to
a large number of objects, we instead measure the prediction accuracy as we increase the number of unique objects
for a ﬁxed computational budget. We systematically perform an exhaustive search of ∼1000 sets of hashing model
parameters 1. For each set of model parameters we calculate
(1) the average computational time for processing an image
and (2) the mean average precision (mAP) on the subset of
20 objects labels from the PASCAL VOC 2007 validation
data set. For a given number of object labels, we record
the highest mAP from all of the models that process images
within a speciﬁed time window.
Figure 7 plots the best achievable mAP for the subset of
20 PASCAL objects for a given time window across a range
of object labels. Several trends are worth noting. First,
1We explored all combinations of the following parameters: K = 4;
number of hash tables = 100, 200, 500, 1000; number of permutations per
hash band = 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7; number of additional objects = 0, 10, 20, 50,
100, 200, 500, 1000, 2000, 5000, 10000; number of matches per hash = 0,
1, 2, 3, 4.
models that process images faster exhibit worse prediction
accuracy (e.g. 0-0.1 min, cyan curve). This observation reinforces the result from Figure 3. Second, as the number of
objects increases, the prediction accuracy on the subset of
20 PASCAL VOC 2007 objects gracefully decreases. This
is to be expected as the frequency of errant hash collisions
increases, and the entropy of the hash table reaches capacity.
Nonetheless, the far right point on the red curve indicates
that for a particular set of model parameters, we achieve a
minimal degradation in the prediction accuracy while still
achieving a throughput of 2-5 minutes per image. This set
of model parameters demonstrates that a hashing-based object detector can be scaled up to a large number of objects
while achieving reasonable balance between prediction accuracy and evaluation throughput. We note that the absolute
times reported here are based on unoptimized code.
5. Conclusions
Our key contribution is a scalable approach to object detection that replaces linear convolution with ordinal convolution by using an efﬁcient LSH scheme.
This approach is applicable to a variety of object detection methods. Through extensive empirical tests on DPM detectors,
we have shown that (a) the system performs comparably
to the original DPM detectors, (b) performance degrades
gracefully as the number of object classes is increased, and
(c) up to 100,000 object classes can be simultaneously detected on a single machine in under 20 seconds.