MONSITJ / ISTOCK
BY KATHLEEN MCGROW, DNP, MS, RN, PMP
Abstract: Artificial intelligence (AI) is a
transformational technology that will affect
all healthcare providers. This article offers an
overview of basic AI concepts and the role
of nurses in embracing this technology in
healthcare settings.
Keywords: AI, algorithm, artificial
intelligence, behavioral analytics, clinical
analytics, machine learning, operational
Artificial intelligence:
46 l Nursing2019 l Volume 49, Number 9
www.Nursing2019.com
September l Nursing2019 l 47
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (AI) is
evolving and will transform healthcare. Given the potential of this
technology for patient care and its
impact on clinical providers, it is
essential for nurses to have a basic
understanding of AI concepts. This
article examines the technology and
the role of nurses in incorporating it
into the healthcare setting.
Significant savings
AI is a popular topic of discussion,
and it is hard to find a conference,
committee, article, or report that
does not mention it. This is not
surprising, as the potential healthcare savings of this technology
could reach $150 billion by 2025.1
Approximately half of this figure
represents clinical savings, while
the other half represents financial
and operational costs.1
Essentials for nursing
48 l Nursing2019 l Volume 49, Number 9
www.Nursing2019.com
AI fundamentals
AI is defined as the theory and development of computer systems
able to complete tasks that typically
require human intelligence, such as
visual perception, speech recognition, decision-making, and/or language translation.2 Simply put, it is
the ability of a machine to emulate
intelligent human behavior and
represents an umbrella term for
machine learning (ML), computer
vision, and natural language processing (NLP) technologies (see
Coming to terms with AI). Eac h of
these can be used individually or in
combination to add intelligence to
applications.
ML is a subset of AI defined as
enabling computing advances
through testing and adaptation scenarios and by using trends and patterns for improved decision-making.3
Syntactic pattern recognition, NLP,
search engines, computer vision, and
machine perception are other examples of ML applications.3
The accuracy of prediction or recognition is contingent on two factors:
the training and the algorithm.4 ML
models are created by feeding data
into an algorithm. This algorithm is a
process or set of rules to be followed
by a computer in calculating or
problem-solving. The magic happens
in the algorithm.4
Training is done using reliable
data. Over time, retraining can occur
using newly created data.4 For example, to predict patient lengths of
stay based on their diagnosis, an algorithm would be written and
trained on accurate and reliable data.
These include electronic health records, medical claims, facility supply
chain, and patient-generated data.
Over time, the model is continuously
retrained with recent data, increasing
its efficacy and reliability.
AI and analytics
Nurses should understand how AI is
utilized in patient care. Some transformational uses of the technology
include accelerating innovation, improving decision-making, automating
and speeding up processes, and saving overall costs. In healthcare, AI is
seen as a potential solution for handling massive increases in complex
medical data, but only 15% to 20% of
end users are using it to drive changes
in the delivery of patient care.1
There are three types of analytics:
• Clinical analytics generate insights
and improve treatment and outcomes.
Among the many examples of AI for
clinical analytics are clinical pathway
prediction, disease progression prediction, health risk protection, predictive risk scoring, and virtual assistants
embedded in clinical systems for
workflow improvements. AI may also
be used in disease management, assisting with the differential diagnosis
on medical images and combining
patient data with academic evidence
and regulatory guidelines to personalize treatment plans.
• Operational analytics improve the
efficiency and effectiveness of systems that provide and manage care
processes. The ability to predict
operational issues and track safety
metrics, maintain equipment, monitor the supply chain, and identify
fraud are examples of AI in healthcare. Other operational improvements include documentation coding
Nurses should be
at the forefront of
this technology and
empowered throughout
the implementation
Coming to terms with AI
Syntactic pattern
recognition8
Provides a mechanism of analysis to the problem of pattern
recognition, containing significant syntactic content.
Natural language
processing9
A machine learning field in which a computer could understand,
analyze, and manipulate data to possibly generate language.
Search engine10
Allows a search for information on the internet using
Computer vision11
A field of study to develop techniques for computers to
visualize and understand digital content, such as images,
photos, and videos.
perception12
A concept in which computers have the ability to sense and
act on their perceptions.
Data warehouse13
A technology in which databases are aggregated from multiple sources for reporting and analysis.
Data lake14
A storage repository that holds a vast amount of raw data in
its native format until it is needed.
Data estate15
A cumulation of all organizational data.
www.Nursing2019.com
September l Nursing2019 l 49
to process claims and new platform
interfaces to adjust claims automatically for reimbursement in revenue
cycle management.
• Behavioral analytics examine consumer behavior patterns that inform
healthcare delivery. The technology
also increases the probability of actions taken to improve the adoption
of recommended practices. It leverages AI for patient engagement, wellbeing, and readmissions and health.
Challenges and limitations
AI is already present in healthcare. It
can be utilized in clinical decision
support, disease management, patient
engagement, and operational improvements. By 2020, most organizations
will use it, as this technology continues to be made readily available for
everyone.5 That said, healthcare organizations may be faced with several
challenges as they begin to deploy AI.
As much of healthcare data are
siloed and unstructured, one challenge is a lack of mature data estates
to serve as a foundation for AI strategies.3 Data estates are essential in
collecting and storing information in
its native format. Modern data estates
include operational databases, data
warehouses, and data lakes. The paradigm shift to AI will require a significant skills transformation among
healthcare staff. AI technology is still
emerging, is in a state of continuous
change, and has not yet matured.
Despite concerns among healthcare organizations and information
technology vendors alike, the need
for interoperability between programs is becoming more recognized
as an important area of development
to leverage AI platforms. The US
Department of Health and Human
Services, the Centers for Medicare
and Medicaid Services, and the Office of the National Coordinator for
Health Information Technology recently proposed rules to promote
interoperability in healthcare in the
US.6 Similarly, the Trusted Exchange
Framework and Common Agreement
has been updated in an effort to foster
a nationwide exchange of electronic
health information across the different
networks.7
Leading healthcare organizations
will need to adjust to a rapid rate of
technologic innovation. Facilities must
enable their technical development
teams with AI, allowing them to incorporate it into applications within their
purview and expand it to redefine
business and clinical processes. Next,
AI must be brought to every employee
by incorporating it into their workflow
through processes and procedures to
amplify all functions within the organization. Nurses should be at the
forefront of this transformational
technology and empowered throughout the implementation process.
Transforming healthcare
The determination to achieve better
patient outcomes at lower costs is a
catalyst for disruptive technology, or
one that will displace existing technologies. Powerful computing capabilities; large amounts of data; and the
development of techniques such as
clinical, operational, and behavioral
analytics can be combined and leveraged for personalized and populationbased care. As AI evolves, it will
fundamentally transform healthcare
organizations and care delivery.
The issues surrounding AI are
novel and complex, and there is still
much to be learned. Healthcare organizations will need to harness the
power of AI to provide the most value for providers and patients.
Equipped with the knowledge of
how it can contribute to patient care
and outcomes, nurses should be the
vanguard and embrace the use of AI
in healthcare settings. ■