Australian Journal of
Educational Technology
2003, 19(1), 59-71
Patterns of engagement in authentic
online learning environments
Jan Herrington, Ron Oliver
Edith Cowan University
Thomas C. Reeves
The University of Georgia, USA
The use of authentic activities within online learning environments has
been shown to have many benefits for learners in online units and courses.
There has been renewed interest in the role of student activities within
course units, as constructivist philosophy and advances in technology
impact on educational design and practice. Courses based on these
principles have been used successfully across a wide variety of discipline
areas. In spite of the growing evidence of the success of authentic learning
environments, they are not without their problems. In this paper we discuss
patterns of engagement that have emerged from our own research on
authentic learning tasks, in particular, the initial reluctance to willingly
immerse in learning scenarios that some students experience, and the need
for the suspension of disbelief before engaging in the task. The paper
proposes ten characteristics of authentic activities, based on educational
theory and research, which have been used as criteria for the selection of
existing online units or courses for in depth investigation. The paper
includes a short review of the literature, a description of the research and
some preliminary findings and identification of issues related to the
necessity for students to willingly suspend disbelief in order to fully engage
in learning scenarios based on authentic tasks.
Authentic activities in learning environments
The use of authentic activities within online learning environments has
been shown to have many benefits for learners in online units and courses.
Instead of providing academic, decontextualised exercises that can be used
primarily to practice a skill, there are many instances of courses where
authentic tasks create the core of the online learning environment, and the
completion of the tasks effectively comprises the entire student
commitment for the course. Many courses have been based on complex
and sustained scenarios and cases, where students become immersed in
Australian Journal of Educational Technology, 2003, 19(1)
problem solving within realistic situations resembling the contexts where
the knowledge they are learning can be realistically applied.
Authentic activities have been used successfully across a wide variety of
discipline areas. For example, in a course entitled Physical activity fitness
and health, students use a virtual laboratory to carry out fitness testing in
areas such as muscular strength, aerobic power, lung function and
flexibility in much the same manner that this procedure would be
conducted with a real person . The benefits to students of the design and construction of a
Formula SAE racecar as part of mechanical and mechatronics engineering
curriculum have been described by Bullen and Karri , while Hunt,
Kershaw and Seddon described a project where transition from
school to university was approached with students’ exploring the
university campus in order to create video clips on the nature of university
life, rather than the more traditional orientation activities. Marshall,
Northcote and Lenoy have used authentic activities in their design
of a course teaching mathematics to Indigenous adults. Bennett, Harper
and Hedberg used case studies of the development of multimedia
products as models for students of Interactive Multimedia Design to
investigate, prior to their own development of multimedia products for
real clients. An architecture learning environment has been developed
 where students are required to compose a piece of music,
and then design a scale model of a music room for the performance of the
piece, described by the teacher as ‘a means of allowing [the] design
concept to transcend from the idea to the realisable’ (p.107).
In spite of the growing evidence of the success of these authentic learning
environments, they are not without their problems. In this paper we will
discuss a problem that has emerged from our own research on authentic
learning environments, namely, the initial reluctance to willingly immerse
in learning scenarios that some students experience, and the need for the
suspension of disbelief before engaging in the task.
Authenticity in learning environments
Some argue that it is impossible to design truly ‘authentic’ learning
experiences. Petraglia argued that authenticity can be
neither ‘predetermined nor preordained’, and such attempts often result in
little more than ‘preauthentication’, that is, ‘the attempt to make learning
materials and environments correspond to the real world prior to the
learner’s interaction with them’ (p.53). He gave the example of a task of
balancing a checkbook, a task which may be authentic for a 21 year old,
but hardly for a five year old. Even amongst the older age group, many
factors contribute to whether they would find the task authentic—some
Herrington, Oliver and Reeves
would find ‘any given lesson in personal finance irrelevant, inaccurate, or
otherwise inappropriate’ (p. 59). In supporting this view, Barab, Squire
and Dueber argued that authenticity occurs ‘not in the learner, the
task, or the environment, but in the dynamic interactions among these
various components … authenticity is manifest in the flow itself, and is not
an objective feature of any one component in isolation’ (p. 38).
Petraglia contended that learners need to be persuaded that they are
participating in an authentic learning environment. This theme is also
adopted by Kantor, Waddington and Osgood who, when referring
to the kinds of goal based scenarios they design for Anderson Consulting,
argued that:
No matter how realistic the case … nor how authentic the conditions and
tools … [it] is not the same as a work environment. It is a simulation of a
client engagement in which the participants tacitly agree to go along with
an interpretation of job reality which we have crafted. (pp. 211-212)
There is increasing evidence that in order to fully engage with an authentic
task or problem based scenario, students need to engage with a process
that is familiar to moviegoers throughout the world – the suspension of
disbelief. For example, consider the suspension of disbelief that audiences
must undergo to enable them to become engaged with movies such as Star
Wars, Mad Max, The Matrix, The Truman Show, and Back to the Future.
Audiences need to accept the worlds that have been created, no matter
how unlikely. Once the initial suspension of disbelief has occurred, it is
only inconsistencies within the parameters of the plot itself that cause
dissonance in the viewer. In other words, once the viewer has accepted the
fundamental basis for the simulated world in which he or she is immersed,
engagement with the story and message of the film is entirely feasible.
In scenario based learning environments, where conditions, characters,
circumstances and parameters are drawn to simulate a real life context for
learning, a similar suspension of disbelief is required. For some students,
there appears to be some misapprehension about the approach, because it
is so different from the more academic approaches with which they are
familiar. Many students initially perceive authentic environments to be
non-academic, non-rigorous, time wasting and unnecessary to efficient
learning. It is often only when the suspension of disbelief occurs that these
students see the complexity and the value of the learning environment.
What are authentic activities?
The use of the word authentic is quite open to interpretation. Bennett,
Harper and Hedberg have usefully discussed the multiple
interpretations that abound in the literature, ranging from activities based
Australian Journal of Educational Technology, 2003, 19(1)
on real situations to models that focus on applying conceptual knowledge
or skills, such as critical thinking or problem solving. Several authors have
attempted to delineate characteristics of authentic activities. For example,
Young listed the attributes of real life problems which need, where
possible, to be replicated in authentic activities, such as active/generative
engagement in defining problems as well as solving them, and
involvement of the student’s beliefs and values. Jonassen defined
authentic activities as tasks: that have real world relevance and utility, that
integrate across the curriculum, that provide appropriate levels of
complexity, and that allow students to select appropriate levels of
difficulty or involvement. Similarly, Bransford, Vye, Kinzer and Risko
 described criteria of authentic activities such as: a single complex
problem should be investigated by the students, students identify and
define their own questions, and activities are logically related to the
problem. The Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt have
stressed the importance of complexity and the necessity to provide an
environment capable of sustained examination. They describe authentic
tasks as ‘generative’ because the completion of the task requires the
students to generate other problems to be solved. Kantor, Waddington
and Osgood have a well-defined level of authenticity for their goal
based scenarios, largely designed for business consulting training:
We make them authentic to the degree that the staging of theatrical
productions is authentic. We provide physical props (plans, offices, desks)
…We locate furniture, phones, computer equipment, flip charts and white
boards in the team rooms to promote the right mix of team collaboration
and communication, creation of work products and research activities.
These levels of authenticity are set to the degree that such models of
communication require, but no more. (p. 222)
10 characteristics of authentic activities
Our own research has focussed on defining critical characteristics of
authentic activities based on a wide literature review of recent research
and theory. In reflecting on the characteristics of activities described by
researchers, ten broad design characteristics of authentic activities have
been identified . These
characteristics comprise:
• Authentic activities have real world relevance: Activities match as nearly as
possible the real world tasks of professionals in practice rather than
decontextualised or classroom based tasks.
• Authentic activities are ill-defined, requiring students to define the tasks and
sub-tasks needed to complete the activity: Problems inherent in the
activities are ill-defined and open to multiple interpretations rather
than easily solved by the application of existing algorithms. Learners
Herrington, Oliver and Reeves
must identify their own unique tasks and sub-tasks in order to
complete the major task.
• Authentic activities comprise complex tasks to be investigated by students
over a sustained period of time: Activities are completed in days, weeks
and months rather than minutes or hours. They require significant
investment of time and intellectual resources.
• Authentic activities provide the opportunity for students to examine the task
from different perspectives, using a variety of resources: The task affords
learners the opportunity to examine the problem from a variety of
theoretical and practical perspectives, rather than allowing a single
perspective that learners must imitate to be successful. The use of a
variety of resources rather than a limited number of preselected
references requires students to detect relevant from irrelevant
information.
• Authentic activities provide the opportunity to collaborate: Collaboration is
integral to the task, both within the course and the real world, rather
than achievable by an individual learner.
• Authentic activities provide the opportunity to reflect: Activities need to
enable learners to make choices and reflect on their learning both
individually and socially.
• Authentic activities can be integrated and applied across different subject areas
and lead beyond domain specific outcomes: Activities encourage
interdisciplinary perspectives and enable students to play diverse roles
thus building robust expertise rather than knowledge limited to a
single well-defined field or domain.
• Authentic activities are seamlessly integrated with assessment: Assessment
of activities is seamlessly integrated with the major task in a manner
that reflects real world assessment, rather than separate artificial
assessment removed from the nature of the task.
• Authentic activities create polished products valuable in their own right rather
than as preparation for something else: Activities culminate in the creation
of a whole product rather than an exercise or sub-step in preparation
for something else.
• Authentic activities allow competing solutions and diversity of outcome:
Activities allow a range and diversity of outcomes open to multiple
solutions of an original nature, rather than a single correct response
obtained by the application of rules and procedures.
Using these characteristics as criteria for the selection of appropriate
courses to study, our current research has sought to investigate the
characteristics of authentic activity that facilitate a whole course or unit of
Australian Journal of Educational Technology, 2003, 19(1)
study being encapsulated within complex tasks, and to determine the
factors that contribute to the successful adoption and implementation of
activity-based online courses or units. We have used the criteria listed
above to select courses or units of study that use authentic activities as a
central core of their presentation. Identification of courses that meet these
criteria is difficult, and to date six cases have been investigated. The units
must have a major online component, not simply supplementary material
to on-campus delivery. Teachers, authors, instructional designers, tutors
and others associated with the design and delivery of the courses have
been interviewed, and the websites of courses have been analysed. The
research is ongoing, and analysis is focusing on the identification of
conceptual themes and issues emerging from the data, using techniques
such as clustering, and making contrasts and comparisons .
One theme which has emerged strongly from a number of different
sources in our research is the nature of authenticity, and how many
authentic environments are the creation of the teachers’, authors’ and
instructional designers’ imaginations, and are thus inevitably someone’s
view of what is authentic. Petraglia has been critical of this
shortcoming, calling it ‘the real world on a short leash’ (p. 53). There is
nevertheless, much evidence to suggest that these learning environments
can provide a great deal of meaning to otherwise decontextualised facts
and skills, and can enhance the transfer of deep and lifelong learning
 . At what point do students become engaged, if ever,
in these manufactured scenarios? Is there a pattern to their acceptance of
the terms of the authenticity, and how important is the suspension of
disbelief?
Patterns of engagement
In analysing the interview data from teachers’ and tutors’ perceptions of
student engagement, there appear to be different approaches adopted by
students, and several issues have emerged from our examination of this
aspect of authentic tasks. The learning environments that have been
examined to date typically build a scenario into which students are
immersed, and include an authentic context where students are given a
role, and a task to perform to solve a significant problem. Resources are
available on the websites to assist with their investigations, and the
students collaboratively produce a polished and realistic product, such as
a research report for assessment. The courses examined have included
subjects in research methods, business communication and coastal and
marine biology. Two main patterns of engagement have emerged from our
initial data that appear to merit further investigation.
Herrington, Oliver and Reeves
Willing acceptance and ‘relief’
The phrase ‘willing suspension of disbelief’ was first used by the early
19th century poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge. The term has been applied to
many instances of human response to the arts, as noted by Milburn (n.d.):
[Coleridge’s] original turn of the phrase was in reference to the reader’s
response to poetry, but everyone immediately realized he had summarized
most of the human experience of art generally … Whether you’re talking
about a Spielberg movie, a Stephen King novel, a twitch-em-up video game,
a multi-decibel rave, or a simple TV sitcom, they all require the same thing
of spectators/ participants: a willing suspension of disbelief. (Para no. 6)
However, the idea is also highly apposite to education. Laurel 
likened the willing suspension of disbelief to engagement: ‘Engagement is
what happens when we are able to give ourselves over to a
representational action, comfortably and unambiguously. It involves a
kind of complicity’ (p. 115). In initial contact with authentic learning
environments as described here, many students willingly and instantly
engage. For example, one incident was described in the interviews which
labelled the students’ response as ‘relief’:
There was less fear. There’s an anecdote I can share is that the very first
time the unit ran, we gave students an option of coming in to campus to
look at it … I stood behind two mature aged women who had expressed to
me before things started that they didn’t want to do this unit, they hated the
idea of it, they were terrified of it, they really disliked the fact that they had
to do it and were quite negative about it. They were talked through how to
access the site … they turned to each other and [said] words to the effect of
‘Oh wow, this is going to be great’. And they immediately weren’t scared of
it. There was a real sense of relief and I think that’s because it was presented
in a human form. (Interview with Camille)
Similarly, there was evidence of a willing acceptance of the characters and
parameters of the scenarios developed using authentic tasks, described by
Laurel as a willingness ‘to think and feel in terms of both the
content and conventions of a mimetic context’ (p. 115). Students can
readily become so immersed in the learning context that has been created
for them that they begin to see the characters as real:
The most interesting part for me was when we piloted it and … one day I
walked in and the students were there in the lab … chatting to each other,
and they were going on and on about this person they were having trouble
with, and I inquired about it and it turned out it was [one of the characters]
and I said as gently as I could ‘That’s not a real person, it’s a character’ and
they said ‘We know that’ and then they just ignored me and kept
conversing with each other about what an awful person he was and how
difficult they were finding him, as if he was real, and I found that
interesting. (Interview with Brooke)
Australian Journal of Educational Technology, 2003, 19(1)
It was also apparent in the interviews that the veracity of the learning
environment and its physical representation on the website was not a
critical factor for those students who engaged with the context from the
outset. For example:
[We] very deliberately didn’t try, to make … total simulation out of it. There
is so much suspension of disbelief required, but the point was, there just
had to be enough to get them engaged.’ (Interview with Carlo).
The quality of the graphics and images was not seen as important to
students if they had accepted the basic context of the scenario:
If it were a commercial product, I’d be disappointed in some of the
technology and the graphics that I think are low end. If we spent a bit more
money on it we could have something that looked a lot more professional
… but I think that is a relatively trivial point at the moment. Yes, I think it’s
been engaging; I think the students have learnt at a higher level. (Interview
with Camille)
Similarly, another teacher pointed out that the original design for the
website planned to include realistic graphics and photographs as a faithful
reproduction of a real-world work environment. Instead, the website was
tested with simple sketches:
Our concern was that the sketches wouldn’t seem as real to the students.
When we piloted it, it worked sensationally. I suppose the students these
days are so used to the blending of artificial and the real it didn’t bother
them at all. (Interview with Brooke)
This observation that many, particularly younger, students have little
trouble adapting to the conventions and conduct of web-based scenarios
may be a legacy of popular computer and strategy games that have
successfully incorporated complex and sustained scenarios in their design.
Nevertheless, these responses cannot be considered to be restricted to this
age group, as many students across the board show immediate and
sustained acceptance of authentic learning environments:
There is quite clear evidence that very large numbers of the students
become deeply engaged. The evidence is overwhelming that the students
mostly become very seriously committed to this scenario and they do find it
deeply engaging. (Interview with Camille)
Delayed engagement
The capacity of authentic learning settings to promote students’ willing
suspension of disbelief is a powerful outcome and one that appears to
hold strong prospects for enhancing the effectiveness of a range of
learning settings that promote knowledge construction. Many students
experience problems with learning environments that focus on learner-
Herrington, Oliver and Reeves
centred tasks and activities. For example, Taplin has noted that
students may have difficulty in changing dependent learning habits, that
problems can arise if students are not self-motivated and that many are
accustomed to teacher-centred modes of instruction and are unhappy
when this directed support is withdrawn. Others such as Hoffman and
Ritchie have found that some students experience discomfort at ‘the
increased degree of freedom they experience’ when they are accustomed
to ‘comprehension and synthesis of instructor-specified information, based
on instructor-formulated learning objectives, and participation in
instructor-led learning activities’ (p. 100). Some students resist authentic
approaches to such a degree that reports of angry emails and accusations
of not being taught are not uncommon. For instance, Taplin reports
from one of the teachers participating in her study: ‘One participant found
that there was very strong resistance—almost to the point of mutiny—
from one group of students because “they are too exam oriented. They
didn’t take it easily when accepting the new teaching mode” ’ (p. 293). One
respondent in our study described some student anger and frustration
with the scenario, and the types of questions that were asked in video
interviews:
They get really angry with ‘dumb’ questions and start being so particular
about the video clips and the sorts of questions that they think need to be
asked. (Interview with Violet)
Few teachers in our study described any sustained resistance to authentic
approaches, although there were several comments about initial inability
to accept the learning environment wholeheartedly. For example, one
respondent likened the experience to the theatre-going experience:
There will be a period where they won’t get engaged, but that’s the same as
going to a play I think. If the actors don’t win you over then you don’t enjoy
it, and you don’t mentally participate. So that very much puts the role of the
tutor or mentor or lecturer in the forefront because they can either make or
break the students’ attitude to the task and simulation in terms of how they
are presented to the students and how seriously they take the situation.
(Interview with Carlo)
This respondent also pointed out that student resistance is not unexpected
in environments where mistakes can happen, and where a great deal of
material has to be worked through to find the critical knowledge that will
assist with the problem:
I know one of the difficulties … is that there is a lot of text that students
may need to go through at the beginning before they actually begin doing
stuff. And I think that’s always a problem so that they will be a little bit
disoriented because of the amount of material they’re processing before
they even get to the problem. (Interview with Carlo)
Australian Journal of Educational Technology, 2003, 19(1)
Similarly, frustration can arise simply because of the similarity of these
authentic learning tasks to the kind of uncertain and messy tasks that
people are often required to do in their professional lives. One teacher
pointed out that students need to be given the time and space to make
these mistakes:
There’s not very many complex things that you would ask people to do in
the workplace that you would ask them to have in by tomorrow, and I
think you’ve got to give them the same operating rules as somebody in the
workplace would have. So generally I do think you have to give them time
to make mistakes; to be inefficient in getting the information together and
to increase their efficiency as they go on. (Interview with Blake)
In all the environments using authentic tasks examined to date in this
study, even reluctant students were reported to have engaged within a
few weeks of the semester. As stated by one teacher:
The data was real enough so that you would think it was real, and it
becomes real. So within a couple of weeks they’ve shifted past the virtual
and it’s real! (Interview with Violet)
These findings provide support for the use of authentic environments for
online learning settings. Our research suggests that the use of the
authentic setting encourages and supports learners in their development
of skills in self-regulation and self-learning, factors which have been seen
to inhibit other forms of online learning. The capacity of the learning
environment to encourage students’ willing suspension of disbelief
appears also to encourage self-direction and independent learning—
important success factors in online learning.
Conclusion
As educators move to adopt learning settings that focus on studentcentred rather than teacher-centred learning activities, the need for
strategies to support and encourage learners in what are sometimes
unfamiliar and discomforting activities becomes an important element in
the design process. Support for students in the early weeks of immersion
in student-centred learning environments is crucial. This is particularly
important in online learning environments where isolation can be an
additional mitigating factor against successful engagement with the
course. Taplin has noted that acceptance of problem based learning
scenarios, in addition to the usual difficulties in conventional situations, is
exacerbated by distance because of the students’ physical isolation.
Teacher support and peer scaffolding are often suggested as strategies that
may assist students who are reluctant to engage with student-centred and
problem-based tasks to persevere beyond the initial weeks of frustration
Herrington, Oliver and Reeves
and uncertainty. Our research suggests that the use of authentic learning
settings can also provide strong supports for such learners. Authentic
settings have the capability to motivate and encourage learner
participation by facilitating students’ willing suspension of disbelief. In
this way, students become immersed in the setting and such immersion
can provide the motivation that is needed for the initial perseverance.
Once students have persevered with what can initially be quite
discomforting and unfamiliar settings, they are able to develop the forms
of familiarity and the skill sets required so that the authentic setting no
longer provides a distraction from the cognitive engagement that higher
order learning requires.
We would not agree with one of Taplin’s respondents who contended that:
‘As educators, we can’t [just worry about pleasing] the students by not
doing it at all. Rather we have to gradually brainwash them … otherwise
they will lose their competitiveness in this society’ (p. 495). We believe,
like O’Reilly that there is a need to humanise the online experience
with greater compassion, empathy and open-mindedness. Authentic
learning settings appear to be able to provide support in the initial stages
of learning, enabling students to experience a suspension of disbelief, and
through these means to be encouraged to persevere with their learning
through initial difficulties. Our ongoing research seeks to explore the
design principles that can accommodate and support these learning
outcomes in online settings where the need for learner engagement is
paramount to learning success.