NMR relaxation rates for the spin-1/2 Heisenberg chain
Anders W. Sandvik∗
National High Magnetic Field Laboratory, Florida State University, 1800 E. Paul Dirac Dr.,
Tallahassee, Florida 32306
The spin-lattice relaxation rate 1/T1 and the spin echo decay rate 1/T2G
for the spin-1
2 antiferromagnetic Heisenberg chain are calculated using quantum Monte Carlo and maximum entropy analytic continuation. The results
are compared with recent analytical calculations by Sachdev. If the nuclear
hyperﬁne form factor Aq is strongly peaked around q = π the predicted lowtemperature behavior [1/T1 ∼ln 1/2(1/T), 1/T2G ∼ln 1/2(1/T)/
T] extends
up to temperatures as high as T/J ≈0.5. If Aq has signiﬁcant weight for
q ≈0 there are large contributions from diﬀusive long-wavelength processes
not taken into account in the theory, and very low temperatures are needed
in order to observe the asymptotic T →0 forms.
The one-dimensional spin- 1
2 antiferromagnetic Heisenberg hamiltonian,
⃗Si · ⃗Si+1,
is relevant as a starting point for understanding the magnetic properties of many quasi
one-dimensional materials. Examples include CuCl·2N(C5H5),1 KCuF3,2 and several tetracyanoquinodimethan (TCNQ) charge transfer salts.3,4 NMR and NQR are commonly used
techniques for studying the spin dynamics of materials such as those listed above. The lowfrequency dynamic susceptibility is accessible through the spin-lattice relaxation rate 1/T1
and the spin echo decay rate 1/T2G. Theoretical results for the temperature dependence
of both these rates were recently obtained by Sachdev,5 using a form for the dynamic susceptibility ﬁrst derived by Schulz6 using the Bosonization method. Neglecting logarithmic
corrections, 1/T1 is predicted to be constant at low temperature, and 1/T2G is predicted
to diverge as T −1/2. With logarithmic corrections taken into account both rates acquire a
factor ln1/2(1/T). These results are expected to be valid only for temperatures T ≪J, and
it is important to verify their validity as well as to obtain results also at higher temperatures. Here results are presented for 1/T1 and 1/T2G computed using quantum Monte Carlo
(QMC) simulations of chains of up to 1024 spins. 1/T2G is related to static susceptibilities
directly computable in the simulations. The dynamic susceptibility required for extracting
1/T1 is calculated in imaginary time and continued to real frequency using the maximum
entropy method.7,8
The results for the temperature dependence of both 1/T1 and 1/T2G at low temperatures
are in good agreement with Sachdev’s predictions. At higher temperatures diﬀusive modes
not taken into account in the theory cause signiﬁcant deviations. If the nuclear hyperﬁne
form factor has large weight at long wavelengths very low temperatures are needed for the
asymptotic forms to apply, and they may then be diﬃcult to observe experimentally. The
results presented here should be useful for comparisons with experiments also at higher
temperatures.
The NMR spin-lattice relaxation rate is given by9
q |2S(q, ω →0),
q is the hyperﬁne form factor, and α denotes the two axes perpendicular to the
external ﬁeld direction.
S(q, ω) is the dynamic structure factor, which is related to the
imaginary part of the dynamic spin susceptibility according to S(q, ω) = χ′′(q, ω)/(1−e−βω),
where β = 1/kBT. Here an isotropic form factor Aα
q = Aq will be assumed. Deﬁning
|Aq|2S(q, ω),
the spin-lattice relaxation rate is then obtained as 1/T1 = 2SA(ω →0). For the numerical calculations carried out here it is more convenient to work directly with the hyperﬁne
coupling A(r) in coordinate space. Deﬁne
A(ri)A(rj)⟨Sz
i (τ) = eτ ˆ
i e−τH. With CA(τ) calculated numerically, SA(ω) can be obtained by
inverting the relation
dωSA(ω)e−τω
using the maximum entropy technique.7,8 This method is described in detail in Ref. 8, and
was recently applied in a calculation of the spin-lattice relaxation rate of the two-dimensional
Heisenberg model.10
The gaussian component of the spin echo decay rate is related to the the nuclear spinspin interactions mediated by the electrons. Under conditions discussed by Pennington and
Slichter11
where Jz(x1, x2) is the z-component of the induced interaction between nuclei at x1 and x2:
Jz(x1, x2) = −1
A(x1 −ri)A(x2 −rj)χ(i −j).
The static susceptibility χ(i −j) is given by the Kubo formula
The hyperﬁne interaction A(r) is normally very short ranged. Here a situation is considered where the nuclei studied reside at the sites of the electronic spins modeled by the
hamiltonian (1). The hyperﬁne coupling is assumed to have a direct contact term of strength
A(0), and a transferred nearest-neighbor term of strength A(1). Results are presented for
several values of the ratio R = A(1)/A(0).
A stable inversion of the relation (5) requires that CA(τ) is known to very high accuracy.
Here a quantum Monte Carlo method based on stochastic series expansion12 (a generalization of Handscomb’s method13) is used. This technique is free from systematical errors of the
“Trotter break-up” used in standard methods.14 The imaginary time correlation functions
needed have been calculated to within relative statistical errors of only 10−4 or lower for temperatures down to T = J/8. This high accuracy is required for obtaining a reliable estimate
of SA(ω →0). The static susceptibilities (8) are computed directly in the QMC simulation,
and hence the calculation of 1/T2G is not hampered by potential problems associated with
analytic continuation. Accurate results for 1/T2G have been obtained at temperatures as
low as T = J/32 for systems of up to 1024 sites, which is large enough for ﬁnite-size eﬀects
to be completely negligible.
In order to test the accuracy of a calculation of 1/T1 by analytic continuation of QMC
data, complete diagonalizations of 16-site chains were also carried out.
Comparisons of
q S(q, ω) obtained in these calculations with numerically continued QMC data
are shown in Fig. 1. The maximum entropy method requires a “default model” which deﬁnes
the zero of entropy.7,8 In all calculations presented here a ﬂat default model was used. Exact
diagonalization gives S(ω) as a ﬁnite number of delta functions and their corresponding
weights. Here the results are plotted as histograms in order to facilitate comparison with
the maximum entropy result.
The jagged structure of the exact diagonalization result,
which is due to the small size of the system, cannot be reproduced by the maximum entropy
method. The results do however represent reasonable frequency averages. Note that even the
high-frequency behavior is obtained quite accurately. Clearly a 16-site system is not large
enough for extracting the low-frequency behavior at low temperatures. The 1/T1 results
presented below are for systems of 256 spins, and the accuracy of the imaginary time data
used for the analytic continuation is even higher than the data used for the 16-site results
shown in Fig. 1. Comparisons with results obtained for 128 spins indicate that there are no
signiﬁcant ﬁnite size eﬀects at the temperatures considered.
Both ﬂuctuations of the uniform (q ≈0) and staggered (q ≈π) magnetization contribute to the NMR rates of half-integer spin chains. At low temperatures the staggered
contribution dominates.5 Neglecting the uniform ﬂuctuations, Sachdev obtained the asymptotic low-temperature forms (in units where ¯h = kB = 1)
where I ≈8.4425, and c is the spinon velocity, which for spin- 1
2 is c = π
2. D is the prefactor
of the asymptotic equal-time spin-correlation function, which is not known accurately.15 The
marginally irrelevant operator present for the critical spin chains has not been taken into
account in the derivation of the above forms. This is expected to lead to a multiplicative
correction ln 1/2(Λ/T) for both 1/T1 and 1/T2G.5 Hence, the ratio T2G/(
TT1) should be a
constant, even with logarithmic corrections included.
If 1/T2G ∼ln1/2(Λ/T)/
T as predicted by Sachdev, T(1/T2G)2 should be a linear function of ln(J/T). In Fig. 2, T(A2
πT2G)−2 is graphed versus ln (J/T) for several values of the
hyperﬁne coupling ratio R = A(1)/A(0). In cases where the corresponding Aq is peaked
around q = π (R < 0) a linear behavior is seen in a wide temperature regime. The points
for R = −0.25 and R = −0.5 nearly coincide at low T, indicating that the q ≈π contributions almost completely dominate the behavior in both cases. A line ﬁt to the R = −0.5
points gives Λ = 0.92J and the amplitude D = 0.080 in (9b). For R > 0 contributions
from q ≈0 rapidly become important at high temperatures, and for large values of R the
asymptotic behavior can only be observed at very low temperatures.
Results for 1/T1 divided by A2
π are shown in Fig. 3. The expected weak (logarithmic)
increase as T decreases can be seen below T/J = 0.5 if R is large and negative, so that
q ≈π processes dominate SA(ω →0) even at relatively high temperatures. For R > 0, 1/T1
decreases with decreasing T down to quite low temperatures — for R = 0.25 this behavior
extends down to the lowest temperature studied. The enhancement of 1/T1 at high T is
caused by the diﬀusive q ≈0 processes not taken into account in the forms (9).5 In order to
more clearly determine the importance of these modes one can study the ratio
Sq<π/2(ω →0)
q<π/2 S(q, ω →0)
q S(q, ω →0)
which is graphed versus the temperature in Fig. 4 (these calculations were carried out on
systems of 128 spins).
At T = J the q < π/2 contribution is approximately 50%, and
decreases rapidly at lower temperatures. These results conﬁrm Sachdev’s conclusion5 that
the q ≈0 contribution to 1/T1 is negligible in the limit T →0.
Returning now to the results shown in Fig. 3, there are not enough low-temperature
data to extract the asymptotic temperature dependence of 1/T1. The results are, however,
consistent with a divergence of the predicted form ln1/2(Λ/T) with the same Λ = 0.92J as
was found above for 1/T2G. The amplitude needed in Eq. (9b) is then D ≈0.14, which
is signiﬁcantly larger than the amplitude extracted from 1/T2G above.
Hence, the ratio
TT1) is diﬀerent from Sachdev’s prediction. The ratio is graphed versus temperature
in Fig. 5. For R < 0 it is indeed almost constant below T/J ≈0.5, whereas for R ≥0 there
is a signiﬁcant temperature dependence down to the lowest temperatures considered. For
positive R there is a sharp maximum in T2G/(
TT1), arising from the minimum in 1/T2G
seen in Fig. 2. The R = −0.5 result for T2G/(
TT1) at low temperatures is approximately
3.0 −3.1, which is almost a factor 2 larger than what is obtained from Eqs. (9).
In summary, the NMR rates 1/T1 and 1/T2G have been calculated for the spin-1/2
Heisenberg model, using quantum Monte Carlo and maximum entropy analytic continuation. The temperature dependence at low temperature is in good agreement with Sachdev’s
recent theoretical results, which include only the contributions from staggered magnetization ﬂuctuations. At high temperature damped q ≈0 modes are important, and can
dominate the NMR rates if the hyperﬁne form factor has large weight at long wavelengths.
In such cases very low temperatures are needed to observe the asymptotic forms. In many
real systems eﬀects of interchain couplings may become important before the asymptotic
regime is reached, and the low-temperature forms may therefore not be easily observed.
The results here should then be useful for determining the relevance of a description by the
one-dimensional Heisenberg model based upon measurements at higher temperatures. It
can be noted that early NMR experiments4 on (NMP)(TCNQ) indicate a behavior of 1/T1
similar to the result shown in Fig. 3 for a small positive hyperﬁne ratio A(1)/A(0), with no
indication of a low-temperature increase down to T ≈0.1J.
It will be interesting to apply the techniques used here to calculate the NMR rates of other
one-dimensional systems. Work on coupled spin chains is in progress.16 Itinerant electrons
described by one-dimensional Hubbard-type models, including electron-phonon interactions,
can also be studied.
I would like to thank E. Dagotto, S. Haas, and D. Scalapino for useful discussions.
Most of the computations were carried out on a cluster of DEC Alpha workstations at the
Supercomputer Computations Research Institute at Florida State University. This work
was supported by the Oﬃce of Naval Research under Grant No. ONR N00014-93-0495.