he goals of IBM Research are to advance computer science
by exploring new ways for computer technology to affect
science, business, and society. Roughly three years ago,
IBM Research was looking for a major research challenge to rival
the scientiﬁc and popular interest of Deep Blue, the computer
chess-playing champion , that also would have clear
relevance to IBM business interests.
With a wealth of enterprise-critical information being captured in natural language documentation of all forms, the problems with perusing only the top 10 or 20 most popular documents containing the user’s two or three key words are
becoming increasingly apparent. This is especially the case in
the enterprise where popularity is not as important an indicator
of relevance and where recall can be as critical as precision.
There is growing interest to have enterprise computer systems
deeply analyze the breadth of relevant content to more precisely answer and justify answers to user’s natural language questions. We believe advances in question-answering (QA) technology can help support professionals in critical and timely
decision making in areas like compliance, health care, business
integrity, business intelligence, knowledge discovery, enterprise
knowledge management, security, and customer support. For
FALL 2010 59
Copyright © 2010, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence. All rights reserved. ISSN 0738-4602
Building Watson:
An Overview of the
DeepQA Project
David Ferrucci, Eric Brown, Jennifer Chu-Carroll,
James Fan, David Gondek, Aditya A. Kalyanpur,
Adam Lally, J. William Murdock, Eric Nyberg, John Prager,
Nico Schlaefer, and Chris Welty
I IBM Research undertook a challenge to build
a computer system that could compete at the
human champion level in real time on the
American TV quiz show, Jeopardy. The extent
of the challenge includes fielding a real-time
automatic contestant on the show, not merely a
laboratory exercise. The Jeopardy Challenge
helped us address requirements that led to the
design of the DeepQA architecture and the
implementation of Watson. After three years of
intense research and development by a core
team of about 20 researchers, Watson is performing at human expert levels in terms of precision, confidence, and speed at the Jeopardy
quiz show. Our results strongly suggest that
DeepQA is an effective and extensible architecture that can be used as a foundation for combining, deploying, evaluating, and advancing a
wide range of algorithmic techniques to rapidly
advance the field of question answering (QA).
researchers, the open-domain QA problem is
attractive as it is one of the most challenging in the
realm of computer science and artiﬁcial intelligence, requiring a synthesis of information
retrieval, natural language processing, knowledge
representation and reasoning, machine learning,
and computer-human interfaces. It has had a long
history and saw rapid advancement spurred by system building, experimentation, and government funding in the past decade
 .
With QA in mind, we settled on a challenge to
build a computer system, called Watson,1 which
could compete at the human champion level in
real time on the American TV quiz show, Jeopardy.
The extent of the challenge includes ﬁelding a realtime automatic contestant on the show, not merely a laboratory exercise.
Jeopardy! is a well-known TV quiz show that has
been airing on television in the United States for
more than 25 years (see the Jeopardy! Quiz Show
sidebar for more information on the show). It pits
three human contestants against one another in a
competition that requires answering rich natural
language questions over a very broad domain of
topics, with penalties for wrong answers. The nature
of the three-person competition is such that conﬁdence, precision, and answering speed are of critical
importance, with roughly 3 seconds to answer each
question. A computer system that could compete at
human champion levels at this game would need to
produce exact answers to often complex natural
language questions with high precision and speed
and have a reliable conﬁdence in its answers, such
that it could answer roughly 70 percent of the questions asked with greater than 80 percent precision
in 3 seconds or less.
Finally, the Jeopardy Challenge represents a
unique and compelling AI question similar to the
one underlying DeepBlue — can a computer system be designed to compete against the
best humans at a task thought to require high levels of human intelligence, and if so, what kind of
technology, algorithms, and engineering is
required? While we believe the Jeopardy Challenge
is an extraordinarily demanding task that will
greatly advance the ﬁeld, we appreciate that this
challenge alone does not address all aspects of QA
and does not by any means close the book on the
QA challenge the way that Deep Blue may have for
playing chess.
The Jeopardy Challenge
Meeting the Jeopardy Challenge requires advancing
and incorporating a variety of QA technologies
including parsing, question classiﬁcation, question
decomposition, automatic source acquisition and
evaluation, entity and relation detection, logical
form generation, and knowledge representation
and reasoning.
Winning at Jeopardy requires accurately computing conﬁdence in your answers. The questions and
content are ambiguous and noisy and none of the
individual algorithms are perfect. Therefore, each
component must produce a conﬁdence in its output, and individual component conﬁdences must
be combined to compute the overall conﬁdence of
the ﬁnal answer. The ﬁnal conﬁdence is used to
determine whether the computer system should
risk choosing to answer at all. In Jeopardy parlance,
this conﬁdence is used to determine whether the
computer will “ring in” or “buzz in” for a question.
The conﬁdence must be computed during the time
the question is read and before the opportunity to
buzz in. This is roughly between 1 and 6 seconds
with an average around 3 seconds.
Conﬁdence estimation was very critical to shaping our overall approach in DeepQA. There is no
expectation that any component in the system
does a perfect job — all components post features
of the computation and associated conﬁdences,
and we use a hierarchical machine-learning
method to combine all these features and decide
whether or not there is enough conﬁdence in the
ﬁnal answer to attempt to buzz in and risk getting
the question wrong.
In this section we elaborate on the various
aspects of the Jeopardy Challenge.
The Categories
A 30-clue Jeopardy board is organized into six
columns. Each column contains ﬁve clues and is
associated with a category. Categories range from
broad subject headings like “history,” “science,” or
“politics” to less informative puns like “tutu
much,” in which the clues are about ballet, to actual parts of the clue, like “who appointed me to the
Supreme Court?” where the clue is the name of a
judge, to “anything goes” categories like “potpourri.” Clearly some categories are essential to
understanding the clue, some are helpful but not
necessary, and some may be useless, if not misleading, for a computer.
A recurring theme in our approach is the requirement to try many alternate hypotheses in varying
contexts to see which produces the most conﬁdent
answers given a broad range of loosely coupled scoring algorithms. Leveraging category information is
another clear area requiring this approach.
The Questions
There are a wide variety of ways one can attempt to
characterize the Jeopardy clues. For example, by
topic, by difﬁculty, by grammatical construction,
by answer type, and so on. A type of classiﬁcation
that turned out to be useful for us was based on the
primary method deployed to solve the clue. The
60 AI MAGAZINE
FALL 2010 61
The Jeopardy! quiz show is a well-known syndicated U.S. TV quiz show that has been on the air
since 1984. It features rich natural language questions covering a broad range of general knowledge. It is widely recognized as an entertaining
game requiring smart, knowledgeable, and quick
The show’s format pits three human contestants
against each other in a three-round contest of
knowledge, conﬁdence, and speed. All contestants
must pass a 50-question qualifying test to be eligible to play. The ﬁrst two rounds of a game use a
grid organized into six columns, each with a category label, and ﬁve rows with increasing dollar
values. The illustration shows a sample board for a
ﬁrst round. In the second round, the dollar values
are doubled. Initially all the clues in the grid are
hidden behind their dollar values. The game play
begins with the returning champion selecting a
cell on the grid by naming the category and the
dollar value. For example the player may select by
saying “Technology for $400.”
The clue under the selected cell is revealed to all
the players and the host reads it out loud. Each
player is equipped with a hand-held signaling button. As soon as the host ﬁnishes reading the clue,
a light becomes visible around the board, indicating to the players that their hand-held devices are
enabled and they are free to signal or “buzz in” for
a chance to respond. If a player signals before the
light comes on, then he or she is locked out for
one-half of a second before being able to buzz in
The ﬁrst player to successfully buzz in gets a
chance to respond to the clue. That is, the player
must answer the question, but the response must
be in the form of a question. For example, validly
formed responses are, “Who is Ulysses S. Grant?”
or “What is The Tempest?” rather than simply
“Ulysses S. Grant” or “The Tempest.” The Jeopardy
quiz show was conceived to have the host providing the answer or clue and the players responding
with the corresponding question or response. The
clue/response concept represents an entertaining
twist on classic question answering. Jeopardy clues
are straightforward assertional forms of questions.
So where a question might read, “What drug has
been shown to relieve the symptoms of ADD with
relatively few side effects?” the corresponding
Jeopardy clue might read “This drug has been
shown to relieve the symptoms of ADD with relatively few side effects.” The correct Jeopardy
response would be “What is Ritalin?”
Players have 5 seconds to speak their response,
but it’s typical that they answer almost immediately since they often only buzz in if they already
know the answer. If a player responds to a clue correctly, then the dollar value of the clue is added to
the player’s total earnings, and that player selects
another cell on the board. If the player responds
incorrectly then the dollar value is deducted from
the total earnings, and the system is rearmed,
allowing the other players to buzz in. This makes
it important for players to know what they know
— to have accurate conﬁdences in their responses.
There is always one cell in the ﬁrst round and
two in the second round called Daily Doubles,
whose exact location is hidden until the cell is
selected by a player. For these cases, the selecting
player does not have to compete for the buzzer but
must respond to the clue regardless of the player’s
conﬁdence. In addition, before the clue is revealed
the player must wager a portion of his or her earnings. The minimum bet is $5 and the maximum
bet is the larger of the player’s current score and
the maximum clue value on the board. If players
answer correctly, they earn the amount they bet,
else they lose it.
The Final Jeopardy round consists of a single
question and is played differently. First, a category is revealed. The players privately write down
their bet — an amount less than or equal to their
total earnings. Then the clue is revealed. They
have 30 seconds to respond. At the end of the 30
seconds they reveal their answers and then their
bets. The player with the most money at the end
of this third round wins the game. The questions
used in this round are typically more difﬁcult than
those used in the previous rounds.
The Jeopardy! Quiz Show
bulk of Jeopardy clues represent what we would
consider factoid questions — questions whose
answers are based on factual information about
one or more individual entities. The questions
themselves present challenges in determining
what exactly is being asked for and which elements
of the clue are relevant in determining the answer.
Here are just a few examples (note that while the
Jeopardy! game requires that answers are delivered
in the form of a question (see the Jeopardy! Quiz
Show sidebar), this transformation is trivial and for
purposes of this paper we will just show the
answers themselves):
Category: General Science
Clue: When hit by electrons, a phosphor gives off
electromagnetic energy in this form.
Answer: Light (or Photons)
Category: Lincoln Blogs
Clue: Secretary Chase just submitted this to me for
the third time; guess what, pal. This time I’m
accepting it.
Answer: his resignation
Category: Head North
Clue: They’re the two states you could be reentering
if you’re crossing Florida’s northern border.
Answer: Georgia and Alabama
Decomposition. Some more complex clues contain multiple facts about the answer, all of which
are required to arrive at the correct response but
are unlikely to occur together in one place. For
Category: “Rap” Sheet
Clue: This archaic term for a mischievous or annoying child can also mean a rogue or scamp.
Subclue 1: This archaic term for a mischievous or
annoying child.
Subclue 2: This term can also mean a rogue or
Answer: Rapscallion
In this case, we would not expect to ﬁnd both
“subclues” in one sentence in our sources; rather,
if we decompose the question into these two parts
and ask for answers to each one, we may ﬁnd that
the answer common to both questions is the
answer to the original clue.
Another class of decomposable questions is one
in which a subclue is nested in the outer clue, and
the subclue can be replaced with its answer to form
a new question that can more easily be answered.
For example:
Category: Diplomatic Relations
Clue: Of the four countries in the world that the
United States does not have diplomatic relations
with, the one that’s farthest north.
Inner subclue: The four countries in the world that
the United States does not have diplomatic relations with (Bhutan, Cuba, Iran, North Korea).
Outer subclue: Of Bhutan, Cuba, Iran, and North
Korea, the one that’s farthest north.
Answer: North Korea
Decomposable Jeopardy clues generated requirements that drove the design of DeepQA to generate zero or more decomposition hypotheses for
each question as possible interpretations.
Puzzles. Jeopardy also has categories of questions
that require special processing defined by the category itself. Some of them recur often enough that
contestants know what they mean without
instruction; for others, part of the task is to figure
out what the puzzle is as the clues and answers are
revealed (categories requiring explanation by the
host are not part of the challenge). Examples of
well-known puzzle categories are the Before and
After category, where two subclues have answers
that overlap by (typically) one word, and the
Rhyme Time category, where the two subclue
answers must rhyme with one another. Clearly
these cases also require question decomposition.
For example:
Category: Before and After Goes to the Movies
Clue: Film of a typical day in the life of the Beatles,
which includes running from bloodthirsty zombie
fans in a Romero classic.
Subclue 2: Film of a typical day in the life of the Beatles.
Answer 1: (A Hard Day’s Night)
Subclue 2: Running from bloodthirsty zombie fans
in a Romero classic.
Answer 2: (Night of the Living Dead)
Answer: A Hard Day’s Night of the Living Dead
Category: Rhyme Time
Clue: It’s where Pele stores his ball.
Subclue 1: Pele ball (soccer)
Subclue 2: where store (cabinet, drawer, locker, and
Answer: soccer locker
There are many infrequent types of puzzle categories including things like converting roman
numerals, solving math word problems, sounds
like, ﬁnding which word in a set has the highest
Scrabble score, homonyms and heteronyms, and
so on. Puzzles constitute only about 2–3 percent of
all clues, but since they typically occur as entire
categories (ﬁve at a time) they cannot be ignored
for success in the Challenge as getting them all
wrong often means losing a game.
Excluded Question Types. The Jeopardy quiz show
ordinarily admits two kinds of questions that IBM
and Jeopardy Productions, Inc., agreed to exclude
from the computer contest: audiovisual (A/V)
questions and Special Instructions questions. A/V
questions require listening to or watching some
sort of audio, image, or video segment to determine a correct answer. For example:
Category: Picture This
(Contestants are shown a picture of a B-52 bomber)
Clue: Alphanumeric name of the fearsome machine
seen here.
Answer: B-52
62 AI MAGAZINE
Special instruction questions are those that are
not “self-explanatory” but rather require a verbal
explanation describing how the question should
be interpreted and solved. For example:
Category: Decode the Postal Codes
Verbal instruction from host: We’re going to give you
a word comprising two postal abbreviations; you
have to identify the states.
Clue: Vain
Answer: Virginia and Indiana
Both present very interesting challenges from an
AI perspective but were put out of scope for this
contest and evaluation.
The Domain
As a measure of the Jeopardy Challenge’s breadth of
domain, we analyzed a random sample of 20,000
questions extracting the lexical answer type (LAT)
when present. We deﬁne a LAT to be a word in the
clue that indicates the type of the answer, independent of assigning semantics to that word. For
example in the following clue, the LAT is the string
“maneuver.”
Category: Oooh….Chess
Clue: Invented in the 1500s to speed up the game,
this maneuver involves two pieces of the same color.
Answer: Castling
About 12 percent of the clues do not indicate an
explicit lexical answer type but may refer to the
answer with pronouns like “it,” “these,” or “this”
or not refer to it at all. In these cases the type of
answer must be inferred by the context. Here’s an
Category: Decorating
Clue: Though it sounds “harsh,” it’s just embroidery, often in a floral pattern, done with yarn on
cotton cloth.
Answer: crewel
The distribution of LATs has a very long tail, as
shown in ﬁgure 1. We found 2500 distinct and
explicit LATs in the 20,000 question sample. The
most frequent 200 explicit LATs cover less than 50
percent of the data. Figure 1 shows the relative frequency of the LATs. It labels all the clues with no
explicit type with the label “NA.” This aspect of the
challenge implies that while task-speciﬁc type systems or manually curated data would have some
impact if focused on the head of the LAT curve, it
still leaves more than half the problems unaccounted for. Our clear technical bias for both business and
scientiﬁc motivations is to create general-purpose,
reusable natural language processing (NLP) and
knowledge representation and reasoning (KRR)
technology that can exploit as-is natural language
resources and as-is structured knowledge rather
than to curate task-speciﬁc knowledge resources.
The Metrics
In addition to question-answering precision, the
system’s game-winning performance will depend
on speed, conﬁdence estimation, clue selection,
and betting strategy. Ultimately the outcome of
FALL 2010 63
Figure 1. Lexical Answer Type Frequency.
presidential
40 Most Frequent LATs
200 Most Frequent LATs
the public contest will be decided based on
whether or not Watson can win one or two games
against top-ranked humans in real time. The highest amount of money earned by the end of a oneor two-game match determines the winner. A player’s ﬁnal earnings, however, often will not reﬂect
how well the player did during the game at the QA
task. This is because a player may decide to bet big
on Daily Double or Final Jeopardy questions. There
are three hidden Daily Double questions in a game
that can affect only the player lucky enough to
ﬁnd them, and one Final Jeopardy question at the
end that all players must gamble on. Daily Double
and Final Jeopardy questions represent signiﬁcant
events where players may risk all their current
earnings. While potentially compelling for a public contest, a small number of games does not represent statistically meaningful results for the system’s raw QA performance.
While Watson is equipped with betting strategies necessary for playing full Jeopardy, from a core
QA perspective we want to measure correctness,
conﬁdence, and speed, without considering clue
selection, luck of the draw, and betting strategies.
We measure correctness and conﬁdence using precision and percent answered. Precision measures
the percentage of questions the system gets right
out of those it chooses to answer. Percent answered
is the percentage of questions it chooses to answer
(correctly or incorrectly). The system chooses
which questions to answer based on an estimated
conﬁdence score: for a given threshold, the system
will answer all questions with conﬁdence scores
above that threshold. The threshold controls the
trade-off between precision and percent answered,
assuming reasonable conﬁdence estimation. For
higher thresholds the system will be more conservative, answering fewer questions with higher precision. For lower thresholds, it will be more aggressive, answering more questions with lower
precision. Accuracy refers to the precision if all
questions are answered.
Figure 2 shows a plot of precision versus percent
attempted curves for two theoretical systems. It is
obtained by evaluating the two systems over a
range of conﬁdence thresholds. Both systems have
40 percent accuracy, meaning they get 40 percent
of all questions correct. They differ only in their
conﬁdence estimation. The upper line represents
an ideal system with perfect conﬁdence estimation. Such a system would identify exactly which
questions it gets right and wrong and give higher
conﬁdence to those it got right. As can be seen in
the graph, if such a system were to answer the 50
64 AI MAGAZINE
% Answered
Figure 2. Precision Versus Percentage Attempted.
Perfect confidence estimation (upper line) and no confidence estimation (lower line).
percent of questions it had highest conﬁdence for,
it would get 80 percent of those correct. We refer to
this level of performance as 80 percent precision at
50 percent answered. The lower line represents a
system without meaningful conﬁdence estimation.
Since it cannot distinguish between which questions it is more or less likely to get correct, its precision is constant for all percent attempted. Developing more accurate conﬁdence estimation means
a system can deliver far higher precision even with
the same overall accuracy.
The Competition:
Human Champion Performance
A compelling and scientiﬁcally appealing aspect of
the Jeopardy Challenge is the human reference
point. Figure 3 contains a graph that illustrates
expert human performance on Jeopardy It is based
on our analysis of nearly 2000 historical Jeopardy
games. Each point on the graph represents the performance of the winner in one Jeopardy game.2 As
in ﬁgure 2, the x-axis of the graph, labeled “%
Answered,” represents the percentage of questions
the winner answered, and the y-axis of the graph,
labeled “Precision,” represents the percentage of
those questions the winner answered correctly.
In contrast to the system evaluation shown in
ﬁgure 2, which can display a curve over a range of
conﬁdence thresholds, the human performance
shows only a single point per game based on the
observed precision and percent answered the winner demonstrated in the game. A further distinction is that in these historical games the human
contestants did not have the liberty to answer all
questions they wished. Rather the percent
answered consists of those questions for which the
winner was conﬁdent and fast enough to beat the
competition to the buzz. The system performance
graphs shown in this paper are focused on evaluating QA performance, and so do not take into
account competition for the buzz. Human performance helps to position our system’s performance, but obviously, in a Jeopardy game, performance will be affected by competition for the buzz
and this will depend in large part on how quickly
a player can compute an accurate conﬁdence and
how the player manages risk.
FALL 2010 65
% Answered
Figure 3. Champion Human Performance at Jeopardy.
The center of what we call the “Winners Cloud”
(the set of light gray dots in the graph in ﬁgures 3
and 4) reveals that Jeopardy champions are conﬁdent and fast enough to acquire on average
between 40 percent and 50 percent of all the questions from their competitors and to perform with
between 85 percent and 95 percent precision.
The darker dots on the graph represent Ken Jennings’s games. Ken Jennings had an unequaled
winning streak in 2004, in which he won 74 games
in a row. Based on our analysis of those games, he
acquired on average 62 percent of the questions
and answered with 92 percent precision. Human
performance at this task sets a very high bar for
precision, conﬁdence, speed, and breadth.
Baseline Performance
Our metrics and baselines are intended to give us
conﬁdence that new methods and algorithms are
improving the system or to inform us when they
are not so that we can adjust research priorities.
Our most obvious baseline is the QA system
called Practical Intelligent Question Answering
Technology (PIQUANT) , which had been under development
at IBM Research by a four-person team for 6 years
prior to taking on the Jeopardy Challenge. At the
time it was among the top three to ﬁve Text
Retrieval Conference (TREC) QA systems. Developed in part under the U.S. government AQUAINT
program3 and in collaboration with external teams
and universities, PIQUANT was a classic QA
pipeline with state-of-the-art techniques aimed
largely at the TREC QA evaluation . PIQUANT performed in the 33 percent accuracy range in TREC evaluations. While
the TREC QA evaluation allowed the use of the
web, PIQUANT focused on question answering
using local resources. A requirement of the Jeopardy
Challenge is that the system be self-contained and
does not link to live web search.
The requirements of the TREC QA evaluation
were different than for the Jeopardy challenge.
Most notably, TREC participants were given a relatively small corpus (1M documents) from which
answers to questions must be justiﬁed; TREC questions were in a much simpler form compared to
Jeopardy questions, and the conﬁdences associated
with answers were not a primary metric. Furthermore, the systems are allowed to access the web
and had a week to produce results for 500 questions. The reader can ﬁnd details in the TREC proceedings4 and numerous follow-on publications.
An initial 4-week effort was made to adapt
PIQUANT to the Jeopardy Challenge. The experiment focused on precision and conﬁdence. It
ignored issues of answering speed and aspects of
the game like betting and clue values.
The questions used were 500 randomly sampled
Jeopardy clues from episodes in the past 15 years.
The corpus that was used contained, but did not
necessarily justify, answers to more than 90 percent of the questions. The result of the PIQUANT
baseline experiment is illustrated in ﬁgure 4. As
shown, on the 5 percent of the clues that PI -
QUANT was most conﬁdent in (left end of the
curve), it delivered 47 percent precision, and over
all the clues in the set (right end of the curve), its
precision was 13 percent. Clearly the precision and
conﬁdence estimation are far below the requirements of the Jeopardy Challenge.
A similar baseline experiment was performed in
collaboration with Carnegie Mellon University
(CMU) using OpenEphyra,5 an open-source QA
framework developed primarily at CMU. The
framework is based on the Ephyra system, which
was designed for answering TREC questions. In our
experiments on TREC 2002 data, OpenEphyra
answered 45 percent of the questions correctly
using a live web search.
We spent minimal effort adapting OpenEphyra,
but like PIQUANT, its performance on Jeopardy
clues was below 15 percent accuracy. OpenEphyra
did not produce reliable conﬁdence estimates and
thus could not effectively choose to answer questions with higher conﬁdence. Clearly a larger
investment in tuning and adapting these baseline
systems to Jeopardy would improve their performance; however, we limited this investment since
we did not want the baseline systems to become
signiﬁcant efforts.
The PIQUANT and OpenEphyra baselines
demonstrate the performance of state-of-the-art
QA systems on the Jeopardy task. In ﬁgure 5 we
show two other baselines that demonstrate the
performance of two complementary approaches
on this task. The light gray line shows the performance of a system based purely on text search,
using terms in the question as queries and search
engine scores as conﬁdences for candidate answers
generated from retrieved document titles. The
black line shows the performance of a system
based on structured data, which attempts to look
the answer up in a database by simply ﬁnding the
named entities in the database related to the
named entities in the clue. These two approaches
were adapted to the Jeopardy task, including identifying and integrating relevant content.
The results form an interesting comparison. The
search-based system has better performance at 100
percent answered, suggesting that the natural language content and the shallow text search techniques delivered better coverage. However, the ﬂatness of the curve indicates the lack of accurate
conﬁdence estimation.6 The structured approach
had better informed conﬁdence when it was able
to decipher the entities in the question and found
66 AI MAGAZINE
the right matches in its structured knowledge
bases, but its coverage quickly drops off when
asked to answer more questions. To be a high-performing question-answering system, DeepQA must
demonstrate both these properties to achieve high
precision, high recall, and an accurate conﬁdence
estimation.
The DeepQA Approach
Early on in the project, attempts to adapt
PIQUANT failed to produce promising results. We devoted many months
of effort to encoding algorithms from the literature. Our investigations ran the gamut from deep
logical form analysis to shallow machine-translation-based approaches. We integrated them into
the standard QA pipeline that went from question
analysis and answer type determination to search
and then answer selection. It was difﬁcult, however, to ﬁnd examples of how published research
results could be taken out of their original context
and effectively replicated and integrated into different end-to-end systems to produce comparable
results. Our efforts failed to have signiﬁcant impact
on Jeopardy or even on prior baseline studies using
TREC data.
We ended up overhauling nearly everything we
did, including our basic technical approach, the
underlying architecture, metrics, evaluation protocols, engineering practices, and even how we
worked together as a team. We also, in cooperation
with CMU, began the Open Advancement of Question Answering (OAQA) initiative. OAQA is
intended to directly engage researchers in the community to help replicate and reuse research results
and to identify how to more rapidly advance the
state of the art in QA .
As our results dramatically improved, we
observed that system-level advances allowing rapid integration and evaluation of new ideas and
new components against end-to-end metrics were
essential to our progress. This was echoed at the
OAQA workshop for experts with decades of
investment in QA, hosted by IBM in early 2008.
Among the workshop conclusions was that QA
would beneﬁt from the collaborative evolution of
a single extensible architecture that would allow
component results to be consistently evaluated in
a common technical context against a growing
FALL 2010 67
% Answered
Figure 4. Baseline Performance.
68 AI MAGAZINE
variety of what were called “Challenge Problems.”
Different challenge problems were identiﬁed to
address various dimensions of the general QA
problem. Jeopardy was described as one addressing
dimensions including high precision, accurate
conﬁdence determination, complex language,
breadth of domain, and speed.
The system we have built and are continuing to
develop, called DeepQA, is a massively parallel
probabilistic evidence-based architecture. For the
Jeopardy Challenge, we use more than 100 different techniques for analyzing natural language,
identifying sources, ﬁnding and generating
hypotheses, ﬁnding and scoring evidence, and
merging and ranking hypotheses. What is far more
important than any particular technique we use is
how we combine them in DeepQA such that overlapping approaches can bring their strengths to
bear and contribute to improvements in accuracy,
conﬁdence, or speed.
DeepQA is an architecture with an accompanying methodology, but it is not speciﬁc to the Jeopardy Challenge. We have successfully applied
DeepQA to both the Jeopardy and TREC QA task.
We have begun adapting it to different business
applications and additional exploratory challenge
problems including medicine, enterprise search,
and gaming.
The overarching principles in DeepQA are massive parallelism, many experts, pervasive conﬁdence estimation, and integration of shallow and
deep knowledge.
Massive parallelism: Exploit massive parallelism
in the consideration of multiple interpretations
and hypotheses.
Many experts: Facilitate the integration, application, and contextual evaluation of a wide range of
loosely coupled probabilistic question and content
analytics.
Pervasive conﬁdence estimation: No component
commits to an answer; all components produce
features and associated conﬁdences, scoring different question and content interpretations. An
underlying conﬁdence-processing substrate learns
how to stack and combine the scores.
Integrate shallow and deep knowledge: Balance the
use of strict semantics and shallow semantics,
leveraging many loosely formed ontologies.
Figure 6 illustrates the DeepQA architecture at a
very high level. The remaining parts of this section
% Answered
Figure 5. Text Search Versus Knowledge Base Search.
provide a bit more detail about the various architectural roles.
Content Acquisition
The ﬁrst step in any application of DeepQA to
solve a QA problem is content acquisition, or identifying and gathering the content to use for the
answer and evidence sources shown in ﬁgure 6.
Content acquisition is a combination of manual and automatic steps. The ﬁrst step is to analyze
example questions from the problem space to produce a description of the kinds of questions that
must be answered and a characterization of the
application domain. Analyzing example questions
is primarily a manual task, while domain analysis
may be informed by automatic or statistical analyses, such as the LAT analysis shown in ﬁgure 1.
Given the kinds of questions and broad domain of
the Jeopardy Challenge, the sources for Watson
include a wide range of encyclopedias, dictionaries, thesauri, newswire articles, literary works, and
Given a reasonable baseline corpus, DeepQA
then applies an automatic corpus expansion
process. The process involves four high-level steps:
(1) identify seed documents and retrieve related
documents from the web; (2) extract self-contained
text nuggets from the related web documents; (3)
score the nuggets based on whether they are
informative with respect to the original seed document; and (4) merge the most informative nuggets
into the expanded corpus. The live system itself
uses this expanded corpus and does not have
access to the web during play.
In addition to the content for the answer and
evidence sources, DeepQA leverages other kinds of
semistructured and structured content. Another
step in the content-acquisition process is to identify and collect these resources, which include databases, taxonomies, and ontologies, such as dbPedia,7 WordNet , and the Yago8
Question Analysis
The ﬁrst step in the run-time question-answering
process is question analysis. During question
analysis the system attempts to understand what
the question is asking and performs the initial
analyses that determine how the question will be
processed by the rest of the system. The DeepQA
approach encourages a mixture of experts at this
stage, and in the Watson system we produce shallow parses, deep parses , logical
forms, semantic role labels, coreference, relations,
named entities, and so on, as well as speciﬁc kinds
of analysis for question answering. Most of these
technologies are well understood and are not discussed here, but a few require some elaboration.
FALL 2010 69
Figure 6. DeepQA High-Level Architecture.
Question Classification. Question classification is
the task of identifying question types or parts of
questions that require special processing. This can
include anything from single words with potentially double meanings to entire clauses that have
certain syntactic, semantic, or rhetorical functionality that may inform downstream components
with their analysis. Question classification may
identify a question as a puzzle question, a math
question, a definition question, and so on. It will
identify puns, constraints, definition components,
or entire subclues within questions.
Focus and LAT Detection. As discussed earlier, a
lexical answer type is a word or noun phrase in the
question that specifies the type of the answer without any attempt to understand its semantics.
Determining whether or not a candidate answer
can be considered an instance of the LAT is an
important kind of scoring and a common source of
critical errors. An advantage to the DeepQA
approach is to exploit many independently developed answer-typing algorithms. However, many of
these algorithms are dependent on their own type
systems. We found the best way to integrate preexisting components is not to force them into a
single, common type system, but to have them
map from the LAT to their own internal types.
The focus of the question is the part of the question that, if replaced by the answer, makes the question a stand-alone statement. Looking back at some
of the examples shown previously, the focus of
“When hit by electrons, a phosphor gives off electromagnetic energy in this form” is “this form”; the
focus of “Secretary Chase just submitted this to me
for the third time; guess what, pal. This time I’m
accepting it” is the ﬁrst “this”; and the focus of
“This title character was the crusty and tough city
editor of the Los Angeles Tribune” is “This title character.” The focus often (but not always) contains
useful information about the answer, is often the
subject or object of a relation in the clue, and can
turn a question into a factual statement when
replaced with a candidate, which is a useful way to
gather evidence about a candidate.
Relation Detection. Most questions contain relations, whether they are syntactic subject-verbobject predicates or semantic relationships
between entities. For example, in the question,
“They’re the two states you could be reentering if
you’re crossing Florida’s northern border,” we can
detect the relation borders(Florida,?x,north).
Watson uses relation detection throughout the
QA process, from focus and LAT determination, to
passage and answer scoring. Watson can also use
detected relations to query a triple store and directly generate candidate answers. Due to the breadth
of relations in the Jeopardy domain and the variety
of ways in which they are expressed, however,
Watson’s current ability to effectively use curated
databases to simply “look up” the answers is limited to fewer than 2 percent of the clues.
Watson’s use of existing databases depends on
the ability to analyze the question and detect the
relations covered by the databases. In Jeopardy the
broad domain makes it difﬁcult to identify the
most lucrative relations to detect. In 20,000 Jeopardy questions, for example, we found the distribution of Freebase9 relations to be extremely ﬂat
(ﬁgure 7). Roughly speaking, even achieving high
recall on detecting the most frequent relations in
the domain can at best help in about 25 percent of
the questions, and the beneﬁt of relation detection
drops off fast with the less frequent relations.
Broad-domain relation detection remains a major
open area of research.
Decomposition. As discussed above, an important
requirement driven by analysis of Jeopardy clues
was the ability to handle questions that are better
answered through decomposition. DeepQA uses
rule-based deep parsing and statistical classification methods both to recognize whether questions
should be decomposed and to determine how best
to break them up into subquestions. The operating
hypothesis is that the correct question interpretation and derived answer(s) will score higher after
all the collected evidence and all the relevant algorithms have been considered. Even if the question
did not need to be decomposed to determine an
answer, this method can help improve the system’s
overall answer confidence.
DeepQA solves parallel decomposable questions
through application of the end-to-end QA system
on each subclue and synthesizes the ﬁnal answers
by a customizable answer combination component. These processing paths are shown in medium gray in ﬁgure 6. DeepQA also supports nested
decomposable questions through recursive application of the end-to-end QA system to the inner
subclue and then to the outer subclue. The customizable synthesis components allow specialized
synthesis algorithms to be easily plugged into a
common framework.
Hypothesis Generation
Hypothesis generation takes the results of question
analysis and produces candidate answers by
searching the system’s sources and extracting
answer-sized snippets from the search results. Each
candidate answer plugged back into the question is
considered a hypothesis, which the system has to
prove correct with some degree of conﬁdence.
We refer to search performed in hypothesis generation as “primary search” to distinguish it from
search performed during evidence gathering
(described below). As with all aspects of DeepQA,
we use a mixture of different approaches for primary search and candidate generation in the Watson system.
70 AI MAGAZINE
Primary Search. In primary search the goal is to
find as much potentially answer-bearing content
as possible based on the results of question analysis — the focus is squarely on recall with the expectation that the host of deeper content analytics
will extract answer candidates and score this content plus whatever evidence can be found in support or refutation of candidates to drive up the precision. Over the course of the project we continued
to conduct empirical studies designed to balance
speed, recall, and precision. These studies allowed
us to regularly tune the system to find the number
of search results and candidates that produced the
best balance of accuracy and computational
resources. The operative goal for primary search
eventually stabilized at about 85 percent binary
recall for the top 250 candidates; that is, the system
generates the correct answer as a candidate answer
for 85 percent of the questions somewhere within
the top 250 ranked candidates.
A variety of search techniques are used, including the use of multiple text search engines with different underlying approaches (for example, Indri
and Lucene), document search as well as passage
search, knowledge base search using SPARQL on
triple stores, the generation of multiple search
queries for a single question, and backﬁlling hit
lists to satisfy key constraints identiﬁed in the
Triple store queries in primary search are based
on named entities in the clue; for example, ﬁnd all
database entities related to the clue entities, or
based on more focused queries in the cases that a
semantic relation was detected. For a small number
of LATs we identiﬁed as “closed LATs,” the candidate answer can be generated from a ﬁxed list in
some store of known instances of the LAT, such as
“U.S. President” or “Country.”
Candidate Answer Generation. The search results
feed into candidate generation, where techniques
appropriate to the kind of search results are applied
to generate candidate answers. For document
search results from “title-oriented” resources, the
title is extracted as a candidate answer. The system
may generate a number of candidate answer variants from the same title based on substring analysis or link analysis (if the underlying source contains hyperlinks). Passage search results require
more detailed analysis of the passage text to identify candidate answers. For example, named entity
detection may be used to extract candidate
answers from the passage. Some sources, such as a
triple store and reverse dictionary lookup, produce
candidate answers directly as their search result.
FALL 2010 71
Figure 7: Approximate Distribution of the 50 Most Frequently
Occurring Freebase Relations in 20,000 Randomly Selected Jeopardy Clues.
If the correct answer(s) are not generated at this
stage as a candidate, the system has no hope of
answering the question. This step therefore signiﬁcantly favors recall over precision, with the expectation that the rest of the processing pipeline will
tease out the correct answer, even if the set of candidates is quite large. One of the goals of the system design, therefore, is to tolerate noise in the
early stages of the pipeline and drive up precision
downstream.
Watson generates several hundred candidate
answers at this stage.
Soft Filtering
A key step in managing the resource versus precision trade-off is the application of lightweight (less
resource intensive) scoring algorithms to a larger
set of initial candidates to prune them down to a
smaller set of candidates before the more intensive
scoring components see them. For example, a
lightweight scorer may compute the likelihood of
a candidate answer being an instance of the LAT.
We call this step soft ﬁltering.
The system combines these lightweight analysis
scores into a soft ﬁltering score. Candidate answers
that pass the soft ﬁltering threshold proceed to
hypothesis and evidence scoring, while those candidates that do not pass the ﬁltering threshold are
routed directly to the ﬁnal merging stage. The soft
ﬁltering scoring model and ﬁltering threshold are
determined based on machine learning over training data.
Watson currently lets roughly 100 candidates pass
the soft ﬁlter, but this a parameterizable function.
Hypothesis and Evidence Scoring
Candidate answers that pass the soft ﬁltering
threshold undergo a rigorous evaluation process
that involves gathering additional supporting evidence for each candidate answer, or hypothesis,
and applying a wide variety of deep scoring analytics to evaluate the supporting evidence.
Evidence Retrieval. To better evaluate each candidate answer that passes the soft filter, the system
gathers additional supporting evidence. The architecture supports the integration of a variety of evidence-gathering techniques. One particularly
effective technique is passage search where the
candidate answer is added as a required term to the
primary search query derived from the question.
This will retrieve passages that contain the candidate answer used in the context of the original
question terms. Supporting evidence may also
come from other sources like triple stores. The
retrieved supporting evidence is routed to the deep
evidence scoring components, which evaluate the
candidate answer in the context of the supporting
Scoring. The scoring step is where the bulk of the
deep content analysis is performed. Scoring algorithms determine the degree of certainty that
retrieved evidence supports the candidate answers.
The DeepQA framework supports and encourages
the inclusion of many different components, or
scorers, that consider different dimensions of the
evidence and produce a score that corresponds to
how well evidence supports a candidate answer for
a given question.
DeepQA provides a common format for the scorers to register hypotheses (for example candidate
answers) and conﬁdence scores, while imposing
few restrictions on the semantics of the scores
themselves; this enables DeepQA developers to
rapidly deploy, mix, and tune components to support each other. For example, Watson employs
more than 50 scoring components that produce
scores ranging from formal probabilities to counts
to categorical features, based on evidence from different types of sources including unstructured text,
semistructured text, and triple stores. These scorers
consider things like the degree of match between a
passage’s predicate-argument structure and the
question, passage source reliability, geospatial location, temporal relationships, taxonomic classiﬁcation, the lexical and semantic relations the candidate is known to participate in, the candidate’s
correlation with question terms, its popularity (or
obscurity), its aliases, and so on.
Consider the question, “He was presidentially
pardoned on September 8, 1974”; the correct
answer, “Nixon,” is one of the generated candidates. One of the retrieved passages is “Ford pardoned Nixon on Sept. 8, 1974.” One passage scorer counts the number of IDF-weighted terms in
common between the question and the passage.
Another passage scorer based on the Smith-Waterman sequence-matching algorithm , measures the lengths of the
longest similar subsequences between the question
and passage . A
third type of passage scoring measures the alignment of the logical forms of the question and passage. A logical form is a graphical abstraction of
text in which nodes are terms in the text and edges
represent either grammatical relationships (for
example, Hermjakob, Hovy, and Lin ;
Moldovan et al. ), deep semantic relationships (for example, Lenat , Paritosh and Forbus ), or both . The logical form alignment
identiﬁes Nixon as the object of the pardoning in
the passage, and that the question is asking for the
object of a pardoning. Logical form alignment
gives “Nixon” a good score given this evidence. In
contrast, a candidate answer like “Ford” would
receive near identical scores to “Nixon” for term
matching and passage alignment with this passage,
but would receive a lower logical form alignment
72 AI MAGAZINE
Another type of scorer uses knowledge in triple
stores, simple reasoning such as subsumption and
disjointness in type taxonomies, geospatial, and
temporal reasoning. Geospatial reasoning is used
in Watson to detect the presence or absence of spatial relations such as directionality, borders, and
containment between geoentities. For example, if
a question asks for an Asian city, then spatial containment provides evidence that Beijing is a suitable candidate, whereas Sydney is not. Similarly,
geocoordinate information associated with entities
is used to compute relative directionality (for
example, California is SW of Montana; GW Bridge
is N of Lincoln Tunnel, and so on).
Temporal reasoning is used in Watson to detect
inconsistencies between dates in the clue and
those associated with a candidate answer. For
example, the two most likely candidate answers
generated by the system for the clue, “In 1594 he
took a job as a tax collector in Andalusia,” are
“Thoreau” and “Cervantes.” In this case, temporal
reasoning is used to rule out Thoreau as he was not
alive in 1594, having been born in 1817, whereas
Cervantes, the correct answer, was born in 1547
and died in 1616.
Each of the scorers implemented in Watson,
how they work, how they interact, and their independent impact on Watson’s performance deserves
its own research paper. We cannot do this work justice here. It is important to note, however, at this
point no one algorithm dominates. In fact we
believe DeepQA’s facility for absorbing these algorithms, and the tools we have created for exploring
their interactions and effects, will represent an
important and lasting contribution of this work.
To help developers and users get a sense of how
Watson uses evidence to decide between competing candidate answers, scores are combined into an
overall evidence proﬁle. The evidence proﬁle
groups individual features into aggregate evidence
dimensions that provide a more intuitive view of
the feature group. Aggregate evidence dimensions
might include, for example, Taxonomic, Geospatial (location), Temporal, Source Reliability, Gender, Name Consistency, Relational, Passage Support, Theory Consistency, and so on. Each
aggregate dimension is a combination of related
feature scores produced by the speciﬁc algorithms
that ﬁred on the gathered evidence.
Consider the following question: Chile shares its
longest land border with this country. In ﬁgure 8
we see a comparison of the evidence proﬁles for
two candidate answers produced by the system for
this question: Argentina and Bolivia. Simple search
FALL 2010 73
Popularity
Reliability
Figure 8. Evidence Profiles for Two Candidate Answers.
Dimensions are on the x-axis and relative strength is on the y-axis.
engine scores favor Bolivia as an answer, due to a
popular border dispute that was frequently reported in the news. Watson prefers Argentina (the correct answer) over Bolivia, and the evidence proﬁle
shows why. Although Bolivia does have strong
popularity scores, Argentina has strong support in
the geospatial, passage support (for example, alignment and logical form graph matching of various
text passages), and source reliability dimensions.
Final Merging and Ranking
It is one thing to return documents that contain
key words from the question. It is quite another,
however, to analyze the question and the content
enough to identify the precise answer and yet
another to determine an accurate enough conﬁdence in its correctness to bet on it. Winning at
Jeopardy requires exactly that ability.
The goal of ﬁnal ranking and merging is to evaluate the hundreds of hypotheses based on potentially hundreds of thousands of scores to identify
the single best-supported hypothesis given the evidence and to estimate its conﬁdence — the likelihood it is correct.
Answer Merging
Multiple candidate answers for a question may be
equivalent despite very different surface forms.
This is particularly confusing to ranking techniques that make use of relative differences
between candidates. Without merging, ranking
algorithms would be comparing multiple surface
forms that represent the same answer and trying to
discriminate among them. While one line of
research has been proposed based on boosting con-
ﬁdence in similar candidates , our approach is inspired by the observation
that different surface forms are often disparately
supported in the evidence and result in radically
different, though potentially complementary,
scores. This motivates an approach that merges
answer scores before ranking and conﬁdence estimation. Using an ensemble of matching, normalization, and coreference resolution algorithms,
Watson identiﬁes equivalent and related hypotheses (for example, Abraham Lincoln and Honest
Abe) and then enables custom merging per feature
to combine scores.
Ranking and Confidence Estimation
After merging, the system must rank the hypotheses and estimate conﬁdence based on their merged
scores. We adopted a machine-learning approach
that requires running the system over a set of training questions with known answers and training a
model based on the scores. One could assume a
very ﬂat model and apply existing ranking algorithms (for example, Herbrich, Graepel, and Obermayer ; Joachims ) directly to these
score proﬁles and use the ranking score for conﬁdence. For more intelligent ranking, however,
ranking and conﬁdence estimation may be separated into two phases. In both phases sets of scores
may be grouped according to their domain (for
example type matching, passage scoring, and so
on.) and intermediate models trained using
ground truths and methods speciﬁc for that task.
Using these intermediate models, the system produces an ensemble of intermediate scores. Motivated by hierarchical techniques such as mixture
of experts and stacked generalization , a metalearner is trained
over this ensemble. This approach allows for iteratively enhancing the system with more sophisticated and deeper hierarchical models while retaining ﬂexibility for robustness and experimentation
as scorers are modiﬁed and added to the system.
Watson’s metalearner uses multiple trained
models to handle different question classes as, for
instance, certain scores that may be crucial to identifying the correct answer for a factoid question
may not be as useful on puzzle questions.
Finally, an important consideration in dealing
with NLP-based scorers is that the features they
produce may be quite sparse, and so accurate con-
ﬁdence estimation requires the application of con-
ﬁdence-weighted learning techniques. .
Speed and Scaleout
DeepQA is developed using Apache UIMA,10 a
framework implementation of the Unstructured
Information Management Architecture . UIMA was designed to support
interoperability and scaleout of text and multimodal analysis applications. All of the components
in DeepQA are implemented as UIMA annotators.
These are software components that analyze text
and produce annotations or assertions about the
text. Watson has evolved over time and the number of components in the system has reached into
the hundreds. UIMA facilitated rapid component
integration, testing, and evaluation.
Early implementations of Watson ran on a single
processor where it took 2 hours to answer a single
question. The DeepQA computation is embarrassing parallel, however. UIMA-AS, part of Apache
UIMA, enables the scaleout of UIMA applications
using asynchronous messaging. We used UIMA-AS
to scale Watson out over 2500 compute cores.
UIMA-AS handles all of the communication, messaging, and queue management necessary using
the open JMS standard. The UIMA-AS deployment
of Watson enabled competitive run-time latencies
in the 3–5 second range.
To preprocess the corpus and create fast runtime indices we used Hadoop.11 UIMA annotators
74 AI MAGAZINE
were easily deployed as mappers in the Hadoop
map-reduce framework. Hadoop distributes the
content over the cluster to afford high CPU utilization and provides convenient tools for deploying, managing, and monitoring the corpus analysis process.
Jeopardy demands strategic game play to match
wits against the best human players. In a typical
Jeopardy game, Watson faces the following strategic decisions: deciding whether to buzz in and
attempt to answer a question, selecting squares
from the board, and wagering on Daily Doubles
and Final Jeopardy.
The workhorse of strategic decisions is the buzzin decision, which is required for every non–Daily
Double clue on the board. This is where DeepQA’s
ability to accurately estimate its conﬁdence in its
answer is critical, and Watson considers this conﬁdence along with other game-state factors in making the ﬁnal determination whether to buzz.
Another strategic decision, Final Jeopardy wagering,
generally receives the most attention and analysis
from those interested in game strategy, and there
exists a growing catalogue of heuristics such as
“Clavin’s Rule” or the “Two-Thirds Rule” as well as identiﬁcation of those critical score
boundaries at which particular strategies may be
used (by no means does this make it easy or rote;
despite this attention, we have found evidence
that contestants still occasionally make irrational
Final Jeopardy bets). Daily Double betting turns out
to be less studied but just as challenging since the
player must consider opponents’ scores and predict the likelihood of getting the question correct
just as in Final Jeopardy. After a Daily Double, however, the game is not over, so evaluation of a wager
requires forecasting the effect it will have on the
distant, ﬁnal outcome of the game.
These challenges drove the construction of statistical models of players and games, game-theoretic analyses of particular game scenarios and
strategies, and the development and application of
reinforcement-learning techniques for Watson to
learn its strategy for playing Jeopardy. Fortunately,
moderate samounts of historical data are available
to serve as training data for learning techniques.
Even so, it requires extremely careful modeling and
game-theoretic evaluation as the game of Jeopardy
has incomplete information and uncertainty to
model, critical score boundaries to recognize, and
savvy, competitive players to account for. It is a
game where one faulty strategic choice can lose the
entire match.
Status and Results
After approximately 3 years of effort by a core algorithmic team composed of 20 researchers and software engineers with a range of backgrounds in natural language processing, information retrieval,
machine learning, computational linguistics, and
knowledge representation and reasoning, we have
driven the performance of DeepQA to operate
within the winner’s cloud on the Jeopardy task, as
shown in ﬁgure 9. Watson’s results illustrated in
this ﬁgure were measured over blind test sets containing more than 2000 Jeopardy questions.
After many nonstarters, by the fourth quarter of
2007 we ﬁnally adopted the DeepQA architecture.
At that point we had all moved out of our private
ofﬁces and into a “war room” setting to dramatically facilitate team communication and tight collaboration. We instituted a host of disciplined
engineering and experimental methodologies supported by metrics and tools to ensure we were
investing in techniques that promised signiﬁcant
impact on end-to-end metrics. Since then, modulo
some early jumps in performance, the progress has
been incremental but steady. It is slowing in recent
months as the remaining challenges prove either
very difﬁcult or highly specialized and covering
small phenomena in the data.
By the end of 2008 we were performing reasonably well — about 70 percent precision at 70 percent attempted over the 12,000 question blind
data, but it was taking 2 hours to answer a single
question on a single CPU. We brought on a team
specializing in UIMA and UIMA-AS to scale up
DeepQA on a massively parallel high-performance
computing platform. We are currently answering
more than 85 percent of the questions in 5 seconds
or less — fast enough to provide competitive performance, and with continued algorithmic development are performing with about 85 percent precision at 70 percent attempted.
We have more to do in order to improve precision, conﬁdence, and speed enough to compete
with grand champions. We are ﬁnding great results
in leveraging the DeepQA architecture capability
to quickly admit and evaluate the impact of new
algorithms as we engage more university partnerships to help meet the challenge.
An Early Adaptation Experiment
Another challenge for DeepQA has been to demonstrate if and how it can adapt to other QA tasks. In
mid-2008, after we had populated the basic architecture with a host of components for searching,
evidence retrieval, scoring, ﬁnal merging, and
ranking for the Jeopardy task, IBM collaborated
with CMU to try to adapt DeepQA to the TREC QA
problem by plugging in only select domain-speciﬁc components previously tuned to the TREC
task. In particular, we added question-analysis
FALL 2010 75
components from PIQUANT and OpenEphyra that
identify answer types for a question, and candidate
answer-generation components that identify
instances of those answer types in the text. The
DeepQA framework utilized both sets of components despite their different type systems — no
ontology integration was performed. The identiﬁcation and integration of these domain speciﬁc
components into DeepQA took just a few weeks.
The extended DeepQA system was applied to
TREC questions. Some of DeepQA’s answer and
evidence scorers are more relevant in the TREC
domain than in the Jeopardy domain and others are
less relevant. We addressed this aspect of adaptation for DeepQA’s ﬁnal merging and ranking by
training an answer-ranking model using TREC
questions; thus the extent to which each score
affected the answer ranking and conﬁdence was
automatically customized for TREC.
Figure 10 shows the results of the adaptation
experiment. Both the 2005 PIQUANT and 2007
OpenEphyra systems had less than 50 percent
accuracy on the TREC questions and less than 15
percent accuracy on the Jeopardy clues. The Deep-
QA system at the time had accuracy above 50 percent on Jeopardy. Without adaptation DeepQA’s
accuracy on TREC questions was about 35 percent.
After adaptation, DeepQA’s accuracy on TREC
exceeded 60 percent. We repeated the adaptation
experiment in 2010, and in addition to the
improvements to DeepQA since 2008, the adaptation included a transfer learning step for TREC
questions from a model trained on Jeopardy questions. DeepQA’s performance on TREC data was 51
percent accuracy prior to adaptation and 67 percent after adaptation, nearly level with its performance on blind Jeopardy data.
The result performed signiﬁcantly better than
the original complete systems on the task for
which they were designed. While just one adaptation experiment, this is exactly the sort of behavior we think an extensible QA system should
exhibit. It should quickly absorb domain- or taskspeciﬁc components and get better on that target
task without degradation in performance in the
general case or on prior tasks.
76 AI MAGAZINE
% Answered
v0.1 12/07
v0.3 08/08
v0.5 05/09
v0.6 10/09
v0.7 04/10
v0.4 12/08
v0.2 05/08
Figure 9. Watson’s Precision and Confidence Progress as of the Fourth Quarter 2009.
The Jeopardy Challenge helped us address requirements that led to the design of the DeepQA architecture and the implementation of Watson. After 3
years of intense research and development by a core
team of about 20 researcherss, Watson is performing at human expert levels in terms of precision,
conﬁdence, and speed at the Jeopardy quiz show.
Our results strongly suggest that DeepQA is an
effective and extensible architecture that may be
used as a foundation for combining, deploying,
evaluating, and advancing a wide range of algorithmic techniques to rapidly advance the ﬁeld of QA.
The architecture and methodology developed as
part of this project has highlighted the need to
take a systems-level approach to research in QA,
and we believe this applies to research in the
broader ﬁeld of AI. We have developed many different algorithms for addressing different kinds of
problems in QA and plan to publish many of them
in more detail in the future. However, no one algorithm solves challenge problems like this. End-toend systems tend to involve many complex and
often overlapping interactions. A system design
and methodology that facilitated the efﬁcient integration and ablation studies of many probabilistic
components was essential for our success to date.
The impact of any one algorithm on end-to-end
performance changed over time as other techniques were added and had overlapping effects.
Our commitment to regularly evaluate the effects
of speciﬁc techniques on end-to-end performance,
and to let that shape our research investment, was
necessary for our rapid progress.
Rapid experimentation was another critical
ingredient to our success. The team conducted
more than 5500 independent experiments in 3
years — each averaging about 2000 CPU hours and
generating more than 10 GB of error-analysis data.
Without DeepQA’s massively parallel architecture
and a dedicated high-performance computing
infrastructure, we would not have been able to perform these experiments, and likely would not have
even conceived of many of them.
FALL 2010 77
DeepQA performs on
BOTH tasks 9/2008
IBM’s 2005
DeepQA prior
to Adaptation
CMU’s 2007
Figure 10. Accuracy on Jeopardy! and TREC.
Tuned for the Jeopardy Challenge, Watson has
begun to compete against former Jeopardy players
in a series of “sparring” games. It is holding its
own, winning 64 percent of the games, but has to
be improved and sped up to compete favorably
against the very best.
We have leveraged our collaboration with CMU
and with our other university partnerships in getting this far and hope to continue our collaborative work to drive Watson to its ﬁnal goal, and help
openly advance QA research.
Acknowledgements
We would like to acknowledge the talented team
of research scientists and engineers at IBM and at
partner universities, listed below, for the incredible
work they are doing to inﬂuence and develop all
aspects of Watson and the DeepQA architecture. It
is this team who are responsible for the work
described in this paper. From IBM, Andy Aaron,
Einat Amitay, Branimir Boguraev, David Carmel,
Arthur Ciccolo, Jaroslaw Cwiklik, Pablo Duboue,
Edward Epstein, Raul Fernandez, Radu Florian,
Dan Gruhl, Tong-Haing Fin, Achille Fokoue, Karen
Ingraffea, Bhavani Iyer, Hiroshi Kanayama, Jon
Lenchner, Anthony Levas, Burn Lewis, Michael
McCord, Paul Morarescu, Matthew Mulholland,
Yuan Ni, Miroslav Novak, Yue Pan, Siddharth Patwardhan, Zhao Ming Qiu, Salim Roukos, Marshall
Schor, Dafna Sheinwald, Roberto Sicconi, Hiroshi
Kanayama, Kohichi Takeda, Gerry Tesauro, Chen
Wang, Wlodek Zadrozny, and Lei Zhang. From our
academic partners, Manas Pathak (CMU), Chang
Wang (University of Massachusetts [UMass]), Hideki Shima (CMU), James Allen (UMass), Ed Hovy
(University of Southern California/Information
Sciences Instutute), Bruce Porter (University of
Texas), Pallika Kanani (UMass), Boris Katz (Massachusetts Institute of Technology), Alessandro Moschitti, and Giuseppe Riccardi (University of Trento), Barbar Cutler, Jim Hendler, and Selmer
Bringsjord (Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute).
1. Watson is named after IBM’s founder, Thomas J. Watson.
2. Random jitter has been added to help visualize the distribution of points.
3. www-nlpir.nist.gov/projects/aquaint.
4. trec.nist.gov/proceedings/proceedings.html.
5. sourceforge.net/projects/openephyra/.
6. The dip at the left end of the light gray curve is due to
the disproportionately high score the search engine
assigns to short queries, which typically are not sufficiently discriminative to retrieve the correct answer in
top position.
7. dbpedia.org/.
8. www.mpi-inf.mpg.de/yago-naga/yago/.
9. freebase.com/.
10. incubator.apache.org/uima/.
11. hadoop.apache.org/.