CONTRIBUTED RESEARCH ARTICLES
Nonparametric Goodness-of-Fit Tests for
Discrete Null Distributions
by Taylor B. Arnold and John W. Emerson
Abstract Methodology extending nonparametric goodness-of-ﬁt tests to discrete null distributions has existed for several decades. However,
modern statistical software has generally failed
to provide this methodology to users. We offer
a revision of R’s ks.test() function and a new
cvm.test() function that ﬁll this need in the R
language for two of the most popular nonparametric goodness-of-ﬁt tests. This paper describes
these contributions and provides examples of
their usage. Particular attention is given to various numerical issues that arise in their implementation.
Introduction
Goodness-of-ﬁt tests are used to assess whether data
are consistent with a hypothesized null distribution.
The χ2 test is the best-known parametric goodnessof-ﬁt test, while the most popular nonparametric
tests are the classic test proposed by Kolmogorov
and Smirnov followed closely by several variants on
Cramér-von Mises tests.
In their most basic forms, these nonparametric
goodness-of-ﬁt tests are intended for continuous hypothesized distributions, but they have also been
adapted for discrete distributions.
Unfortunately,
most modern statistical software packages and programming environments have failed to incorporate
these discrete versions. As a result, researchers would
typically rely upon the χ2 test or a nonparametric
test designed for a continuous null distribution. For
smaller sample sizes, in particular, both of these
choices can produce misleading inferences.
This paper presents a revision of R’s ks.test()
function and a new cvm.test() function to ﬁll this
void for researchers and practitioners in the R environment. This work was motivated by the need for such
goodness-of-ﬁt testing in a study of Olympic ﬁgure
skating scoring . We ﬁrst
present overviews of the theory and general implementation of the discrete Kolmogorov-Smirnov and
Cramér-von Mises tests. We discuss the particular implementation of the tests in R and provide examples.
We conclude with a short discussion, including the
state of existing continuous and two-sample Cramérvon Mises testing in R.
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test
The most popular nonparametric goodness-of-ﬁt test
is the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Given the cumulative distribution function F0(x) of the hypothesized
distribution and the empirical distribution function
Fdata(x) of the observed data, the test statistic is given
|F0(x) −Fdata(x)|
When F0 is continuous, the distribution of D does not
depend on the hypothesized distribution, making this
a computationally attractive method. Slakter 
offers a standard presentation of the test and its performance relative to other algorithms. The test statistic is
easily adapted for one-sided tests. For these, the absolute value in (1) is discarded and the tests are based on
either the supremum of the remaining difference (the
‘greater’ testing alternative) or by replacing the supremum with a negative inﬁmum (the ‘lesser’ hypothesis
alternative). Tabulated p-values have been available
for these tests since 1933 .
The extension of the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test
to non-continuous null distributions is not straightforward. The formula of the test statistic D remains
unchanged, but its distribution is much more difﬁcult to obtain; unlike the continuous case, it depends
on the null model. Use of the tables associated with
continuous hypothesized distributions results in conservative p-values when the null distribution is discontinuous , Goodman , and
Massey ). In the early 1970’s, Conover 
developed the method implemented here for computing exact one-sided p-values in the case of discrete
null distributions. The method developed in Gleser
 is used to provide exact p-values for two-sided
Implementation
The implementation of the discrete Kolmogorov-
Smirnov test involves two steps. First, the particular
test statistic is calculated (corresponding to the desired one-sided or two-sided test). Then, the p-value
for that particular test statistic may be computed.
The form of the test statistic is the same as in the
continuous case; it would seem that no additional
work would be required for the implementation, but
this is not the case. Consider two non-decreasing functions f and g, where the function f is a step function
with jumps on the set {x1,... xN} and g is continuous (the classical Kolmogorov-Smirnov situation). In
The R Journal Vol. 3/2, December 2011
ISSN 2073-4859
CONTRIBUTED RESEARCH ARTICLES
order to determine the supremum of the difference
between these two functions, notice that
| f (x) −g(x)|
|g(xi) −f (xi)|,
x→xi |g(x) −f (xi−1)|
|g(xi) −f (xi)|,
|g(xi) −f (xi−1)|
Computing the maximum over these 2N values (with
f equal to Fdata(x) and g equal to F0(x) as deﬁned
above) is clearly the most efﬁcient way to compute
the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test statistic for a continuous null distribution. When the function g is not
continuous, however, equality (3) does not hold in
general because we cannot replace limx→xi g(x) with
the value g(xi).
If it is known that g is a step function, it follows
that for some small ϵ,
| f (x) −g(x)| =
(|g(xi) −f (xi)|,|g(xi −ϵ) −f (xi−1)|) (4)
where the discontinuities in g are more than some distance ϵ apart. This, however, requires knowledge that
g is a step function as well as of the nature of its support (speciﬁcally, the break-points). As a result, we
implement the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test statistic for
discrete null distributions by requiring the complete
speciﬁcation of the null distribution.
Having obtained the test statistic, the p-value must
then be calculated. When an exact p-value is required
for smaller sample sizes, the methodology in Conover
 is used in for one-sided tests. For two-sided
tests, the methods presented in Gleser lead to
exact two-sided p-values. This requires the calculation of rectangular probabilities for uniform order
statistics as discussed by Niederhausen . Full
details of the calculations are contained in source code
of our revised function ks.test() and in the papers
of Conover and Gleser.
For larger sample sizes (or when requested for
smaller sample sizes), the classical Kolmogorov-
Smirnov test is used and is known to produce conservative p-values for discrete distributions; the revised
ks.test() supports estimation of p-values via simulation if desired.
Cramér-von Mises tests
While the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test may be the most
popular of the nonparametric goodness-of-ﬁt tests,
Cramér-von Mises tests have been shown to be more
powerful against a large class of alternatives hypotheses.
The original test was developed by Harald
Cramér and Richard von Mises and further adapted by Anderson and
Darling , and Watson . The original test
statistic, W2, Anderson’s A2, and Watson’s U2 are:
−∞[Fdata(x) −F0(x)]2 dF0(x)
[Fdata(x) −F0(x)]2
F0(x) −F0(x)2
Fdata(x) −F0(x) −W2i2
As with the original Kolmogorov-Smirnov test statistic, these all have test statistic null distributions which
are independent of the hypothesized continuous models. The W2 statistic was the original test statistic. The
A2 statistic was developed by Anderson in the process of generalizing the test for the two-sample case.
Watson’s U2 statistic was developed for distributions
which are cyclic (with an ordering to the support but
no natural starting point); it is invariant to cyclic reordering of the support. For example, a distribution
on the months of the year could be considered cyclic.
It has been shown that these tests can be more
powerful than Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests to certain
deviations from the hypothesized distribution. They
all involve integration over the whole range of data,
rather than use of a supremum, so they are best-suited
for situations where the true alternative distribution
deviates a little over the whole support rather than
having large deviations over a small section of the
support. Stephens offers a comprehensive analysis of the relative powers of these tests.
Generalizations of the Cramér-von Mises tests to
discrete distributions were developed in Choulakian
et al. . As with the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test,
the forms of the test statistics are unchanged, and
the null distributions of the test statistics are again
hypothesis-dependent. Choulakian et al. does
not offer ﬁnite-sample results, but rather shows that
the asymptotic distributions of the test statistics under the null hypothesis each involve consideration of
a weighted sum of independent chi-squared variables
(with the weights depending on the particular null
distribution).
Implementation
Calculation of the three test statistics is done using
the matrix algebra given by Choulakian et al. .
The only notable difﬁculty in the implementation of
The R Journal Vol. 3/2, December 2011
ISSN 2073-4859
CONTRIBUTED RESEARCH ARTICLES
the discrete form of the tests involves calculating the
percentiles of the weighted sum of chi-squares,
where p is the number of elements in the support of
the hypothesized distribution. Imhof provides
a method for obtaining the distribution of Q, easily
adapted for our case because the chi-squared variables have only one degree of freedom. The exact
formula given for the distribution function of Q is
P{Q ≥x} = 1
sin[θ(u,x)]
for continuous functions θ(·,x) and ρ(·) depending
on the weights λi.
There is no analytic solution to the integral in (9),
so the integration is accomplished numerically. This
seems ﬁne in most situations we considered, but numerical issues appear in the regime of large test statistics x (or, equivalently, small p-values). The function
θ(·,x) is linear in x; as the test statistic grows the corresponding periodicity of the integrand decreases and
the approximation becomes unstable. As an example
of this numerical instability, the red plotted in Figure
1 shows the non-monotonicity of the numerical evaluation of equation (9) for a null distribution that is
uniform on the set {1,2,3}.
test statistic
Unstable asymptotic p−value from (9)
Bound given by (11)
Bound given by (13)
Figure 1: Plot of calculated p-values for given test
statistics using numerical integration (red) compared
to the conservative chi-squared bound (dashed blue)
and the Markov inequality bound (dashed green).
The null distribution is uniform on the set {1,2,3} in
this example. The sharp variations in the calculated
p-values are a result of numerical instabilities, and
the true p-values are bounded by the dashed curves.
We resolve this problem by using a combination of
two conservative approximations to avoid the numerical instability. First, consider the following inequality:
The values for the weighted sum can be bounded
using a simple transformation and a chi-squared distribution of a higher degree of freedom. Second, consider the Markov inequality:
i=1(1 −2tλi)
where the bound can be minimized over t ∈
(0,1/2λmax). The upper bounds for the p-value given
by (11) and (13) are both calculated and the smaller
is used in cases where the numerical instability of (9)
may be a concern.
The original formulation, numerical integration of
(9), is preferable for most p-values, while the upper
bound described above is used for smaller p-values
(smaller than 0.001, based on our observations of the
numerical instability of the original formulation). Figure 1 shows the bounds with the blue and green
dashed lines; values in red exceeding the bounds
are a result of the numerical instability. Although
it would be preferable to determine the use of the
bound based on values of the test statistic rather than
the p-value, the range of “extreme” values of the test
statistic varies with the hypothesized distribution.
Kolmogorov-Smirnov and Cramérvon Mises tests in R
Functions ks.test() and cvm.test() are provided
for convenience in package dgof, available on
CRAN. Function ks.test() offers a revision of R’s
Kolmogorov-Smirnov function ks.test() from recommended package stats; cvm.test() is a new function for Cramér-von Mises tests.
The revised ks.test() function supports onesample tests for discrete null distributions by allowing
the second argument, y, to be an empirical cumulative distribution function (an R function with class
"ecdf") or an object of class "stepfun" specifying a
discrete distribution. As in the original version of
ks.test(), the presence of ties in the data (the ﬁrst
argument, x) generates a warning unless y describes a
discrete distribution. If the sample size is less than or
equal to 30, or when exact=TRUE, exact p-values are
The R Journal Vol. 3/2, December 2011
ISSN 2073-4859
CONTRIBUTED RESEARCH ARTICLES
provided (a warning is issued when the sample size
is greater than 30 due to possible numerical instabilities). When exact = FALSE (or when exact is unspeciﬁed and the sample size is greater than 30) the classical Kolmogorov-Smirnov null distribution of the test
statistic is used and resulting p-values are known to
be conservative though imprecise 
for details). In such cases, simulated p-values may
be desired, produced by the simulate.p.value=TRUE
The function cvm.test() is similar in design to
ks.test(). Its ﬁrst two arguments specify the data
and null distribution; the only extra option, type,
speciﬁes the variant of the Cramér-von Mises test:
x a numerical vector of data values.
y an ecdf or step-function (stepfun) for specifying
the null model
type the variant of the Cramér-von Mises test; W2 is
the default and most common method, U2 is for
cyclical data, and A2 is the Anderson-Darling
alternative.
As with ks.test(), cvm.test() returns an object of
class "htest".
Consider a toy example with observed data of length
2 (speciﬁcally, the values 0 and 1) and a hypothesized
null distribution that places equal probability on the
values 0 and 1. With the current ks.test() function in
R (which, admittedly, doesn’t claim to handle discrete
distributions), the reported p-value, 0.5, is clearly incorrect:
> stats::ks.test(c(0, 1), ecdf(c(0, 1)))
One-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test
D = 0.5, p-value = 0.5
alternative hypothesis: two-sided
Instead, the value of D given in equation (1) should
be 0 and the associated p-value should be 1. Our revision of ks.test() ﬁxes this problem when the user
provides a discrete distribution:
> library(dgof)
> dgof::ks.test(c(0, 1), ecdf(c(0, 1)))
One-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test
D = 0, p-value = 1
alternative hypothesis: two-sided
Next, we simulate a sample of size 25 from the discrete uniform distribution on the integers {1,2,...,10}
and show usage of the new ks.test() implementation. The ﬁrst is the default two-sided test, where the
exact p-value is obtained using the methods of Gleser
> set.seed(1)
> x <- sample(1:10, 25, replace = TRUE)
> dgof::ks.test(x, ecdf(1:10))
One-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test
D = 0.08, p-value = 0.9354
alternative hypothesis: two-sided
Next, we conduct the default one-sided test, where
Conover’s method provides the exact p-value (up to
the numerical precision of the implementation):
> dgof::ks.test(x, ecdf(1:10),
alternative = "g")
One-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test
D^+ = 0.04, p-value = 0.7731
alternative hypothesis:
the CDF of x lies above the null hypothesis
In contrast, the option exact=FALSE results in the pvalue obtained by applying the classical Kolmogorov-
Smirnov test, resulting in a conservative p-value:
> dgof::ks.test(x, ecdf(1:10),
alternative = "g", exact = FALSE)
One-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test
D^+ = 0.04, p-value = 0.9231
alternative hypothesis:
the CDF of x lies above the null hypothesis
The p-value may also be estimated via a Monte Carlo
simulation:
> dgof::ks.test(x, ecdf(1:10),
alternative = "g",
simulate.p.value = TRUE, B = 10000)
One-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test
D^+ = 0.04, p-value = 0.7717
alternative hypothesis:
the CDF of x lies above the null hypothesis
A different toy example shows the dangers of
using R’s existing ks.test() function with discrete
> dgof::ks.test(rep(1, 3), ecdf(1:3))
The R Journal Vol. 3/2, December 2011
ISSN 2073-4859
CONTRIBUTED RESEARCH ARTICLES
One-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test
D = 0.6667, p-value = 0.07407
alternative hypothesis: two-sided
exact=FALSE
the new ks.test() function, or if the original
stats::ks.test() is used, the reported p-value is
0.1389 even though the test statistic is the same.
We demonstrate the Cramér-von Mises tests with
the same simulated data.
> cvm.test(x, ecdf(1:10))
Cramer-von Mises - W2
W2 = 0.057, p-value = 0.8114
alternative hypothesis: Two.sided
> cvm.test(x, ecdf(1:10), type = "A2")
Cramer-von Mises - A2
A2 = 0.3969, p-value = 0.75
alternative hypothesis: Two.sided
We conclude with a toy cyclical example showing
that the test is invariant to cyclic reordering of the
> set.seed(1)
> y <- sample(1:4, 20, replace = TRUE)
> cvm.test(y, ecdf(1:4), type = 'U2')
Cramer-von Mises - U2
U2 = 0.0094, p-value = 0.945
alternative hypothesis: Two.sided
> z <- y%%4 + 1
> cvm.test(z, ecdf(1:4), type = 'U2')
Cramer-von Mises - U2
U2 = 0.0094, p-value = 0.945
alternative hypothesis: Two.sided
In contrast, the Kolmogorov-Smirnov or the standard
Cramér-von Mises tests produce different results after
such a reordering. For example, the default Cramérvon Mises test yields p-values of 0.8237 and 0.9577
with the original and transformed data y and z, respectively.
Discussion
This paper presents the implementation of several
nonparametric goodness-of-ﬁt tests for discrete null
distributions. In some cases the p-values are known to
be exact. In others, conservativeness in special cases
with small p-values has been established. Although
we provide for Monte Carlo simulated p-values with
the new ks.test(), no simulations may be necessary necessary for these methods; they were generally developed during an era when extensive simulations may have been prohibitively expensive or timeconsuming. However, this does raise the possibility
that alternative tests relying upon modern computational abilities could provide even greater power in
certain situations, a possible avenue for future work.
In the continuous setting, both of the Kolmogorov-
Smirnov and the Cramér-von Mises tests have twosample analogues. When data are observed from two
processes or sampled from two populations, the hypothesis tested is whether they came from the same
(unspeciﬁed) distribution.
With the discrete case,
however, the null distribution of the test statistic depends on the underlying probability model, as discussed by Walsh . Such an extension would
require the speciﬁcation of a null distribution, which
generally goes unstated in two-sample goodness-of-
ﬁt tests. We note that Dufour and Farhat explored two-sample goodness-of-ﬁt tests for discrete
distributions using a permutation test approach.
Further generalizations of goodness-of-ﬁt tests for
discrete distributions are described in the extended
study of de Wet and Venter . There are existing R packages for certain type of Cramér-von Mises
goodness-of-ﬁt tests for continuous distributions.
Functions implemented in package nortest focus on the composite hypothesis of normality,
while package ADGofTest provides
the Anderson-Darling variant of the test for general
continuous distributions. Packages CvM2SL1Test
 and CvM2SL2Test provide two-sample Cramér-von Mises
tests with continuous distributions. Package cramer
 offers a multivariate Cramér test for the
two-sample problem. Finally, we note that the discrete goodness-of-ﬁt tests discussed in this paper do
not allow the estimation of parameters of the hypothesized null distributions for
Acknowledgement
We are grateful to Le-Minh Ho for his implementation
of the algorithm described in Niederhausen for
calculating rectangular probabilities of uniform order
statistics. We also appreciate the feedback from two
reviewers of this paper as well as from a reviewer of
Emerson and Arnold .