Vision Transformers for Dense Prediction
Ren´e Ranftl
Alexey Bochkovskiy
Intel Labs
 
Vladlen Koltun
We introduce dense vision transformers, an architecture
that leverages vision transformers in place of convolutional
networks as a backbone for dense prediction tasks. We assemble tokens from various stages of the vision transformer
into image-like representations at various resolutions and
progressively combine them into full-resolution predictions
using a convolutional decoder. The transformer backbone
processes representations at a constant and relatively high
resolution and has a global receptive ﬁeld at every stage.
These properties allow the dense vision transformer to provide ﬁner-grained and more globally coherent predictions
when compared to fully-convolutional networks. Our experiments show that this architecture yields substantial improvements on dense prediction tasks, especially when a
large amount of training data is available. For monocular
depth estimation, we observe an improvement of up to 28%
in relative performance when compared to a state-of-theart fully-convolutional network. When applied to semantic
segmentation, dense vision transformers set a new state of
the art on ADE20K with 49.02% mIoU. We further show
that the architecture can be ﬁne-tuned on smaller datasets
such as NYUv2, KITTI, and Pascal Context where it also
sets the new state of the art. Our models are available at
 
1. Introduction
Virtually all existing architectures for dense prediction
are based on convolutional networks . The design of dense prediction architectures commonly follows a pattern that logically separates the network
into an encoder and a decoder. The encoder is frequently
based on an image classiﬁcation network, also called the
backbone, that is pretrained on a large corpus such as ImageNet . The decoder aggregates features from the encoder and converts them to the ﬁnal dense predictions. Architectural research on dense prediction frequently focuses
on the decoder and its aggregation strategy .
However, it is widely recognized that the choice of backbone architecture has a large inﬂuence on the capabilities
of the overall model, as any information that is lost in the
encoder is impossible to recover in the decoder.
Convolutional backbones progressively downsample the
input image to extract features at multiple scales. Downsampling enables a progressive increase of the receptive
ﬁeld, the grouping of low-level features into abstract highlevel features, and simultaneously ensures that memory
and computational requirements of the network remain
tractable. However, downsampling has distinct drawbacks
that are particularly salient in dense prediction tasks: feature resolution and granularity are lost in the deeper stages
of the model and can thus be hard to recover in the decoder.
While feature resolution and granularity may not matter for
some tasks, such as image classiﬁcation, they are critical
for dense prediction, where the architecture should ideally
be able to resolve features at or close to the resolution of the
input image.
Various techniques to mitigate the loss of feature granularity have been proposed.
These include training at
higher input resolution (if the computational budget permits), dilated convolutions to rapidly increase the receptive ﬁeld without downsampling, appropriately-placed
skip connections from multiple stages of the encoder to
the decoder , or, more recently, by connecting multiresolution representations in parallel throughout the network . While these techniques can signiﬁcantly improve prediction quality, the networks are still bottlenecked
by their fundamental building block: the convolution. Convolutions together with non-linearities form the fundamental computational unit of image analysis networks. Convolutions, by deﬁnition, are linear operators that have a limited receptive ﬁeld. The limited receptive ﬁeld and the limited expressivity of an individual convolution necessitate sequential stacking into very deep architectures to acquire suf-
ﬁciently broad context and sufﬁciently high representational
power. This, however, requires the production of many intermediate representations that require a large amount of
 
memory. Downsampling the intermediate representations
is necessary to keep memory consumption at levels that are
feasible with existing computer architectures.
In this work, we introduce the dense prediction transformer (DPT). DPT is a dense prediction architecture that is
based on an encoder-decoder design that leverages a transformer as the basic computational building block of the encoder.
Speciﬁcally, we use the recently proposed vision
transformer (ViT) as a backbone architecture. We reassemble the bag-of-words representation that is provided
by ViT into image-like feature representations at various
resolutions and progressively combine the feature representations into the ﬁnal dense prediction using a convolutional decoder. Unlike fully-convolutional networks, the vision transformer backbone foregoes explicit downsampling
operations after an initial image embedding has been computed and maintains a representation with constant dimensionality throughout all processing stages. It furthermore
has a global receptive ﬁeld at every stage. We show that
these properties are especially advantageous for dense prediction tasks as they naturally lead to ﬁne-grained and globally coherent predictions.
We conduct experiments on monocular depth estimation
and semantic segmentation. For the task of general-purpose
monocular depth estimation , where large-scale training data is available, DPT provides a performance increase
of more than 28% when compared to the top-performing
fully-convolutional network for this task. The architecture
can also be ﬁne-tuned to small monocular depth prediction
datasets, such as NYUv2 and KITTI , where it
also sets the new state of the art. We provide further evidence of the strong performance of DPT using experiments
on semantics segmentation. For this task, DPT sets a new
state of the art on the challenging ADE20K and Pascal Context datasets. Our qualitative results indicate
that the improvements can be attributed to ﬁner-grained and
more globally coherent predictions in comparison to convolutional networks.
2. Related Work
Fully-convolutional networks are the prototypical architecture for dense prediction.
Many variants of
this basic pattern have been proposed over the years, however, all existing architectures adopt convolution and subsampling as their fundamental elements in order to learn
multi-scale representations that can leverage an appropriately large context. Several works propose to progressively
upsample representations that have been pooled at different stages , while others use dilated convolutions or parallel multi-scale feature aggregation
at multiple scales to recover ﬁne-grained predictions
while at the same time ensuring a sufﬁciently large context.
More recent architectures maintain a high-resolution representation together with multiple lower-resolution representations throughout the network .
Attention-based models and in particular transformers have been the architecture of choice for learning
strong models for natural language processing (NLP) in recent years. Transformers are set-to-set models that are based on the self-attention mechanism. Transformer models have been particularly successful when instantiated as high-capacity architectures and trained on very
large datasets. There have been several works that adapt attention mechanisms to image analysis . In
particular, it has recently been demonstrated that a direct application of token-based transformer architectures that have
been successful in NLP can yield competitive performance
on image classiﬁcation . A key insight of this work was
that, like transformer models in NLP, vision transformers
need to be paired with a sufﬁcient amount of training data
to realize their potential.
3. Architecture
This section introduces the dense vision transformer. We
maintain the overall encoder-decoder structure that has been
successful for dense prediction in the past. We leverage vision transformers as the backbone, show how the representation that is produced by this encoder can be effectively transformed into dense predictions, and provide intuition for the success of this strategy. An overview of the
complete architecture is shown in Figure 1 (left).
Transformer encoder. On a high level, the vision transformer (ViT) operates on a bag-of-words representation of the image . Image patches that are individually
embedded into a feature space, or alternatively deep features extracted from the image, take the role of “words”.
We will refer to embedded “words” as tokens throughout
the rest of this work. Transformers transform the set of tokens using sequential blocks of multi-headed self-attention
(MHSA) , which relate tokens to each other to transform the representation.
Importantly for our application, a transformer maintains
the number of tokens throughout all computations. Since tokens have a one-to-one correspondence with image patches,
this means that the ViT encoder maintains the spatial resolution of the initial embedding throughout all transformer
stages. Additionally, MHSA is an inherently global operation, as every token can attend to and thus inﬂuence every other token. Consequently, the transformer has a global
receptive ﬁeld at every stage after the initial embedding.
This is in stark contrast to convolutional networks, which
progressively increase their receptive ﬁeld as features pass
through consecutive convolution and downsampling layers.
More speciﬁcally, ViT extracts a patch embedding from
the image by processing all non-overlapping square patches
Transformer
Transformer
Transformer
Transformer
Reassemble32
Reassemble16
Reassemble8
Reassemble4
Reassembles
Concatenate
Residual Conv Unit
Residual Conv Unit
Resample0.5
Figure 1. Left: Architecture overview. The input image is transformed into tokens (orange) either by extracting non-overlapping patches
followed by a linear projection of their ﬂattened representation (DPT-Base and DPT-Large) or by applying a ResNet-50 feature extractor
(DPT-Hybrid). The image embedding is augmented with a positional embedding and a patch-independent readout token (red) is added.
The tokens are passed through multiple transformer stages. We reassemble tokens from different stages into an image-like representation
at multiple resolutions (green). Fusion modules (purple) progressively fuse and upsample the representations to generate a ﬁne-grained
prediction. Center: Overview of the Reassembles operation. Tokens are assembled into feature maps with 1
s the spatial resolution of the
input image. Right: Fusion blocks combine features using residual convolutional units and upsample the feature maps.
of size p2 pixels from the image. The patches are ﬂattened
into vectors and individually embedded using a linear projection. An alternative, more sample-efﬁcient, variant of
ViT extracts the embedding by applying a ResNet50 to
the image and uses the pixel features of the resulting feature
maps as tokens. Since transformers are set-to-set functions,
they do not intrinsically retain the information of the spatial
positions of individual tokens. The image embeddings are
thus concatenated with a learnable position embedding to
add this information to the representation. Following work
in NLP, the ViT additionally adds a special token that is not
grounded in the input image and serves as the ﬁnal, global
image representation which is used for classiﬁcation. We
refer to this special token as the readout token. The result
of applying the embedding procedure to an image of size
H × W pixels is a a set of t0 = {t0
0, . . . , t0
tokens, where Np =
p2 , t0 refers to the readout token,
and D is the feature dimension of each token.
The input tokens are transformed using L transformer
layers into new representations tl, where l refers to the output of the l-th transformer layer. Dosovitskiy et al. 
deﬁne several variants of this basic blueprint. We use three
variants in our work: ViT-Base, which uses the patch-based
embedding procedure and features 12 transformer layers;
ViT-Large, which uses the same embedding procedure and
has 24 transformer layers and a wider feature size D; and
ViT-Hybrid, which employs a ResNet50 to compute the image embedding followed by 12 transformer layers. We use
patch size p = 16 for all experiments. We refer the interested reader to the original work for additional details
on these architectures.
The embedding procedure for ViT-Base and ViT-Large
projects the ﬂattened patches to dimension D = 768 and
D = 1024, respectively. Since both feature dimensions are
larger than the number of pixels in an input patch, this
means that the embedding procedure can learn to retain information if it is beneﬁcial for the task. Features from the
input patches can in principle be resolved with pixel-level
accuracy. Similarly, the ViT-Hybrid architecture extracts
features at
16 the input resolution, which is twice as high
as the lowest-resolution features that are commonly used
with convolutional backbones.
Convolutional decoder.
Our decoder assembles the set
of tokens into image-like feature representations at various
resolutions. The feature representations are progressively
fused into the ﬁnal dense prediction. We propose a simple three-stage Reassemble operation to recover image-like
representations from the output tokens of arbitrary layers of
the transformer encoder:
Reassemble
s (t) = (Resamples ◦Concatenate ◦Read)(t),
where s denotes the output size ratio of the recovered representation with respect to the input image, and ˆD denotes
the output feature dimension.
We ﬁrst map the Np + 1 tokens to a set of Np tokens
that is amenable to spatial concatenation into an image-like
representation:
Read : RNp+1×D →RNp×D.
This operation is essentially responsible for appropriately
handling the readout token. Since the readout token doesn’t
serve a clear purpose for the task of dense prediction, but
could potentially still be useful to capture and distribute
global information, we evaluate three different variants of
this mapping:
Readignore(t) = {t1, . . . , tNp}
simply ignores the readout token,
Readadd(t) = {t1 + t0, . . . , tNp + t0}
passes the information from the readout token to all other
tokens by adding the representations, and
Readproj(t) = {mlp(cat(t1, t0)), . . . ,
mlp(cat(tNp, t0))}
passes information to the other tokens by concatenating the
readout to all other tokens before projecting the representation to the original feature dimension D using a linear layer
followed by a GELU non-linearity .
After a Read block, the resulting Np tokens can be reshaped into an image-like representation by placing each
token according to the position of the initial patch in the
image. Formally, we apply a spatial concatenation operation that results in a feature map of size H
Concatenate : RNp×D →R
We ﬁnally pass this representation to a spatial resampling
layer that scales the representation to size H
features per pixel:
Resamples : R
We implement this operation by ﬁrst using 1 × 1 convolutions to project the input representation to ˆD, followed by a
(strided) 3 × 3 convolution when s ≥p, or a strided 3 × 3
transpose convolution when s < p, to implement spatial
downsampling and upsampling operations, respectively.
Irrespective of the exact transformer backbone, we reassemble features at four different stages and four different resolutions.
We assemble features from deeper layers of the transformer at lower resolution, whereas features from early layers are assembled at higher resolution.
When using ViT-Large, we reassemble tokens from layers
l = {5, 12, 18, 24}, whereas with ViT-Base we use layers
l = {3, 6, 9, 12}. We use features from the ﬁrst and second ResNet block from the embedding network and stages
l = {9, 12} when using ViT-Hybrid. Our default architecture uses projection as the readout operation and produces
feature maps with ˆD = 256 dimensions. We will refer
to these architectures as DPT-Base, DPT-Large, and DPT-
Hybrid, respectively.
We ﬁnally combine the extracted feature maps from
consecutive stages using a ReﬁneNet-based feature fusion
block (see Figure1 (right)) and progressively upsample the representation by a factor of two in each fusion
stage. The ﬁnal representation size has half the resolution
of the input image. We attach a task-speciﬁc output head to
produce the ﬁnal prediction. A schematic overview of the
complete architecture is shown in Figure 1.
Handling varying image sizes. Akin to fully-convolutional
networks, DPT can handle varying image sizes. As long as
the image size is divisible by p, the embedding procedure
can be applied and will produce a varying number of image tokens Np. As a set-to-set architecture, the transformer
encoder can trivially handle a varying number of tokens.
However, the position embedding has a dependency on the
image size as it encodes the locations of the patches in the
input image. We follow the approach proposed in and
linearly interpolate the position embeddings to the appropriate size. Note that this can be done on the ﬂy for every
image. After the embedding procedure and the transformer
stages, both the reassemble and fusion modules can trivially handle a varying number of tokens, provided that the
input image is aligned to the stride of the convolutional decoder (32 pixels).
4. Experiments
We apply DPT to two dense prediction tasks: monocular depth estimation and semantic segmentation. For both
tasks, we show that DPT can signiﬁcantly improve accuracy
when compared to convolutional networks with a similar
capacity, especially if a large training dataset is available.
We ﬁrst present our main results using the default conﬁguration and show comprehensive ablations of different DPT
conﬁgurations at the end of this section.
4.1. Monocular Depth Estimation
Monocular depth estimation is typically cast as a dense
regression problem. It has been shown that massive metadatasets can be constructed from existing sources of data,
provided that some care is taken in how different representations of depth are uniﬁed into a common representation
and that common ambiguities (such as scale ambiguity) are
appropriately handled in the training loss . Since transformers are known to realize their full potential only when
an abundance of training data is available, monocular depth
estimation is an ideal task to test the capabilities of DPT.
Experimental protocol. We closely follow the protocol of
Ranftl et al. . We learn a monocular depth prediction
network using a scale- and shift-invariant trimmed loss that
operates on an inverse depth representation, together with
the gradient-matching loss proposed in . We construct
a meta-dataset that includes the original datasets that were
used in (referred to as MIX 5 in that work) and extend
it with with ﬁve additional datasets ( ).
Training set
DPT - Large
10.82 (-13.2%)
0.089 (-31.2%)
0.270 (-17.5%)
8.46 (-64.6%)
8.32 (-12.9%)
9.97 (-30.3%)
DPT - Hybrid
11.56 (-51.6%)
10.89 (-23.2%)
16.08 (-32.7%)
12.51 (-12.5%)
MiDaS 
Casser 
Table 1. Comparison to the state of the art on monocular depth estimation. We evaluate zero-shot cross-dataset transfer according to the
protocol deﬁned in . Relative performance is computed with respect to the original MiDaS model . Lower is better for all metrics.
We refer to this meta-dataset as MIX 6. It contains about
1.4 million images and is, to the best of our knowledge, the
largest training set for monocular depth estimation that has
ever been compiled.
We use multi-objective optimization together with
Adam and set a learning rate of 1e−5 for the backbone and 1e−4 for the decoder weights. The encoder is
initialized with ImageNet-pretrained weights, whereas the
decoder is initialized randomly. We use an output head that
consists of 3 convolutional layers. The output head progressively halves the feature dimension and upsamples the predictions to the input resolution after the ﬁrst convolutional
layer (details in supplementary material). We disable batch
normalization in the decoder, as we found it to negatively
inﬂuence results for regression tasks. We resize the image
such that the longer side is 384 pixels and train on random
square crops of size 384. We train for 60 epochs, where one
epoch consists of 72,000 steps with a batch size of 16. As
the batch size is not divisible by the number of datasets, we
construct a mini-batch by ﬁrst drawing datasets uniformly
at random before sampling from the respective datasets.
We perform random horizontal ﬂips for data augmentation.
Similar to , we ﬁrst pretrain on a well-curated subset of
the data for 60 epochs before training on the
full dataset.
DPT-Hybrid
Table 2. Evaluation on NYUv2 depth.
DPT-Hybrid
Table 3. Evaluation on KITTI (Eigen split).
Zero-shot cross-dataset transfer. Table 1 shows the results of zero-shot transfer to different datasets that were not
seen during training. We refer the interested reader to Ranftl et al. for details of the evaluation procedure and
error metrics. For all metrics, lower is better. Both DPT
variants signiﬁcantly outperform the state of the art. The
average relative improvement over the best published architecture, MiDaS, is more than 23% for DPT-Hybrid and 28%
for DPT-Large. DPT-Hybrid achieves this with a comparable network capacity (Table 9), while DPT-Large is about 3
times larger than MiDaS. Note that both architectures have
similar latency to MiDaS (Table 9).
To ensure that the observed improvements are not only
due to the enlarged training set, we retrain the fullyconvolutional network used by MiDaS on our larger metadataset MIX 6. While the fully-convolutional network indeed beneﬁts from the larger training set, we observe that
both DPT variants still strongly outperform this network.
This shows that DPT can better beneﬁt from increased training set size, an observation that matches previous ﬁndings
on transformer-based architectures in other ﬁelds.
The quantitative results are supported by visual comparisons in Figure 2. DPT can better reconstruct ﬁne details while also improving global coherence in areas that are
challenging for the convolutional architecture (for example,
large homogeneous regions or relative depth arrangement
across the image).
Fine-tuning on small datasets. We ﬁne-tune DPT-Hybrid
on the KITTI and NYUv2 datasets to further compare the representational power of DPT to existing work.
Since the network was trained with an afﬁne-invariant loss,
its predictions are arbitrarily scaled and shifted and can have
large magnitudes. Direct ﬁne-tuning would thus be challenging, as the global mismatch in the magnitude of the
predictions to the ground truth would dominate the loss.
We thus ﬁrst align predictions of the initial network to each
training sample using the robust alignment procedure described in . We then average the resulting scales and
shifts across the training set and apply the average scale and
MiDaS (MIX 6)
DPT-Hybrid
Figure 2. Sample results for monocular depth estimation. Compared to the fully-convolutional network used by MiDaS, DPT shows better
global coherence (e.g., sky, second row) and ﬁner-grained details (e.g., tree branches, last row).
shift to the predictions before passing the result to the loss.
We ﬁne-tune with the loss proposed by Eigen et al. .
We disable the gradient-matching loss for KITTI since this
dataset only provides sparse ground truth.
Tables 2 and 3 summarize the results. Our architecture
matches or improves state-of-the-art performance on both
datasets in all metrics. This indicates that DPT can also be
usefully applied to smaller datasets.
4.2. Semantic Segmentation
We choose semantic segmentation as our second task
since it is representative of discrete labeling tasks and is
a very competitive proving ground for dense prediction architectures. We employ the same backbone and decoder
structure as in previous experiments. We use an output head
that predicts at half resolution and upsamples the logits to
full resolution using bilinear interpolation (details in supplementary material). The encoder is again initialized from
ImageNet-pretrained weights, and the decoder is initialized
Experimental protocol. We closely follow the protocol established by Zhang et al. . We employ a cross-entropy
loss and add an auxiliary output head together with an auxiliary loss to the output of the penultimate fusion layer. We
set the weight of the auxiliary loss to 0.2. Dropout with
a rate of 0.1 is used before the ﬁnal classiﬁcation layer in
both heads. We use SGD with momentum 0.9 and a polynomial learning rate scheduler with decay factor 0.9. We
use batch normalization in the fusion layers and train with
batch size 48. Images are resized to 520 pixels side length.
We use random horizontal ﬂipping and random rescaling in
the range ∈(0.5, 2.0) for data augmentation. We train on
square random crops of size 480. We set the learning rate to
0.002. We use multi-scale inference at test time and report
both pixel accuracy (pixAcc) as well as mean Intersectionover-Union (mIoU).
ADE20K. We train the DPT on the ADE20K semantic segmentation dataset for 240 epochs. Table 4 summarizes our results on the validation set. DPT-Hybrid outperforms all existing fully-convolutional architectures. DPT-
Large performs slightly worse, likely because of the signiﬁcantly smaller dataset compared to our previous experiments. Figure 3 provides visual comparisons. We observe
that the DPT tends to produce cleaner and ﬁner-grained delineations of object boundaries and that the predictions are
also in some cases less cluttered.
Fine-tuning on smaller datasets.
We ﬁne-tune DPT-
Hybrid on the Pascal Context dataset for 50 epochs. All
other hyper-parameters remain the same. Table 5 shows results on the validation set for this experiment. We again see
that DPT can provide strong performance even on smaller
ResNeSt-200 
DPT-Hybrid
Figure 3. Sample results for semantic segmentation on ADE20K (ﬁrst and second column) and Pascal Context (third and fourth column).
Predictions are frequently better aligned to object edges and less cluttered.
4.3. Ablations
We examine a number of aspects and technical choices in
DPT via ablation studies. We choose monocular depth estimation as the task for our ablations and follow the same protocol and hyper-parameter settings as previously described.
We use a reduced meta-dataset that is composed of three
datasets and consists of about 41,000 images.
We choose these datasets since they provide high-quality
ground truth. We split each dataset into a training set and
a small validation set of about 1,000 images total. We report results on the validation sets in terms of relative absolute deviation after afﬁne alignment of the predictions to
the ground truth . Unless speciﬁed otherwise, we use
ViT-Base as the backbone architecture.
Skip connections. Convolutional architectures offer natural points of interest for passing features from the encoder
to the decoder, namely before or after downsampling of the
pixAcc [%]
ResNeSt-101
ResNeSt-200
DPT-Hybrid
ViT-Hybrid
Table 4. Semantic segmentation results on the ADE20K validation
pixAcc [%]
ResNeSt-200
ResNeSt-269
DPT-Hybrid
ViT-Hybrid
Table 5. Finetuning results on the Pascal Context validation set.
representation. Since the transformer backbone maintains a
constant feature resolution, it is not clear at which points in
the backbone features should be tapped. We evaluate several possible choices in Table 6 (top). We observe that it is
beneﬁcial to tap features from layers that contain low-level
features as well as deeper layers that contain higher-level
features. We adopt the best setting for all further experiments.
We perform a similar experiment with the hybrid architecture in Table 6 (bottom), where R0 and R1 refer to using features from the ﬁrst and second downsampling stages
of the ResNet50 embedding network. We observe that using low-level features from the embedding network leads
to better performance than using features solely from the
transformer stages. We use this setting for all further experiments that involve the hybrid architecture.
Readout token. Table 7 examines various choices for implementing the ﬁrst stage of the Reassemble block to handle the readout token.
While ignoring the token yields
good performance, projection provides slightly better performance on average. Adding the token, on the other hand,
yields worse performance than simply ignoring it. We use
projection for all further experiments.
Backbones.
The performance of different backbones is
HRWSI BlendedMVS ReDWeb
{3, 6, 9, 12}
{6, 8, 10, 12}
{9, 10, 11, 12}
{3, 6, 9, 12}
{R0, R1, 9, 12}
Table 6. Performance of attaching skip connections to different
encoder layers. Best results are achieved with a combination of
skip connections from shallow and deep layers.
HRWSI BlendedMVS ReDWeb
Table 7. Performance of approaches to handle the readout token.
Fusing the readout token to the individual input tokens using a
projection layer yields the best performance.
shown in Table 8. ViT-Large outperforms all other backbones but is also almost three times larger than ViT-Base
and ViT-Hybrid. ViT-Hybrid outperforms ViT-Base with a
similar number of parameters and has comparable performance to the large backbone. As such it provides a good
trade-off between accuracy and capacity.
ViT-Base has comparable performance to ResNext101-
WSL, while ViT-Hybrid and ViT-Large improve performance even though they have been pretrained on signiﬁcantly less data. Note that ResNext101-WSL was pretrained
on a billion-scale corpus of weakly supervised data in
addition to ImageNet pretraining. It has been observed that
this pretraining boosts the performance of monocular depth
prediction . This architecture corresponds to the original MiDaS architecture.
We ﬁnally compare to a recent variant of ViT called
DeIT . DeIT trains the ViT architecture with a more
data-efﬁcient pretraining procedure. Note that the DeIT-
Base architecture is identical to ViT-Base, while DeIT-
Base-Dist introduces an additional distillation token, which
we ignore in the Reassemble operation. We observe that
DeIT-Base-Dist indeed improves performance when compared to ViT-Base. This indicates that similarly to convolutional architectures, improvements in pretraining procedures for image classiﬁcation can beneﬁt dense prediction
Inference resolution. While fully-convolutional architectures can have large effective receptive ﬁelds in their deepest
layers, the layers close to the input are local and have small
receptive ﬁelds.
Performance thus suffers heavily when
performing inference at an input resolution that is signiﬁcantly different from the training resolution. Transformer
encoders, on the other hand, have a global receptive ﬁeld
HRWSI BlendedMVS ReDWeb
ResNext101-WSL
DeIT-Base-Dist
ViT-Hybrid
Table 8. Ablation of backbones. The hybrid and large backbones
consistently outperform the convolutional baselines. The base architecture can outperform the convolutional baseline with better
pretraining (DeIT-Base-Dist).
Resolution
Perfomrance decrease [%]
ViT-Hybrid
DeIT-Distilled
ResNext-101
Figure 4. Relative loss in performance for different inference resolutions (lower is better).
in every layer. We conjecture that this makes DPT less dependent on inference resolution. To test this hypothesis, we
plot the loss in performance of different architectures when
performing inference at resolutions higher than the training
resolution of 384×384 pixels. We plot the relative decrease
in performance in percent with respect to the performance
of performing inference at the training resolution in Figure 4. We observe that the performance of DPT variants
indeed degrades more gracefully as inference resolution increases.
Inference speed. Table 9 shows inference time for different network architectures. Timings were conducted on an
Intel Xeon Platinum 8280 CPU @ 2.70GHz with 8 physical
cores and an Nvidia RTX 2080 GPU. We use square images
with a width of 384 pixels and report the average over 400
runs. DPT-Hybrid and DPT-Large show comparable latency
to the fully-convolutional architecture used by MiDaS. Interestingly, while DPT-Large is substantially larger than the
other architectures in terms of parameter count, it has competitive latency since it exposes a high degree of parallelism
through its wide and comparatively shallow structure.
DPT-Hybrid
Parameters [million]
Table 9. Model statistics. DPT has comparable inference speed to
the state of the art.
5. Conclusion
We have introduced the dense prediction transformer,
DPT, a neural network architecture that effectively leverages vision transformers for dense prediction tasks. Our
experiments on monocular depth estimation and semantic
segmentation show that the presented architecture produces
more ﬁne-grained and globally coherent predictions when
compared to fully-convolutional architectures. Similar to
prior work on transformers, DPT unfolds its full potential
when trained on large-scale datasets.
References
 Vijay Badrinarayanan, Alex Kendall, and Roberto Cipolla.
SegNet: A deep convolutional encoder-decoder architecture for image segmentation. IEEE TIP, 39(12):2481–2495,
 Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio.
Neural machine translation by jointly learning to align and
translate. In ICLR, 2015.
 Irwan Bello, Barret Zoph, Ashish Vaswani, Jonathon Shlens,
and Quoc V Le.
Attention augmented convolutional networks. In ICCV, 2019.
 Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan,
Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. In NeurIPS, 2020.
 Vincent Casser, Soeren Pirk, Reza Mahjourian, and Anelia
Angelova. Unsupervised learning of depth and ego-motion:
A structured approach. In AAAI, 2019.
 Liang-Chieh Chen, George Papandreou, Iasonas Kokkinos,
Kevin Murphy, and Alan L. Yuille. DeepLab: Semantic image segmentation with deep convolutional nets, atrous convolution, and fully connected crfs. TPAMI, 40(4):834–848,
 Liang-Chieh Chen, George Papandreou, Florian Schroff, and
Hartwig Adam. Rethinking atrous convolution for semantic image segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.05587,
 Marius Cordts, Mohamed Omran, Sebastian Ramos, Timo
Markus Enzweiler,
Rodrigo Benenson,
Franke, Stefan Roth, and Bernt Schiele.
The Cityscapes
dataset for semantic urban scene understanding. In CVPR,
 Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li,
and Fei-Fei Li. ImageNet: A large-scale hierarchical image
database. In CVPR, 2009.
 Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina
Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In ACL, 2019.
 Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov,
Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Unterthiner,
Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszkoreit, and Neil Houlsby. An image is
worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at
scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.
 David Eigen, Christian Puhrsch, and Rob Fergus. Depth map
prediction from a single image using a multi-scale deep network. In NeurIPS, 2014.
 Huan Fu, Mingming Gong, Chaohui Wang, Kayhan Batmanghelich, and Dacheng Tao. Deep ordinal regression network for monocular depth estimation. In CVPR, 2018.
 Jun Fu, Jing Liu, Yuhang Wang, Yong Li, Yongjun Bao, Jinhui Tang, and Hanqing Lu. Adaptive context network for
scene parsing. In ICCV, 2019.
 Andreas Geiger, Philip Lenz, and Raquel Urtasun. Are we
ready for autonomous driving? The KITTI vision benchmark
suite. In CVPR, 2012.
 Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun.
Deep residual learning for image recognition.
 Dan Hendrycks and Kevin Gimpel.
Gaussian error linear
units (GELUs). arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.08415, 2016.
 Xinyu Huang, Peng Wang, Xinjing Cheng, Dingfu Zhou,
Qichuan Geng, and Ruigang Yang. The ApolloScape open
dataset for autonomous driving and its application. TPAMI,
42(10):2702–2719, 2020.
 Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Lei Ba. Adam: A method
for stochastic optimization. In ICLR, 2015.
 Jin Han Lee, Myung-Kyu Han, Dong Wook Ko, and
Il Hong Suh. From big to small: Multi-scale local planar
guidance for monocular depth estimation.
arXiv preprint
 
 Zhengqi Li, Tali Dekel, Forrester Cole, Richard Tucker,
Noah Snavely, Ce Liu, and William T. Freeman. Learning
the depths of moving people by watching frozen people. In
CVPR, 2019.
 Zhengqi Li and Noah Snavely. MegaDepth: Learning singleview depth prediction from Internet photos. In CVPR, 2018.
 Guosheng Lin, Anton Milan, Chunhua Shen, and Ian D.
Reid. ReﬁneNet: Multi-path reﬁnement networks for highresolution semantic segmentation. In CVPR, 2017.
 Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis, Luke
Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov.
A robustly optimized BERT pretraining approach. arXiv preprint
 
 Dhruv Mahajan, Ross Girshick, Vignesh Ramanathan,
Kaiming He, Manohar Paluri, Yixuan Li, Ashwin Bharambe,
and Laurens van der Maaten. Exploring the limits of weakly
supervised pretraining. In ECCV, 2018.
 Roozbeh Mottaghi, Xianjie Chen, Xiaobai Liu, Nam-Gyu
Cho, Seong-Whan Lee, Sanja Fidler, Raquel Urtasun, and
Alan L. Yuille. The role of context for object detection and
semantic segmentation in the wild. In CVPR, 2014.
 Hyeonwoo Noh, Seunghoon Hong, and Bohyung Han.
Learning deconvolution network for semantic segmentation.
In ICCV, 2015.
 Niki Parmar, Ashish Vaswani, Jakob Uszkoreit, Lukasz
Kaiser, Noam Shazeer, Alexander Ku, and Dustin Tran. Image transformer. In ICML, 2018.
 Prajit Ramachandran, Niki Parmar, Ashish Vaswani, Irwan
Bello, Anselm Levskaya, and Jonathon Shlens. Stand-alone
self-attention in vision models. In NeurIPS, 2019.
 Ren´e Ranftl,
Katrin Lasinger,
David Hafner,
Schindler, and Vladlen Koltun. Towards robust monocular
depth estimation: Mixing datasets for zero-shot cross-dataset
transfer. TPAMI, 2020.
 Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-
Net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation. In MICCAI, 2015.
 Ozan Sener and Vladlen Koltun.
Multi-task learning as
multi-objective optimization. In NeurIPS, 2018.
 Pierre Sermanet, David Eigen, Xiang Zhang, Micha¨el Mathieu, Rob Fergus, and Yann LeCun.
OverFeat: Integrated
recognition, localization and detection using convolutional
networks. In ICLR, 2014.
 Evan Shelhamer, Jonathan Long, and Trevor Darrell. Fully
convolutional networks for semantic segmentation. CVPR,
 Nathan Silberman, Derek Hoiem, Pushmeet Kohli, and Rob
Indoor segmentation and support inference from
RGBD images. In ECCV, 2012.
 Josef Sivic and Andrew Zisserman. Efﬁcient visual search of
videos cast as text retrieval. TPAMI, 31(4):591–606, 2009.
 Ke Sun, Bin Xiao, Dong Liu, and Jingdong Wang. Deep
high-resolution representation learning for human pose estimation. In CVPR, 2019.
 Hugo Touvron, Matthieu Cord, Matthijs Douze, Francisco
Massa, Alexandre Sablayrolles, and Herv´e J´egou. Training
data-efﬁcient image transformers & distillation through attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.12877, 2020.
 Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia
Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In NeurIPS, 2017.
 Chaoyang Wang, Oliver Wang, Federico Perazzi, and Simon
Lucey. Web stereo video supervision for depth prediction
from dynamic scenes. In 3DV, 2019.
 Huiyu Wang, Yukun Zhu, Bradley Green, Hartwig Adam,
Alan L. Yuille, and Liang-Chieh Chen.
Axial-DeepLab:
Stand-alone axial-attention for panoptic segmentation.
ECCV, 2020.
 Jingdong Wang, Ke Sun, Tianheng Cheng, Borui Jiang,
Chaorui Deng, Yang Zhao, Dong Liu, Yadong Mu, Mingkui
Tan, Xinggang Wang, Wenyu Liu, and Bin Xiao.
high-resolution representation learning for visual recognition. TPAMI, 2020.
 Qiang Wang, Shizhen Zheng, Qingsong Yan, Fei Deng,
Kaiyong Zhao, and Xiaowen Chu. IRS: A large synthetic
indoor robotics stereo dataset for disparity and surface normal estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.09678, 2019.
 Wenshan Wang, Delong Zhu, Xiangwei Wang, Yaoyu Hu,
Yuheng Qiu, Chen Wang, Yafei Hu, Ashish Kapoor, and Sebastian Scherer. TartanAir: A dataset to push the limits of
visual slam. In IROS, 2020.
 Ke Xian, Chunhua Shen, Zhiguo Cao, Hao Lu, Yang Xiao,
Ruibo Li, and Zhenbo Luo. Monocular relative depth perception with web stereo data supervision. In CVPR, 2018.
 Ke Xian, Jianming Zhang, Oliver Wang, Long Mai, Zhe Lin,
and Zhiguo Cao. Structure-guided ranking loss for single
image depth prediction. In CVPR, 2020.
 Yao Yao, Zixin Luo, Shiwei Li, Jingyang Zhang, Yufan
Ren, Lei Zhou, Tian Fang, and Long Quan. BlendedMVS:
A large-scale dataset for generalized multi-view stereo networks. CVPR, 2020.
 Wei Yin, Yifan Liu, Chunhua Shen, and Youliang Yan. Enforcing geometric constraints of virtual normal for depth prediction. In ICCV, 2019.
 Fisher Yu and Vladlen Koltun. Multi-scale context aggregation by dilated convolutions. In ICLR, 2016.
 Yuhui Yuan, Xilin Chen, and Jingdong Wang.
Objectcontextual representations for semantic segmentation.
ECCV, 2020.
 Hang Zhang, Chongruo Wu, Zhongyue Zhang, Yi Zhu, Zhi
Zhang, Haibin Lin, Yue Sun, Tong He, Jonas Muller, R.
Manmatha, Mu Li, and Alexander Smola. ResNeSt: Splitattention networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.08955, 2020.
 Hengshuang Zhao, Jiaya Jia, and Vladlen Koltun. Exploring
self-attention for image recognition. In CVPR, 2020.
 Hengshuang Zhao, Jianping Shi, Xiaojuan Qi, Xiaogang
Wang, and Jiaya Jia. Pyramid scene parsing network. In
CVPR, 2017.
 Bolei Zhou, Hang Zhao, Xavier Puig, Sanja Fidler, Adela
Barriuso, and Antonio Torralba.
Scene parsing through
ADE20K dataset. In CVPR, 2017.
Supplementary Material
A. Architecture details
We provide additional technical details in this section.
Hybrid encoder. The hybrid encoder is based on a preactivation ResNet50 with group norm and weight standardization . It deﬁnes four stages after the initial stem, each
of which downsamples the representation before applying
multiple ResNet blocks. We refer by RN to the output of
the N-th stage. DPT-Hybrid thus taps skip connections after the ﬁrst (R0) and second stage (R1).
Residual convolutional units.
Figure A1 (a) shows a
schematic overview of the residual convolutional units 
that are used in the decoder. Batch normalization is used for
semantic segmentation but is disabled for monocular depth
estimation. When using batch normalization, we disable biases in the preceding convolutional layer.
Monocular depth estimation head. The output head for
monocular depth estimation is shown in Figure A1 (b). The
initial convolution halves the feature dimensions, while the
second convolution has an output dimension of 32. The ﬁnal linear layer projects this representation to a non-negative
scalar that represent the inverse depth prediction for every
pixel. Bilinear interpolation is used to upsample the representation.
Semantic segmentation head. The output head for semantic segmentation is shown in Figure A1 (c). the ﬁrst convolutional block preserves the feature dimension, while the
ﬁnal linear layer projects the representation to the number
of output classes. Dropout is used with a rate of 0.1. We
use bilinear interpolation for the ﬁnal upsampling operation. The prediction thus represents the per-pixel logits of
the classes.
B. Additional results
We provide additional qualitative and quantitative results
in this section.
Monocular depth estimation. We notice that the biggest
gains in performance for zero-shot transfer were achieved
for datasets that feature dense, high-resolution evaluations . This could be explained by more ﬁnegrained predictions.
Visual inspection of sample results
(c.f. Figure A3) from these datasets conﬁrms this intuition.
We observe more details and also better global depth arrangement in DPT predictions when compared to the fullyconvolutional baseline. Note that results for DPT and Mi-
DaS are computed at the same input resolution (384 pixels).
Semantic segmentation. We show per-class IoU scores for
the ADE20K validation set in Figure A2. While we observe a general trend of an improvement in per-class IoU in
comparison to the baseline , we do not observe a strong
pattern across classes.
Attention maps. We show attention maps from different
encoder layers in Figures A4 and A5. In both cases, we
show results from the monocular depth estimation models.
We visualize the attention of two reference tokens (upper
left corner and lower right corner, respectively) to all other
tokens in the image across various layers in the encoder. We
show the average attention over all 12 attention heads.
We observe the tendency that attention is spatially more
localized close to the reference token in shallow layers (leftmost columns), whereas deeper layers (rightmost columns)
frequently attend across the whole image.