DEEP LSTM FOR LARGE VOCABULARY CONTINUOUS SPEECH RECOGNITION
Xu Tian, Jun Zhang, Zejun Ma, Yi He, Juan Wei, Peihao Wu, Wenchang Situ, Shuai Li, Yang Zhang
Alibaba Shenma Search, Beijing, China
{xu.tian, zj102217, zejun.mamzj, heyi.hy, wj80290, peihao.wph, wenchang.situwc, voolc.li, zy80232}@alibaba-inc.com
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs), especially long shortterm memory (LSTM) RNNs, are effective network for sequential task like speech recognition. Deeper LSTM models
perform well on large vocabulary continuous speech recognition, because of their impressive learning ability. However,
it is more difﬁcult to train a deeper network. We introduce
a training framework with layer-wise training and exponential moving average methods for deeper LSTM models. It is
a competitive framework that LSTM models of more than 7
layers are successfully trained on Shenma voice search data
in Mandarin and they outperform the deep LSTM models
trained by conventional approach. Moreover, in order for online streaming speech recognition applications, the shallow
model with low real time factor is distilled from the very deep
model. The recognition accuracy have little loss in the distillation process. Therefore, the model trained with the proposed training framework reduces relative 14% character error rate, compared to original model which has the similar
real-time capability. Furthermore, the novel transfer learning
strategy with segmental Minimum Bayes-Risk is also introduced in the framework. The strategy makes it possible that
training with only a small part of dataset could outperform
full dataset training from the beginning.
1. INTRODUCTION
Recently, deep neural network has been widely employed
in various recognition tasks. Increasing the depth of neural
network is a effective way to improve the performance, and
convolutional neural network (CNN) has beneﬁted from it in
visual recognition task .
Deeper long short-term memory (LSTM) recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are also
applied in large vocabulary continuous speech recognition
(LVCSR) task, because LSTM networks have shown better
performance than Fully-connected feed-forward deep neural
network .
Training neural network becomes more challenge when it
goes deep. A conceptual tool called linear classiﬁer probe is
introduced to better understand the dynamics inside a neural
network . The discriminating features of linear classiﬁer
is the hidden units of a intermediate layer. For deep neural
networks, it is observed that deeper layer’s accuracy is lower
than that of shallower layers. Therefore, the tool shows the
difﬁculty of deep neural model training visually.
Layer-wise pre-training is a successful method to train
very deep neural networks . The convergence becomes
harder with increasing the number of layers, even though the
model is initialized with Xavier or its variants . But the
deeper network which is initialized with a shallower trained
network could converge well.
The size of LVCSR training dataset goes larger and training with only one GPU becomes high time consumption inevitably. Therefore, parallel training with multi-GPUs is more
suitable for LVCSR system. Mini-batch based stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is the most popular method in neural network training procedure. Asynchronous SGD is a successful
effort for parallel training based on it . It can many
times speed up the training time without decreasing the accuracy. Besides, synchronous SGD is another effective effort,
where the parameter server waits for every works to ﬁnish
their computation and sent their local models to it, and then it
sends updated model back to all workers . Synchronous
SGD converges well in parallel training with data parallelism,
and is also easy to implement.
In order to further improve the performance of deep neural network with parallel training, several methods are proposed. Model averaging method achieves linear speedup, as
the ﬁnal model is averaged from all parameters of local models in different workers , but the accuracy decreases
compared with single GPU training. Moreover, blockwise
model-updating ﬁlter (BMUF) provides another almost linear speedup approach with multi-GPUs on the basis of model
averaging. It can achieve improvement or no-degradation of
recognition performance compared with mini-batch SGD on
single GPU .
Moving averaged (MA) approaches are also proposed for
parallel training. It is demonstrated that the moving average
of the parameters obtained by SGD performs as well as the
parameters that minimize the empirical cost, and moving average parameters can be used as the estimator of them, if the
size of training data is large enough . One pass learning is then proposed, which is the combination of learning
rate schedule and averaged SGD using moving average .
Exponential moving average (EMA) is proposed as a noninterference method . EMA model is not broadcasted to
workers to update their local models, and it is applied as the
ﬁnal model of entire training process. EMA method is utilized with model averaging and BMUF to further decrease
the character error rate (CER). It is also easy to implement in
existing parallel training systems.
Frame stacking can also speed up the training time .
The super frame is stacked by several regular frames, and it
contains the information of them. Thus, the network can see
multiple frames at a time, as the super frame is new input.
Frame stacking can also lead to faster decoding.
For streaming voice search service, it needs to display intermediate recognition results while users are still speaking.
As a result, the system needs to fulﬁll high real-time requirement, and we prefer unidirectional LSTM network rather than
bidirectional one. High real-time requirement means low real
time factor (RTF), but the RTF of deep LSTM model is higher
inevitably. The dilemma of recognition accuracy and realtime requirement is an obstacle to the employment of deep
LSTM network. Deep model outperforms because it contains
more knowledge, but it is also cumbersome. As a result, the
knowledge of deep model can be distilled to a shallow model
 . It provided a effective way to employ the deep model to
the real-time system.
In this paper, we explore a entire deep LSTM RNN training framework, and employ it to real-time application. The
deep learning systems beneﬁt highly from a large quantity
of labeled training data. Our ﬁrst and basic speech recognition system is trained on 17000 hours of Shenma voice search
dataset. It is a generic dataset sampled from diverse aspects
of search queries. The requirement of speech recognition system also addressed by speciﬁc scenario, such as map and navigation task. The labeled dataset is too expensive, and training a new model with new large dataset from the beginning
costs lots of time. Thus, it is natural to think of transferring
the knowledge from basic model to new scenario’s model.
Transfer learning expends less data and less training time than
full training. In this paper, we also introduce a novel transfer learning strategy with segmental Minimum Bayes-Risk
(sMBR). As a result, transfer training with only 1000 hours
data can match equivalent performance for full training with
7300 hours data.
Our deep LSTM training framework for LVCSR is presented in Section 2. Section 3 describes how the very deep
models does apply in real world applications, and how to
transfer the model to another task. The framework is analyzed
and discussed in Section 4, and followed by the conclusion in
Section 5.
2. OUR TRAINING FRAMEWORK
2.1. Layer-wise Training with Soft Target and Hard Target
Gradient-based optimization of deep LSTM network with
random initialization get stuck in poor solution easily. Xavier
initialization can partially solve this problem , so this
method is the regular initialization method of all training procedure. However, it does not work well when it is utilized
to initialize very deep model directly, because of vanishing or exploding gradients. Instead, layer-wise pre-training
method is a effective way to train the weights of very deep
architecture . In layer-wise pre-training procedure, a
one-layer LSTM model is ﬁrstly trained with normalized initialization. Sequentially, two-layers LSTM model’s ﬁrst layer
is initialized by trained one-layer model, and its second layer
is regularly initialized. In this way, a deep architecture is
layer-by-layer trained, and it can converge well.
In conventional layer-wise pre-training, only parameters
of shallower network are transfered to deeper one, and the
learning targets are still the alignments generated by HMM-
GMM system. The targets are vectors that only one state’s
probability is one, and the others’ are zeros. They are known
as hard targets, and they carry limited knowledge as only one
state is active. In contrast, the knowledge of shallower network should be also transfered to deeper one. It is obtained
by the softmax layer of existing model typically, so each state
has a probability rather than only zero or one, and called as
soft target. As a result, the deeper network which is student
network learns the parameters and knowledge from shallower
one which is called teacher network. When training the student network from the teacher network, the ﬁnal alignment is
the combination of hard target and soft target in our layerwise training phase. The ﬁnal alignment provides various
knowledge which transfered from teacher network and extracted from true labels. If only soft target is learned, student
network perform no better than teacher network, but it could
outperform teacher network as it also learns true labels.
The deeper network spends less time to getting the same
level of original network than the network trained from
the beginning, as a period of low performance is skipped.
Therefore, training with hard and soft target is a time saving
method. For large training dataset, training with the whole
dataset still spends too much time. A network ﬁrstly trained
with only a small part of dataset could go deeper as well, and
so the training time reducing rapidly. When the network is
deep enough, it then trained on the entire dataset to get further
improvement. There is no gap of accuracy between these two
approaches, but latter one saves much time.
2.2. Differential Saturation Check
The objects of conventionalsaturation check are gradients and
the cell activations . Gradients are clipped to range [-5, 5],
while the cell activations clipped to range [-50, 50]. Apart
from them, the differentials of recurrent layers is also limited.
If the differentials go beyond the range, corresponding back
propagation is skipped, while if the gradients and cell activations go beyond the bound, values are set as the boundary
values. The differentials which are too large or too small will
lead to the gradients easily vanishing, and it demonstrates the
failure of this propagation. As a result, the parameters are not
updated, and next propagation .
2.3. Sequence Discriminative Training
Cross-entropy (CE) is widely used in speech recognition
training system as a frame-wise discriminative training criterion. However, it is not well suited to speech recognition,
because speech recognition training is a sequential learning
problem. In contrast, sequence discriminative training criterion has shown to further improve performance of neural
network ﬁrst trained with cross-entropy .
choose state-level minimum bayes risk (sMBR) among
a number of sequence discriminative criterion is proposed,
such as maximum mutual information (MMI) and minimum phone error (MPE) . MPE and sMBR are designed
to minimize the expected error of different granularity of labels, while CE aims to minimizes expected frame error, and
MMI aims to minimizes expected sentence error. State-level
information is focused on by sMBR.
a frame-level accurate model is ﬁrstly trained by CE loss
function, and then sMBR loss function is utilized for further
training to get sequence-level accuracy. Only a part of training dataset is needed in sMBR training phase on the basis of
whole dataset CE training.
2.4. Parallel Training
It is demonstrated that training with larger dataset can improve recognition accuracy. However, larger dataset means
more training samples and more model parameters. Therefore, parallel training with multiple GPUs is essential, and it
makes use of data parallelism . The entire training data
is partitioned into several split without overlapping and they
are distributed to different GPUs. Each GPU trains with one
split of training dataset locally. All GPUs synchronize their
local models with model average method after a mini-batch
optimization .
2.4.1. Block-wise Model Updating Filter
Model average method achieves linear speedup in training phase, but the recognition accuracy decreases compared
with single GPU training. Block-wise model updating ﬁlter (BMUF) is another successful effort in parallel training
with linear speedup as well. It can achieve no-degradation
of recognition accuracy with multi-GPUs . In the model
average method, aggregated model ¯θ(t) is computed and
broadcasted to GPUs. On the basis of it, BMUF proposed a
novel model updating strategy:
G(t) = ¯θ(t) −θg(t −1)
∆(t) = ηt∆(t −1) + ζtG(t)
Where G(t) denotes model update, and ∆(t) is the globalmodel update. There are two parameters in BMUF, block
momentum η, and block learning rate ζ. Then, the global
model is updated as
θg(t) = θg(t −1) + ∆(t)
Consequently, θg(t) is broadcasted to all GPUs to initial their
local models, instead of ¯θ(t) in model average method.
2.4.2. Exponential Moving Average Model
Averaged SGD is proposed to further accelerate the convergence speed of SGD. Averaged SGD leverages the moving
average (MA) ¯θ as the estimator of θ∗ :
Where θτ is computed by model averaging or BMUF. It is
shown that ¯θt can well converge to θ∗, with the large enough
training dataset in single GPU training. It can be considered
as a non-interference strategy that ¯θt does not participate the
main optimization process, and only takes effect after the end
of entire optimization. However, for the parallel training implementation, each θτ is computed by model averaging and
BMUF with multiple models, and moving average model ¯θt
does not well converge, compared with single GPU training.
Model averaging based methods are employed in parallel training of large scale dataset, because of their faster convergence, and especially no-degradation implementation of
BMUF. But combination of model averaged based methods
and moving average does not match the expectation of further
enhance performance and it is presented as
The weight of each θgt is equal in moving average method
regardless the effect of temporal order. But t closer to the end
of training achieve higher accuracy in the model averaging
based approach, and thus it should be with more proportion
in ﬁnal ¯θg. As a result, exponential moving average(EMA) is
appropriate, which the weight for each older parameters decrease exponentially, and never reaching zero. After moving
average based methods, the EMA parameters are updated recursively as
ˆθgt = αˆθgt−1 + (1 −α)θgt
Here α represents the degree of weight decrease, and called
exponential updating rate. EMA is also a non-interference
training strategy that is implemented easily, as the updated
model is not broadcasted. Therefore, there is no need to add
extra learning rate updating approach, as it can be appended
to existing training procedure directly.
3. DEPLOYMENT
There is a high real time requirement in real world application, especially in online voice search system. Shenma voice
search is one of the most popular mobile search engines in
China, and it is a streaming service that intermediate recognition results displayed while users are still speaking. Unidirectional LSTM network is applied, rather than bidirectional
one, because it is well suited to real-time streaming speech
recognition.
3.1. Distillation
It is demonstrated that deep neural network architecture can
achieve improvement in LVCSR. However, it also leads to
much more computation and higher RTF, so that the recognition result can not be displayed in real time. It should be noted
that deeper neural network contains more knowledge, but it is
also cumbersome. the knowledge is key to improve the performance. If it can be transfered from cumbersome model to
a small model, the recognition ability can also be transfered
to the small model. Knowledge transferring to small model
is called distillation . The small model can perform as
well as cumbersome model, after distilling. It provide a way
to utilize high-performance but high RTF model in real time
system. The class probability produced by the cumbersome
model is regarded as soft target, and the generalization ability of cumbersome model is transfered to small model with
it. Distillation is model’s knowledge transferring approach,
so there is no need to use the hard target, which is different
with the layer-wise training method.
3.2. Transfer Learning with sMBR
For a certain speciﬁc scenario, the model trained with the data
recorded from it has better adaptation than the model trained
with generic scenario. But it spends too much time training a
model from the beginning, if there is a well-trained model
for generic scenarios. Moreover, labeling a large quantity
of training data in new scenario is both costly and time consuming. If a model transfer trained with smaller dataset can
obtained the similar recognition accuracy compared with the
model directly trained with larger dataset, it is no doubt that
transfer learning is more practical. Since speciﬁc scenario is
Shenma Voice Search
Training set
Validation set
The time summation of different sets of Shenma voice
search and Amap.
a subset of generic scenario, some knowledge can be shared
between them. Besides, generic scenario consists of various
conditions, so its model has greater robustness. As a result,
not only shared knowledge but also robustness can be transfered from the model of generic scenario to the model of speciﬁc one.
As the model well trained from generic scenario achieves
good performance in frame level classiﬁcation, sequence discriminative training is required to adapt new model to speciﬁc
scenario additionally. Moreover, it does not need alignment
from HMM-GMM system, and it also saves amount of time
to prepare alignment.
4. EXPERIMENTS
4.1. Training Data
A large quantity of labeled data is needed for training a more
accurate acoustic model. We collect the 17000 hours labeled
data from Shenma voice search, which is one of the most popular mobile search engines in China. The dataset is created
from anonymous online users’ search queries in Mandarin,
and all audio ﬁle’s sampling rate is 16kHz, recorded by mobile phones. This dataset consists of many different conditions, such as diverse noise even low signal-to-noise, babble,
dialects, accents, hesitation and so on.
In the Amap, which is one of the most popular web mapping and navigation services in China, users can search locations and navigate to locations they want though voice search.
To present the performance of transfer learning with sequence
discriminative training, the model trained from Shenma voice
search which is greneric scenario transfer its knowledge to
the model of Amap voice search. 7300 hours labeled data
is collected in the similar way of Shenma voice search data
collection.
Two dataset is divided into training set, validation set and
test set separately, and the quantity of them is shown in Table 1. The three sets are split according to speakers, in order to avoid utterances of same speaker appearing in three
sets simultaneously. The test sets of Shenma and Amap voice
search are called Shenma Test and Amap Test.
4.2. Experimental setup
LSTM RNNs outperform conventional RNNs for speech
recognition system, especially deep LSTM RNNs, because
of its long-range dependencies more accurately for temporal sequence conditions . Shenma and Amap voice
search is a streaming service that intermediate recognition
results displayed while users are still speaking. So as for online recognition in real time, we prefer unidirectional LSTM
model rather than bidirectional one. Thus, the training system
is unidirectional LSTM-based.
A 26-dimensional ﬁlter bank and 2-dimensional pitch feature is extracted for each frame, and is concatenated with
ﬁrst and second order difference as the ﬁnal input of the network. The super frame are stacked by 3 frames without overlapping. The architecture we trained consists of two LSTM
layers with sigmoid activation function, followed by a fullconnection layer. The out layer is a softmax layer with 11088
hidden markov model (HMM) tied-states as output classes,
the loss function is cross-entropy (CE). The performance metric of the system in Mandarin is reported with character error
rate (CER). The alignment of frame-level ground truth is obtained by GMM-HMM system. Mini-batched SGD is utilized
with momentum trick and the network is trained for a total
of 4 epochs. The block learning rate and block momentum
of BMUF are set as 1 and 0.9. 5-gram language model is
leveraged in decoder, and the vocabulary size is as large as
760000. Differentials of recurrent layers is limited to range
[-10000,10000], while gradients are clipped to range [-5, 5]
and cell activations clipped to range [-50, 50]. After training
with CE loss, sMBR loss is employed to further improve the
performance.
It has shown that BMUF outperforms traditional model
averaging method, and it is utilized at the synchronization
phase. After synchronizing with BMUF, EMA method further updates the model in non-interference way. The training
system is deployed on the MPI-based HPC cluster where 8
GPUs. Each GPU processes non-overlap subset split from
the entire large scale dataset in parallel.
Local models from distributed workers synchronize with
each other in decentralized way.
In the traditional model
averaging and BMUF method, a parameter server waits for
all workers to send their local models, aggregate them, and
send the updated model to all workers. Computing resource
of workers is wasted until aggregation of the parameter server
done. Decentralized method makes full use of computing
resource, and we employ the MPI-based Mesh AllReduce
method. It is mesh topology as shown in Figure 1. There is
no centralized parameter server, and peer to peer communication is used to transmit local models between workers. Local
model θi of i-th worker in N workers cluster is split to N
pieces θi,j j = 1 · · · N, and send to corresponding worker.
In the aggregation phase, j-th worker computed N splits of
model θi,j i = 1 · · · N and send updated model ¯θgj back to
workers. As a result, all workers participate in aggregation
and no computing resource is dissipated.
It is signiﬁcant
to promote training efﬁciency, when the size of neural network model is too large. The EMA model is also updated
additionally, but not broadcasting it.
Fig. 1. Mesh AllReduce of model averaging and BMUF.
5. RESULTS
In order to evaluate our system, several sets of experiments
are performed. The Shenma test set including about 9000
samples and Amap test set including about 7000 samples contain various real world conditions. It simulates the majority of user scenarios, and can well evaluates the performance
of a trained model. Firstly, we show the results of models
trained with EMA method. Secondly, for real world applications, very deep LSTM is distilled to a shallow one, so as
for lower RTF. The model of Amap is also needed to train for
map and navigation scenarios. The performance of transfer
learning from Shenma voice search to Amap voice search is
also presented.
5.1. Layer-wise Training
In layer-wise training, the deeper model learns both parameters and knowledge from the shallower model.
deeper model is initialized by the shallower one, and its
alignment is the combination of hard target and soft target
of shallower one. Two targets have the same weights in our
framework. The teacher model is trained with CE. For each
layer-wise trained CE model, corresponding sMBR model is
also trained, as sMBR could achieve additional improvement.
In our framework, 1000 hours data is randomly selected from
Xavier Init CE
Layer-wise CE
The CER of 6 to 9-layers models trained by regular
Xavier Initialization, layer-wise training with CE criterion and CE
+ sMBR criteria. The teacher of 9-layer model is 8-layers sMBR
model, while the others’ teacher is CE model.
the total dataset for sMBR training.
There is no obvious
performance enhancement when the size of sMBR training
dataset increases.
For very deep unidirectional LSTM initialized with
Xavier initialization algorithm, 6-layers model converges
well, but there is no further improvement with increasing the
number of layers. Therefore, the ﬁrst 6 layers of 7-layers
model is initialized by 6-layers model, and soft target is provided by 6-layers model. Consequently, deeper LSTM is also
trained in the same way. It should be noticed that the teacher
model of 9-layers model is the 8-layers model trained by
sMBR, while the other teacher model is CE model. As shown
in Table 2, the layer-wise trained models always performs
better than the models with Xavier initialization, as the model
Therefore, for the last layer training, we choose
8-layers sMBR model as the teacher model instead of CE
model. A comparison between 6-layers and 9-layers sMBR
models shows that 3 additional layers of layer-wise training
brings relative 12.6% decreasing of CER. It is also signiﬁcant
that the averaged CER of sMBR models with different layers decreases absolute 0.73% approximately compared with
CE models, so the improvement of sequence discriminative
learning is promising.
5.2. Distillation
9-layers unidirectional LSTM model achieves outstanding
performance, but meanwhile it is too computationally expensive to allow deployment in real time recognition system. In
order to ensure real-time of the system, the number of layers needs to be reduced. The shallower network can learn the
knowledge of deeper network with distillation. It is found that
RTF of 2-layers network is acceptable, so the knowledge is
distilled from 9-layers well-trained model to 2-layers model.
Table 3 shows that distillation from 9-layers to 2-layers brings
RTF decrease of relative 53%, while CER only increases 5%.
The knowledge of deep network is almost transfered with
distillation, Distillation brings promising RTF reduction, but
only little knowledge of deep network is lost. Moreover, CER
of 2-layers distilled LSTM decreases relative 14%, compared
with 2-layers regular-trained LSTM.
9-layers LSTM
2-layers regular-trained LSTM
2-laryers distilled LSTM
The CER and RTF of 9-layers, 2-layers regular-trained
and 2-laryers distilled LSTM.
Training methods
Shenma model
Amap CE + sMBR
Shenma model + Amap sMBR
Table 4. The CER of different 2-layers models, which are Shenma
distilled model, Amap model further trained with Amap dataset, and
Shenma model trained with sMBR on Amap dataset.
5.3. Transfer Learning
2-layers distilled model of Shenma voice search has shown
a impressive performance on Shenma Test, and we call it
Shenma model. It is trained for generic search scenario, but
it has less adaptation for speciﬁc scenario like Amap voice
search. Training with very large dataset using CE loss is regarded as improvement of frame level recognition accuracy,
and sMBR with less dataset further improves accuracy as sequence discriminative training. If robust model of generic
scenario is trained, there is no need to train a model with very
large dataset, and sequence discriminative training with less
dataset is enough. Therefore, on the basis of Shenma model, it
is sufﬁcient to train a new Amap model with small dataset using sMBR. As shown in Table 4, Shenma model presents the
worst performance among three methods, since it does not
trained for Amap scenario. 2-layers Shenma model further
trained with sMBR achieves about 8.1% relative reduction,
compared with 2-layers regular-trained Amap model. Both
training sMBR datasets contain the same 1000 hours data. As
a result, with the Shenma model, only about 14% data usage
achieves lower CER, and it leads to great time and cost saving
with less labeled data. Besides, transfer learning with sMBR
does not use the alignment from the HMM-GMM system, so
it also saves huge amount of time.
6. CONCLUSION
We have presented a whole deep unidirectional LSTM parallel training system for LVCSR. The recognition performance
improves when the network goes deep. Distillation makes
it possible that deep LSTM model transfer its knowledge to
shallow model with little loss. The model could be distilled
to 2-layers model with very low RTF, so that it can display the
immediate recognition results. As a result, its CER decrease
relatively 14%, compared with the 2-layers regular trained
model. In addition, transfer learning with sMBR is also proposed. If a great model has well trained from generic scenario, only 14% of the size of training dataset is needed to
train a more accuracy acoustic model for speciﬁc scenario.
Our future work includes 1) ﬁnding more effective methods
to reduce the CER by increasing the number of layers; 2)
applying this training framework to Connectionist Temporal
Classiﬁcation (CTC) and attention-based neural networks.
7. REFERENCES
 Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian
“Deep residual learning for image recognition,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.03385, 2015.
 Geoffrey Hinton, Li Deng, Dong Yu, George E Dahl,
Abdel-rahman Mohamed, Navdeep Jaitly, Andrew Senior, Vincent Vanhoucke, Patrick Nguyen, Tara N
Sainath, et al., “Deep neural networks for acoustic modeling in speech recognition: The shared views of four
research groups,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine,
vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 82–97, 2012.
 Alex Graves, Abdel-rahman Mohamed, and Geoffrey
Hinton, “Speech recognition with deep recurrent neural networks,” in 2013 IEEE international conference
on acoustics, speech and signal processing. IEEE, 2013,
pp. 6645–6649.
 Alex Graves, Navdeep Jaitly, and Abdel-rahman Mohamed, “Hybrid speech recognition with deep bidirectional lstm,” in Automatic Speech Recognition and Understanding (ASRU), 2013 IEEE Workshop on. IEEE,
2013, pp. 273–278.
 Hasim Sak, Andrew W Senior, and Franc¸oise Beaufays,
“Long short-term memory recurrent neural network architectures for large scale acoustic modeling.,” in IN-
TERSPEECH, 2014, pp. 338–342.
 Guillaume Alain and Yoshua Bengio, “Understanding
intermediate layers using linear classiﬁer probes,” arXiv
 
 Geoffrey E Hinton and Ruslan R Salakhutdinov, “Reducing the dimensionality of data with neural networks,”
Science, vol. 313, no. 5786, pp. 504–507, 2006.
 Xavier Glorot and Yoshua Bengio,
“Understanding
the difﬁculty of training deep feedforward neural networks.,” in Aistats, 2010, vol. 9, pp. 249–256.
 Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian
Sun, “Delving deep into rectiﬁers: Surpassing humanlevel performance on imagenet classiﬁcation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, 2015, pp. 1026–1034.
 Jeffrey Dean, Greg Corrado, Rajat Monga, Kai Chen,
Matthieu Devin, Mark Mao, Andrew Senior, Paul
Tucker, Ke Yang, Quoc V Le, et al., “Large scale distributed deep networks,” in Advances in neural information processing systems, 2012, pp. 1223–1231.
 Shanshan Zhang, Ce Zhang, Zhao You, Rong Zheng,
and Bo Xu, “Asynchronous stochastic gradient descent
for dnn training,” in 2013 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing. IEEE,
2013, pp. 6660–6663.
 Jianmin Chen, Rajat Monga, Samy Bengio, and Rafal
Jozefowicz, “Revisiting distributed synchronous sgd,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.00981, 2016.
 Ryan McDonald, Keith Hall, and Gideon Mann, “Distributed training strategies for the structured perceptron,” in Human Language Technologies: The 2010 Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics. Association
for Computational Linguistics, 2010, pp. 456–464.
 Martin Zinkevich, Markus Weimer, Lihong Li, and
Alex J Smola,
“Parallelized stochastic gradient descent,” in Advances in neural information processing
systems, 2010, pp. 2595–2603.
 Kai Chen and Qiang Huo, “Scalable training of deep
learning machines by incremental block training with
intra-block parallel optimization and blockwise modelupdate ﬁltering,”
in 2016 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP). IEEE, 2016, pp. 5880–5884.
 Boris T Polyak and Anatoli B Juditsky, “Acceleration of
stochastic approximation by averaging,” SIAM Journal
on Control and Optimization, vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 838–
855, 1992.
 Wei Xu, “Towards optimal one pass large scale learning with averaged stochastic gradient descent,” arXiv
 
 Tian Xu, Zhang Jun, Ma Zejun, He Yi, and Wei Juan,
“Exponential moving average model in parallel speech
recognition training,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.01024,
 Has¸im Sak,
Andrew Senior,
Kanishka Rao,
Franc¸oise Beaufays, “Fast and accurate recurrent neural
network acoustic models for speech recognition,” arXiv
 
 Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean, “Distilling the knowledge in a neural network,” arXiv preprint
 
 Geoffrey E Hinton, Simon Osindero, and Yee-Whye
Teh, “A fast learning algorithm for deep belief nets,”
Neural computation, vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 1527–1554,
 Brian Kingsbury,
“Lattice-based optimization of sequence classiﬁcation criteria for neural-network acoustic modeling,”
in Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, 2009. ICASSP 2009. IEEE International Conference on. IEEE, 2009, pp. 3761–3764.
 Has¸im Sak, Andrew Senior, Kanishka Rao, Ozan Irsoy,
Alex Graves, Franc¸oise Beaufays, and Johan Schalkwyk,
“Learning acoustic frame labeling for speech
recognition with recurrent neural networks,” in Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2015
IEEE International Conference on. IEEE, 2015, pp.
4280–4284.
 Has¸im Sak, F´elix de Chaumont Quitry, Tara Sainath,
Kanishka Rao, et al., “Acoustic modelling with cd-ctcsmbr lstm rnns,” in Automatic Speech Recognition and
Understanding (ASRU), 2015 IEEE Workshop on. IEEE,
2015, pp. 604–609.
 Yves Normandin,
Hidden Markov models, maximum
mutual information estimation, and the speech recognition problem, Ph.D. thesis, McGill University, Montreal,
 Daniel Povey, Discriminative training for large vocabulary speech recognition,
Ph.D. thesis, University of
Cambridge, 2005.
 Michiel Hermans and Benjamin Schrauwen, “Training
and analysing deep recurrent neural networks,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2013,
pp. 190–198.