Fireﬂy Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
Xin-She Yang
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge,
Trumpington Street, Cambridge CB2 1PZ, UK
Nature-inspired algorithms are among the most powerful algorithms for optimization. This paper intends to provide a detailed description of a new Fireﬂy
Algorithm (FA) for multimodal optimization applications. We will compare the
proposed ﬁreﬂy algorithm with other metaheuristic algorithms such as particle
swarm optimization (PSO). Simulations and results indicate that the proposed
ﬁreﬂy algorithm is superior to existing metaheuristic algorithms. Finally we
will discuss its applications and implications for further research.
Citation detail: X.-S. Yang, “Fireﬂy algorithms for multimodal optimization”, in: Stochastic Algorithms: Foundations and Applications, SAGA 2009,
Lecture Notes in Computer Sciences, Vol. 5792, pp. 169-178 .
Introduction
Biologically inspired algorithms are becoming powerful in modern numerical
optimization , especially for the NP-hard problems such as
the travelling salesman problem. Among these biology-derived algorithms, the
multi-agent metaheuristic algorithms such as particle swarm optimization form
hot research topics in the start-of-the-art algorithm development in optimization and other applications .
Particle swarm optimization (PSO) was developed by Kennedy and Eberhart in 1995 , based on the swarm behaviour such as ﬁsh and bird schooling in
nature, the so-called swarm intelligence. Though particle swarm optimization
has many similarities with genetic algorithms, but it is much simpler because
it does not use mutation/crossover operators. Instead, it uses the real-number
randomness and the global communication among the swarming particles. In
this sense, it is also easier to implement as it uses mainly real numbers.
This paper aims to introduce the new Fireﬂy Algorithm and to provide
the comparison study of the FA with PSO and other relevant algorithms. We
will ﬁrst outline the particle swarm optimization, then formulate the ﬁreﬂy
algorithms and ﬁnally give the comparison about the performance of these
algorithms. The FA optimization seems more promising than particle swarm
optimization in the sense that FA can deal with multimodal functions more
naturally and eﬃciently.
In addition, particle swarm optimization is just a
special class of the ﬁreﬂy algorithms as we will demonstrate this in this paper.
Particle Swarm Optimization
Standard PSO
The PSO algorithm searches the space of the objective functions by adjusting
the trajectories of individual agents, called particles, as the piecewise paths
formed by positional vectors in a quasi-stochastic manner .
now as many as about 20 diﬀerent variants of PSO. Here we only describe the
simplest and yet popular standard PSO.
The particle movement has two major components: a stochastic component
and a deterministic component. A particle is attracted toward the position of
the current global best g∗and its own best location x∗
i in history, while at
the same time it has a tendency to move randomly. When a particle ﬁnds a
location that is better than any previously found locations, then it updates it
as the new current best for particle i. There is a current global best for all n
particles. The aim is to ﬁnd the global best among all the current best solutions
until the objective no longer improves or after a certain number of iterations.
For the particle movement, we use x∗
i to denote the current best for particle
i, and g∗≈min or max{f(xi)}(i = 1, 2, ..., n) to denote the current global best.
Let xi and vi be the position vector and velocity for particle i, respectively.
The new velocity vector is determined by the following formula
i + αǫ1 ⊙(g∗−xt
i) + βǫ2 ⊙(x∗
where ǫ1 and ǫ2 are two random vectors, and each entry taking the values
between 0 and 1. The Hadamard product of two matrices u ⊙v is deﬁned as
the entrywise product, that is [u ⊙v]ij = uijvij. The parameters α and β are
the learning parameters or acceleration constants, which can typically be taken
as, say, α ≈β ≈2. The initial values of xt=0
can be taken as the bounds or
limits a = min(xj), b = max(xj) and vt=0
= 0. The new position can then be
updated by
Although vi can be any values, it is usually bounded in some range [0, vmax].
There are many variants which extend the standard PSO algorithm, and the
most noticeable improvement is probably to use inertia function θ(t) so that vt
is replaced by θ(t)vt
i where θ takes the values between 0 and 1. In the simplest
case, the inertia function can be taken as a constant, typically θ ≈0.5 ∼0.9.
This is equivalent to introducing a virtual mass to stabilize the motion of the
particles, and thus the algorithm is expected to converge more quickly.
Fireﬂy Algorithm
Behaviour of Fireﬂies
The ﬂashing light of ﬁreﬂies is an amazing sight in the summer sky in the
tropical and temperate regions. There are about two thousand ﬁreﬂy species,
and most ﬁreﬂies produce short and rhythmic ﬂashes. The pattern of ﬂashes is
often unique for a particular species. The ﬂashing light is produced by a process
of bioluminescence, and the true functions of such signaling systems are still
debating. However, two fundamental functions of such ﬂashes are to attract
mating partners (communication), and to attract potential prey. In addition,
ﬂashing may also serve as a protective warning mechanism. The rhythmic ﬂash,
the rate of ﬂashing and the amount of time form part of the signal system that
brings both sexes together.
Females respond to a male’s unique pattern of
ﬂashing in the same species, while in some species such as photuris, female
ﬁreﬂies can mimic the mating ﬂashing pattern of other species so as to lure and
eat the male ﬁreﬂies who may mistake the ﬂashes as a potential suitable mate.
We know that the light intensity at a particular distance r from the light
source obeys the inverse square law. That is to say, the light intensity I decreases as the distance r increases in terms of I ∝1/r2.
Furthermore, the
air absorbs light which becomes weaker and weaker as the distance increases.
These two combined factors make most ﬁreﬂies visible only to a limited distance, usually several hundred meters at night, which is usually good enough
for ﬁreﬂies to communicate.
The ﬂashing light can be formulated in such a way that it is associated with
the objective function to be optimized, which makes it possible to formulate new
optimization algorithms. In the rest of this paper, we will ﬁrst outline the basic
formulation of the Fireﬂy Algorithm (FA) and then discuss the implementation
as well as its analysis in detail.
Fireﬂy Algorithm
Now we can idealize some of the ﬂashing characteristics of ﬁreﬂies so as to
develop ﬁreﬂy-inspired algorithms. For simplicity in describing our new Fireﬂire
Algorithm (FA), we now use the following three idealized rules: 1) all ﬁreﬂies
are unisex so that one ﬁreﬂy will be attracted to other ﬁreﬂies regardless of
their sex; 2) Attractiveness is proportional to their brightness, thus for any
two ﬂashing ﬁreﬂies, the less brighter one will move towards the brighter one.
The attractiveness is proportional to the brightness and they both decrease as
their distance increases. If there is no brighter one than a particular ﬁreﬂy,
it will move randomly; 3) The brightness of a ﬁreﬂy is aﬀected or determined
by the landscape of the objective function. For a maximization problem, the
brightness can simply be proportional to the value of the objective function.
Other forms of brightness can be deﬁned in a similar way to the ﬁtness function
in genetic algorithms.
Based on these three rules, the basic steps of the ﬁreﬂy algorithm (FA) can
be summarized as the pseudo code shown in Fig. 1.
Fireﬂy Algorithm
Objective function f(x),
x = (x1, ..., xd)T
Generate initial population of ﬁreﬂies xi (i = 1, 2, ..., n)
Light intensity Ii at xi is determined by f(xi)
Deﬁne light absorption coeﬃcient γ
while (t <MaxGeneration)
for i = 1 : n all n ﬁreﬂies
for j = 1 : i all n ﬁreﬂies
if (Ij > Ii), Move ﬁreﬂy i towards j in d-dimension; end if
Attractiveness varies with distance r via exp[−γr]
Evaluate new solutions and update light intensity
Rank the ﬁreﬂies and ﬁnd the current best
Postprocess results and visualization
Figure 1: Pseudo code of the ﬁreﬂy algorithm (FA).
In certain sense, there is some conceptual similarity between the ﬁreﬂy algorithms and the bacterial foraging algorithm (BFA) . In BFA, the attraction among bacteria is based partly on their ﬁtness and partly on their
distance, while in FA, the attractiveness is linked to their objective function
and monotonic decay of the attractiveness with distance. However, the agents
in FA have adjustable visibility and more versatile in attractiveness variations,
which usually leads to higher mobility and thus the search space is explored
more eﬃciently.
Attractiveness
In the ﬁreﬂy algorithm, there are two important issues: the variation of light
intensity and formulation of the attractiveness. For simplicity, we can always
assume that the attractiveness of a ﬁreﬂy is determined by its brightness which
in turn is associated with the encoded objective function.
In the simplest case for maximum optimization problems, the brightness I
of a ﬁreﬂy at a particular location x can be chosen as I(x) ∝f(x). However,
the attractiveness β is relative, it should be seen in the eyes of the beholder or
judged by the other ﬁreﬂies. Thus, it will vary with the distance rij between
ﬁreﬂy i and ﬁreﬂy j. In addition, light intensity decreases with the distance
from its source, and light is also absorbed in the media, so we should allow
the attractiveness to vary with the degree of absorption. In the simplest form,
the light intensity I(r) varies according to the inverse square law I(r) = Is/r2
where Is is the intensity at the source. For a given medium with a ﬁxed light
absorption coeﬃcient γ, the light intensity I varies with the distance r. That
is I = I0e−γr, where I0 is the original light intensity. In order to avoid the
singularity at r = 0 in the expression Is/r2, the combined eﬀect of both the
inverse square law and absorption can be approximated using the following
Gaussian form
I(r) = I0e−γr2.
Sometimes, we may need a function which decreases monotonically at a slower
rate. In this case, we can use the following approximation
At a shorter distance, the above two forms are essentially the same. This is
because the series expansions about r = 0
e−γr2 ≈1 −γr2 + 1
2γ2r4 + ...,
1 + γr2 ≈1 −γr2 + γ2r4 + ...,
are equivalent to each other up to the order of O(r3).
As a ﬁreﬂy’s attractiveness is proportional to the light intensity seen by
adjacent ﬁreﬂies, we can now deﬁne the attractiveness β of a ﬁreﬂy by
β(r) = β0e−γr2,
where β0 is the attractiveness at r = 0.
As it is often faster to calculate
1/(1 + r2) than an exponential function, the above function, if necessary, can
conveniently be replaced by β =
1+γr2 . Equation (6) deﬁnes a characteristic
distance Γ = 1/√γ over which the attractiveness changes signiﬁcantly from β0
In the implementation, the actual form of attractiveness function β(r) can
be any monotonically decreasing functions such as the following generalized
β(r) = β0e−γrm,
For a ﬁxed γ, the characteristic length becomes Γ = γ−1/m →1 as m →∞.
Conversely, for a given length scale Γ in an optimization problem, the parameter
γ can be used as a typical initial value. That is γ =
Distance and Movement
The distance between any two ﬁreﬂies i and j at xi and xj, respectively, is the
Cartesian distance
rij = ||xi −xj|| =
(xi,k −xj,k)2,
where xi,k is the kth component of the spatial coordinate xi of ith ﬁreﬂy. In
2-D case, we have rij =
(xi −xj)2 + (yi −yj)2.
The movement of a ﬁreﬂy i is attracted to another more attractive (brighter)
ﬁreﬂy j is determined by
xi = xi + β0e−γr2
ij(xj −xi) + α (rand −1
where the second term is due to the attraction while the third term is randomization with α being the randomization parameter. rand is a random number
generator uniformly distributed in . For most cases in our implementation,
we can take β0 = 1 and α ∈ . Furthermore, the randomization term can
easily be extended to a normal distribution N(0, 1) or other distributions. In
addition, if the scales vary signiﬁcantly in diﬀerent dimensions such as −105 to
105 in one dimension while, say, −0.001 to 0.01 along the other, it is a good
idea to replace α by αSk where the scaling parameters Sk(k = 1, ..., d) in the d
dimensions should be determined by the actual scales of the problem of interest.
The parameter γ now characterizes the variation of the attractiveness, and
its value is crucially important in determining the speed of the convergence and
how the FA algorithm behaves. In theory, γ ∈[0, ∞), but in practice, γ = O(1)
is determined by the characteristic length Γ of the system to be optimized.
Thus, in most applications, it typically varies from 0.01 to 100.
Scaling and Asymptotic Cases
It is worth pointing out that the distance r deﬁned above is not limited to
the Euclidean distance. We can deﬁne many other forms of distance r in the
n-dimensional hyperspace, depending on the type of problem of our interest.
For example, for job scheduling problems, r can be deﬁned as the time lag
or time interval.
For complicated networks such as the Internet and social
networks, the distance r can be deﬁned as the combination of the degree of
local clustering and the average proximity of vertices. In fact, any measure
that can eﬀectively characterize the quantities of interest in the optimization
problem can be used as the ‘distance’ r. The typical scale Γ should be associated
with the scale in the optimization problem of interest. If Γ is the typical scale
for a given optimization problem, for a very large number of ﬁreﬂies n ≫m
where m is the number of local optima, then the initial locations of these n
ﬁreﬂies should distribute relatively uniformly over the entire search space in
a similar manner as the initialization of quasi-Monte Carlo simulations. As
the iterations proceed, the ﬁreﬂies would converge into all the local optima
(including the global ones) in a stochastic manner.
By comparing the best
solutions among all these optima, the global optima can easily be achieved.
At the moment, we are trying to formally prove that the ﬁreﬂy algorithm will
approach global optima when n →∞and t ≫1.
In reality, it converges
very quickly, typically with less than 50 to 100 generations, and this will be
demonstrated using various standard test functions later in this paper.
There are two important limiting cases when γ →0 and γ →∞. For γ →0,
the attractiveness is constant β = β0 and Γ →∞, this is equivalent to say
that the light intensity does not decrease in an idealized sky. Thus, a ﬂashing
ﬁreﬂy can be seen anywhere in the domain. Thus, a single (usually global)
optimum can easily be reached. This corresponds to a special case of particle
swarm optimization (PSO) discussed earlier.
Subsequently, the eﬃciency of
this special case is the same as that of PSO.
On the other hand, the limiting case γ →∞leads to Γ →0 and β(r) →
δ(r) (the Dirac delta function), which means that the attractiveness is almost
zero in the sight of other ﬁreﬂies or the ﬁreﬂies are short-sighted.
Figure 2: Michalewicz’s function for two independent variables with a global minimum
f∗≈−1.801 at (2.20319, 1.57049).
equivalent to the case where the ﬁreﬂies ﬂy in a very foggy region randomly.
No other ﬁreﬂies can be seen, and each ﬁreﬂy roams in a completely random
way. Therefore, this corresponds to the completely random search method. As
the ﬁreﬂy algorithm is usually in somewhere between these two extremes, it is
possible to adjust the parameter γ and α so that it can outperform both the
random search and PSO. In fact, FA can ﬁnd the global optima as well as all the
local optima simultaneously in a very eﬀective manner. This advantage will be
demonstrated in detail later in the implementation. A further advantage of FA
is that diﬀerent ﬁreﬂies will work almost independently, it is thus particularly
suitable for parallel implementation. It is even better than genetic algorithms
and PSO because ﬁreﬂies aggregate more closely around each optimum (without
jumping around as in the case of genetic algorithms). The interactions between
diﬀerent subregions are minimal in parallel implementation.
Multimodal Optimization with Multiple
Validation
In order to demonstrate how the ﬁreﬂy algorithm works, we have implemented it
in Matlab. We will use various test functions to validate the new algorithm. As
an example, we now use the FA to ﬁnd the global optimum of the Michalewicz
sin(xi)[sin(ix2
where m = 10 and d = 1, 2, .... The global minimum f∗≈−1.801 in 2-D occurs
at (2.20319, 1.57049), which can be found after about 400 evaluations for 40
ﬁreﬂies after 10 iterations (see Fig. 2 and Fig. 3). Now let us use the FA to
ﬁnd the optima of some tougher test functions. This is much more eﬃcient
than most of existing metaheuristic algorithms. In the above simulations, the
values of the parameters are α = 0.2, γ = 1 and β0 = 1.
We have also used much tougher test functions. For example, Yang de-
Figure 3: The initial 40 ﬁreﬂies (left) and their locations after 10 iterations (right).
scribed a multimodal function which looks like a standing-wave pattern 
i=1(xi/a)2m −2e−Pd
is multimodal with many local peaks and valleys, and it has a unique global
minimum f∗= −1 at (0, 0, ..., 0) in the region −20 ≤xi ≤20 where i = 1, 2, ..., d
and a = 15. The 2D landscape of Yang’s function is shown in Fig. 4.
Comparison of FA with PSO and GA
Various studies show that PSO algorithms can outperform genetic algorithms
(GA) and other conventional algorithms for solving many optimization problems. This is partially due to that fact that the broadcasting ability of the current best estimates gives better and quicker convergence towards the optimality.
A general framework for evaluating statistical performance of evolutionary algorithms has been discussed in detail by Shilane et al. . Now we will compare
the Fireﬂy Algorithms with PSO, and genetic algorithms for various standard
test functions. For genetic algorithms, we have used the standard version with
no elitism with a mutation probability of pm = 0.05 and a crossover probability
of 0.95. For the particle swarm optimization, we have also used the standard
version with the learning parameters α ≈β ≈2 without the inertia correction
 . We have used various population sizes from n = 15 to 200, and found
that for most problems, it is suﬃcient to use n = 15 to 50. Therefore, we have
used a ﬁxed population size of n = 40 in all our simulations for comparison.
After implementing these algorithms using Matlab, we have carried out extensive simulations and each algorithm has been run at least 100 times so as to
carry out meaningful statistical analysis. The algorithms stop when the variations of function values are less than a given tolerance ǫ ≤10−5. The results
are summarized in the following table (see Table 1) where the global optima
are reached. The numbers are in the format: average number of evaluations
(success rate), so 3752 ± 725(99%) means that the average number (mean) of
function evaluations is 3752 with a standard deviation of 725. The success rate
of ﬁnding the global optima for this algorithm is 99%.
We can see that the FA is much more eﬃcient in ﬁnding the global optima
with higher success rates. Each function evaluation is virtually instantaneous
Figure 4: Yang’s function in 2D with a global minimum f∗= −1 at (0, 0) where
Table 1: Comparison of algorithm performance
Functions/Algorithms
Michalewicz’s (d=16)
89325 ± 7914(95%)
6922 ± 537(98%)
3752 ± 725(99%)
Rosenbrock’s (d=16)
55723 ± 8901(90%)
32756 ± 5325(98%)
7792 ± 2923(99%)
De Jong’s (d=256)
25412 ± 1237(100%)
17040 ± 1123(100%)
7217 ± 730(100%)
Schwefel’s (d=128)
227329 ± 7572(95%)
14522 ± 1275(97%)
9902 ± 592(100%)
Ackley’s (d=128)
32720 ± 3327(90%)
23407 ± 4325(92%)
5293 ± 4920(100%)
Rastrigin’s
110523 ± 5199(77%)
79491 ± 3715(90%)
15573 ± 4399(100%)
19239 ± 3307(92%)
17273 ± 2929(90%)
7925 ± 1799(100%)
Griewank’s
70925 ± 7652(90%)
55970 ± 4223(92%)
12592 ± 3715(100%)
Shubert’s (18 minima)
54077 ± 4997(89%)
23992 ± 3755(92%)
12577 ± 2356(100%)
Yang’s (d = 16)
27923 ± 3025(83%)
14116 ± 2949(90%)
7390 ± 2189(100%)
on modern personal computer. For example, the computing time for 10,000
evaluations on a 3GHz desktop is about 5 seconds. Even with graphics for
displaying the locations of the particles and ﬁreﬂies, it usually takes less than
a few minutes. It is worth pointing out that more formal statistical hypothesis
testing can be used to verify such signiﬁcance.
Conclusions
In this paper, we have formulated a new ﬁreﬂy algorithm and analyzed its similarities and diﬀerences with particle swarm optimization. We then implemented
and compared these algorithms. Our simulation results for ﬁnding the global
optima of various test functions suggest that particle swarm often outperforms
traditional algorithms such as genetic algorithms, while the new ﬁreﬂy algorithm is superior to both PSO and GA in terms of both eﬃciency and success
rate. This implies that FA is potentially more powerful in solving NP-hard
problems which will be investigated further in future studies.
The basic ﬁreﬂy algorithm is very eﬃcient, but we can see that the solutions
are still changing as the optima are approaching. It is possible to improve the
solution quality by reducing the randomness gradually. A further improvement
on the convergence of the algorithm is to vary the randomization parameter α
so that it decreases gradually as the optima are approaching. These could form
important topics for further research. Furthermore, as a relatively straightforward extension, the Fireﬂy Algorithm can be modiﬁed to solve multiobjective
optimization problems. In addition, the application of ﬁreﬂy algorithms in combination with other algorithms may form an exciting area for further research.