Attentional mechanisms of borderline
personality disorder
Michael I. Posner*†‡, Mary K. Rothbart*†, Nathalie Vizueta*, Kenneth N. Levy§¶, David E. Evans†, Kathleen M. Thomas*,
and John F. Clarkin§
*Sackler Institute for Developmental Psychobiology, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New York, NY 10021; §Department of Psychiatry,
Westchester Division, Weill Medical College, White Plains, NY 10605; ¶Department of Psychology, Hunter College of the City University of
New York, New York, NY 10021; and †Department of Psychology, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403
Contributed by Michael I. Posner, October 23, 2002
We consider whether disruption of a speciﬁc neural circuit related
to self-regulation is an underlying biological deﬁcit in borderline
personality disorder (BPD). Because patients with BPD exhibit a
poor ability to regulate negative affect, we hypothesized that
brain mechanisms thought to be involved in such self-regulation
would function abnormally even in situations that seem remote
from the symptoms exhibited by these patients. To test this idea,
we compared the efﬁciency of attentional networks in BPD patients with controls who were matched to the patients in having
very low self-reported effortful control and very high negative
emotionality and controls who were average in these two temperamental dimensions. We found that the patients exhibited
signiﬁcantly greater difﬁculty in their ability to resolve conﬂict
among stimulus dimensions in a purely cognitive task than did
average controls but displayed no deﬁcit in overall reaction time,
errors, or other attentional networks. The temperamentally
matched group did not differ signiﬁcantly from either group. A
signiﬁcant correlation was found between measures of the ability
to control conﬂict in the reaction-time task and self-reported
effortful control.
andel (1, 2) has argued that new concepts in neuroscience
now make it possible to relate higher level cognition to
brain systems, making contact with psychoanalytic concepts.
Borderline personality disorder (BPD) is one mental health
problem that has been identified and studied by psychoanalytic
(3) as well as behaviorally oriented (4) therapists. Because of
its complexity and lack of clear organic markers, BPD poses
one of the greatest challenges to the goal suggested by Kandel’s
articles. As a first step in trying to make a translation between
psychoanalytic and neuroscience concepts, we examine
whether patients with BPD show a systematic deficit in a circuit
known from neuroimaging studies to be involved in regulation
of cognition and emotion.
BPD as defined in DSM IV involves a failure to integrate
interpersonal relationships with the self-image, lability of affect,
and impulsivity. There is no question about the devastating
reality of behavioral problems of people diagnosed with BPD.
Estimates of prevalence run from 0.3% to 1.8% in the adult
population of the United States (5). Up to 75% of individuals
diagnosed with BPD engage in self-destructive behavior such as
self-mutilation (6) and suicide (7).
We began our efforts by hypothesizing that borderline
patients would be high in negative affect and low in effortful
control as measured by temperament and personality scales
(8). These two constructs are related most closely to the
overwhelming negative feelings and poor control of emotion
and behavior that are at the heart of the borderline symptoms.
A temperament high in negative emotionality (fear and anger)
and low in effortful control would also seem to provide a basis
for poor interpersonal relations, another of the central difficulties in BPD.
We chose to measure temperament with the adult temperament questionnaire (ATQ) (8), because (i) it included scales
assessing negative affect and effortful control, and (ii) in children, effortful control as measured by a child form of the ATQ
has been found to correlate with the ability to resolve conflict
between stimulus dimensions (9). In adults, conflict tasks activate a common network of neural areas including the dorsal
anterior cingulate and lateral prefrontal cortex, important for
the control of cognition and emotion (10, 11).
Because a sense of conscience among children has been
found to be related to effortful control (12) and BPD patients
have problems with appropriate behavior in social settings, we
speculated that there might be a specific disorder of mechanisms related to effortful control present in BPD patients that
would generalize beyond the domain of interpersonal relations. To test this idea, we compared performance on the
attention network test (ANT), a reaction-time (RT) task that
was created to assess the efficiency of three attentional control
networks (13). We studied patients diagnosed with BPD and
two groups of controls. One group, the temperamentally
matched controls, showed similar levels of negative affect and
effortful control to the patients as measured by the ATQ (8).
A second group, the average controls, showed mean levels on
these two temperamental variables. We also correlated performance on effortful control as measured by the questionnaire with the efficiency of the executive attention network as
measured by the ANT.
Participants. Thirty-nine individuals in the New York area were
diagnosed as having BPD by trained psychiatrists as part of a
double-blind treatment study. The diagnosis involved 11 h of
objective measures and interviews covering Axis I disorders
[Structured Clinical Interview for Diagnosis (SCID), ref. 14] and
Axis II disorders [International Personality Disorder Examination (IPDE), ref. 15].
In addition, we identified controls without known personality
disorders from a sample of 1,000 students at Hunter College in
New York City who completed the ATQ (ref. 8 and D.E.E. and
M.K.R., unpublished data). The ATQ is a self-report questionnaire that asks subjects to read and rate 118 self-descriptive
statements. Scores range from 1 to 7, with 4 representing the
midpoint of the scale. The composite temperament scales of
negative affect and effortful control were used to select two
control groups for further study (see Table 1). All controls were
also screened for personality disorders by using the international
personality disorder examination (14). Only those without disorder are included in Table 1.
Procedure. All participants completed the ANT (ref. 13; see also
Fig. 1) to provide an evaluation of efficiency in three aspects of
attention: alerting, orienting, and conflict resolution. Alerting is
Abbreviations: BPD, borderline personality disorder; ATQ, adult temperament questionnaire; ANT, attention network test; RT, reaction time.
‡To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: .
16366–16370 
December 10, 2002 
www.pnas.orgcgidoi10.1073pnas.252644699
produced by a warning signal that contains no information about
where the target will occur. Orienting is induced by a spatial cue
that indicates where the target will be located. Conflict is
produced by flankers surrounding the target that are incongruent with the target. Specific subtractions to obtain each measure
are shown in Fig. 1d.
The task was to press the left key if the central arrow pointed
leftward and the right key if it pointed rightward. The target
arrow was surrounded by flanker arrows that either pointed in
the same direction (congruent) or the opposite direction (incongruent). One of four cue conditions was presented before the
target: no cue, a double cue, a single cue at the location of the
upcoming target, or a single central cue.
Each subject was given a total of 288 experimental trials, one
fourth in each of the four cue conditions. Each trial began with
either no cue or one of the three cues presented for 100 msec.
The cue was followed after an average interval of 400 msec
by a congruent, incongruent, or neutral target with equal
frequency.
For all the persons described above and 40 additional
persons for whom data were available on both the ATQ
and ANT (131 persons total: 39 BPD patients, 22 temperamentally matched controls, and 70 unselected controls), we
correlated performance on the ANT with scores on
the effortful control measures of the ATQ. The effortful
control measure involves questions dealing with the ability of
people to exercise deliberate control of their behavior,
thought, or emotion by activating or inhibiting relevant behaviors. For example, in a statement related to effortful
control, people are asked to rate on a seven-point scale the
degree to which each of the following are true of them: ‘‘I
hardly ever finish things on time,’’ and ‘‘I can easily resist
talking out of turn, even when I am excited and want to express
an idea.’’ To study negative affect, participants rate statements
Table 1. Group demographics
age, years
age, years
age, years
age, years
BPD patients
Unmedicated BPD
Medicated BPD
Temperamentally matched
Average controls
ANT. (a) The cue conditions used in the experiment. (b) Three types of targets. (c) Time line for each trial. (d) Subtractions used to form network scores.
[Reproduced with permission from ref. 13 .]
Posner et al.
December 10, 2002 
PSYCHOLOGY
such as ‘‘looking down at the ground from an extremely high
place makes me feel uneasy,’’ and ‘‘I seldom become sad when
I watch a sad movie.’’
Results of the effort to select temperamentally matched controls
are shown in Table 2. The temperamental controls matched the
patients in negative affect very closely and were even lower on
effortful control than the patients. Medicated and nonmedicated
BPD patients did not differ in temperament scores.
Results of the ANT task are shown in Table 3. ANOVAs
showed highly significant effects of cue and target quite similar
to what had been found in previous studies (13). These differences are reflected in the network scores shown in Table 3 and
Fig. 2, which provide the result of the subtractions for alerting,
orienting, and conflict (shown in Fig. 1d).
There were no differences between groups in overall RT,
error rate, or alerting or orienting network scores. In the
conflict network score, there was a significant effect of group
membership [F(2,88)  3.57, P  0.03]. Subsequent comparison by t test showed that the patients differed from average
controls (P  0.01) but did not differ significantly from
temperamental controls. The temperamental control subjects
had a somewhat larger conflict score than did the average
controls and somewhat smaller than the patients. However,
they did not show significant differences from either the
average controls or the patients.
We evaluated whether the difference between patients and
controls could be explained by differences in age or medication.
It was possible that the medicated patients showed a somewhat
larger effect, because they tend to have more severe symptoms
than the unmedicated patients. Although the medicated patients
showed a somewhat larger conflict score than unmedicated
patients, this result was not significant [F(1,39)  0.498]. Given
the age differences between groups, we evaluated age as a
predictor of conflict. Age and conflict scores were not significantly correlated for any of the groups. Thus the difference
between patients and average controls was not because of age or
medication.
To examine the relationship between network scores on the
ANT and questionnaire scale scores, we calculated conflict
scores (RT for incongruent  congruent trials) for each subject
and divided by the overall RT to reduce the influence of overall
RT. We then correlated these adjusted conflict scores with
effortful control as measured by the ATQ. We found a significant negative correlation of 0.29 (P  0.01). All the subscales
related to effortful control were also related to the conflict
scores of the ANT. This replicated a finding that had been
reported in young children (9). We also replicated the usual
finding that effortful control was negatively related to reported
negative affect r  0.68 (P  0.01) (16).
Discussion
The results obtained indicate two important findings about BPD.
First, there seems to be a specific abnormality in BPD patients
in an attentional network involved in conflict resolution and
more generally in cognitive control. This was found even though
the ANT is a purely cognitive task, remote from the emotional
symptoms related to BPD. No other attentional network seems
to be impaired in these patients.
Second, the abnormality as measured by the ANT is definitely present only in the patients. Although the temperamental controls are also elevated in conflict score, they are not
significantly different from the average controls despite having
lower average effortful control values than the patients. These
findings are congruent with a number of hypotheses about the
etiology of the disorder. One is the idea that temperament
plays a role in the disorder, possibly in predisposing an
individual to develop it. We have examined several polymorphisms in candidate genes known to influence the conflict
network (17), but thus far we have not able to detect any
abnormal frequencies in the patients (18). In the full sample
of patients studied at the Department of Psychiatry (Westchester Division of Weill Medical College), 71% reported emotional abuse, 38% physical abuse, and 28% sexual abuse. These
and other aspects of socialization might act together with a lack
of effortful control to produce the other symptoms. Another
possibility is that the difficulties in socialization themselves
may produce an inappropriate development of attentional
mechanisms for the control of cognition and emotion.
Although the attentional deficit found in BPD patients is not
likely to be confined to this group, the fact that it involves a
specific attentional network provides important information on
the anatomy of the deficit. Neuroimaging studies have shown
that an important part of the conflict network involves the
anterior cingulate gyrus (10, 11, 19). There is evidence of the
development of this network between ages 2 and 7 years, as
indicated in the performance on a spatial conflict task inducing
conflict between identity and location, two of the earliest
developing visual-system operations (9). In adults, this spatial
conflict task activates the dorsal cingulate in an area similar to
the one activated by the color Stroop and in the flanker task as
used in the ANT (11). There are significant correlations between
children’s performance on the spatial conflict task and parental
Table 2. ATQ scores
Negative affect Effortful control
BPD patients
5.08 (0.60)
3.51 (0.66)
Unmedicated BPD
4.93 (0.48)
3.59 (0.58)
Medicated BPD
5.22 (0.67)
3.44 (0.73)
Temperamentally matched
5.07 (0.31)
2.82 (0.43)
Average controls
3.98 (0.13)
4.03 (0.15)
Standard deviation is shown in parentheses after each score.
Table 3. ANT RT, accuracy, and network scores for patients and controls
BPD patients
571 (13.7)
0.976 (0.01)
Unmedicated BPD
133 (15.1)
584 (24.0)
0.978 (0.01)
Medicated BPD
147 (12.5)
558 (15.1)
0.974 (0.01)
Temperamentally matched
125 (11.6)
540 (13.2)
0.973 (0.01)
Average controls
532 (11.6)
0.977 (0.00)
The standard error of the mean is shown in parentheses after each score.
www.pnas.orgcgidoi10.1073pnas.252644699
Posner et al.
reports of effortful control (9, 20). The current data show a
similar correlation in adults.
Work with a child version of the ANT suggests that development in the network underlying the ability to deal with conflict
continues up to age 7 but not after that age.** A striking feature
of children over the developmental period from age 2 to 7 is an
increase in their ability to regulate their cognition and emotion.
Moreover, during this period, abusive events, which have also
been related to BPD, may be likely to influence the developing
attentional system (3). It is useful therefore to consider what is
known about the normal development of attention and effortful
control at these ages.
Studies of effortful control (21) and the conflict network
(22) both have found substantial heritability. In addition,
empathy with others is strongly related to effortful control,
with children high in effortful control showing greater empathy (23). To display empathy toward others requires that
we interpret their signals of distress or pleasure. Lack of
empathy may help to produce the kind of difficulty with
interpersonal relations found in BPD. Recently it was found
that both effortful control and conflict as measured by the
ANT aided in the prediction of antisocial outcomes in adolescence (L. Ellis, unpublished data). In children (24) and
adults (25), lesions of the medial frontal areas including the
dorsal anterior cingulate produce the tendency toward poor
interpersonal relations and more generally antisocial behavior.
Consistent with its influence on empathy, effortful control also
seems to play a role in the development of conscience (26).
These findings make it plausible that the temperamental
characteristics of BPD patients could predispose them to
difficulties in socialization.
This research was supported by a grant from the Borderline Personality
Disorder Research Foundation.
1. Kandel, E. R. Am. J. Psychiatry 155, 457–469.
2. Kandel, E. R. Am. J. Psychiatry 56, 504–524.
3. Kernberg, P. F., Weiner, A. S. & Bardenstein, K. K. Personality Disorders
in Children and Adolescents (Basic Books, New York).
4. Linehan, M. M. Cognitive Behaviorial Treatment of Borderline Personality
Disorder (Guilford, New York).
5. Lenzenweger, M. F., Loranger, A. W., Korfine, L. & Neff, C. Arch. Gen.
Psychiatry 54, 345–351.
6. Clarkin, J. F., Widiger, T., Frances, A., Hurt, S. W. & Gilmore, M. J.
Abnorm. Soc. Psychol. 92, 263–275.
7. McGlashan, T. H. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 43, 20–30.
8. Rothbart, M. K., Ahadi, S. A. & Evans, D. E. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 78,
9. Gerardi-Caulton, G. Dev. Sci. 34, 397–404.
10. Bush, G., Luu, P. & Posner, M. I. Trends Cogn. Sci. 46, 215–222.
11. Fan, J., Flombaum, J. I., McCandliss, B. D., Thomas, K. M. & Posner, M. I.
 Neuroimage, in press.
12. Kochanska, G. Dev. Psychol. 3, 228–240.
13. Fan, J., McCandliss, B. D., Sommer, T., Raz, M. & Posner, M. I. J.
Cognit. Neurosci. 3, 340–347.
14. First, M. B., Gibbon, M., Spitzer, R. L. & Williams, J. B. W. User’s Guide
for the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IVAxis I-Research Version (Am.
Psychiatr. Press, Washington, DC), Version 2.
15. Loranger, A. W. International Personality Disorder Examination (Psychol. Assess. Resources, Odessa, FL).
16. Derryberry, D. & Rothbart, M. K. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 55,
17. Fossella, J., Sommer T., Fan, J., Wu, Y., Swanson, J. M., Pfaff, D. W. & Posner,
M. I. BMC Neurosci. 3, 14.
18. Posner, M. I., Rothbart, M. K., Vizueta, N., Thomas, K. M., Levy, K., Fossella,
J., Silbersweig, D. A., Stern, E., Clarkin, J. & Kernberg, O. Dev.
Psychopathol., in press.
19. Beauregard, M., Levesque, J. & Bourgouin, P. J. Neurosci. 21, RC165.
20. Rothbart, M. K., Ellis, L. & Posner, M. I. J. Pers., in press.
In unpublished adult studies using the ANT and ATQ we had not found signiﬁcant
correlations between conﬂict scores and effortful control. The ﬁnding of a signiﬁcant
correlation in this study might be due to a larger range of scores when including results
from BPD patients and temperamentally matched controls who are relatively low in
effortful control as well as advanced students who were relatively high in effortful control.
A large range of performance might be important in obtaining the correlation.
**Rueda, M. R., Fan, J., McCandliss, B., Halparin, J., Gruber, D., Pappert, L. & Posner, M. I.
 Cognit. Neurosci. Soc. Suppl., 21 (abstr.).
Network scores in terms of RT differences for alerting, orienting, and conﬂict for each of the three experimental groups.
Posner et al.
December 10, 2002 
PSYCHOLOGY
21. Goldsmith, H. H., Lemery, K. S., Buss, K. A., Campos, J. J. Dev. Psychol.
35, 972–985.
22. Fan, J., Wu, Y., Fossella, J. & Posner, M. I. BioMed. Central Neurosci.
23. Rothbart, M. K., Ahadi, S. A. & Hershey, K. Merrill Palmer Q. 40, 21–39.
24. Anderson, S. W., Damasio, H., Tranel, D. & Damasio, A. R. Dev.
Neuropsychol. 18, 281–296.
25. Damasio, A. Human Brain (Putnam, New York).
26. Kochanska, G., Murray, K., Jacques, T. Y., Koenig, A. L. & Vandegeest, K. A.
 Child Dev. 67, 490–507.
www.pnas.orgcgidoi10.1073pnas.252644699
Posner et al.