The Carcinogenesis Bioassay in Perspective:
Application in Identifying Human Cancer Hazards
Victor A. Fung,1 J. Carl Barrett,2 and James Huff2
1National Toxicology Program, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892 USA;
2Environmental Carcinogenesis Program, National Institute of Environmental Health
Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709 USA
Two-year chemical carcinogenesis studies
using rodents are the major bioassay for
identifying environmental carcinogens
(1-3). Due largely to the limited number of
animals per test (generally 50-60 animals of
each sex of two species, rats and mice, in
each experimental group), bioassays are conducted at relatively high exposure concentrations to optimize the probability of
detecting a carcinogenic response. These
long-term bioassays were originally designed
primarily for qualitative identification of
potential human carcinogens, so that further
studies could be done as necessary to elucidate dose-response relationships for quantitative risk assessment. Unfortunately, subsequent experiments are often not possible
due to limited resources and the need to test
other chemicals; thus, carcinogenesis bioassay data are frequently used for quantitative
risk assessments, despite potential limitations and confounding factors (4).
Carcinogenesis bioassays have been
criticized for identifying "too many rodent
carcinogens" and are criticized as not predicting carcinogenic hazards to humans,
largely because of purported differences in
exposures and lack of discrimination due to
high-dose effects (5). Long-term bioassays
are designed to expose rodents to chemicals
or environmental mixtures that cause only
minimal toxic effects. The highest dose
selected for these studies has been termed
the "maximum tolerated dose" (MTD),
when, in fact, it actually represents a minimally toxic exposure dose (6-8). Since
nearly half the chemicals tested by the
National Cancer Institute
(NCI) (9) and
the National Toxicology Program (NTP)
(10) elicited a positive response in the
rodent bioassays, some researchers have
postulated that carcinogenesis in these
studies results from cell killing and
increased cell division (mitogenesis) (5).
However, no obvious correlation between
toxicity and carcinogenicity exists (11-14).
Mitogenesis is certainly crucial to the carcinogenic process (5,15-18), but the conclusion that the majority of positive carcinogenesis responses results from cell
killing and mitogenesis requires a more
critical evaluation (11,12,17-19).
Most of the chemicals selected for the
NCI/NTP rodent bioassay program were
suspect carcinogens. Thus, not surprisingly,
many of these chemicals (two-thirds) did
induce carcinogenic responses in well-controlled, 2-year rodent carcinogen bioassays.
More criteria are used to predict the carcinogenic potential of chemicals since the
inception of the bioassay program, as more
information on mechanisms of carcinogenesis have become available. These criteria
include 1) positive or suggestive evidence
from epidemiological studies or previous
experimental studies in animals, 2) potential to act as an electrophilic agent or to be
metabolized to an electrophilic species, 3)
potential to be metabolized to active free
radical species, and 4) known biological
activity, such as genotoxicity (20-23).
Other information useful for assessing
potential carcinogenicity includes data on
levels and duration of exposure to the
chemical, potential for bioaccumulation,
mechanism of carcinogenic activity, species
differences, and genetic susceptibility.
Some chemicals were selected for carcinogenicity testing based primarily on estimates of human exposures, without prior
suspicion of carcinogenicity. Estimates of
exposure were based on 1) production volume; 2) use pattern (e.g., is the chemical an
intermediate or end product, is it used in an
open or dosed system, is it used in occupational settings or by certain subgroups of the
general population); 3) environmental
occurrence (e.g., naturally occurring products in certain foods and environmental pollutants such as pesticides); 4) potential to
enter the food chain; 5) physical properties
(e.g., vapor pressure and partition coefficients) that are relevant to the route of
human exposure; 6) potential for bioaccumulation; and 7) worker and consumer
exposure databases. This subset of chemicals
represents a more randomly selected group
of substances to ascertain more accurately
the percentage of chemicals that are carcinogenic to rodents, assess whether testing
chemicals at minimally toxic exposure levels
generally results in carcinogenic responses,
and predict the proportion of chemicals that
may pose a carcinogenic risk to humans.
In this paper we have divided chemicals
tested for carcinogenicity into two cate-
The selection process for chemicals tested in
the rodent
bioassay has been
biased toward chemicals suspead ofpotential carcinonicity. Results fiom carcinogenicityboassays of 400.
icals tested
by te NaioN l Cacer lniNational
Toxicology Program (NCIINTP) wer
analyzed to determine the dependence of positive results on chemical selection criteria:
those suspected of being carcinogenic and
those selected based on large volumes produced and widespread e
chemicals, 210(52%) ind
d carcinogenicity in at least one organ of one sex of one
species of the four sex/species groups typically used by NCI/NTP. Only 92 of the
400 cemis (23%) were positive in two
species and thus by international criteria are
considered likely to pose acrci
hazard to humns. A total of 267 chemicals
(67%) welected as suspect cinoens,
and 187 (68%) of these were
Suspect chemicals account for 86% of
chemicals with at least one positive result
and account for 90% of chemials considered positive in two species. The International AgenCy for Research own Cancer
is only 5 of the 40 c
carcinogenic to humans (gioup 1) and 10 as
probably carcinogenic to humans (group
2A). The majority (80%) ofthe 133 chemicals selected only on production/exposure
considerations were not cognc in anim
tolerated (or minimally toxic)
:dos. Only 9
(6.8%) were positive in two species, and
none is listed in IARC groups 1 or 2A.
Thus, on the basis of our analyses we predict that less than 5-10% of the 75,000
chmics in commercial use might be reaso nabl
aiipated to be cinogenic to
humans. (Cry werd chemicl carinogenesit, human
catcinogens, National Cancer
Institute/National Toxicology Program
bioassay program, predictive animal data.
Environ Health Perspect 103:680-683
gories: those selected on the basis of being
suspect carcinogens and those selected on
the basis of exposure/production volume.
Two-thirds of the suspect carcinogens
exhibited carcinogenic activity, whereas
the majority (nearly 80%) of the high-volume chemicals were not carcinogenic, even
when tested at relatively high exposures.
The scientific and public health significance of these observations is discussed.
Address correspondence to V.A. Fung, National
Cancer Institute, Room 712, Executive Plaza
North, Bethesda, MD 20892 USA.
We thank John R. Bucher, Ronald Melnick,
Raymond W. Tennant, and Elizabeth Weisburger
for reviewing the manuscript and providing valuable suggestions.
Received 30 January 1995; accepted 8 May 1995.
Environmental Health Perspectives
Bioassay Results of400 Chemicals
As ofJune 1994, NCI/NTP has completed
carcinogenicity bioassays on 400 chemicals, and these have been peer reviewed in
public forums. Of the 400 chemicals tested, 210 (52%) showed a statistically significant increase in the numbers of animals
with tumors in at least one site or one
organ of one sex of one species in the four
typical sex-species groups of one or more
exposure levels (Table 1). Fifty-five of the
210 "positive" chemicals were positive in
only 1 sex-species group, 79 chemicals in
2 groups, 31 chemicals in 3 groups, and 45
chemicals in 4 groups (Table 2).
Our review of the selection criteria for
the 400 chemicals indicated that 267
(67%) were selected with a suspicion of
carcinogenicity, and 133 (33%) were
selected mainly on the basis of production
volumes and occupation/population exposures. Of the 210 positive chemicals, 181
(86%) were suspect carcinogens, and 29
(14%) were selected mainly on exposure
considerations (Table 2). These results
clearly demonstrate a bias in the chemical
selection process toward chemicals that are
suspect carcinogens.
Further analysis of the 181 positive
chemicals that were suspect carcinogens
showed that 42 were positive in only 1 of 4
sex-species groups, 70 in 2 groups (14 of
these chemicals were positive in 2 species),
27 in 3 groups, and 42 in all 4 groups
(Table 2). Thus, 83 (14 + 27 + 42) of the
267 suspect carcinogens tested were positive in 2 species and thus meet the international criteria to evaluate further for potential human cancer risk.
Only 29 of the 133 chemicals (22%)
selected mainly on the basis of exposure
considerations were positive in at least 1 of
the 4 sex-species groups, 13 of these 29
chemicals were
sex-species group; 9 chemicals in 2 groups
(2 of these chemicals were positive in 2
species), 4 chemicals in 3 groups, and 3
chemicals in all 4 experimental groups.
Thus, 9 (2 + 4 + 3) of the 133 chemicals
tested (6.8%) were positive in two species
and would be considered for further evaluation as possibly carcinogenic to humans.
Chemicals Likely to Pose
Carcinogenic Hazards to Humans
According to the strength-of-evidence criteria pioneered by the International Agency
for Research and Cancer (IARC), which are
used by the Department of Health and
Human Services (DHHS) in its Annual
Report on Carcinogens (ARC) and by others,
chemicals that induce cancer in two species
should be considered most likely to pose
carcinogenic hazards to humans (24-27)
and need more detailed and extensive evaluation of the available data and information.
These empirical and qualitative scientific
criteria have been adopted by research and
regulatory agencies worldwide for evaluating
the available information to determine
whether a chemical is carcinogenic to
humans. Thus, 92 (44%) of the 210 positive chemicals (or 23% of the 400 chemicals
tested) should be further evaluated as potential human carcinogens. Eighty-three of
these 92 chemicals (90%) were suspect carcinogens; only 9 (10%) were selected mainly on the basis of production and exposure
considerations. It is noteworthy that less
than half of the 210 positive chemicals and
only 23% (92/400) of all chemicals tested
by NCI/NTP would be considered for further evaluation as likely to present carcinogenic hazards to humans using international
criteria (e.g., IARC). Of course, we do not
mean to imply that chemicals with positive
results in only one species or in one sex of
one strain are necessarily not hazardous, for
each chemical must be evaluated individually using all available toxicologic information
to better determine potential carcinogenic
risks to humans.
Classification of Chemicals by LARC
To date, 75{ (36%) of the 210 positive
chemicals (or 19% of the 400 total chemicals) have been classified by IARC and/or
DHHS. Sixty-three chemicals are considered
by IARC as posing cancer risks to humans: 5
of these chemicals are in IARC group 1
("agent is carcinogenic to humans"), 10
chemicals are in group 2A ("agent is probably carcinogenic to humans"), and 48 chemicals are in p-oup 2B ("agent is possibly carcinogenic to humans"). Sixty chemicals are
listed by DHHS in the Annual Report on
Carcinogens (ARC) as presenting carcinogenic hazards to humans: 4 chemicals are
listed as "known to be carcinogenic to
humans" (4 of the 5 in IARC) and 56 chemicals are listed as "reasonably anticipated to
be a carcinogen to humans." For the majority of the chemicals there is excellent correspondence for listing by both IARC and in
the ARC. The categories of evidence and
names of the chemicals are provided in
Tables 3 and 4.
Sixty-eight of the 75 chemicals (91%)
listed by IARC or in the ARCwere selected
as suspect carcinogens, and 7 (9%) were
selected on the basis of human exposure
considerations. Fifty-seven of the 181 positive chemicals (32%) selected as suspect
carcinogens are listed in one of the IARC
categories: group 1 (5 chemicals), group
2A (10 chemicals), and group 2B (42
chemicals). Fifty-five of the 181 positive
chemicals (30%) are listed in the ARC: 4
chemicals in the "known to be carcinogenictv
humans" and 51 in the "reasonably anticipated to be a carcinogen" classification. 'Table 3 contains the names of the
chemicals in the various IARC and ARC
categories of evide ce.
Six of the 29
chemicals (21%) selected
dn the basisof ex osure considerations are
listed in IARC group 2B; none is listed in
group 1 or group 2A. Five of the 29 chemicals (17%) are listed in ARCclassification,
"reasonably anticipated to be a carcinogen"; none is listed in the "known" classification. Table 4 contains the names of these
chemicals in the various IARC and ARC
classifications.
Magnitude of Public Health
These results may be used to better predict
the percentage of the 75,000 chemicals in
commercial use that would eventually
prove to be carcinogenic to humans; of
Table 1. Statistics on selection rationale for 400 chemicals/chemical mixtures with published or peerreviewed technical reports as of January 1994
Selection basis
Completed bioassays
Suspicion of carcinogenicity
Production volumes and
occupation/population exposures
Total no. of
chemicals (%)
No. of chemicals with
Positive results (%)
Negative results (%)
Table 2. Relationship between selection criteria and number of chemicals with evidence of carcinogenicity
Evidence of
carcinogenicity in
number sex/species
experiments
Total for chemicals
with positive results
Suspicion of
carcinogenicity (%)
Mainly human
considerations (%)
Volume 103, Number 7-8, July-August 1995
beiecuon oasis
Table 3. IARC and Annual Report on Carcinogens (ARC) classifications of chemicals selected for NCI/NTP
bioassay based on a suspicion of carcinogenicity
IARC category
ARC classification
Category 1 (5 chemicals)
Known carcinogens (4 chemicals)
Aspirin, phenacetin, caffeine mixture
Aspirin, phenacetin, caffeine mixture
Ethylene oxide
8-Methoxypsoralen + PUVA
8-Methoxypsoralen + PUVA
Reasonably anticipated to be
Category 2A (10 chemicals)
carcinogens (51 chemicals)
5-Azacytidine
2-Aminoanthraquinone
1,3-Butadiene
1-Amino-2-methylanthraquinone
C.l. Direct Black 38
o-Anisidine
C.l. Direct Blue 6
Bromodichloromethane
C.l. Direct Brown 95
1,3-Butadiene
1,2-Dibromoethane (EDB)
Chlorendic acid
Procarbazine*HCI
Chlorinated paraffins (C12, 60% chlorine)
1,2-Propylene oxide
3-Chloro-2-methylpropene
tris(Aziridinyl)phosphine sulfide (thio-TEPA)
4-Chloro-o-phenylenediamine
tris(2,3-Dibromopropyl)phosphate
Cl. Direct Black38
Category 2B (42 chemicals)
p-Cresidine
o-Anisidine
Bromodichloromethane
2,4-Diaminoanisole sulfate
2,4-Diaminotoluene
Chlorendic acid
1,2-Dibromo-3-chloropropane
Chlorinated paraffins (C12, 60% chlorine)
1,4-Dichlorobenzene
4-Chloro-o-phenylene diamine
Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT)
4-Chloro-o-toluidine
1,2-Dichloroethane
p-Cresidine
1,3-Dichloropropene
2,4-Diaminoanisole sulfate
Diglycidol resorcinol ether
2,4-Diaminotoluene
3,3'-Dimethoxybenzidine dihydrochloride
1,2-Dibromo-3-chloropropane
3,3'-Dimethylbenzidine dihydrochloride
1,4-Dichlorobenzene
Dimethyl vinyl chloride
Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT)
Ethyl acrylate
p,p'-Dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene (p,p'-DDE)
Ethylene oxide
1,2-Dichloroethane
Ethylene thiourea
1,3-Dichloropropene
Hydrazobenzene
Dichlorvos (DDVP)
Diglycidol resorcinol ether
Methylene chloride
3,3'-Dimethoxybenzidine dihydrochloride
4,4'-Methylene dianiline dihydrochloride
3,3'-Dimethylbenzidine dihydrochloride
4,4'-Methylenebis-(NN-dimethyl)benzenamime
Ethyl acrylate
Michler's ketone
Ethylene thiourea
Heptachlor
Lasciocarpine
Ochratoxin A
Methylene chloride
4,4'-Oxydianiline
4,4'-Methylene dianiline dihydrochloride
Phenazopyridine*HCI
2-Methyl-1-nitroanthraquinone
Phenoxybenzamine-HCI
Polybrominated biphenyl mixture
5-Nitroacenaphthene
(Firemaster FF-1)
Procarbazine.HCI
Ochratoxin A
1,2-Propylene oxide
Phenazopyridine*HCI
Phenoxybenzamine*HCI
Sulfallate
Polybrominated biphenyl mixture (Firemaster FF-1)
2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
Tetrachloroethylene
Sulfallate
o-Toluidine*HCI
2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
Tetrachloroethylene
2,4,6-Trichlorophenol
4,4'-Thiodianiline
tris(Aziridinyl)phosphine sulfide (thio-TEPA)
o-Toluidine*HCI
tris(2,3-Dibromopropyl)phosphate
2,4,6-Trichlorophenol
course, exposure patterns and other necessary conditions must also be considered
(28-30). Our current review of the 400
chemicals tested in the bioassay program
indicates that only 23% are positive in two
species, and thus, using international criteria, these 92 chemicals may be considered
for further evaluation as being most likely
to pose carcinogenic risks to humans.
However, because the majority of chemicals tested to date were selected as suspect
carcinogens, this must be considered to be
a high estimate. Only 6.8% of the chemicals selected on the basis of exposure/production volume may be considered as likely to pose carcinogenic risks to humans.
Therefore, we predict that if all 75,000
chemicals in use were to be tested for carcinogenicity in the standard NTP bioassay,
significantly less than 50% would be carcinogenic in animals, and even a smaller
percentage (less than 5-10%) would need
further evaluation (Huff et al., submitted).
Relevance ofAnimal Studies to
Human Health
There are considerable molecular and cellular similarities in carcinogenic processes
among mammals, including rodents and
humans (31-35). For those agents identified as carcinogenic to humans, experiments in animals have shown remarkable
target organ concordance (36-40). Nearly
one-third of these agents confirmed as
causing cancer in humans were identified
first in experiments using laboratory animals (4,41-43). Nonetheless, Lijinsky (44)
reminds us that there are indeed differences in carcinogenic responses of various
species and strains to carcinogens, although
these differences have not yet been
explained (45).
Our evaluation and the knowledge that
all chemicals known to induce cancer in
humans that have been studied under adequate experimental protocols also cause
cancer in laboratory animals (24,25,36,
37,39,46) leads to the persuasive speculation that the obverse would often hold true:
chemicals shown to unequivocally induce
cancer in laboratory animals, especially in
multiple species, must be considered capable of causing cancer in humans. Obviously
further and detailed evaluations need to be
made. The International Agency for
Research on Cancer adopted this widely
accepted scientific view: "In the absence of
adequate data in humans, it is biologically
plausible and prudent to regard agents and
mixtures for which there is sufficient evidence of carcinogenicity in experimental
animals as if they presented a carcinogenic
risk to humans" (25). This public health
statement has and should continue to be
endorsed and used by those responsible for
protecting human health.