Solving the apparent diversity-accuracy dilemma
of recommender systems
Tao Zhou ∗
‡, Zolt´an Kuscsik ∗
§, Jian-Guo Liu ∗
‡ , Mat´uˇs Medo ∗, Joseph R. Wakeling ∗and Yi-Cheng Zhang
∗Department of Physics, University of Fribourg, Chemin du Mus´ee 3, CH-1700 Fribourg, Switzerland,†Department of Modern Physics and Nonlinear Science Center, University
of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China,‡Research Center for Complex Systems Science, University of Shanghai for Science and Technology, Shanghai 200093,
China, and §Department of Theoretical Physics and Astrophysics, P. J. ˇSaf´arik University, Park Angelinum 9, Koˇsice 04001, Slovak Republic
Submitted to Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
Recommender systems use data on past user preferences to predict
possible future likes and interests. A key challenge is that while the
most useful individual recommendations are to be found among diverse niche objects, the most reliably accurate results are obtained
by methods that recommend objects based on user or object similarity. In this paper we introduce a new algorithm speciﬁcally to
address the challenge of diversity and show how it can be used to
resolve this apparent dilemma when combined in an elegant hybrid
with an accuracy-focused algorithm. By tuning the hybrid appropriately we are able to obtain, without relying on any semantic or
context-speciﬁc information, simultaneous gains in both accuracy
and diversity of recommendations.
information ﬁltering |
recommender systems |
hybrid algorithms
etting what you want, as the saying goes, is easy: the
hard part is working out what it is that you want in the
ﬁrst place . Whereas information ﬁltering tools like search
engines typically require the user to specify in advance what
they are looking for , this challenge of identifying
user needs is the domain of recommender systems ,
which attempt to anticipate future likes and interests by mining data on past user activities.
Many diverse recommendation techniques have been developed, including collaborative ﬁltering , content-based
analysis , spectral analysis , latent semantic models
and Dirichlet allocation , and iterative self-consistent
reﬁnement . What most have in common is that
they are based on similarity, either of users or objects or both:
for example, e-commerce sites such as Amazon.com use the
overlap between customers’ past purchases and browsing activity to recommend products , while the TiVo digital
video system recommends TV shows and movies on the basis of correlations in users’ viewing patterns and ratings .
The risk of such an approach is that, with recommendations
based on overlap rather than diﬀerence, more and more users
will be exposed to a narrowing band of popular objects, while
niche items that might be very relevant will be overlooked.
The focus on similarity is compounded by the metrics used
to assess recommendation performance. A typical method of
comparison is to consider an algorithm’s accuracy in reproducing known user opinions that have been removed from a
test data set. An accurate recommendation, however, is not
necessarily a useful one: real value is found in the ability
to suggest objects users would not readily discover for themselves, that is, in the novelty and diversity of recommendation . Despite this, most studies of recommender systems
focus overwhelmingly on accuracy as the only important factor (for example, the Netﬂix Prize challenged researchers
to increase accuracy without any reference to novelty or personalization of results). Where diversiﬁcation is addressed, it
is typically as an adjunct to the main recommendation process, based on restrictive features such as semantic or other
context-speciﬁc information .
The clear concern is that an algorithm that focuses too
strongly on diversity rather than similarity is putting accuracy at risk. Our main focus in this paper is to show that this
apparent dilemma can in fact be resolved by an appropriate
combination of accuracy- and diversity-focused methods. We
begin by introducing a “heat-spreading” algorithm designed
speciﬁcally to address the challenge of diversity, with high
success both at seeking out novel items and at enhancing the
personalization of individual user recommendations. We show
how this algorithm can be coupled in a highly eﬃcient hybrid
with a diﬀusion-based recommendation method recently introduced by our group .
Using three diﬀerent datasets
from three distinct communities, we employ a combination of
accuracy- and diversity-related metrics to perform a detailed
study of recommendation performance and a comparison to
well-known methods.
We show that not only does the hybrid algorithm outperform other methods but that, without
relying on any semantic or context-speciﬁc information, it can
be tuned to obtain signiﬁcant and simultaneous gains in both
accuracy and diversity of recommendations.
Recommendation procedure. Since explicit ratings are not always available , the algorithms studied in this paper are
selected to work with very simple input data: u users, o objects, and a set of links between the two corresponding to the
objects collected by particular users (more explicit preference
indicators can be easily mapped to this “unary” form, albeit
losing information in the process, whereas the converse is not
so). These links can be represented by an o × u adjacency
matrix A where aαi = 1 if object α is collected by user i
and aαi = 0 otherwise (throughout this paper we use Greek
and Latin letters respectively for object- and user-related indices). Alternatively we can visualize the data as a bipartite
user-object network with u + o nodes, where the degrees of
object and user nodes, kα and ki, represent respectively the
number of users who have collected object α and the number
of objects collected by user i.
Recommendation scores are calculated for each user and
each of their uncollected objects, enabling the construction
of a sorted recommendation list with the most-recommended
items at the top. Diﬀerent algorithms generate diﬀerent object scores and thus diﬀerent rankings.
Reserved for Publication Footnotes
www.pnas.org — —
Issue Date
Issue Number
Algorithms. The heat spreading (HeatS) algorithm introduced
here employs a process analogous to heat diﬀusion across the
user-object network. This can be related to earlier work using a “heat conduction” algorithm to generate recommendations , but with some key diﬀerences. The earlier algorithm operates on an object-object network derived from
an explicit ratings structure, which washes out information
about novelty or popularity of objects and consequently limits the algorithm to considering questions of accuracy and not
diversity. The algorithm also requires multiple iterations to
converge to a steady state.
By contrast HeatS requires no
more than unary data, and generates eﬀective recommendations in a single pass.
HeatS works by assigning objects an initial level of “resource” denoted by the vector f (where fβ is the resource
possessed by object β), and then redistributing it via the
transformation ˜f = WHf, where
is a row-normalized o × o matrix representing a discrete analogy of a heat diﬀusion process. Recommendations for a given
user i are obtained by setting the initial resource vector f i
in accordance with the objects the user has already collected,
that is, by setting f i
β = aβi. The resulting recommendation
list of uncollected objects is then sorted according to ˜f i
descending order.
HeatS is a variant on an earlier probabilistic spreading
(ProbS) algorithm introduced by our group , which redistributes resource in a manner akin to a random walk process.
Whereas HeatS employs a row-normalized transition matrix,
that of ProbS is column-normalized,
with the resource redistribution and resulting object scores
then being given by ˜f = WPf = (WH)T f.
A visual representation of the resource spreading processes
of ProbS and HeatS is given in Fig. 1: in ProbS (a–c) the
initial resource placed on objects is ﬁrst evenly distributed
among neighboring users, and then evenly redistributed back
to those users’ neighboring objects. By contrast HeatS (d–f)
redistributes resource via an averaging procedure, with users
receiving a level of resource equal to the mean amount possessed by their neighboring objects, and objects then receiving back the mean of their neighboring users’ resource levels.
(Note that in ProbS total resource levels remain constant,
whereas in HeatS this is not so.) Due to the sparsity of real
datasets, these “physical” descriptions of the algorithms turn
out to be more computationally eﬃcient in practice than constructing and using the transition matrices WP and WH.
To provide a point of comparison we also employ two
methods well-known in the recommender systems literature.
Global ranking (GRank) recommends objects according to
their overall popularity, sorting them by their degree kα in descending order. While computationally cheap, GRank is not
personalized (apart from the exclusion of diﬀerent alreadycollected objects) and in most cases it performs poorly.
A much more eﬀective method is user similarity (USim), a
well known and widely used technique that recommends items
frequently collected by a given user’s “taste mates” . The
taste overlap between users i and j is measured by the cosine
similarity,
α=1 aαiaαj
and if user i has not yet collected object α, its recommendation score is given by
j=1 sijaαj
with the ﬁnal recommendation list for user i being sorted according to vαi in descending order.
Hybrid methods. A basic but very general means of creating
hybrid algorithms is to use weighted linear aggregation :
if methods X and Y report scores of xα and yα respectively,
then a hybrid score for object α can be given by
zα = (1 −λ)
where the normalizations address the fact that diﬀerent methods may produce scores on very diﬀerent scales. By varying
the parameter λ ∈ , we can tune the hybrid X+Y to favor
the characteristics of one method or the other.
Though easy to implement, this approach has the disadvantage of requiring two independent recommendation calculations, thus increasing computational cost. HeatS and ProbS,
however, are already fundamentally linked, with their recommendation processes being determined by diﬀerent normalizations of the same underlying matrix (in fact, their transition
matrices are the transpose of each other). A much more elegant hybrid can thus be achieved by incorporating the hybridization parameter λ into the transition matrix normalization:
where λ = 0 gives us the pure HeatS algorithm, and λ = 1
gives us pure ProbS (other hybrid forms are possible but give
inferior performance: Fig. S1 of supporting information [SI]
provides a comparison of the diﬀerent alternatives). In contrast to Eq. 5, this HeatS+ProbS hybrid has a computational
complexity of order no greater than ProbS or HeatS alone.
Note that while in the present work λ takes a universal value,
there is no reason in principle why we cannot use diﬀerent
values for each individual target user.
Datasets.Three diﬀerent datasets (Table 1) were used to
test the above algorithms, diﬀering both in subject matter (movies, music and internet bookmarks) and in quantitative aspects such as user/object ratios and link sparsity.
The ﬁrst (Netﬂix) is a randomly-selected subset of the huge
dataset provided for the Netﬂix Prize , while the other two
(RYM and Delicious) were obtained by downloading publiclyavailable data from the music ratings website RateYourMusic.com and the social bookmarking website Delicious.com
(taking care to anonymize user identity in the process).
While the Delicious data is inherently unary (a user has
either collected a web link or not), the raw Netﬂix and RYM
data contain explicit ratings on a 5-star scale.
A coarsegraining procedure was therefore used to transform these into
unary form: an object is considered to be collected by a user
only if the given rating is 3 or more. Sparseness of the datasets
(deﬁned as the number of links divided by the total number of
possible user-object pairs) is measured relative to these coarsegrained connections.
www.pnas.org — —
Footline Author
Recommendation performance metrics. To test a recommendation method on a dataset we remove at random 10% of the
links and apply the algorithm to the remainder to produce a
recommendation list for each user. We then employ four different metrics, two to measure accuracy in recovery of deleted
links (A) and two to measure recommendation diversity (D):
(A1) Recovery of deleted links, r. An accurate method will
clearly rank preferable objects more highly than disliked ones.
Assuming that users’ collected objects are indeed preferred,
deleted links should be ranked higher on average than the
other uncollected objects. So, if uncollected object α is listed
in place p for user i, the relative rank rαi = p/(o −ki) should
be smaller if α is a deleted link (where objects from places p1
to p2 have the same score, which happens often in practice,
we give them all the same relative ranking, 1
2[p1+p2]/[o−ki]).
Averaging over all deleted links we obtain a quantity, r, such
that the smaller its value, the higher the method’s ability to
recover deleted links.
(A2) Precision and recall enhancement, eP (L) and eR(L).
Since real users usually consider only the top part of the recommendation list, a more practical measure may be to consider di(L), the number of user i’s deleted links contained in
the top L places.
Depending on our concerns, we may be
interested either in how many of these top L places are occupied by deleted links, or how many of the user’s Di deleted
links have been recovered in this way. Averaging these ratios
di(L)/L and di(L)/Di over all users with at least one deleted
link, we obtain the mean precision and recall, P(L) and R(L),
of the recommendation process .
A still better perspective may be given by considering
these values relative to the precision and recall of random
recommendations, Prand(L) and Rrand(L). If user i has a total of Di deleted links, then P i
rand(L) = Di/(o −ki) ≈Di/o
(since in general o ≫ki) and hence averaging over all users,
Prand(L) = D/(ou), where D is the total number of deleted
links. By contrast the mean number of deleted links in the
top L places is given by LDi/(o −ki) ≈LDi/o and so
Rrand(L) = L/o. From this we can deﬁne the precision and
recall enhancement,
Prand(L) = P(L) · ou
Rrand(L) = R(L) · o
Results for recall are given in SI (Figs. S2 and S3), but
are similar in character to those shown here for precision.
(D1) Personalization, h(L). Our ﬁrst measure of diversity considers the uniqueness of diﬀerent users’ recommendation lists—that is, inter-user diversity. Given two users i and
j, the diﬀerence between their recommendation lists can be
measured by the inter-list distance,
hij(L) := 1 −qij(L)
where qij(L) is the number of common items in the top L
places of both lists:
identical lists thus have hij(L) = 0
whereas completely diﬀerent lists have hij(L) = 1. Averaging
hij(L) over all pairs of users with at least one deleted link
we obtain the mean distance h(L), for which greater or lesser
values mean respectively greater or lesser personalization of
users’ recommendation lists.
(D2) Surprisal/novelty, I(L). The second type of diversity
concerns the capacity of the recommender system to generate
novel and unexpected results—to suggest objects a user is
unlikely to already know about. To measure this we use the
self-information or “surprisal” of recommended objects,
which measures the unexpectedness of an object relative to its
global popularity. Given an object α, the chance a randomlyselected user has collected it is given by kα/u and thus its
self-information is Iα = log2(u/kα). From this we can calculate the mean self-information Ii(L) of each user’s top L
objects, and averaging over all users with at least one deleted
link we obtain the mean top-L surprisal I(L).
Note that unlike the metrics for accuracy, the diversityrelated measures could be averaged over all users regardless
of whether they have deleted links or not, but the ﬁnal results
do not diﬀer signiﬁcantly. Where metrics depend on L, diﬀerent choices result in shifts in the precise numbers but relative
performance diﬀerences between methods remain unchanged
so long as L ≪o. Extended results are available in SI (Figs.
S4 and S5); a value of L = 20 was chosen for the results displayed here in order to reﬂect the likely length of a practical
recommendation list.
Individual algorithms. A summary of the principal results for
all algorithms, metrics and datasets is given in Table 2.
ProbS is consistently the strongest performer with respect
to accuracy, with USim a close second, while both GRank and
HeatS perform signiﬁcantly worse (the latter reporting particularly bad performance with respect to precision enhancement). By contrast with respect to the diversity metrics HeatS
is by far the strongest performer: ProbS has some success with
respect to personalization, but along with USim and GRank
performs weakly where surprisal (novelty) is concerned.
That GRank has any personalization at all (h(L) > 0)
stems only from the fact that it does not recommend items
already collected, and diﬀerent users have collected diﬀerent
items. The diﬀerence in GRank’s performance between Net-
ﬂix, RYM and Delicious can be ascribed to the “blockbuster”
phenomenon common in movies, far less so with music and
web links: the 20 most popular objects in Netﬂix are each
collected by on average 31.7% of users, while for RYM the
ﬁgure is 7.2% and for Delicious only 5.6%.
The opposing performances of ProbS and HeatS—the
former favoring accuracy,
the latter personalization and
novelty—can be related to their diﬀerent treatment of popular
objects. The random-walk procedure of ProbS favors highlyconnected objects, whereas the averaging process of HeatS
favors objects with few links: for example, in the Delicious
dataset the average degree of users’ top 20 objects as returned
by ProbS is 346, while with HeatS it is only 2.2. Obviously the
latter will result in high surprisal values, and also greater personalization, as low-degree objects are more numerous and a
method that favors them has a better chance of producing different recommendation lists for diﬀerent users. On the other
hand randomly-deleted links are clearly more likely to point
to popular objects, and methods that favor low-degree objects
will therefore do worse; hence the indiscriminate but populist
GRank is able to outperform the novelty-favoring HeatS.
If we deliberately delete only links to low-degree objects,
the situation is reversed, with HeatS providing better accuracy, although overall performance of all algorithms deteriorates (Table 3 and Fig. S6). Hence, while populism can be a
cheap and easy way to get superﬁcially accurate results, it is
limited in scope: the most appropriate method can be determined only in the context of a given task or user need. The
result also highlights the very distinct and unusual character
of HeatS compared to other recommendation methods.
Hybrid methods. Given that diﬀerent algorithms serve diﬀerent purposes and needs, is it possible to combine two (or more)
in such a way as to obtain the best features of both? With
Footline Author
Issue Date
Issue Number
HeatS favoring diversity and ProbS accuracy, their hybrid
combination (Eq. 6) might be expected to provide a smooth
transition from one to the other. In fact, the situation is even
more favorable: while pure HeatS represents the optimum for
novelty, it is possible to obtain performance improvements
relative to all other metrics by tuning the hybridization parameter λ appropriately (Fig. 2). The accuracy of ProbS can
thus be maintained and even improved while simultaneously
attaining diversity close to or even exceeding that of HeatS.
Alternatively, diversity can be favored while minimizing the
cost in terms of accuracy.
Depending on the particular needs of a system and
U(r, eP , h, I, L) and choose λ to optimize it: Table 4 gives as
an example the percentage improvements that can be made,
relative to pure ProbS (λ = 1), if we choose λ to minimize
r. Shared improvements are obtained for all metrics except
with the Delicious dataset, where minimizing r has a negative
eﬀect on eP (L). However, from Fig. 2 we can see that even in
this case it is possible to choose a value of λ to simultaneously
improve all metrics relative to ProbS.
Although HeatS+ProbS provides the best performance
when taking into account all the metrics, other hybrids
(constructed using the more general method of Eq. 5) can
provide some valuable individual contributions (Fig. S7).
HeatS+USim behaves similarly to HeatS+ProbS, but with
generally smaller performance improvements. A more interesting hybrid is to combine the poorly-performing GRank with
either HeatS or ProbS. These combinations can have a dramatic eﬀect on link recovery: for RYM either can be tuned to
produce an improvement in r of almost 30% (relative to pure
ProbS), compared to only 6.8% for the HeatS+ProbS hybrid
(Table 4).
The explanation for these improvements stems from the
way in which ProbS and HeatS interact with sparse datasets.
Coverage of uncollected objects is limited to those sharing a
user in common with an object collected by the target user
(Fig. 1): all others receive a score of zero and so share a common (and large) relative rank, rαi = (o −1
2(Z −1))/(o −ki)
where Z is the number of objects with zero score. GRank,
with its universal coverage, is able to diﬀerentially rank these
objects and so lower their contributions to r. Consequently,
while incorporating it too strongly has a deleterious eﬀect on
the other metrics, a small GRank contribution can provide a
useful enhancement to recommendation coverage—notably in
“cold start” cases where little or nothing is known about a
Discussion
Recommender systems have at their heart some very simple and natural social processes.
Each one of us looks to
others for advice and opinions, learning over time who to
trust and whose suggestions to discount. The paradox is that
many of the most valuable contributions come not from close
friends but from people with whom we have only a limited
connection—“weak ties” who alert us to possibilities outside
our regular experience .
The technical challenges facing recommender systems involve similar paradoxes.
The most reliably accurate algorithms are those based on similarity and popularity of users
and objects, yet the most valuable recommendations are those
of niche items users are unlikely to ﬁnd for themselves .
In this paper we have shown how this apparent dilemma can
be resolved by an appropriate combination of diversity- and
accuracy-focused methods, using a hybrid algorithm that joins
a method with proven high accuracy with a new algorithm
dedicated speciﬁcally to the production of novel and personalized recommendations. Their combination allows not merely
a compromise between the two imperatives but allows us to
simultaneously increase both accuracy and diversity of recommendations.
By tuning the degree of hybridization the
algorithms can be tailored to many custom situations and requirements.
We expect these results to be general: while we have presented a particular set of algorithms and datasets here, other
recommender systems must face the same apparent dilemma
and we expect them to beneﬁt from a similar hybrid approach.
It is interesting to note that while the Netﬂix Prize focused
solely on accuracy, the winning entry in fact took a diversiﬁcation approach, in this case based on tracking the changes in
user opinions over time .
The algorithms presented here rely on no more than unary
data and can thus place diversity at the heart of the recommendation process while still being applicable to virtually any
dataset. More detailed sources of information can nevertheless be used to extend the recommendation process. Topical
information and other measures of item-item similarity can
be used to further diversify recommendation lists : usergenerated classiﬁcations such as tags may be useful here. The HeatS and ProbS algorithms, and hence their
hybrid, can be further customized by modifying the initial
allocation of resource to increase or decrease the inﬂuence of selected objects on the recommendation process. The
hybridization process itself can be extended by incorporating
techniques such as content-based or semantic analyses .
The ultimate measure of success for any recommender system is of course in the appreciation of its users, and in particular the ability of the system to serve their often very distinct
While in this paper we have optimized the hybrid
from a global perspective, there is no reason why it cannot be
tuned diﬀerently for each individual user—either by the system provider or by users themselves. This last consideration
opens the door to extensive future theoretical and empirical
research, bringing diversity and personalization not just to the
contents of recommendation lists, but to the recommendation
process itself.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We are grateful to Yi-Kuo Yu for useful comments and
conversations, and to two anonymous referees for their valuable feedback. This work
was supported by Swiss National Science Foundation grant 200020-121848, Swiss
State Ministry for Education and Research grant C05.0148 (Physics of Risk), and
National Natural Science Foundation of China grants 10635040 and 60744003. We
also acknowledge funding from the Liquid Publications and QLectives projects (EU
FET-Open grants 213360 and 231200) during the ﬁnal stages of this work.
1. Masum H, Zhang Y-C Manifesto for the reputation society. First Monday 9:
2. Hanani U, Shapira B, Shoval P Information ﬁltering: overview of issues, research and systems. User Model User-Adap Interact 11:203–259.
3. Brin S, Page L The anatomy of a large-scale hypertextual Web search engine.
Comput Netw ISDN Syst 30:107–117.
4. Kleinberg JM Authoritative sources in a hyperlinked environment. J ACM
46:604–632.
5. Belkin NJ Helping people ﬁnd what they don’t know. Commun ACM 43:58–61.
6. Goldberg D, Nichols D, Oki BM, Terry D Using collaborative ﬁltering to weave
an information tapestry. Commun ACM 35:61–70.
7. Resnick P, Varian HR Recommender systems. Commun ACM 40:56–58.
8. Adomavicius G, Tuzhilin A Toward the next generation of recommender systems: a survey of the state-of-the-art and possible extensions. IEEE Trans Knowl Data
Eng 17:734–749.
www.pnas.org — —
Footline Author
9. Schafer JB, Frankowski D, Herlocker J, Sen S Collaborative ﬁltering recommender systems. Lect Notes Comput Sci 4321:291–324.
10. Pazzani MJ, Billsus D Content-based recommendation systems. Lect Notes
Comput Sci 4321:325–341.
11. Goldberg K, Roeder T, Gupta D, Perkins C Eigentaste: a constant time collaborative ﬁltering algorithm. Inf Retr 4:133–151.
12. Maslov S, Zhang Y-C Extracting hidden information from knowledge networks.
Phys Rev Lett 87:248701.
13. Hofmann T Latent semantic models for collaborative ﬁltering. ACM Trans Inf
Syst 22:89–115.
14. Blei DM, Ng AY, Jordan MI Latent Dirichlet allocation. J Mach Learn Res
3:993–1022.
15. Laureti P, Moret L, Zhang Y-C, Yu Y-K Information ﬁltering via iterative
reﬁnement. Europhys Lett 75:1006–1012.
16. de Kerchove C, Van Dooren P Reputation systems and optimization. SIAM
News 41 (March).
17. Ren J, Zhou T, Zhang Y-C Information ﬁltering via self-consistent reﬁnement.
Europhys Lett 82:58007.
18. Schafer JB, Konstan JA, Riedl J E-commerce recommendation applications.
Data Min Knowl Disc 5:115–153.
19. Linden G, Smith B, York J Amazon.com recommendations: item-to-item collaborative ﬁltering. IEEE Internet Comput 7:76–80.
20. Ali K, van Stam W TiVo: making show recommendations using a distributed
collaborative ﬁltering architecture. Proc 10th ACM SIGKDD Int Conf Knowl Disc
Data Min 394–401.
21. Herlocker JL, Konstan JA, Terveen K, Riedl JT Evaluating collaborative ﬁltering recommender systems. ACM Trans Inf Syst 22:5–53.
22. Bennett J, Lanning S The Netﬂix prize. Proc KDD Cup Workshop 2007 3–6.
23. Burke R Hybrid recommender systems: survey and experiments. User Model
User-Adap Interact 12:331–370.
24. Ziegler C-N, McNee SM, Konstan JA, Lausen G Improving recommendation
lists through topic diversiﬁcation. Proc 14th Int World Wide Web Conf 22–32.
25. Zhou T, Ren J, Medo M, Zhang Y-C Bipartite network projection and personal
recommendation. Phys Rev E 76:046115.
26. Claypool M, Brown D, Le P, Waseda M Inferring user interest. IEEE Internet
Comput 5:32–39.
27. Zhang Y-C, Blattner M, Yu Y-K Heat conduction process on community networks as a recommendation model. Phys Rev Lett 99:154301.
28. Stojmirovi´c A, Yu Y-K Information ﬂow in interaction networks. J Comput Biol
14:1115–1143.
29. Swets JA Information retrieval systems. Science 141:245–250.
30. Tribus M Thermostatics and Thermodynamics (Van Nostrand, Princeton, NJ).
31. Granovetter M The strength of weak ties. Am J Sociol 78:1360–1380.
32. Koren Y The BellKor solution to the Netﬂix Grand Prize; T¨oscher A, Jahrer
M, Bell R The BigChaos solution to the Netﬂix Grand Prize; Piotte M, Chabbert M The Pragmatic Theory solution to the Netﬂix Grand Prize. Technical
reports submitted to the Netﬂix Grand Prize.
33. Hotho A, J¨aschke R, Schmitz C, Stumme G Information retrieval in folksonomies: search and ranking. Lect Notes Comput Sci 4011:411–426.
34. Cattuto C, Loreto V, Pietronero L Semiotic dynamics and collaborative tagging.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104:1461–1464.
35. Zhang Z-K, Zhou T, Zhang Y-C Personalized recommendation via integrated
diﬀusion on user-item-tag tripartite graphs. Physica A 389:179–186.
36. Zhou T, Jiang L-L, Su R-Q, Zhang Y-C Eﬀect of initial conﬁguration on
network-based recommendation. Europhys Lett 81:58004.
Footline Author
Issue Date
Issue Number
1. The HeatS (a,b,c) and ProbS (d,e,f) algorithms (Eqs. 1 and 2) at work on the
bipartite user-object network. Objects are shown as squares, users as circles, with the target
user indicated by the shaded circle. While the HeatS algorithm redistributes resource via a
nearest-neighbour averaging process, the ProbS algorithm works by an equal distribution of
resource among nearest neighbours.
Table 1. Properties of the tested datasets.
1.17 · 10−2
3.37 · 10−3
5.30 · 10−4
Table 2. Performance of the recommendation algorithms according to each of the four metrics: recovery of deleted links,
precision enhancement, personalization, and surprisal.
Table 3. Performance of individual recommendation algorithms for a probe set
consisting of only low-degree (k < 100)
Table 4. Tuning the HeatS+ProbS hybridization parameter λ to optimize for r produces simultaneous
improvements in other metrics. The relative changes
are given in percentage terms against the pure ProbS
algorithm.
www.pnas.org — —
Footline Author
Fig. 2. Performance of the HeatS+ProbS hybrid algorithm (Eq. 6) on the three diﬀerent datasets. By varying the hybridization parameter between pure HeatS (λ = 0)
and pure ProbS (λ = 1) it is possible to gain simultaneous performance enhancements with respect to both accuracy (r and eP (L)) and diversity (h(L) and I(L)) of
recommendations. Tuning λ in this fashion allows the algorithm to be customized and optimized for diﬀerent user or community needs.
Footline Author
Issue Date
Issue Number
Supporting information
Zhou et al., “Solving the apparent diversity-accuracy dilemma
of recommender systems”
Figure S1. Elegant hybrids of the HeatS and ProbS algorithms can be created in several ways besides that given in Eq. 6 of
the paper: for example W ′
j=1 aαjaβj/ki, or W ′′
(1−λ)kα+λkβ
j=1 aαjaβj/kj. While W ′
αβ performs well
only with respect to I(20), Eq. 6 and W ′′
αβ both have their advantages. However, Eq. 6 is somewhat easier to tune to diﬀerent
requirements since it varies more slowly and smoothly with λ. The results shown here are for the RateYourMusic dataset.
Figure S2. Precision P(L) and recall R(L) provide complementary but contrasting measures of accuracy: the former considers
what proportion of selected objects (in our case, objects in the top L places of the recommendation list) are relevant, the latter
measures what proportion of relevant objects (deleted links) are selected. Consequently, recall (red) grows with L, whereas
precision (blue) decreases. Here we compare precision and recall for the HeatS+ProbS hybrid algorithm on the Delicious and
Netﬂix datasets. While quantitatively diﬀerent, the qualitative performance is very similar for both measures.
www.pnas.org — —
Footline Author
Figure S3. A more elegant comparison can be obtained by considering precision and recall enhancement, that is, their values
relative to that of randomly-sorted recommendations: eP(L) = P(L) · ou/D and eR(L) = R(L) · o/L (Eqs. 7a, b in the paper).
Again, qualitative performance is close, and both of these measures decrease with increasing L, reﬂecting the inherent diﬃculty
of improving either measure given a long recommendation list.
probe users only
probe users only
Figure S4. Comparison of the diversity-related metrics h(20) and I(20) when two diﬀerent averaging procedures are used:
averaging only over users with at least one deleted link (as displayed in the paper) and averaging over all users. The diﬀerent procedures do not alter the results qualitatively and make little quantitative diﬀerence. The results shown are for the
RateYourMusic dataset.
Figure S5. Comparison of performance metrics for diﬀerent lengths L of recommendation lists: L = 10 (red), L = 20 (green)
and L = 50 (blue). Strong quantitative diﬀerences are observed for precision enhancement eP (L) and personalization h(L),
but their qualitative behaviour remains unchanged. Much smaller diﬀerences are observed for surprisal I(L).
Footline Author
Issue Date
Issue Number
original probe
degree < 100
degree < 200
original probe
degree < 100
degree < 200
original probe
degree < 100
degree < 200
original probe
degree < 100
degree < 200
Figure S6. Our accuracy-based metrics all measure in one way or another the recovery of links deleted from the dataset. Purely
random deletion will inevitably favor high-degree (popular) objects, with their greater proportion of links, and consequently
methods that favor popular items will appear to provide higher accuracy. To study this eﬀect, we created two special probe sets
consisting of links only to objects whose degree was less than some threshold (either 100 or 200): links to these objects were
deleted with probability 0.5, while links to higher-degree objects were left untouched. The result is a general decrease in accuracy
for all algorithms—unsurprisingly, since rarer links are inherently harder to recover—but also a reversal of performance, with
the low-degree-favoring HeatS now providing much higher accuracy than the high-degree-oriented ProbS, USim and GRank.
The results shown here are for the Netﬂix dataset.
HeatS + ProbS
HeatS + USim
HeatS + GRank
ProbS + GRank
HeatS + ProbS
HeatS + USim
HeatS + GRank
ProbS + GRank
HeatS + ProbS
HeatS + USim
HeatS + GRank
ProbS + GRank
HeatS + ProbS
HeatS + USim
HeatS + GRank
ProbS + GRank
Figure S7. In addition to HeatS+ProbS, various other hybrids were created and tested using the method of Eq. 5 in the paper,
where for hybrid X+Y, λ = 0 corresponds to pure X and λ = 1 pure Y. The results shown here are for the Netﬂix dataset.
The HeatS+USim hybrid oﬀers similar but weaker performance compared to HeatS+ProbS; combinations of GRank with other
methods produce signiﬁcant improvements in r, the recovery of deleted links, but show little or no improvement of precision
enhancement eP(L) and poor results in diversity-related metrics. We can conclude that the proposed HeatS+ProbS hybrid is
not only computationally convenient but also performs better than combinations of the other methods studied.
www.pnas.org — —
Footline Author