ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 04 June 2019
doi: 10.3389/frai.2019.00008
Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org
June 2019 | Volume 2 | Article 8
Edited by:
Dror Y. Kenett,
Johns Hopkins University,
United States
Reviewed by:
J. D. Opdyke,
Allstate Insurance Company,
United States
Aparna Gupta,
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute,
United States
*Correspondence:
Daniel Felix Ahelegbey
 
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Finance,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Received: 26 February 2019
Accepted: 13 May 2019
Published: 04 June 2019
Ahelegbey DF, Giudici P and
Hadji-Misheva B Factorial
Network Models to Improve P2P
Credit Risk Management.
Front. Artif. Intell. 2:8.
doi: 10.3389/frai.2019.00008
Factorial Network Models to Improve
P2P Credit Risk Management
Daniel Felix Ahelegbey 1*, Paolo Giudici 2 and Branka Hadji-Misheva 3
1 Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Boston University, Boston, MA, United States, 2 Department of Economics and
Management, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 3 Zurich University of Applied Sciences (ZHAW), Zurich, Switzerland
This paper investigates how to improve statistical-based credit scoring of SMEs involved
in P2P lending. The methodology discussed in the paper is a factor network-based
segmentation for credit score modeling. The approach ﬁrst constructs a network of
SMEs where links emerge from comovement of latent factors, which allows us to
segment the heterogeneous population into clusters. We then build a credit score
model for each cluster via lasso-type regularization logistic regression. We compare
our approach with the conventional logistic model by analyzing the credit score of over
1,5000 SMEs engaged in P2P lending services across Europe. The result reveals that
credit risk modeling using our network-based segmentation achieves higher predictive
performance than the conventional model.
Keywords: credit risk, factor models, FinTech, peer-to-peer lending, credit scoring, lasso, segmentation
1. INTRODUCTION
Issuance of loans by traditional ﬁnancial institutions, such as banks, to other ﬁrms and individuals,
is often associated with major risks. The failure of loan recipients to honor their obligation at
the time of maturity leaves the banks vulnerable and aﬀects their operations. The risk associated
with such transactions is referred to as credit risk. It is well known that some percentage of these
non-performing loans are eventually imputed to economic losses. To minimize such risk exposures,
various methods have been extensively discussed in the credit risk literature to enable credit-issuing
institutions to undertake a thorough assessment to classify loan applicants into risky and non-risky
customers. Some of these methods range from logistic and linear probability models to decision
trees, neural networks and support vector machines. A conventional individual-level reduced-form
approach is the credit scoring model which attributes a score of credit-worthiness to each loan
applicant based on the available history of their ﬁnancial characteristics. See Altman for
some pioneer works on corporate bankruptcy prediction models using accounting-based measures
as variables. For a comprehensive review on credit scoring models, see Alam et al. .
Recent advancements gradually transforming the traditional economic and ﬁnancial system is
the emergence of digital-based systems. Such systems present a paradigm shift from traditional
infrastructural systems to technological (digital) systems. Financial technological (“FinTech”)
companies are gradually gaining ground in major developed economies across the world. The
emergence of Peer-to-Peer (P2P) platforms is a typical example of a FinTech system. The P2P
platform aims at facilitating credit services by connecting individual lenders with individual
borrowers without the interference of traditional banks as intermediaries. Such platform serves
as a digital ﬁnancial market and an alternative to the traditional physical ﬁnancial market.
P2P platforms signiﬁcantly improve the customer experience and the speed of the service and
reduce costs to both individual borrowers and lenders as well as small business owners. Despite
Ahelegbey et al.
Factorial Networks in P2P Lending
the various advantages, P2P systems inherit some of the
challenges of traditional credit risk management. In addition,
they are characterized by the asymmetry of information and
by a strong interconnectedness among their users that makes distinguishing healthy and risky
credit applicants diﬃcult, thus aﬀecting credit issuers. There is,
therefore, a need to explore methods that can help improve
credit scoring of individual or companies that engage in P2P
credit services.
investigates
factor-network-based
segmentation can be employed to improve the statistical-based
credit score for small and medium enterprises (SMEs) involved
in P2P lending. The approach is to ﬁrst constructs a network
of SMEs where links emerge from comovement of the latent
factors that drive the observed ﬁnancial characteristics. The
network structure then allows us to segment the heterogeneous
population into two sub-groups of connected and nonconnected clusters. We then build a credit score model for each
sub-population via lasso-type regularization logistic regression.
The contribution to the literature of this paper is manifold.
Firstly, we extend the ideas contained in the factor networkbased classiﬁcation of Ahelegbey et al. to a more realistic
setting, characterized by a large number of observations which,
when links between them are the main object of analysis, becomes
extremely challenging.
Secondly, we extend the network-based scoring model
proposed in Giudici et al. to a setting characterized
by a large number of explanatory variables. The variables
are selected via lasso-type regularization and, then, summarized by factor scores.
Thus, we contribute to network-based models for credit risk
quantiﬁcation. Network models have been shown to be eﬀective
in gauging the vulnerabilities among ﬁnancial institutions for
risk transmission , and
a scheme to complement micro-prudential supervision with
macro-prudential surveillance to ensure ﬁnancial stability .
Recent application of networks have been shown to improve
loan default predictions and capturing information that reﬂects
underlying common features .
Thirdly, our empirical application contributes to modeling
credit risk in SMEs particularly engaged in P2P lending. For
related works on P2P lending via logistic regression . We model the credit
score of over 15,000 SMEs engaged in P2P credit services across
Southern Europe. We compare the performance of our networkbased segmentation credit score model (NS-CSM) with the
conventional single credit score model (CSM). We show via our
empirical results that our network-based segmentation presents a
more eﬃcient scheme that achieves higher performance than the
conventional approach.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents
the factor network segmentation methodology and the lassotype regularization for credit scoring. Section 3 discusses the
empirical application of our segmentation approach against the
conventional single model.
2. METHODOLOGY
We present the formulation and inference of a latent factor
network to improve credit scoring and model estimation. Our
objective is to analyze the characteristics of the borrowers to build
a model that predicts the likelihood of their default.
2.1. Logistic Model
Let Y be a vector of independent observations of the loan status
of n ﬁrms, such that Yi = 1 if ﬁrm-i has defaulted on its loan
obligation, and zero otherwise. Furthermore, let X = {Xij}, i =
1, . . . , n, j = 1, . . . , p, be a matrix of n observations with p
ﬁnancial characteristic variables or predictors. The conventional
parameterization of the conditional distribution of Y given X is
the logistic model with log-odds ratio given by
= β0 + Xiβ
β0 is a constant term,
(β1, . . . , βp)′ is a p × 1 vector of coeﬃcients and Xi is the i-th
2.2. Decomposition of Data Matrix by
The dataset X can be considered as points of n-institutions in
a p-dimensional space. It can also be interpreted at observed
outcomes driven by some underlying ﬁrm characteristics. More
speciﬁcally, X can be expressed as a factor model given by
X = FW + ε
where F is n×k matrix of latent factors, W is p×k matrix of factor
loadings, ε is n × p matrix of errors uncorrelated with F. The
error term ε is typically assumed to be multivariate normal but F
in general case need not be multivariate normal . Lastly, k < p is the number of factors required to
summarize the pattern of correlations in the observed data matrix
X. In the context of our application, we set k to be the number of
factors that account for approximately 95% of the variation in X.
2.3. Factor Network-Based Segmentation
We present the construction of network structure for the
segmentation of the population. Following the literature on
graphical models , we represent the network structure as
an undirected binary matrix, G ∈{0, 1}n×n, where Gij represents
the presence or absence of a link between nodes i and j. We
construct G via similarity of the latent ﬁrm characteristics, such
that Gij = 1 if the latent coordinates of ﬁrm-i are strongly related
to ﬁrm-j, and zero otherwise.
Given the latent factors matrix, F, we construct a network
where the marginal probability of a link between nodes-i and j by
γij = P(Gij = 1|F) = 8[θ + (FF′)ij]
Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org
June 2019 | Volume 2 | Article 8
Ahelegbey et al.
Factorial Networks in P2P Lending
where γij ∈(0, 1), 8 is the standard normal cumulative density
function, θ ∈R is a network density parameter, and (FF′)ij is the
i-th row and the j-th column of FF′. Under the assumption that
G is undirected, it follows that γij = P(Gij = 1|F) = P(Gji =
1|F) = γji. We validate the link between nodes-i and j in G by
Gij = 1(γij > γ )
where 1(γij > γ ) is the indicator function, i.e., unity if γij > γ
and zero otherwise, and γ ∈(0, 1) is a threshold parameter.
By deﬁnition, the parameters θ and γ control the density of G.
Following Ahelegbey et al. , we set θ = 8−1 .
2.4.1. Lasso
The lasso estimator solves a penalized loglikelihood function given by
Yi(β0 + Xiβ) −log
 1 + exp(β0 + Xiβ)
where n is the number of observations, p the number of
predictors, and λ is the penalty term, such that large values of
λ shrinks a large number of the coeﬃcients toward zero.
2.4.2. Adaptive Lasso
The adaptive lasso estimator is an extension of the
lasso that solves
Yi(β0 + Xiβ) −log
 1 + exp(β0 + Xiβ)
where wj is a weight penalty such that wj = 1/| ˆβj|v, with ˆβj as the
ordinary least squares (or ridge regression) estimate and v > 0.
2.4.3. Elastic-Net
The elastic-net estimator solves
the following
Yi(β0 + Xiβ) −log
 1 + exp(β0 + Xiβ)
(α|βj| + (1 −α)β2
where α ∈(0, 1) is an additional penalty such that when α = 1 we
a lasso estimator (L1 penalty), and when α = 0 a ridge estimator
(L2 penalty). For the elastic-net estimator, we set α = 0.5 giving
equal weight to the L1 and L2 regularization.
2.4.4. Adaptive Elastic-Net
The adaptive elastic-net estimator 
combines the additional penalties of the adaptive lasso and the
TABLE 1 | Description of the ﬁnancial ratios with summary of mean statistics
according to default status.
Formula (description)
(Total Assets - Shareholders
Funds)/Shareholders Funds
(Longterm debt + Loans)/Shareholders
Total Assets/Total Liabilities
Current Assets/Current Liabilities
(Current Assets - Current assets:
stocks)/Current Liabilities
(Shareholders Funds + Non current
liabilities)/Fixed Assets
EBIT/Interest paid
(Proﬁt (loss) before tax + Interest
paid)/Total Assets
P/L after tax/Shareholders Funds
Operating Revenues/Total Assets
Sales/Total Assets
Interest Paid/(Proﬁt before taxes + Interest
EBITDA/Interest Paid
EBITDA/Operating Revenues
EBITDA/Sales
Constraint EBIT
Constraint PL before tax
Constraint Financial PL
Constraint P/L for period
Trade Payables/Operating Revenues
Trade Receivables/Operating Revenues
Inventories/Operating Revenues
Total Revenue
Industry Classiﬁcation on NACE code
Total number of institutions (%)
13413(89.15%) 1632(10.85%)
Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org
June 2019 | Volume 2 | Article 8
Ahelegbey et al.
Factorial Networks in P2P Lending
elastic-net to solve the following
Yi(β0 + Xiβ) −log
 1 + exp(β0 + Xiβ)
(αwj|βj| + (1 −α)β2
In the empirical work, we focus on estimating the credit score
using the four lasso-type regularization methods. We select the
regularization parameter using 10-fold cross-validation on a grid
of λ values for the penalized logistic regression problem. Two
λ’s are widely considered in the literature, i.e., λ.min and λ.1se.
The former is the value of the λ that minimizes the mean
square cross-validated errors, while the latter is the λ value that
corresponds to one standard error from the minimum mean
square cross-validated errors. Our preliminary analysis shows
that λ.1se produces a larger penalty that is too restrictive in the
sense that we lose almost all the regressors. Although our goal
is to encourage a sparse credit scoring model for the purpose of
interpretability, we do not want to impose too much sparsity that
renders the majority of the features insigniﬁcant. Thus, we rather
choose λ.min over λ.1se. For the additional penalty terms, we set
α = 0.5, v = 2, and ˆβj as the ridge regression estimate.
TABLE 2 | The eigenvalues of the singular value decomposition to determine the
factors to retain.
Eigenvalue
Variance explained (%)
Cumulative (%)
3. APPLICATION
3.1. Data: Description and Summary
Statistics
To illustrate the eﬀectiveness of the application of factor network
methodology in credit scoring analysis, we obtained data from
the European External Credit Assessment Institution (ECAI)
on 15045 small-medium enterprises engaged in Peer-to-Peer
lending on digital platforms across Southern Europe.
FIGURE 1 | A graphical representation of the estimated factor network. (A)
shows the structural representation of the factor network for threshold
γ = 0.05, and (B) depicts the connected sub-population only. The nodes in
red-color are defaulted class of companies and green-color coded nodes are
non-defaulted class of companies. (A) Network Structure of All Institutions. (B)
Network of Connected Component.
TABLE 3 | Summary statistic of connected and non-connected sub-population
obtained from the factor network-based segmentation for threshold values of
γ = {0.05, 0.1}.
Non-conn-sub
Non-Default
Non-Default
Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org
June 2019 | Volume 2 | Article 8
Ahelegbey et al.
Factorial Networks in P2P Lending
TABLE 4 | Estimated coefﬁcients from lasso (top left), adaptive lasso (top right), elastic-net (bottom left) and adaptive elastic-net (bottom right).
NS-CSM(NC)
NS-CSM(NC)
Adaptive lasso
Elastic-net
Adaptive elastic-net
CSM is the benchmark credit score model, NS-CSM(C) is the network segmented connected sub-population credit score model, and NS-CSM(NC) is the network segmented
non-connected sub-population credit score model, estimated for threshold value γ = 0.1.
Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org
June 2019 | Volume 2 | Article 8
Ahelegbey et al.
Factorial Networks in P2P Lending
The observation on each institution is composed of 24
ﬁnancial characteristic ratios constructed from oﬃcial ﬁnancial
information recorded in 2015. Table 1 presents a description
of the ﬁnancial ratios with summary of mean statistics of the
institutions grouped according to their default status. In all, the
data consists of 1,632 (10.85%) defaulted institutions and 13,413
(89.15%) non-defaulted companies.
3.2. Decomposition of the Observed Data
Matrix by Factors
To estimate the underlying factors that drive the observed
data matrix, we decompose the matrix of observed ﬁnancial
characteristics via a singular value decomposition given by,
X = UDV = FW + ε
where U and V are orthonormal, and D = 31/2 is a diagonal
matrix of non-negative and decreasing singular values, with 3
as the diagonal matrix of the non-zero eigenvalues of X′X and
TABLE 5 | Number of selected variables of the four methods.
Adaptive lasso
Elastic-net
elastic-net
NS-CSM(NC)
XX′. U is n × p, D is p × p and V is p × p. Following the
error approximation criteria, we obtain the factor matrix by,
F = Un,k Dk,k and W = Vk,p, where Un,k is n×k matrix composed
of the ﬁrst k columns of U, k < p, Dk,k is k×k matrix comprising
the ﬁrst k columns and rows of D, and Vk,p is k × p matrix
of factor loadings. The matrix F can therefore be interpreted
as a projection of X onto the eigenspace spanned by Un,k. We
determine k by observing the number of eigenvalues associated
with the largest variance matrix. Table 2 shows the eigenvalues
of the singular value decomposition to determine the factors
to retain. The eigenvalues reported are the normalized squared
diagonal terms of D. From the table, we set k = 17 since the ﬁrst
17 eigenvalues explain about 95% of the total variation in X.
3.3. Factor Network Analysis
We use the estimated factor matrix, F, to construct the network
for the segmentation of the companies. For purposes of graphical
representations and to keep the companies name anonymous,
we report the estimated network by representing the group
of institutions with color-codes. The defaulted companies are
represented in a red color code, and non-defaulted companies in
the green color code (see Figure 1). Table 3 reports the summary
statistics of the estimated network in terms of the defaultstatus composition of the SMEs. For robustness purposes, we
compare the results obtained with a threshold value γ = 0.05
against γ = 0.10.
The result for the threshold γ = 0.05 of Table 3 shows that
the connected sub-population is composed of 4,305 companies
FIGURE 2 | ROC curves of the four methods. CSM is the benchmark model, NS-CSM(C) is the network segmented connected sub-population model, and
NS-CSM(NC) is the network segmented non-connected sub-population model, estimated for threshold values of γ = {0.05, 0.1}.
Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org
June 2019 | Volume 2 | Article 8
Ahelegbey et al.
Factorial Networks in P2P Lending
which constitute 28.6% of the full sample. The non-connected
sub-population is composed of 10,740 (71.4%). The percentage
of the defaulted class of companies are 22.4 and 6.2% among
the connected- and non-connected sub-population, respectively.
We notice that higher threshold values (say γ = 0.1) decrease
(increase) the total number of connected (non-connected)
sub-population and vice versa. Such higher threshold values
also lead to a lower (higher) number of defaulted class of
connected (non-connected) SMEs but (and) constituting a higher
percentage of the defaulted population. Figure 1 presents the
graphical representation of the estimated factor network with
the sub-population of defaulted and non-defaulted companies
color coded as red and green, respectively. Figure 1A shows
the structural representation of both connected and nonconnected sub-population while Figure 1B depicts the structure
of connected sub-population only.
3.4. Credit Score Modeling
We compare the lasso, adaptive lasso, elastic-net, and adaptive
elastic-net variable selection methods to model the credit score of
the listed companies in our dataset. To estimate the models, we
standardized each series to a zero mean and unit variance. Table 4
reports the variable selection and estimated coeﬃcients of the
four methods. The column CSM represents the benchmark credit
scoring model, NS-CSM(C) - the network segmented connected
sub-population credit scoring model, and NS-CSM(NC) for
the network segmented non-connected sub-population credit
scoring model. The top left panel represents the lasso method, the
adaptive lasso is on the top right panel, elastic-net at the bottom
left and adaptive elastic-net at the bottom right.
Table 5 reports the number of variables selected by each of the
four competing methods for the credit score model estimation.
From the table, the elastic-net is the least parsimonious, followed
by the lasso, and lastly, the adaptive elastic-net and adaptive
lasso are the most parsimonious. From Tables 4, 5, we observed
a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the number of selected explanatory
variables for the benchmark model and the network segmented
TABLE 6 | Comparing area under the ROC curve (AUC) of the four methods.
Adaptive lasso
Elastic-net
elastic-net
NS-CSM(γ = 0.05)
NS-CSM(γ = 0.1)
models. More precisely, the former model the credit score of a
given company by using more variables while the latter on the
other hand uses a signiﬁcantly lower number of variables. The
similar results across the four variable selection methods, given
their similarities, is not terribly surprising. But they do indicate
that the general approach appears to be robust in this setting,
which was the main purpose of the testing. The network-based
segmentation framework is therefore more parsimonious than
the benchmark full population credit score model, and this helps
in interpretability.
3.5. Comparing Default Predicting
We analyzed the performance of the models by splitting the
sample into 70% training and 30% testing sample. We now
compare the default prediction accuracy of the models in terms
of the standard area under the curve (AUC) derived from
the receiver operator characteristic (ROC) curve. The AUC
depicts the true positive rate (TPR) against the false positive
rate (FPR) depending on some threshold. TPR is the number
of correct positive predictions divided by the total number of
positives. FPR is the ratio of false positives predictions overall
negatives. See Figure 2 for the plot of the ROC curve for the
competing methods.
The comparison of the ROC curves from the competing
methods shows that the CSM (in red) lies below the rest. Clearly,
the curves of NS-CSM (γ
= 0.1) depicted in green seems
to dominate the others. The summary of the area under the
ROC curve reported in Table 6 shows that NS-CSM (γ = 0.1)
is ranked ﬁrst, followed by NS-CSM (γ
0.05), and the
lowest AUC is obtained by the CSM. Overall, in terms of default
predictive accuracy, the result of the AUC shows the NS-CSM
outperforms the CSM, on average by two percentage points. This
is an advantage that can be further increased considering as the
cut-oﬀthe observed default percentages, which are diﬀerent in
the two samples.
We investigate whether the AUC of the network segmented
model is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the benchmark model for
the four methods. We applied the DeLong test to investigate the pairwise comparison of the AUC of
the benchmark model (i.e., CSM) and that of the NS-CSM
= {0.05, 0.1}. We perform these tests under the nullhypotheses that H0: AUC (CSM) ≥AUC (NS-CSM) and the
alternative hypotheses, H1: AUC (CSM) < AUC (NS-CSM).
Table 7 reports the one-sided statistical test of the AUC of the
TABLE 7 | AUC of the benchmark model relative to the network segmented models under the four methods.
Signiﬁcance
Signiﬁcance
Adaptive lasso
NS-CSM(γ = 0.05)
NS-CSM(γ = 0.1)
Elastic-net
Adaptive elastic-net
NS-CSM(γ = 0.05)
NS-CSM(γ = 0.1)
Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org
June 2019 | Volume 2 | Article 8
Ahelegbey et al.
Factorial Networks in P2P Lending
benchmark model relative to the network segmented models. The
result of the De Long test shows that while the ROC of CSM
is not statistically diﬀerent from that of NS-CSM(γ = 0.05),
the diﬀerence between the ROC of NS-CSM(γ = 0.1) and the
benchmark (CSM) is statistically signiﬁcant at 90% conﬁdence
level for all four methods.
In conclusion, our proposed factor network approach to credit
score modeling presents an eﬃcient framework to analyze the
interconnections among the borrowers of a peer to peer platform
and provides a way to segment a heterogeneous population
into clusters with more homogeneous characteristics. The results
show that the lasso logistic model for credit scoring leads to
better identiﬁcation of the signiﬁcant set of relevant ﬁnancial
characteristic variables, thereby producing a more interpretable
model, especially when combined with the segmentation of
the population via the factor network-based approach. These
empirical results are promising, but certainly not deﬁnitive. More
research is required to determine whether the observed ‘lift’
truly is signiﬁcant rather than just an artifact of random chance
or spurious correlation, especially given the fact that these pvalues are not calibrated in any way and
Calabrese and Giudici . Further research may include a
Bayesian approach, as in Figini and Giudici and Giudici
 . We therefore ﬁnd evidence of a modest improvement in
the default predictive performance of our model compared to the
conventional approach.
4. CONCLUSION
This paper improves credit risk management of SMEs engaged
in P2P credit services by proposing a factor network-based
approach to segment a heterogeneous population into a cluster
of homogeneous sub-populations and estimating a credit
score model on the clusters using a lasso-type regularization
logistic model.
We demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of our approach through
empirical applications analyzing the probability of default of
over 15,000 SMEs involved in P2P lending across Europe.
We compare the results from our model with the one
obtained with standard single credit score methods. We
to obtain sub-population clusters such that the resulting
models associated with these clusters are more parsimonious
than the conventional full population approach, leading to
better interpretability and to a modest improved default
predictive performance.
DATA AVAILABILITY
All datasets generated for this study are included in the
manuscript and/or the supplementary ﬁles.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
In this manuscript, all the authors investigated how to improve
the credit scoring of SMEs involved in P2P lending via a
factor network-based segmentation method. The contribution
of this work is manifold. DA extended a recently proposed
concept of factor network-based classiﬁcation to a more realistic
setting. PG contributed to network-based models for credit risk
quantiﬁcation using a lasso logistic regression. BH-M presented
an application of our approach to model the credit score
of over 15,000 SMEs engaged in P2P credit services across
Southern Europe.
Funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research
and innovation programme under grant agreement No. 825215
 .