Lecture Notes in
Mathematics
Edited by A. Oold and B. Eckmann
8ubseries: Nankai Institute of Mathematics, Tianjin, P. R. China
8.8. Chern
8.8. Chern (Ed.)
Partial Differential Equations
Proceedings of a Symposium held in
Tianjin, June 23 - July 5, 1986
Springer-Verlag
Berlin Heidelberg NewYork London Paris Tokyo
Shiing-shen Chern
Mathematical Sciences Research Institute
1000 Centennial Drive
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
Mathematics Subject Classification : 35C, 35H, 35J, 35K, 35L, 35S, 53C,
ISBN 3-540-19097-X Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg New York
ISBN 0-387-19097-X Springer-Verlag New York Berlin Heidelberg
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved, whether the whole or part of the material
is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, re-use of illustrations, recitation,
broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in other ways, and storage in data banks. Duplication
of this publication or parts thereof is only permitted under the provisions of the German Copyright
Law of September 9, 1965, in its version of June 24, 1985, and a copyright fee must always be
paid. Violations fall under the prosecution act of the German Copyright Law.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 1988
Printed in Germany
Printing and binding: Druckhaus Beltz, Hemsbach/Bergstr.
2146/3140-543210
This volume contains a selection of papers presented at the 7th symposium on
differential geometry and differential equations (=DD7),
which took place at Nankai
Institute of Mathematics, Tianjin, China, June 23
July 5, 1986. The subject was
partial differential equations. It was a culmination of a year-long
1985-1986 at the institute. A list of the other papers presented at the symposium
can be found at the end of this volume, some of which will be published elsewhere.
For the record I would like to give a list of the preceding DD-Symposia as follows:
Subj ecJ:.
Differential
geometry and
differential
Differential
Partial differential
Changchun,
Publication
Proceedings of the 1980 Beijing Symposium
on Differential Geometry and Differential
Equations, Science Press, Beijing, China,
Proceedings of the 1981 Symposium on Differential Geometry and Differential Equations, Shanghai-Hefei, Science Press,
Beijing, China, 1984
Proceedings of the 1982 Changchun Symposium on Differential Geometry and Differential Equations, Science Press, Beijing,
China, 1986
Ordinary differential
Proceedings of the 1983.Beijing Symposium
on Differential Geometry and Differential
Equations, Science Press, Beijing, China,
Computation
on partial
differential
Differential
13aug. 17,
Proceedings of the 1984 Beijing Symposium
on Differential Geometry and Differential
Equations, Science Press, Beijing, China,
Differential Geometry and Differential
Equations, Proceedings, Shanghai 1985,
Lecture Notes in Mathematics 1255,
Springer-Verlag 1987
S.S. Chern
Editorial board
F. Almgren
R.W. Beals
Chang Kung-ching
Chi Min-you
Huang Yumin
Sun Hesheng
J.E. Taylor
A.J. Tromba
Wang Rou-hwai
Institute of Math. and Computer Science, The Hebrew Univ.
of Jerusalem, Givat Ram. 91904, Jerusalem, Israel
Dept. of Math., Princeton Univ., Fine Hall-Box 37,
Princeton, N.J. 08544, USA
Dept. of Math., Yale Univ., Box 2155, Yale Station,
New Haven, Conn.
06520, USA
Dept. of Math., Beijing Univ.,Beijing, China
Dept. of Math., Wuhan Univ., Wuhan, Hubei, China
Dept. of Math. Nankai Univ., Tianjin, China
Institute of Applied Physics and Computational Math.,
Beijing, China
Math. Dept., Rutgers Univ., New Brunswick, N.J. 08904,
Dept. of Math., Univ. of California, Santa Cruz,
CA. 95064,
Dept. of Math., Jilin Univ., Changchun, Jilin, China
Institute of Applied Physics and Computational Math.,
Beij ing, China
A TABLE OF CONTENTS OF DOl SYMPOSIUM ON PARTIAL
DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS - ASELECTION OF PAPERS
F.Almgren, W.Browder & E.H.Lieb :
Co-area, Liquid Crystals and Minimal Surfaces
Richard Beals:
Non-elliptic Problems and Complex Analysis
Chen Shuxing
Smoothness of Shock Front Solutions for System of Conservation Laws.
Chen Yazhe
On Degenerate Monge-Ampere Equations.
Fu Hong-Yuan:
Initial and Boundary Problems for the Degenerate or Singular Systems
of Filtration Type.
Huang Yumin
On Interior Regularity of Solutions of a Class of Hypoelliptic
Differential Equations.
Jin Zhiren :
A Counterexample to the Yamabe Problem for Complete Noncompact
Manifolds.
Li Huilai :
Free Boundary Problem for Degenerate Parabolic Equations.
Li Ta-tsien & Zhao Yanchun
Global Perturbation of the Riemann Problem for the System of
One-dimensional Isentropic Flow.
10. Qiu Qing-jiu & Qian Si-xin
Analysis of
COO Singularities for a Class of Operators with Varying
Multiple Characteristics.
11. Tan Yongj i
An Inverse Problem for Nonlocal Elliptic BVP and Resistivity
Identificating.
12. Jean E.Taylor
Local Ellipticity of F and Regularity of
F Minimizing Currents.
13. Friedrich Tomi & A.J.Tromba
A Geometric Proof of the Mumford Compactness Theorem.
14. Wang Guanglie :
Harnack Inequalities for Functions in de Giorgi Parabolic Class.
15. Wang Zhiqiang :
Equivariant Morse Theory for Isolated Critical Orbits and Its
Applications to Nonlinear Problems.
Wu Fantong :
A Class Diffractive Boundary Value Problem with Multiple
Characteristic.
Wu Lancheng
Existence, Uniqueness and Regularity of the Minimizer of a Certain
Functional.
18. Yan Ziqian
Everywhere Regularity for Solutions to Quasilinear Elliptic Systems.
19. Zhang Kewei :
On the Dirichlet Problem of a Class of Elliptic Systems.
Zhou Yulin & Guo Boling :
Initial Value Problems for a Nonlinear Singular Integral-Differential
Equation of Deep Water.