Neural Turing Machines
Alex Graves
 
Greg Wayne
 
Ivo Danihelka
 
Google DeepMind, London, UK
We extend the capabilities of neural networks by coupling them to external memory resources, which they can interact with by attentional processes. The combined system is
analogous to a Turing Machine or Von Neumann architecture but is differentiable end-toend, allowing it to be efﬁciently trained with gradient descent. Preliminary results demonstrate that Neural Turing Machines can infer simple algorithms such as copying, sorting,
and associative recall from input and output examples.
Introduction
Computer programs make use of three fundamental mechanisms: elementary operations
(e.g., arithmetic operations), logical ﬂow control (branching), and external memory, which
can be written to and read from in the course of computation . Despite its wide-ranging success in modelling complicated data, modern machine learning
has largely neglected the use of logical ﬂow control and external memory.
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) stand out from other machine learning methods
for their ability to learn and carry out complicated transformations of data over extended
periods of time. Moreover, it is known that RNNs are Turing-Complete , and therefore have the capacity to simulate arbitrary procedures, if properly
wired. Yet what is possible in principle is not always what is simple in practice. We
therefore enrich the capabilities of standard recurrent networks to simplify the solution of
algorithmic tasks. This enrichment is primarily via a large, addressable memory, so, by
analogy to Turing’s enrichment of ﬁnite-state machines by an inﬁnite memory tape, we
 
dub our device a “Neural Turing Machine” (NTM). Unlike a Turing machine, an NTM
is a differentiable computer that can be trained by gradient descent, yielding a practical
mechanism for learning programs.
In human cognition, the process that shares the most similarity to algorithmic operation
is known as “working memory.” While the mechanisms of working memory remain somewhat obscure at the level of neurophysiology, the verbal deﬁnition is understood to mean
a capacity for short-term storage of information and its rule-based manipulation . In computational terms, these rules are simple programs, and the stored
information constitutes the arguments of these programs. Therefore, an NTM resembles
a working memory system, as it is designed to solve tasks that require the application of
approximate rules to “rapidly-created variables.” Rapidly-created variables 
are data that are quickly bound to memory slots, in the same way that the number 3 and the
number 4 are put inside registers in a conventional computer and added to make 7 . An NTM bears another close resemblance to models of working memory since the
NTM architecture uses an attentional process to read from and write to memory selectively.
In contrast to most models of working memory, our architecture can learn to use its working
memory instead of deploying a ﬁxed set of procedures over symbolic data.
The organisation of this report begins with a brief review of germane research on working memory in psychology, linguistics, and neuroscience, along with related research in
artiﬁcial intelligence and neural networks. We then describe our basic contribution, a memory architecture and attentional controller that we believe is well-suited to the performance
of tasks that require the induction and execution of simple programs. To test this architecture, we have constructed a battery of problems, and we present their precise descriptions
along with our results. We conclude by summarising the strengths of the architecture.
Foundational Research
Psychology and Neuroscience
The concept of working memory has been most heavily developed in psychology to explain
the performance of tasks involving the short-term manipulation of information. The broad
picture is that a “central executive” focuses attention and performs operations on data in a
memory buffer . Psychologists have extensively studied the capacity
limitations of working memory, which is often quantiﬁed by the number of “chunks” of
information that can be readily recalled .1 These capacity limitations lead
toward an understanding of structural constraints in the human working memory system,
but in our own work we are happy to exceed them.
In neuroscience, the working memory process has been ascribed to the functioning of a
system composed of the prefrontal cortex and basal ganglia . Typ-
1There remains vigorous debate about how best to characterise capacity limitations .
Modeling studies of working memory range from those that consider how biophysical
circuits could implement persistent neuronal ﬁring to those that try to solve
explicit tasks . Of these, Hazy et al.’s
model is the most relevant to our work, as it is itself analogous to the Long Short-Term
Memory architecture, which we have modiﬁed ourselves. As in our architecture, Hazy
et al.’s has mechanisms to gate information into memory slots, which they use to solve a
memory task constructed of nested rules. In contrast to our work, the authors include no
sophisticated notion of memory addressing, which limits the system to storage and recall
of relatively simple, atomic data. Addressing, fundamental to our work, is usually left
out from computational models in neuroscience, though it deserves to be mentioned that
Gallistel and King and Marcus have argued that
addressing must be implicated in the operation of the brain.
Cognitive Science and Linguistics
Historically, cognitive science and linguistics emerged as ﬁelds at roughly the same time
as artiﬁcial intelligence, all deeply inﬂuenced by the advent of the computer . Their intentions were to explain human mental behaviour based on
information or symbol-processing metaphors. In the early 1980s, both ﬁelds considered
recursive or procedural (rule-based) symbol-processing to be the highest mark of cognition. The Parallel Distributed Processing (PDP) or connectionist revolution cast aside the
symbol-processing metaphor in favour of a so-called “sub-symbolic” description of thought
processes .
Fodor and Pylyshyn famously made two barbed claims
about the limitations of neural networks for cognitive modeling. They ﬁrst objected that
connectionist theories were incapable of variable-binding, or the assignment of a particular
datum to a particular slot in a data structure. In language, variable-binding is ubiquitous;
for example, when one produces or interprets a sentence of the form, “Mary spoke to John,”
one has assigned “Mary” the role of subject, “John” the role of object, and “spoke to” the
role of the transitive verb. Fodor and Pylyshyn also argued that neural networks with ﬁxedlength input domains could not reproduce human capabilities in tasks that involve processing variable-length structures. In response to this criticism, neural network researchers
including Hinton , Smolensky , Touretzky , Pollack , Plate , and Kanerva investigated speciﬁc mechanisms that could support both variable-binding and variable-length
structure within a connectionist framework. Our architecture draws on and potentiates this
Recursive processing of variable-length structures continues to be regarded as a hallmark of human cognition. In the last decade, a ﬁreﬁght in the linguistics community staked
several leaders of the ﬁeld against one another. At issue was whether recursive processing
is the “uniquely human” evolutionary innovation that enables language and is specialized to
language, a view supported by Fitch, Hauser, and Chomsky , or whether
multiple new adaptations are responsible for human language evolution and recursive processing predates language . Regardless of recursive processing’s evolutionary origins, all agreed that it is essential to human cognitive ﬂexibility.
Recurrent Neural Networks
Recurrent neural networks constitute a broad class of machines with dynamic state; that
is, they have state whose evolution depends both on the input to the system and on the
current state. In comparison to hidden Markov models, which also contain dynamic state,
RNNs have a distributed state and therefore have signiﬁcantly larger and richer memory
and computational capacity. Dynamic state is crucial because it affords the possibility of
context-dependent computation; a signal entering at a given moment can alter the behaviour
of the network at a much later moment.
A crucial innovation to recurrent networks was the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)
 . This very general architecture was developed for a
speciﬁc purpose, to address the “vanishing and exploding gradient” problem , which we might relabel the problem of “vanishing and exploding sensitivity.”
LSTM ameliorates the problem by embedding perfect integrators for memory storage in the network. The simplest example of a perfect integrator is the equation
x(t + 1) = x(t) + i(t), where i(t) is an input to the system. The implicit identity matrix
Ix(t) means that signals do not dynamically vanish or explode. If we attach a mechanism
to this integrator that allows an enclosing network to choose when the integrator listens to
inputs, namely, a programmable gate depending on context, we have an equation of the
form x(t + 1) = x(t) + g(context)i(t). We can now selectively store information for an
indeﬁnite length of time.
Recurrent networks readily process variable-length structures without modiﬁcation. In
sequential problems, inputs to the network arrive at different times, allowing variablelength or composite structures to be processed over multiple steps. Because they natively
handle variable-length structures, they have recently been used in a variety of cognitive
problems, including speech recognition , text
generation , handwriting generation and machine
translation . Considering this property, we do not feel that it is urgent or even necessarily valuable to build explicit parse trees to merge composite structures
greedily .
Other important precursors to our work include differentiable models of attention and program search , constructed with recurrent neural networks.
Neural Turing Machines
A Neural Turing Machine (NTM) architecture contains two basic components: a neural
network controller and a memory bank. Figure 1 presents a high-level diagram of the NTM
architecture. Like most neural networks, the controller interacts with the external world via
input and output vectors. Unlike a standard network, it also interacts with a memory matrix
using selective read and write operations. By analogy to the Turing machine we refer to the
network outputs that parametrise these operations as “heads.”
Crucially, every component of the architecture is differentiable, making it straightforward to train with gradient descent. We achieved this by deﬁning ‘blurry’ read and write
operations that interact to a greater or lesser degree with all the elements in memory (rather
than addressing a single element, as in a normal Turing machine or digital computer). The
degree of blurriness is determined by an attentional “focus” mechanism that constrains each
read and write operation to interact with a small portion of the memory, while ignoring the
rest. Because interaction with the memory is highly sparse, the NTM is biased towards
storing data without interference. The memory location brought into attentional focus is
determined by specialised outputs emitted by the heads. These outputs deﬁne a normalised
weighting over the rows in the memory matrix (referred to as memory “locations”). Each
weighting, one per read or write head, deﬁnes the degree to which the head reads or writes
at each location. A head can thereby attend sharply to the memory at a single location or
weakly to the memory at many locations.
Let Mt be the contents of the N × M memory matrix at time t, where N is the number
of memory locations, and M is the vector size at each location. Let wt be a vector of
weightings over the N locations emitted by a read head at time t. Since all weightings are
normalised, the N elements wt(i) of wt obey the following constraints:
wt(i) = 1,
0 ≤wt(i) ≤1, ∀i.
The length M read vector rt returned by the head is deﬁned as a convex combination of
the row-vectors Mt(i) in memory:
wt(i)Mt(i),
which is clearly differentiable with respect to both the memory and the weighting.
Taking inspiration from the input and forget gates in LSTM, we decompose each write into
two parts: an erase followed by an add.
Given a weighting wt emitted by a write head at time t, along with an erase vector
et whose M elements all lie in the range (0, 1), the memory vectors Mt−1(i) from the
previous time-step are modiﬁed as follows:
Mt(i) ←−Mt−1(i) [1 −wt(i)et] ,
where 1 is a row-vector of all 1-s, and the multiplication against the memory location acts
point-wise. Therefore, the elements of a memory location are reset to zero only if both the
weighting at the location and the erase element are one; if either the weighting or the erase
is zero, the memory is left unchanged. When multiple write heads are present, the erasures
can be performed in any order, as multiplication is commutative.
Each write head also produces a length M add vector at, which is added to the memory
after the erase step has been performed:
Mt(i) + wt(i) at.
Once again, the order in which the adds are performed by multiple heads is irrelevant. The
combined erase and add operations of all the write heads produces the ﬁnal content of the
memory at time t. Since both erase and add are differentiable, the composite write operation is differentiable too. Note that both the erase and add vectors have M independent
components, allowing ﬁne-grained control over which elements in each memory location
are modiﬁed.
Figure 2: Flow Diagram of the Addressing Mechanism.
The key vector, kt, and key
strength, βt, are used to perform content-based addressing of the memory matrix, Mt. The
resulting content-based weighting is interpolated with the weighting from the previous time step
based on the value of the interpolation gate, gt. The shift weighting, st, determines whether
and by how much the weighting is rotated. Finally, depending on γt, the weighting is sharpened
and used for memory access.
Addressing Mechanisms
Although we have now shown the equations of reading and writing, we have not described
how the weightings are produced. These weightings arise by combining two addressing
mechanisms with complementary facilities. The ﬁrst mechanism, “content-based addressing,” focuses attention on locations based on the similarity between their current values
and values emitted by the controller. This is related to the content-addressing of Hopﬁeld
networks . The advantage of content-based addressing is that retrieval is
simple, merely requiring the controller to produce an approximation to a part of the stored
data, which is then compared to memory to yield the exact stored value.
However, not all problems are well-suited to content-based addressing. In certain tasks
the content of a variable is arbitrary, but the variable still needs a recognisable name or address. Arithmetic problems fall into this category: the variable x and the variable y can take
on any two values, but the procedure f(x, y) = x × y should still be deﬁned. A controller
for this task could take the values of the variables x and y, store them in different addresses,
then retrieve them and perform a multiplication algorithm. In this case, the variables are
addressed by location, not by content. We call this form of addressing “location-based addressing.” Content-based addressing is strictly more general than location-based addressing
as the content of a memory location could include location information inside it. In our experiments however, providing location-based addressing as a primitive operation proved
essential for some forms of generalisation, so we employ both mechanisms concurrently.
Figure 2 presents a ﬂow diagram of the entire addressing system that shows the order
of operations for constructing a weighting vector when reading or writing.
Focusing by Content
For content-addressing, each head (whether employed for reading or writing) ﬁrst produces
a length M key vector kt that is compared to each vector Mt(i) by a similarity measure
. The content-based system produces a normalised weighting wc
t based on the similarity and a positive key strength, βt, which can amplify or attenuate the precision of the
In our current implementation, the similarity measure is cosine similarity:
||u|| · ||v||.
Focusing by Location
The location-based addressing mechanism is designed to facilitate both simple iteration
across the locations of the memory and random-access jumps. It does so by implementing
a rotational shift of a weighting. For example, if the current weighting focuses entirely on
a single location, a rotation of 1 would shift the focus to the next location. A negative shift
would move the weighting in the opposite direction.
Prior to rotation, each head emits a scalar interpolation gate gt in the range (0, 1). The
value of g is used to blend between the weighting wt−1 produced by the head at the previous
time-step and the weighting wc
t produced by the content system at the current time-step,
yielding the gated weighting wg
t + (1 −gt)wt−1.
If the gate is zero, then the content weighting is entirely ignored, and the weighting from the
previous time step is used. Conversely, if the gate is one, the weighting from the previous
iteration is ignored, and the system applies content-based addressing.
After interpolation, each head emits a shift weighting st that deﬁnes a normalised distribution over the allowed integer shifts. For example, if shifts between -1 and 1 are allowed,
st has three elements corresponding to the degree to which shifts of -1, 0 and 1 are performed. The simplest way to deﬁne the shift weightings is to use a softmax layer of the
appropriate size attached to the controller. We also experimented with another technique,
where the controller emits a single scalar that is interpreted as the lower bound of a width
one uniform distribution over shifts. For example, if the shift scalar is 6.7, then st(6) = 0.3,
st(7) = 0.7, and the rest of st is zero.
If we index the N memory locations from 0 to N −1, the rotation applied to wg
can be expressed as the following circular convolution:
t (j) st(i −j)
where all index arithmetic is computed modulo N. The convolution operation in Equation (8) can cause leakage or dispersion of weightings over time if the shift weighting is
not sharp. For example, if shifts of -1, 0 and 1 are given weights of 0.1, 0.8 and 0.1, the
rotation will transform a weighting focused at a single point into one slightly blurred over
three points. To combat this, each head emits one further scalar γt ≥1 whose effect is to
sharpen the ﬁnal weighting as follows:
j ˜wt(j)γt
The combined addressing system of weighting interpolation and content and locationbased addressing can operate in three complementary modes. One, a weighting can be
chosen by the content system without any modiﬁcation by the location system. Two, a
weighting produced by the content addressing system can be chosen and then shifted. This
allows the focus to jump to a location next to, but not on, an address accessed by content;
in computational terms this allows a head to ﬁnd a contiguous block of data, then access a
particular element within that block. Three, a weighting from the previous time step can
be rotated without any input from the content-based addressing system. This allows the
weighting to iterate through a sequence of addresses by advancing the same distance at
each time-step.
Controller Network
The NTM architecture architecture described above has several free parameters, including
the size of the memory, the number of read and write heads, and the range of allowed location shifts. But perhaps the most signiﬁcant architectural choice is the type of neural
network used as the controller. In particular, one has to decide whether to use a recurrent
or feedforward network. A recurrent controller such as LSTM has its own internal memory
that can complement the larger memory in the matrix. If one compares the controller to
the central processing unit in a digital computer (albeit with adaptive rather than predeﬁned
instructions) and the memory matrix to RAM, then the hidden activations of the recurrent
controller are akin to the registers in the processor. They allow the controller to mix information across multiple time steps of operation. On the other hand a feedforward controller
can mimic a recurrent network by reading and writing at the same location in memory at
every step. Furthermore, feedforward controllers often confer greater transparency to the
network’s operation because the pattern of reading from and writing to the memory matrix
is usually easier to interpret than the internal state of an RNN. However, one limitation of
a feedforward controller is that the number of concurrent read and write heads imposes a
bottleneck on the type of computation the NTM can perform. With a single read head, it
can perform only a unary transform on a single memory vector at each time-step, with two
read heads it can perform binary vector transforms, and so on. Recurrent controllers can
internally store read vectors from previous time-steps, so do not suffer from this limitation.
Experiments
This section presents preliminary experiments on a set of simple algorithmic tasks such
as copying and sorting data sequences. The goal was not only to establish that NTM is
able to solve the problems, but also that it is able to do so by learning compact internal
programs. The hallmark of such solutions is that they generalise well beyond the range of
the training data. For example, we were curious to see if a network that had been trained
to copy sequences of length up to 20 could copy a sequence of length 100 with no further
For all the experiments we compared three architectures: NTM with a feedforward
controller, NTM with an LSTM controller, and a standard LSTM network. Because all
the tasks were episodic, we reset the dynamic state of the networks at the start of each
input sequence. For the LSTM networks, this meant setting the previous hidden state equal
to a learned bias vector. For NTM the previous state of the controller, the value of the
previous read vectors, and the contents of the memory were all reset to bias values. All
the tasks were supervised learning problems with binary targets; all networks had logistic
sigmoid output layers and were trained with the cross-entropy objective function. Sequence
prediction errors are reported in bits-per-sequence. For more details about the experimental
parameters see Section 4.6.
The copy task tests whether NTM can store and recall a long sequence of arbitrary information. The network is presented with an input sequence of random binary vectors
followed by a delimiter ﬂag. Storage and access of information over long time periods has
always been problematic for RNNs and other dynamic architectures. We were particularly
interested to see if an NTM is able to bridge longer time delays than LSTM.
The networks were trained to copy sequences of eight bit random vectors, where the
sequence lengths were randomised between 1 and 20. The target sequence was simply a
copy of the input sequence (without the delimiter ﬂag). Note that no inputs were presented
to the network while it receives the targets, to ensure that it recalls the entire sequence with
no intermediate assistance.
As can be seen from Figure 3, NTM (with either a feedforward or LSTM controller)
learned much faster than LSTM alone, and converged to a lower cost. The disparity between the NTM and LSTM learning curves is dramatic enough to suggest a qualitative,
cost per sequence (bits)
sequence number (thousands)
NTM with LSTM Controller
NTM with Feedforward Controller
Figure 3: Copy Learning Curves.
rather than quantitative, difference in the way the two models solve the problem.
We also studied the ability of the networks to generalise to longer sequences than seen
during training (that they can generalise to novel vectors is clear from the training error).
Figures 4 and 5 demonstrate that the behaviour of LSTM and NTM in this regime is radically different. NTM continues to copy as the length increases2, while LSTM rapidly
degrades beyond length 20.
The preceding analysis suggests that NTM, unlike LSTM, has learned some form of
copy algorithm. To determine what this algorithm is, we examined the interaction between
the controller and the memory (Figure 6). We believe that the sequence of operations performed by the network can be summarised by the following pseudocode:
initialise: move head to start location
while input delimiter not seen do
receive input vector
write input to head location
increment head location by 1
return head to start location
while true do
read output vector from head location
emit output
increment head location by 1
This is essentially how a human programmer would perform the same task in a low-
2The limiting factor was the size of the memory (128 locations), after which the cyclical shifts wrapped
around and previous writes were overwritten.
Figure 4: NTM Generalisation on the Copy Task. The four pairs of plots in the top row
depict network outputs and corresponding copy targets for test sequences of length 10, 20, 30,
and 50, respectively. The plots in the bottom row are for a length 120 sequence. The network
was only trained on sequences of up to length 20. The ﬁrst four sequences are reproduced with
high conﬁdence and very few mistakes. The longest one has a few more local errors and one
global error: at the point indicated by the red arrow at the bottom, a single vector is duplicated,
pushing all subsequent vectors one step back. Despite being subjectively close to a correct copy,
this leads to a high loss.
level programming language. In terms of data structures, we could say that NTM has
learned how to create and iterate through arrays. Note that the algorithm combines both
content-based addressing (to jump to start of the sequence) and location-based addressing (to move along the sequence). Also note that the iteration would not generalise to
long sequences without the ability to use relative shifts from the previous read and write
weightings (Equation 7), and that without the focus-sharpening mechanism (Equation 9)
the weightings would probably lose precision over time.
Repeat Copy
The repeat copy task extends copy by requiring the network to output the copied sequence a
speciﬁed number of times and then emit an end-of-sequence marker. The main motivation
was to see if the NTM could learn a simple nested function. Ideally, we would like it to be
able to execute a “for loop” containing any subroutine it has already learned.
The network receives random-length sequences of random binary vectors, followed by
a scalar value indicating the desired number of copies, which appears on a separate input
channel. To emit the end marker at the correct time the network must be both able to
interpret the extra input and keep count of the number of copies it has performed so far.
As with the copy task, no inputs are provided to the network after the initial sequence and
repeat number. The networks were trained to reproduce sequences of size eight random
binary vectors, where both the sequence length and the number of repetitions were chosen
randomly from one to ten. The input representing the repeat number was normalised to
have mean zero and variance one.
Figure 5: LSTM Generalisation on the Copy Task. The plots show inputs and outputs
for the same sequence lengths as Figure 4. Like NTM, LSTM learns to reproduce sequences
of up to length 20 almost perfectly. However it clearly fails to generalise to longer sequences.
Also note that the length of the accurate preﬁx decreases as the sequence length increases,
suggesting that the network has trouble retaining information for long periods.
Figure 6: NTM Memory Use During the Copy Task. The plots in the left column depict
the inputs to the network (top), the vectors added to memory (middle) and the corresponding
write weightings (bottom) during a single test sequence for the copy task. The plots on the right
show the outputs from the network (top), the vectors read from memory (middle) and the read
weightings (bottom). Only a subset of memory locations are shown. Notice the sharp focus of
all the weightings on a single location in memory (black is weight zero, white is weight one).
Also note the translation of the focal point over time, reﬂects the network’s use of iterative
shifts for location-based addressing, as described in Section 3.3.2. Lastly, observe that the read
locations exactly match the write locations, and the read vectors match the add vectors. This
suggests that the network writes each input vector in turn to a speciﬁc memory location during
the input phase, then reads from the same location sequence during the output phase.
cost per sequence (bits)
sequence number (thousands)
NTM with LSTM Controller
NTM with Feedforward Controller
Figure 7: Repeat Copy Learning Curves.
Figure 7 shows that NTM learns the task much faster than LSTM, but both were able to
solve it perfectly.3 The difference between the two architectures only becomes clear when
they are asked to generalise beyond the training data. In this case we were interested in
generalisation along two dimensions: sequence length and number of repetitions. Figure 8
illustrates the effect of doubling ﬁrst one, then the other, for both LSTM and NTM. Whereas
LSTM fails both tests, NTM succeeds with longer sequences and is able to perform more
than ten repetitions; however it is unable to keep count of of how many repeats it has
completed, and does not predict the end marker correctly. This is probably a consequence
of representing the number of repetitions numerically, which does not easily generalise
beyond a ﬁxed range.
Figure 9 suggests that NTM learns a simple extension of the copy algorithm in the
previous section, where the sequential read is repeated as many times as necessary.
Associative Recall
The previous tasks show that the NTM can apply algorithms to relatively simple, linear data
structures. The next order of complexity in organising data arises from “indirection”—that
is, when one data item points to another. We test the NTM’s capability for learning an
instance of this more interesting class by constructing a list of items so that querying with
one of the items demands that the network return the subsequent item. More speciﬁcally,
we deﬁne an item as a sequence of binary vectors that is bounded on the left and right
by delimiter symbols. After several items have been propagated to the network, we query
by showing a random item, and we ask the network to produce the next item. In our
experiments, each item consisted of three six-bit binary vectors (giving a total of 18 bits
3It surprised us that LSTM performed better here than on the copy problem. The likely reasons are that the
sequences were shorter (up to length 10 instead of up to 20), and the LSTM network was larger and therefore
had more memory capacity.
Figure 8: NTM and LSTM Generalisation for the Repeat Copy Task. NTM generalises
almost perfectly to longer sequences than seen during training. When the number of repeats is
increased it is able to continue duplicating the input sequence fairly accurately; but it is unable
to predict when the sequence will end, emitting the end marker after the end of every repetition
beyond the eleventh. LSTM struggles with both increased length and number, rapidly diverging
from the input sequence in both cases.
per item). During training, we used a minimum of 2 items and a maximum of 6 items in a
single episode.
Figure 10 shows that NTM learns this task signiﬁcantly faster than LSTM, terminating
at near zero cost within approximately 30, 000 episodes, whereas LSTM does not reach
zero cost after a million episodes. Additionally, NTM with a feedforward controller learns
faster than NTM with an LSTM controller. These two results suggest that NTM’s external
memory is a more effective way of maintaining the data structure than LSTM’s internal
state. NTM also generalises much better to longer sequences than LSTM, as can be seen
in Figure 11. NTM with a feedforward controller is nearly perfect for sequences of up to
12 items (twice the maximum length used in training), and still has an average cost below
1 bit per sequence for sequences of 15 items.
In Figure 12, we show the operation of the NTM memory, controlled by an LSTM
with one head, on a single test episode. In “Inputs,” we see that the input denotes item
delimiters as single bits in row 7. After the sequence of items has been propagated, a
Figure 9: NTM Memory Use During the Repeat Copy Task. As with the copy task the
network ﬁrst writes the input vectors to memory using iterative shifts. It then reads through
the sequence to replicate the input as many times as necessary (six in this case). The white dot
at the bottom of the read weightings seems to correspond to an intermediate location used to
redirect the head to the start of the sequence (The NTM equivalent of a goto statement).
cost per sequence (bits)
sequence number (thousands)
NTM with LSTM Controller
NTM with Feedforward Controller
Figure 10: Associative Recall Learning Curves for NTM and LSTM.
cost per sequence (bits)
num ber of items per sequence
NTM with LSTM Controller
NTM with Feedforward Controller
Figure 11: Generalisation Performance on Associative Recall for Longer Item Sequences.
The NTM with either a feedforward or LSTM controller generalises to much longer sequences
of items than the LSTM alone. In particular, the NTM with a feedforward controller is nearly
perfect for item sequences of twice the length of sequences in its training set.
delimiter in row 8 prepares the network to receive a query item. In this case, the query
item corresponds to the second item in the sequence (contained in the green box). In
“Outputs,” we see that the network crisply outputs item 3 in the sequence (from the red
box). In “Read Weightings,” on the last three time steps, we see that the controller reads
from contiguous locations that each store the time slices of item 3. This is curious because it
appears that the network has jumped directly to the correct location storing item 3. However
we can explain this behaviour by looking at “Write Weightings.” Here we see that the
memory is written to even when the input presents a delimiter symbol between items.
One can conﬁrm in “Adds” that data are indeed written to memory when the delimiters
are presented (e.g., the data within the black box); furthermore, each time a delimiter is
presented, the vector added to memory is different. Further analysis of the memory reveals
that the network accesses the location it reads after the query by using a content-based
lookup that produces a weighting that is shifted by one. Additionally, the key used for
content-lookup corresponds to the vector that was added in the black box. This implies the
following memory-access algorithm: when each item delimiter is presented, the controller
writes a compressed representation of the previous three time slices of the item. After the
query arrives, the controller recomputes the same compressed representation of the query
item, uses a content-based lookup to ﬁnd the location where it wrote the ﬁrst representation,
and then shifts by one to produce the subsequent item in the sequence (thereby combining
content-based lookup with location-based offsetting).
Dynamic N-Grams
The goal of the dynamic N-Grams task was to test whether NTM could rapidly adapt to
new predictive distributions. In particular we were interested to see if it were able to use its
Figure 12: NTM Memory Use During the Associative Recall Task. In “Inputs,” a sequence of items, each composed of three consecutive binary random vectors is propagated to the
controller. The distinction between items is designated by delimiter symbols (row 7 in “Inputs”).
After several items have been presented, a delimiter that designates a query is presented (row 8
in “Inputs”). A single query item is presented (green box), and the network target corresponds
to the subsequent item in the sequence (red box). In “Outputs,” we see that the network correctly produces the target item. The red boxes in the read and write weightings highlight the
three locations where the target item was written and then read. The solution the network ﬁnds
is to form a compressed representation (black box in “Adds”) of each item that it can store in
a single location. For further analysis, see the main text.
memory as a re-writable table that it could use to keep count of transition statistics, thereby
emulating a conventional N-Gram model.
We considered the set of all possible 6-Gram distributions over binary sequences. Each
6-Gram distribution can be expressed as a table of 25 = 32 numbers, specifying the probability that the next bit will be one, given all possible length ﬁve binary histories. For
each training example, we ﬁrst generated random 6-Gram probabilities by independently
drawing all 32 probabilities from the Beta(1
2) distribution.
We then generated a particular training sequence by drawing 200 successive bits using
the current lookup table.4 The network observes the sequence one bit at a time and is then
asked to predict the next bit. The optimal estimator for the problem can be determined by
4The ﬁrst 5 bits, for which insufﬁcient context exists to sample from the table, are drawn i.i.d. from a
Bernoulli distribution with p = 0.5.
cost per sequence (bits)
sequence number (thousands)
NTM with LSTM Controller
NTM with Feedforward Controller
Optimal Estimator
Figure 13: Dynamic N-Gram Learning Curves.
Bayesian analysis :
P(B = 1|N1, N0, c) =
N1 + N0 + 1
where c is the ﬁve bit previous context, B is the value of the next bit and N0 and N1 are
respectively the number of zeros and ones observed after c so far in the sequence. We can
therefore compare NTM to the optimal predictor as well as LSTM. To assess performance
we used a validation set of 1000 length 200 sequences sampled from the same distribution as the training data. As shown in Figure 13, NTM achieves a small, but signiﬁcant
performance advantage over LSTM, but never quite reaches the optimum cost.
The evolution of the two architecture’s predictions as they observe new inputs is shown
in Figure 14, along with the optimal predictions. Close analysis of NTM’s memory usage
(Figure 15) suggests that the controller uses the memory to count how many ones and zeros
it has observed in different contexts, allowing it to implement an algorithm similar to the
optimal estimator.
Priority Sort
This task tests whether the NTM can sort data—an important elementary algorithm. A
sequence of random binary vectors is input to the network along with a scalar priority
rating for each vector. The priority is drawn uniformly from the range [-1, 1]. The target
sequence contains the binary vectors sorted according to their priorities, as depicted in
Figure 16.
Each input sequence contained 20 binary vectors with corresponding priorities, and
each target sequence was the 16 highest-priority vectors in the input.5 Inspection of NTM’s
5We limited the sort to size 16 because we were interested to see if NTM would solve the task using a
binary heap sort of depth 4.
Figure 14: Dynamic N-Gram Inference. The top row shows a test sequence from the N-Gram
task, and the rows below show the corresponding predictive distributions emitted by the optimal
estimator, NTM, and LSTM. In most places the NTM predictions are almost indistinguishable
from the optimal ones.
However at the points indicated by the two arrows it makes clear
mistakes, one of which is explained in Figure 15. LSTM follows the optimal predictions closely
in some places but appears to diverge further as the sequence progresses; we speculate that this
is due to LSTM “forgetting” the observations at the start of the sequence.
Figure 15: NTM Memory Use During the Dynamic N-Gram Task. The red and green
arrows indicate point where the same context is repeatedly observed during the test sequence
(“00010” for the green arrows, “01111” for the red arrows). At each such point the same
location is accessed by the read head, and then, on the next time-step, accessed by the write
head. We postulate that the network uses the writes to keep count of the fraction of ones and
zeros following each context in the sequence so far. This is supported by the add vectors, which
are clearly anti-correlated at places where the input is one or zero, suggesting a distributed
“counter.” Note that the write weightings grow fainter as the same context is repeatedly seen;
this may be because the memory records a ratio of ones to zeros, rather than absolute counts.
The red box in the prediction sequence corresponds to the mistake at the ﬁrst red arrow in
Figure 14; the controller appears to have accessed the wrong memory location, as the previous
context was “01101” and not “01111.”
Figure 16: Example Input and Target Sequence for the Priority Sort Task. The input
sequence contains random binary vectors and random scalar priorities. The target sequence is a
subset of the input vectors sorted by the priorities.
Write Weightings
Read Weightings
Hypothesised Locations
Figure 17:
NTM Memory Use During the Priority Sort Task.
Left: Write locations
returned by ﬁtting a linear function of the priorities to the observed write locations. Middle:
Observed write locations. Right: Read locations.
memory use led us to hypothesise that it uses the priorities to determine the relative location
of each write. To test this hypothesis we ﬁtted a linear function of the priority to the
observed write locations. Figure 17 shows that the locations returned by the linear function
closely match the observed write locations. It also shows that the network reads from the
memory locations in increasing order, thereby traversing the sorted sequence.
The learning curves in Figure 18 demonstrate that NTM with both feedforward and
LSTM controllers substantially outperform LSTM on this task. Note that eight parallel
read and write heads were needed for best performance with a feedforward controller on
this task; this may reﬂect the difﬁculty of sorting vectors using only unary vector operations
(see Section 3.4).
Experimental Details
For all experiments, the RMSProp algorithm was used for training in the form described
in with momentum of 0.9. Tables 1 to 3 give details about the network
conﬁgurations and learning rates used in the experiments. All LSTM networks had three
stacked hidden layers. Note that the number of LSTM parameters grows quadratically with
cost per sequence (bits)
sequence number (thousands)
NTM with LSTM Controller
NTM with Feedforward Controller
Figure 18: Priority Sort Learning Curves.
Controller Size
Memory Size
Learning Rate
#Parameters
Repeat Copy
Associative
Priority Sort
Table 1: NTM with Feedforward Controller Experimental Settings
the number of hidden units (due to the recurrent connections in the hidden layers). This
contrasts with NTM, where the number of parameters does not increase with the number of
memory locations. During the training backward pass, all gradient components are clipped
elementwise to the range (-10, 10).
Conclusion
We have introduced the Neural Turing Machine, a neural network architecture that takes
inspiration from both models of biological working memory and the design of digital computers. Like conventional neural networks, the architecture is differentiable end-to-end and
can be trained with gradient descent. Our experiments demonstrate that it is capable of
learning simple algorithms from example data and of using these algorithms to generalise
well outside its training regime.
Controller Size
Memory Size
Learning Rate
#Parameters
Repeat Copy
Associative
Priority Sort
Table 2: NTM with LSTM Controller Experimental Settings
Network Size
Learning Rate
#Parameters
1, 352, 969
Repeat Copy
5, 312, 007
Associative
1, 344, 518
Priority Sort
Table 3: LSTM Network Experimental Settings
Acknowledgments
Many have offered thoughtful insights, but we would especially like to thank Daan Wierstra, Peter Dayan, Ilya Sutskever, Charles Blundell, Joel Veness, Koray Kavukcuoglu,
Dharshan Kumaran, Georg Ostrovski, Chris Summerﬁeld, Jeff Dean, Geoffrey Hinton, and
Demis Hassabis.