(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 9, No. 2, 2018
182 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org
Sentiment Analysis using SVM: A Systematic
Literature Review
Munir Ahmad1, Shabib Aftab2, Muhammad Salman Bashir3, Noureen Hameed4
Department of Computer Science
Virtual University of Pakistan
Lahore, Pakistan
Abstract—The world has revolutionized and phased into a
new era, an era which upholds the true essence of technology and
digitalization. As the market has evolved at a staggering scale, it
is must to exploit and inherit the advantages and opportunities, it
provides. With the advent of web 2.0, considering the scalability
and unbounded reach that it provides, it is detrimental for an
organization to not to adopt the new techniques in the
competitive stakes that this emerging virtual world has set along
with its advantages. The transformed and highly intelligent data
mining approaches now allow organizations to collect, categorize,
and analyze users’ reviews and comments from micro-blogging
sites regarding their services and products. This type of analysis
makes those organizations capable to assess, what the consumers
want, what they disapprove of, and what measures can be taken
to sustain and improve the performance of products and services.
This study focuses on critical analysis of the literature from year
2012 to 2017 on sentiment analysis by using SVM (support vector
machine). SVM is one of the widely used supervised machine
learning techniques for text classification. This systematic review
will serve the scholars and researchers to analyze the latest work
of sentiment analysis with SVM as well as provide them a
baseline for future trends and comparisons.
Keywords—Sentiment analysis; polarity detection; machine
learning; support vector machine (SVM); support vector machine;
SLR; systematic literature review
INTRODUCTION
With the rapid development of mobile internet in the recent
years, the usage of micro-blogging websites have seen a
considerable increment. On the other hand, trend of sharing the
views and experience regarding products and services is
increasing day by day. Moreover, users rely on the feedback of
the previous customers before targeting the new product or
service to purchase. In the same way the companies can get the
reviews about their products or services from their clients via
micro blogging sites (Facebook, twitter, etc.) to explore and
analyze the response and ultimately can improve those targeted
products or services. However, it is not practically possible to
read all the reviews in tweets. Several researchers have been
working to develop automated techniques and algorithms for
sentiment analysis and text classification. The term sentiment
analysis is basically aims to classify the given text into
positive, negative and neutral category. Three basic approaches
are available in the literature today for sentiment analysis:
Lexicon driven, Machine learning based, and Hybrid
(integration of lexicon and machine learning). The authors in
 explored different Lexicon driven sentiment analysis tools
and techniques. In , different machine learning techniques
have been discussed in detail which are used for sentiment
analysis. Moreover, in order to take the results up a notch,
researchers combined lexicon based techniques and machine
learning techniques to formulate a hybrid framework to dig-up
even better results as explained in . SVM belongs to the
supervised
algorithms.
Supervised machine learning algorithm is one which has to be
trained first with the pre identified output class (training data)
and then it makes itself capable to classify the real input data
(test data). Several annotated datasets regarding different
domains are available which are used by machine learning
algorithms for classification and sentiment analysis. Some of
these annotated datasets include: the customer review dataset
 , , Pros and Cons dataset , Amazon product review
dataset and gender classification dataset . In this study,
published papers regarding sentiment analysis with SVM
technique from year 2012 to 2017 are analyzed. Two online
libraries are used for this research: ACM and IEEE. Nine
hundred and one articles were selected based on the particular
query strings. After following the complete systematic
framework, 8 papers were finally selected for in-depth and
detailed review.
Further organization of this paper is as follows. Section II
describes the related work in this domain. Section III defines
research methodology used for this SLR. Section IV presents
in-depth review of selected papers. Section V discusses the
findings of this detailed review. Section VI finally concludes
the paper.
RELATED WORK
Development and refining the automated techniques of
sentiment extraction and analysis is one of the hot research
topics today. Many researchers have worked on sentiment
analysis techniques via different approaches (Lexical, Machine
Learning and Hybrid) however, in-depth analysis and review of
latest literature on sentiment analysis with SVM was still
required. Some of the related studies on sentiment analysis are
as follows.
Authors in conducted a systematic literature review
regarding opinion mining from the reviews of mobile app store
users. The researchers focused on the importance of mobile
applications in now days and further highlighted the increasing
demand of user reviews about those apps. Obviously these
reviews are crucial for the new users, who are going to buy
these apps and also for those who develop or sell these apps.
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 9, No. 2, 2018
183 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org
The authors highlighted the proposed solutions of mining
problems, and also identified the remaining unsolved issues
and new challenges. In , a systematic literature review is
conducted to analyze the current state of Arabic text mining.
For this review, more than one hundred papers are selected
from different reliable sources and then were classified
according to their specific domains. A quantitative analysis of
selected articles is also conducted with respect to publication
type, year, category and contribution. The researchers in 
conducted a literature review on sentiment analysis and
opinion mining of social issues. The selected papers have taken
the data from social web sites. According to authors, different
types of classification techniques, if combined, can provide the
better results. In , a literature survey is conducted about
opinion and spam mining. For this purpose, most cited research
articles from these domains are considered. Authors found the
proposed architecture and methods imperfect in those selected
researches. They highlighted that the important thing in spam
detection is not only the spam identification but also, not to
filter the real ones. In , a systematic literature review is
conducted for the classification of burn care parameters with
machine learning techniques. A total of 1503 topic relevant
research articles were primarily selected, after screening and
extracting the most relevant literature, 15 studies were selected
for the analysis. All the selected studies demonstrated the
benefits of machine learning techniques in burn care however
different research articles reflected different accuracies. The
authors in this SLR focused on the benefits of using machinelearning techniques in burn care as well as highlighted the
importance of common metrics and goals for effective
evaluation and validation of these techniques. In , the
authors have performed sentiment classification of Arabic
tweets by using Naïve Bayes, Decision Tree and Support
Vector Machine. In this study, a framework for Arabic tweets
classification is followed which consisted of several subtasks
such as: Term Frequency Inverse Document Frequency (TF-
IDF) and Arabic stemming etc. Moreover three information
retrieval metrics are used for performance evaluation:
precision, recall, and f-measure. In , a literature review is
conducted covering the domain of data mining applications in
customer relationship management. The study considered the
research literature from year 2000-2006, covering 24 journals.
For this study, 900 articles were shortlisted and then 87 most
relevant papers were selected to classify in four CRM
dimensions i.e. customer identification, customer attraction,
customer retention and customer development. In , the
authors have predicted the rainfall in Malaysia by using
machine-learning techniques. They have used following
classification algorithms: Naïve Bayes, Decision Tree, Support
Vector Machine, Neural Network and Random Forest. A
comparative analysis was performed to identify the particular
technique which can bring good results with little amount of
training data. The comparative analysis showed that Decision
Tree and Random Forest both can get well trained by using
lower amount of training data and can get high F-measure
score. However, Support Vector Machine and Naive Bayes
both showed lower F-measure score, when trained with lower
amount of training data. Neural Network required large amount
of training data to predict very little amount of test data. In
 , the authors have focused on the effects of preprocessing
feature in sentiment classification process. They have classified
the 1000 Arabic tweets and compared their implemented
stemmer with light stemmer. They have used two approaches
for comparative analysis, Machine Learning and Semantic
Orientation. According to authors, the used stemmer achieved
1% of improvement with Machine Learning approach.
orientation
improvement was 0.5%. In Machine learning approach, SVM
used twice, once before applying the preprocessing phase and
then again used after each stage of preprocessing to analyze the
system's performance. They claimed the improvement of 4.5
percent in all measures. Same steps were adopted for semantic
orientation approach and achieved 2-7% improvement in
different measures. In , the authors have analyzed the
performance of Support Vector Machine for polarity detection
of textual data. A sentiment analysis framework is proposed
and performance of SVM was evaluated on three datasets. Two
datasets were taken from twitter and one from IMDB review.
Performance of SVM was compared for each dataset by
keeping in view three different ratios of training data and test
data: 70:30, 50:50 and 30:70. Precision, recall and f-measure
scores were used for performance evaluation. In , student’s
academic performance was predicted by using three data
mining techniques: Decision tree (C4.5), Multilayer Perceptron
and Naïve Bayes. These techniques were applied on student’s
data, which was collected from 2 undergraduate courses in two
semesters. According to results, Naïve Bayes showed overall
accuracy of 86% and outperformed MLP and Decision tree.
RESEARCH PROTOCOL
The purpose of this research is to extract the valuable
information from most relevant research articles on sentiment
analysis/opinion mining, published in last five years.
A Systematic literature review analyzes the gap between
different researches, spanning within a particular time period as
explained by . Research Protocol defines the structure in
which different steps are specified which have to be followed
in a particular sequence. For the selection of most relevant
research articles with high quality measures, a detailed
procedure is adopted in this study along with some specific
structure and boundary lines as explained by and .
Guidelines for this Systematic Literature Review are also taken
from latest review papers in software engineering domain such
as , , .
Research protocol/methodology of this study consists of
following steps (Fig. 1):
 Identification of research questions
 Selection of keywords for query string
 Identification of search space
 Outlining the selection criteria
 Extraction of literature with selection criteria
 Quality assessment of extracted literature
 Data extraction and synthesis
 Presentation of results
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 9, No. 2, 2018
184 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org
Fig. 1. Steps of SLR.
A. Research Questions
Research questions reflect the objectives of SLR and during
the critical review of most relevant extracted articles; those
questions have to be answered. Research questions of this SLR
are given below.
RQ1: Which are the latest research trends in the domain of
sentiment analysis?
RQ2: Which machine learning/lexicon/hybrid technique is
considered for comparison with SVM?
RQ3: Which areas of sentiment analysis are considered for
investigation by the researchers?
RQ4: Which factors affect the classification results?
RQ5: Which type of dataset is used for performance
evaluation?
B. Query String and Search Space
Query String is the combination of selected keywords used
to extract the research articles from concerned libraries.
Keywords extracted from research questions are given
Sentiment,
Extraction,
Detection, Mining, Support Vector Machine, SVM
The following search query is finalized with the above key
((“Sentiment” OR “Polarity” OR “Opinion”) AND
(“Analysis” OR “Extraction” OR “Detection” OR “Mining”)
AND (“Support Vector Machine” OR “SVM”))
Two well-known search libraries are selected for the
extraction of literature: ACM and IEEE. Both of these libraries
have different characteristics and options to search the
material. Therefore, slight adjustments are made in query string
to obtain more relevant and appropriate literature. The Query
had to be searched for multiple times with different
combinations of selected keywords. Results of search query
along with some significant parameters can be seen in Table I.
SEARCH SPACE
C. Selection Criteria
In this section, most relevant literature is selected with the
particular selection criteria. The selection criteria further
consists of IC (inclusion criteria) and EC (exclusion criteria).
1) Inclusion Criteria (IC)
Inclusion criteria is formed with the following rules:
IC1: Papers published from year 2012 till 2017.
IC2: Papers that used Support Vector Machine for
Sentiment Analysis.
IC3: Papers that used Hybrid Model for sentiment analysis,
which includes Support Vector Machine.
IC5: Papers that used other machine learning algorithms in
comparison with Support Vector Machine.
IC5: Papers that used other lexical/Hybrid techniques in
comparison with Support Vector Machine.
2) Exclusion Criteria (EC)
Exclusion criteria is formed with the following rules:
EC1: Papers which are not in English.
EC2: Papers published before 2012 or after 2017.
EC3: Papers which did not use Support Vector Machine.
EC4: Papers that do not target sentiment/opinion/polarity
analysis of textual data.
EC6: Papers that do not contain any results.
EC7: Papers that used Hybrid Model, which does not
include Support Vector Machine.
Only those papers are shortlisted which are more relevant
to the research questions. After applying IC and EC, 92 most
relevant studies are found. All the remaining studies were
excluded as defined in EC.
Search Scheme
Query Search
2017-11-05
Query Search
2017-11-06
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 9, No. 2, 2018
185 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org
D. Quality Assessment
Quality assessment parameters must be followed in order to
provide effective results. Following parameters are considered
for this SLR to maintain the quality.
 Top rated scientific libraries are selected to find the
relevant research material.
 Most recent research articles were selected to ascertain
the best quality
 Selection process is un-biased.
 All the steps of SLR (as discussed above) are followed
in the true sense.
E. Data Extraction and Syntesis
After applying the search process (Fig. 2), 8 most relevant
research articles were short listed as provided in Table II
where CP stands for Conference Paper.
MOST RELEVENT RESEARCH LITERATURE
Digital Library
Selected Papers
No. of Researches
 , 
Fig. 2. Search process.
LITERATURE ANALYSIS
A. A Feature Based Approach for Sentiment Analysis by
Using Support Vector Machine [Result Needed]
The authors in developed a process for feature based
sentiment analysis using Support Vector Machine (SVM). In
the proposed model the dataset has to pass through five
different phases before the conclusion of final result. First of
all, the Sentence level classification is performed. Only reviews
which have sentimental meaning are to be stored such as
positive, negative or neutral. Questions or comments which
aren’t actually reviews will be filtered out using POS tagging
as keeping them would led to an unnecessary extension of the
vocabulary dictionary and unwanted scoring. After sentence
level sentiment classification, extraction of aspects is
performed which is most important and challenging task. POS
tagging is used to extract words with tags like NNS (noun
plural), NN (Noun), NNP (Proper noun singular), etc. In the
next phase, the opinion words for aspects are extracted using
the Stanford parser . After that the dataset are labeled using
SentiWordNet . And finally for the opinion regarding
whole product, SVM classifier was applied on the labeled
dataset. SVM plots vectors in a 3D virtual space and
distinctively allocates testing data’s points to particular group
which it belongs to, e.g. positive, negative, neutral or whatever
the predefined groups are. The dataset considered for this
research was taken from user reviews about laptops which
were from a variety of companies like HP, Apple, Dell, Lenovo,
B. Modeling Sentiment Terminologies: Target Based Polarity
In , the researchers presented a subject sensitive
sentiment analysis approach, which includes the context of
tweets. According to authors the text cleansing techniques for
input data before classification process can improve the results.
normalization
representation of input data. They have pointed out that the
subject aware classification brings the better results as compare
to subject un-aware classification. The results can be further
improved, if uni-gram approach is used instead of bi-gram or
n-gram approach. A twitter dataset about word “Obama” was
selected first. Features from tweets of selected dataset were
extracted through Alchemy API, Tweet NLP and NTLK. From
dataset, 30% of the data was used for training purpose and the
rest of 70% as the test data. The collected tweets were scanned
for feature extraction and then the features were stored in a
separate dictionary - Keyword_Bundle - in conjunction with
their specific topics to retain the target and context of the
tweets. This technique further helped for the development of
input matrix for SVM to classify the tweet with improved
accuracy. Then two more datasets were selected “Movie
Review”, and “Apple” to have a comparative analysis. 85.00 %,
84.00%, and 88.00% accuracies were achieved of “Obama”,
“Movie Review” and “Apple” datasets respectively, making a
cumulative accuracy of 85.60%.
C. Multi-Aspect and Multi-Class Based Document Sentiment
Analysis of Educational Data Catering Accreditation
In , authors presented an approach that classified the
documents into multiple categories by keeping in view the
multiple aspects. The existing problems of document level
sentiment analysis such as entity identification, subjectivity
detection and negation were also taken into consideration in
this study. The proposed framework was used for educational
data mining. The faculty performance was evaluated using the
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 9, No. 2, 2018
186 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org
comments provided by the students as feedback. The dataset
contained 5000 comments about the faculty. The objective
reviews which had no polarity inclination were filtered out,
such as social comments, replies and questions. Java string
tokenizer was used to divide the reviews into two token groups.
After this, stopwords removal algorithms were used to remove
special characters and some pronouns which would hold no
significant value in the actual classification. They used TF-IDF
to represent the acquired data in a numerical form, which is
further used by the classifiers. Two machine learning
classifiers, i.e. Naïve Bayes and Support Vector Machine were
applied on the pre-processed dataset. 81.00% and 72.80%
accuracy were achieved by the SVM and Naïve Bayes,
respectively for aspect based document level sentiment
D. Tweeple’s Microblogs on Illegal Immigration in USA
Authors in presented a process for opinion mining of
tweeps (People who use Twitter). The topic that was
specifically chosen in comparison with some other political
topics was “Illegal Immigration” as it has been under
discussion for decades in the US. The dataset used in this
research was collected after the US Republican Presidential
election debate on Oct 28, 2015. Three major categories of the
topic were selected i.e. “reform/give citizenship to illegal
immigrants”, “deport all immigrants” or “deport only the
criminal illegal immigrants”. Binary classification of first two
and multinomial classification of all three categories was done
using the Random Forest, Multinomial Naïve Bayes, Linear
SVM and Logistic Regression classifiers. The results obtained
for all the four classifiers were promising with 82% of overall
average. Linear SVM and ensemble based approach using
Random Forest classifiers depicted optimal results and
accuracy with the mean score of 90% and 84%, respectively
for binomial and multinomial classification, for individual
classes with lower error rate.
E. A Proposal of a Method to Automatically Estimate
Evaluations of Various topic of Traverler’s Reviews
Authors of conducted a study to evaluate the
performance of SVM. For performance evaluation, results of
SVM were compared with the dependency search tree results.
For the SVM based estimation, one-against-one method was
used and this parameter was selected by Scikitlearn3, which is
a programming package of python. The ease with which SVM
can be extended to multiclass classification by one-against-one
method played a key role in the performance evaluation. In
addition, SVM’s RBF kernel was used. The Dependency Tree
Search was used for the comparison because the researchers
expected that linguistic dependency relationship would prove
to be useful for obtaining evaluation data from texts as
evaluation words often appear after the evaluated object. In
order to obtain evaluation data from scriptures, evaluationattribute dictionary was used. Three Polarities were defined:
positive, negative and neutral. 1000 Reviews from TripAdvisor
of 2014 were used as the dataset for the experimental
evaluation. Three different experiments were performed A, B,
and C with different number of valued scores, 5, 3, 3
respectively. These three targeted different procedures. A was
used to determine the basic results of machine learning. B was
basically used to assess the estimation in laxer score. C was an
estimation of individual topics using the dependency tree
search so the results of machine learning and methods used by
the dependency tree could be compared. This architecture is
incapable of designing completely foolproof feature vectors.
The researchers have suggested future work to focus on
automatic estimation by machine learning.
F. Sentiment Analysis of Textual Reviews
In , the researchers presented an experimental study for
performance evaluation of different approaches for documentlevel sentiment classification of movie reviews. The
approaches included two supervised machine learning based
classifiers: Support Vector Machine and Naïve Bayes, one
unsupervised technique: Semantic Orientation Approach (SO-
PMI-IR Algorithm) and one lexical driven approach:
SentiWordNet. For Naïve Bayes, the multinomial version of
NB was implement using Java with Eclipse IDE and the
labeled dataset was fed as k-folds where k was chosen to 3, 5
and 10. For SVM algorithm the dataset was converted to vector
space representation using TF-IDF, afterwards same k-fold
scheme was used. The Unsupervised SO-PMI-IR algorithm
was implemented using Java in accordance with a POS tagger.
Firstly, POS tagging was applied on the data and then feature
extraction was performed for each review. The SentiWordNet
approach was implemented after performing POS tagging and
feature extraction. In this approach, the researchers not only
used the SentiWord’s lexical dictionary but rather used an
enhanced procedure to increase the result of classification to a
greater degree of accuracy. This was accomplished by
scheming out an adjective and adverb correlation in essence
with SentiWord’s predefined dictionary. In this method
SentiWord’s scoring and Adjective Priority Scoring (APS)
were assigned different weighting and the combined score of
the composites was used to compute final results. 35% weightage was given to APS and the rest 65% to SentiWord’s scoring.
Two existent datasets of “movie reviews” were used along with
one created individually for sentiment classification with
different amendments in the procedures. Accuracy didn’t fall
out of the range of 65%-68% for SentiWordNet but SO-PMI-
IR method went up to an accuracy of 89.00% but the only
drawback is that a lot of PMI values have to be computed. On
the other hand Naïve Bayes performed better than SVM.
G. Utilizing Hashtags for Sentiment Analysis of Tweets in The
Political Domain
Authors in presented a novel target-oriented hybrid
sentiment analysis system. It consisted of three major modules:
preprocessing module, lexicon-based sentiment feature generator
module and finally Machine learning module. The pre-processing
module performed the optimization process and normalized the
data. Sentiment Feature Generation Module started with
replacing slangs with English words holding the same meaning
using a slang dictionary and then tagging all the words in the
dataset either by score or type. A total of 14 feature types were
selected by the researchers using this module. After the feature
selection phase, the data was forwarded to the machine
learning classifier, which was a linear SVM. The dataset used
in the evaluation was based on the occurrences of the word
“iPhone”. It consisted of 940 tweets which were labeled by a
group of 22 human annotators. 470 tweets had a positive
polarity whereas 470 tweets had negative polarity. The
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 9, No. 2, 2018
187 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org
proposed hybrid model achieved an overall accuracy of
89.13% outperforming the SVM’s Baseline accuracy of
86.70%. The researchers concluded that use of sentiment
features instead of conventional text processing features can
bring the better results.
H. A Boosted SVM based Sentiment Analysis Approach for
Online Opinionated Text
Authors in proposed a hybrid sentiment classification
model. For evaluation purpose two different datasets were
used. A “movie reviews” dataset which was acquired from
imdb.com in 2004 and a “hotel review” dataset which was
acquired from tripadvisor.com and yatra.com. The authors
came up with hybrid architectures like Adaptive Boosting
(AdaBoost)) or bagging combined with SVM. This research
proposed to use bagging technique to construct the SVM
ensemble. In bagging, several SVMs are trained independently
via a bootstrap method and then they are aggregated to
formulate a strong classifier via an appropriate combination
technique. The vector space model (VSM) was utilized in order
to generate the bag of words representation for each document.
The text documents were pre-processed with basic natural
language processing techniques like word tokenization, stop
word removal and stemming. The residual tokens were
arranged as per their frequencies or occurrences in whole
dataset. The average accuracy achieved from both the datasets
went up to 93.00%. The study goes on to conclude that SVMs
usually suffer from biased decision boundaries (in case of the
hyper plane), and their prediction performance drops
significantly when the data is highly skewed. The authors
concluded that the obtained results are considerably better
when multiple technologies are used in correlation instead of
using SVM alone.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
Finally, 08 research papers are selected by using systematic
framework explained in Section II. These papers have been
discussed in detail in Section IV of this research. Following
answers are obtained against the identified Research Questions
(RQs) while having an in-depth exploration and analysis of the
selected papers.
RQ1: Which are the latest research trends in the domain of
sentiment analysis?
As per systematic research process, 8 most relevant papers
have shown the latest trends in the domain of sentiment
analysis. The latest trends included the proposal of new
techniques for polarity detection and sentiment analysis,
customization of already proposed techniques and introducing
the novel ideas to use the hybrid techniques more effectively.
Moreover, one of the most important latest trends covered by
our shortlisted papers is to target the new domain or area from
where significant knowledge can be extracted by using
classification techniques.
RQ2: Which machine learning/lexicon/hybrid technique is
considered for comparison with SVM?
All selected papers – have used one or more
techniques in comparison with SVM. The purpose of
comparative analysis is to identify the difference between
accuracy of that technique and the accuracy of SVM. The
algorithms or techniques which are used in comparison with
SVM include supervised machine learning, unsupervised
machine learning, lexicon, and the hybrid of supervised and
RQ3: Which areas of sentiment analysis are considered for
investigation by the researchers?
The selected papers discussed sentence level sentiment
analysis as well as document level sentiment analysis. For this
purpose, different techniques are used including machine
learning, lexicon based and hybrid. However, the focal point of
investigation was the performance evaluation and comparative
analysis to identify the best technique for sentiment analysis.
RQ4: Which factors affect the classification results?
All the selected papers have investigated the performance
of their proposed techniques in terms of accuracy. To check the
performance of any classification technique the output result
has to be compared with pre classified or pre labeled dataset. It
has been seen by analyzing the selected papers that accuracy of
results may depend upon the following: the steps and
techniques of preprocessing phase, the selection of input
dataset along with its subject and ratio of training data & test
data (in case of supervised classifier). Moreover, some of
researches have claimed that the use of multiple techniques can
bring more accurate results instead of using single technique.
RQ5: Which type of data sets are used for performance
evaluation?
The selected papers have used the following as input
dataset: tweets on different topics, user reviews about product
or services and student comments about faculty. It also has
been noted from the selected papers that the performance of
sentiment classification techniques depends upon the selected
dataset as well as the preprocessing techniques.
Limitations of Research:
Following are the limitations of this research:
1) Although all the published literature was obtained
through a rigorous and thorough research process that depicts
the completeness of this study however there may be still
possibilities of missing some important relevant work.
2) The enhanced and optimized algorithms were mostly
evaluated by the researchers themselves; therefore, the actual
results might not be as accurate as claimed. This may affect
the interpretation of this research.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Sentiment Analysis is considered as one of the hot research
topics in the domain of knowledge discovery. Large amount of
online data is being added on daily basis ranging from social
media posts and comments to movie and software reviews. By
using sentiment analysis techniques, these data sources can be
used to fetch the useful information such as: prediction of
election results, getting user’s feedback about any software,
analyzing the market reputation of particular brand and
obtaining public opinion before launching a new product etc.
Multiple approaches are available for sentiment analysis such
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 9, No. 2, 2018
188 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org
as lexicon based, machine learning based and the hybrid of
both. SVM is one of the widely used machine learning
techniques for the detection of polarity from text. Now days,
along with conventional machine learning classification
techniques, many customized and integrated models have been
proposed by researchers for sentiment analysis and polarity
detection. This
comprehensive review of latest research by focusing on SVM
technique of sentiment analysis. This study has followed a
systematic framework for review and provided the answers of
identified research questions after critical review of selected
papers. For future work it is suggested to perform a
comparative analysis of the customized techniques with same