Machine Learning, 5, 355-381 
© 1990 Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston. Manufactured in The Netherlands.
Learning Sequential Decision Rules Using Simulation
Models and Competition
JOHN J. GREFENSTETTE
( )
CONNIE LOGGIA RAMSEY
( )
ALAN C. SCHULTZ
( . NAVY.MIL)
Navy Center for Applied Research in Artificial Intelligence, Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC
20375-5000
Abstract. The problem of learning decision rules for sequential tasks is addressed, focusing on the problem of
learning tactical decision rules from a simple flight simulator. The learning method relies on the notion of competition and employs genetic algorithms to search the space of decision policies. Several experiments are presented
that address issues arising from differences between the simulation model on which learning occurs and the target
environment on which the decision rules are ultimately tested.
Keywords. Sequential decision rules, competition-based learning, genetic algorithms.
1. Introduction
In response to the knowledge acquisition bottleneck associated with the design of expert
systems, research in machine learning attempts to automate the knowledge acquisition process and to broaden the base of accessible sources of knowledge. The choice of an appropriate
learning technique depends on the nature of the performance task and the form of available
knowledge. If the performance task is classification, and a large number of training examples are available, then inductive learning techniques can be used to learn
classification rules. If there exists an extensive domain theory and a source of expert behavior,
then explanation-based methods may be applied .
Many interesting practical problems that may be amenable to automated learning do not
fit either of these models. One such class of problems is the class of sequential decision
tasks. For many interesting sequential decision tasks, there exists neither a database of examples nor a complete and tractable domain theory that might support traditional machine
learning methods. In these cases, one method for manually developing a set of decision
rules is to test a hypothetical set of rules against a simulation model of the task environment, and to incrementally modify the decision rules on the basis of the simulated experience. Research in machine learning may help to automate this process of learning from
a simulation model. This paper presents some initial efforts in that direction.
Sequential decision tasks may be characterized by the following general scenario: A decision making agent interacts with a discrete-time dynamical system in an iterative fashion.
At the beginning of each time step, the system is in some state. The agent observes a representation of the current state and selects one of a finite set of actions, based on the agent's
decision rules. As a result, the dynamical system enters a new state and returns a (perhaps
JJ. GREFENSTETTE, C.L. RAMSEY, A.C. SCHULTZ
null) payoff. This cycle repeats indefinitely. The objective is to find a set of decision rules
that maximizes the expected total payoff.1 For many sequential decision problems, including
the one considered here, the most natural formulation of the problem includes delayed payoff,
in the sense that non-null payoff occurs only when some special condition occurs. While
the tasks we consider here have a naturally graduated payoff function, it should be noted
that any problem solving task may be cast into sequential decision paradigm, by defining
the payoff to be a positive constant for any goal state and null for non-goal states .
Several laboratory-scale sequential decision tasks have been investigated in the machine
learning literature, including pole balancing , gas pipeline
control , and the animat problem . In addition, sequential decision problems include many important practical problems, and much
work has been devoted to their solution. The field of adaptive control theory has developed
sophisticated techniques for sequential decision problems for which sufficient knowledge
of the dynamical system is available in the form of a tractable mathematical model. For
problems lacking a complete mathematical model of the dynamical system, dynamic programming methods can produce optimal decision rules, as long as the number of states
is fairly small. The Temporal Difference (TD) method addresses learning
control rules through incremental experience. Like dynamic programming, the TD method
requires sufficient memory (perhaps distributed among the units of a neural net) to store
information about the individual states of the dynamical system . For
very large state spaces, genetic algorithms offer the chance to learn decision rules without
partitioning of the state space a priori. Classifier systems 
use genetic algorithms at the level of individual rules, or classifiers, to derive decision
rules for sequential tasks.
The system described in this paper adopts a distinctly different approach, applying genetic
algorithms at the level of the tactical plan, rather than the individual rule, with each tactical plan comprising an entire set of decision rules for the given task. This approach is
especially designed for sequential decision tasks involving a rapidly changing state and
other agents, and therefore best suited to reactive rather than projective planning .
The approach described here reflects a particular methodology for learning via a simulation
model. The motivation behind the methodology is that making mistakes on real systems
may be costly or dangerous. Since learning may require experimenting with tactical plans
that might occasionally produce unacceptable results if applied to the real world, we assume
that hypothetical plans will be evaluated in a simulation model (see Figure 1).
Periodically, a plan is extracted from the learning system to represent the learning system's
current plan. This plan is tested in the target environment, and the resulting performance
is plotted on a learning curve. In principle, this mode of learning might continue indefinitely,
with the user periodically updating the decision rules used in the target environment with
the current plan suggested by the learning system.
Simulation models have played an important role in several machine learning efforts.
The idea of using a simulator to generate examples goes back to Samuel in the domain
of checkers. Buchanan, Sullivan, Cheng and Clearwater , use the RL system to learn
error classification rules from a model of a particle beam accelerator, but do not explicitly
LEARNING SEQUENTIAL DECISION RULES
Figure 1. A model for learning from a simulation model.
explicitly address the effects of differences between the simulation model and a real target
system. Goldberg describes a classifier system that learns control rules for a simulated
gas pipeline. Booker and Wilson present classifier systems for organisms
learning in a simulated environment. Research on classifier systems does not usually
distinguish between the simulated environment used for learning and a separate target environment. One exception is Booker , who discusses the possibility of an organism
using a classifier system to build an internal model of the external environment. Making
a clear distinction between the simulation model used for training and the target environment used for testing suggests a number of experiments that measure the effects of differences between the training model and the target environment. The experiments described
here represent some steps in this direction.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the particular
sequential decision task, called the Evasive Maneuvers problem, that provides the context
for the current research. Section 3 describes the learning system SAMUEL, including its
knowledge representation, its performance module, and its learning methods. Section 4
presents a case study of the application of SAMUEL to the Evasive Maneuvers problem.
First some experiments are described that focus on specific mechanisms of the learning
systems. These are followed by studies that deal with the effects of the difference between
the simulation model on which learning occurs and the target environment on which the
results of learning will be tested. Section 5 summarizes our results and presents topics
for further research.
2. The evasive maneuvers problem
The experiments described here concern a particular sequential decision task called the
Evasive Maneuvers (EM) problem, inspired in part by Erickson and Zytkow . In
the EM problem, there are two objects of interest, a plane and a missile. The tactial objective is to maneuver the plane to avoid being hit by the approaching missile. The missile
tracks the motion of the plane and steers toward the plane's anticipated position. The initial
speed of the missile is greater than that of the plane, but the missile loses speed as it
maneuvers. If the missile speed drops below some threshold, it loses maneuverability and
J.J. GREFENSTETTE, C.L. RAMSEY, A.C. SCHULTZ
drops out of the sky. It is assumed that the plane is more maneuverable than the missile;
that is, the plane has a smaller turning radius. There are six sensors that provide information about the current tactical state:
1. last-turn: the current turning rate of the plane. This sensor can assume nine values,
ranging from -180 degrees to 180 degrees in 45 degree increments.
2. time: a clock that indicates time since detection of the missile. Assumes integer values
between 0 and 19.
3. range: the missile's current distance from the plane. Assumes values from 0 to 1500
in increments of 100.
4. bearing: the direction from the plane to the missile. Assumes integer values from 1
to 12. The bearing is expressed in clock terminology, in which 12 o'clock denotes dead
ahead of the plane, and 6 o'clock denotes directly behind the plane.
5. heading: the missile's direction relative to the plane. Assumes values from 0 to 360
in increments of 10 degrees. A heading of 0 (or 360) indicates that the missile is aimed
directly at the plane's current position, whereas a heading of 180 means the missile is
aimed directly away from the plane.
6. speed: the missile's current speed measured relative to the ground. Assumes values from
0 to 1000 in increments of 50.
Finally, there is a discrete set of actions available to control the plane. In this study, we
consider only actions that specify discrete turning rates for the plane. The control variable
turn has nine possible settings, between —180 and 180 degrees in 45 degree increments.
The learning objective is to develop a tactical plan, i.e., set of decision rules that map
current sensor readings into actions, that successfully evades the missile whenever possible.
The EM problem is divided into episodes that begin when the threatening missile is
detected and that end when either the plane is hit or the missile is exhausted. It is assumed
that the only feedback provided is a numeric payoff, supplied at the end of each episode,
that reflects the success of the episode with respect to the goal of evading the missile. The
payoff is defined by the formula:
payoff = 1000 if plane escapes missile.
= 10t if plane is hit at time t.
The missile may hit the plane any time between 1 and 20 seconds after detection, so the
payoff varies from 10 to 200 for unsuccessful episodes to 1000 for successful evasion.
The EM problem is clearly a laboratory-scale model of realistic tactical problems. Nevertheless, it includes several features that make it a challenging machine learning problem:
• A weak domain model. It is assumed that the learner has no initial model of the missile.
This assumption reflects our interest in learning tactics for environments whose complexity precludes a predictive model of the other agents in the scenario. It is also important to emphasize that having a simulation model of an agent does not imply having
a tractable procedure for computing the optimal decision rules for responding to the agent.
LEARNING SEQUENTIAL DECISION RULES
• Incomplete state information. The objects in the underlying dynamical system (the plane
and the missile) travel through a two-dimensional real space. Since the sensors are discrete,
they necessarily provide only a partial representation of the current state. This has important consequences, since the decision-making agent receives all its information through
its sensors. Given the many-to-one mapping performed by the sensors, the agent does
not have sufficient information in this formulation of the problem to apply techniques
such as dynamic programming or the TD method since these methods require unambiguous state information .
• A large state space. While the number of states in the underlying dynamical system is
of course infinite, even the number of observable feature vectors defined by the sensors
is quite large. Over 25 million distinct feature vectors may be observed, each requiring
one of nine possible actions, giving a total of over 225 million maximally specific
condition-action pairs. To be useful, the decision rules learned by the system must have
a fair amount of generality.
• Delayed payoff. The EM problem assumes that payoff information is available only at
the end of an episode. If feedback were immediately available after each decision, then
other well-known methods for learning from examples might apply. However, for complex
tactical problems, the level of effort required to develop a reliable critic that gives immediate feedback is likely to approximate the manual knowledge engineering effort required
to create an optimal set of decision rules. We are interested in developing methods that
require less human analytic effort, even at the expense of greater computational effort.
• Noisy sensors. Realistic sensors are likely to suffer from some level of noise that may
result in incorrect information about the current state. The presence of noise further complicates the learning task.
The following sections present one approach to addressing these challenges.
3. SAMUEL on EM
SAMUEL is a system designed to explore competition-based learning for sequential decision tasks.2 SAMUEL consists of three major components: a problem specific module,
a performance module, and a learning module. Figure 2 shows the architecture of the system.
The problem specific module consists of the task environment simulation, or world model,
and its interfaces. The performance module is called CPS (Competitive Production System),
a production system that interacts with the world model by reading sensors, setting control
variables, and obtaining payoff from a critic. Like traditional production system interpreters,
CPS performs matching and conflict resolution. In addition, CPS performs rule-level assignment of credit based on the intermittent feedback from the critic. The learning module
uses a genetic algorithm to develop reactive tactical plans, expressed as a set of conditionaction rules. Each plan is evaluated by testing its performance on a number of tasks in
the world model. As a result of these evaluations, plans are selected for replication and
modification. Genetic operators, such as crossover and mutation, produce plausible new
plans from high performance precursors.
J.J. GREFENSTETTE, C.L. RAMSEY, A.C. SCHULTZ
Figure 2. SAMUEL: A learning system for tactical plans.
The design of SAMUEL owes much to Smith's LS-1 system , and draws
on some ideas from classifier systems . In a
departure from several previous genetic learning systems, SAMUEL learns rules expressed
in a high level rule language. There have been several proposals for applying genetic algorithms to higher level rule languages , but few empirical results have been
reported. The use of a high level language for rules offers several advantages over low level
binary pattern languages typically adopted in genetic learning systems. First, it is easier
to incorporate existing knowledge, whether acquired from experts or by symbolic learning
programs. Second, it is easier to explain the knowledge learned through experience and
to transfer the knowledge to human operators. Third, it is possible to combine several forms
of learning in a single system: Empirical methods such as genetic algorithms may discover
a set of high performance rules, and then an analytic learning method may attempt to explain
the success of those rules and thereby enhance an existing partial domain theory .
The following subsections describe the major modules in more detail, using EM as a
concrete example problem. It should be noted that the current version of SAMUEL represents
just one way to implement a rule learning system based on genetic algorithms. Although
the design of SAMUEL builds on several years of experience with genetic algorithms, we
expect that many of the particular learning operators are likely to be modified and generalized
as the result of further experience.
LEARNING SEQUENTIAL DECISION RULES
3.1. Performance component
The performance module of SAMUEL, CPS, has some similarities to both traditional production system interpreters and to classifier systems. The primary features of CPS are:
• A restricted but high level rule language;
• Partial matching;
• Competition-driven conflict resolution; and
• Incremental credit assignment methods.
These features are described in more detail in the following sections.
3.1.1. Knowledge representation
In contrast with many genetic learning systems, SAMUEL does not apply binary recombination operators to individual rules. Instead, the CROSSOVER operator in SAMUEL recombines entire plans by exchanging rules between them. This approach to recombination has
both positive and negative implications. The disadvantage is that SAMUEL does not address
the important problem of creating new high-level symbols from low-level detector messages,
as classifier systems do . The advantage is that a more natural
high-level rule representation may be adopted. Each CPS rule has the form
(and c1 . . . cn )
then (and a1 . . . am)
where each ci is a condition on one of the sensors and each action aj specifies a setting
for one of the control variables.
The form of the conditions depends of the type of the sensor. SAMUEL supports four
types of sensors: linear, cyclic, structured, and pattern. Linear sensors take on linearly
order numeric values. Conditions over linear sensors specify upper and lower bounds for
the sensor values. The range of each linear sensor is divided by the user into up to 255
equal segments whose endpoints constitute the legal bounds in the conditions. For example, the speed sensor in EM can take on values over the range 0 to 1000, discretized into
20 equal segments. Thus, an example of a legal condition over speed is
(speed 100 250)
which matches if 100 < speed < 250. In EM, last-turn, time, range, and speed are linear
Cyclic sensors take on cyclicly ordered numeric values. Like linear sensors, the range
of each cycle sensor is divided by the user into equal segments whose endpoints constitute
the legal bounds in the conditions. Unlike linear sensors, any pair of legal values can be
interpreted as a valid condition for cyclic sensors. In EM, bearing and heading are cyclic
J.J. GREFENSTETTE, C.L. RAMSEY, A.C. SCHULTZ
sensors, since the next "higher" value than bearing = 12 is bearing = 1, and the next
"higher" value than heading = 350 is heading = 0. The following is a legal condition
over heading:
(heading 330 90)
which matches if 330 < heading < 360 or if 0 < heading < 90.
The rule language of CPS also supports structured nominal sensors whose values are
taken from the nodes of a tree-structured hierarchy. For example, a sensor called weather
might be defined to take on values from the following hierarchy:
Conditions for structured sensors specify a list of values, and the condition matches if the
sensor's current value occurs in a subtree labeled by one of the values in the list. A condition for the weather sensor might be
(weather is [cloudy wet])
This would match if weather had value cloudy, wet, rain, or snow.
Finally, pattern sensors can take on binary string values. Conditions on pattern sensors
specify patterns over the alphabet {0, 1, #}, as in classifier systems . For
example, the sensor detectorl might be defined as a eight bit string, and a condition for
this sensor might be
(detectorl 00##10#1)
This condition matches if the string assigned to detectorl agrees with all the positions occupied by 0 or 1 in the condition's pattern. The present study uses only numeric (linear and
cyclic) sensors, so these other forms will not be discussed further.
The right-hand side of each rule specifies a setting for one or more control variables.
For the EM problem, each rule specifies one setting for the variable turn. In general, a
given rule may specify conditions for any subset of the sensors and actions for any subset
of the control variables. Each rule also has a numeric strength, that serves as a prediction
LEARNING SEQUENTIAL DECISION RULES
of the rule's utility . The method used to update the rule strengths is
described in the section on credit assignment below. A sample rule in the EM system follows:
(and (last-turn 0 45) (time 4 14) (range 500 1400)
(heading 330 90) (speed 50 850))
strength 750
3.1.2. Production system cycle
CPS follows the match/conflict-resolution/act cycle of traditional production systems. A
preprocessing phase compiles the rules into match tables so that sensor values index the
corresponding match set. However, since there is no guarantee that the current set of rules
is in any sense complete, it is important to provide a mechanism for gracefully handling
cases in which no rule matches . In CPS this is accomplished by assigning
each rule a match score equal to the number of conditions it matches. The match set consists of all the rules with the highest current match score. That is, if some rule matches
m out of n sensors and no rule matches m + 1 sensors, then the match set consists of
all rules with match score m.
Once the match set is computed, an action is selected from the (possibility conflicting)
actions recommended by the members of the match set. Each possible action receives a
bid equal to the strength of the strongest rule in the match set that specifies that action
in its right-hand side. Unlike classifier systems in which all members of the match set
vote on which action to perform , CPS selects an action using the probability
distribution defined by the strength of the (single) bidder for each action. This prevents
a large number of low strength rules from combining to suggest an action that is actually
associated with low payoff. All rules in the match set that agree with the selected action
are said to be active , and will have their strength adjusted according to
the credit assignment algorithm described in the next section.
After conflict resolution, the control variables are set to the values indicated by the selected
actions.3 The world model is then advanced by one simulation step. The new state is
reflected in a new set of sensor readings, and the entire process repeats.
3.2. Learning methods
Learning in SAMUEL occurs on two distinct levels: credit assignment at the rule level,
and genetic competition at the plan level.
3.2.1. Credit assignment
Systems that learn rules for sequential behavior generally face a credit assignment problem: If a sequence of rules fires before the system solves a particular problem, how can
J.J. GREFENSTETTE, C.L. RAMSEY, A.C. SCHULTZ
credit or blame be accurately assigned to early rules that set the stage for the final result?
Our approach is to assign each rule a measure called strength that serves as a prediction
of the expected level of payoff that will be achieved if this rule fires. When payoff is obtained
at the end of an episode, the strengths of all active rules (i.e., rules that suggested the actions taken during the current episode) are incrementally adjusted to reflect the current
payoff. The adjustment scheme, called the Profit Sharing Plan (PSP), consists of subtracting a fraction of the rule's current strength and adding the same fraction of the payoff.
The approach is illustrated in Figure 3 with the incremental fraction set to 0.10.
This example shows that rules whose strength correctly predicts the payoff (e.g., R,)
retain their original levels of strength, while rules that overestimate the expected payoff
(R2) lose strength and rules that underestimate payoff (R3) gain strength. It has been shown
that the PSP computes a time-weighted estimate of the expected external payoff, and that
this estimate is useful for conflict resolution . However, conflict resolution
should take into account not only the expected payoff associated with each rule, but also
some measure of our confidence in that estimate. One way to measure confidence is through
the variance associated with the estimated payoff.4 In SAMUEL, the PSP has been adapted
to estimate both the mean and the variance of the payoff associated with each rule, as follows:
At the end of each episode, the critic provides a payoff r. For each active rule Ri, the
estimate of its mean payoff is updated as follows:
The estimate of the variance in its payoff is updated similarly:
The constant c in the equations above is a runtime parameter called the psp rate. If rule
RI has an estimated payoff with mean /*,- and variance oj, we define the strength of/?,- as:
strength(R,) = ^ - CT,-.
Thus, a high strength rule must have both high mean and low variance in its estimated
payoff. By biasing conflict resolution toward high-strength rules, we expect to select actions
for which we have high confidence of success.
Figure 3. Updating the strength of rules.
LEARNING SEQUENTIAL DECISION RULES
3.2.2. The genetic algorithm
At the plan level, SAMUEL treats the learning process as a heuristic optimization problem,
i.e., a search through a space of knowledge structures looking for structures that lead to
high performance. A genetic algorithm is used to perform the search. Genetic algorithms
are motivated by standard models of heredity and evolution in the field of population genetics,
and embody abstractions of the mechanisms of adaptation present in natural systems
 . Briefly, a genetic algorithm simulates the dynamics of population genetics
by maintaining a knowledge base of knowledge structures that evolves over time in response
to the observed performance of its knowledge structures in their training environment. Each
knowledge structure yields one point in the space of alternative solutions to the problem
at hand, which can then be subjected to an evaluation process and assigned a measure
of utility (its fitness) reflecting its potential worth as a solution. The search proceeds by
repeatedly selecting structures from the current knowledge base on the basis fo fitness,
and applying idealized genetic search operators to these structures to produce new structures (offspring)
for evaluation. Goldberg provides a detailed discussion of genetic
algorithms. The learning level of SAMUEL is a specialized version of a standard genetic
algorithm, GENESIS . The remainder of this section outlines the differences between GENESIS and the genetic algorithm in SAMUEL.
3.2.2.1. Adaptive initialization. Two approaches to initializing the knowledge structures
of a genetic algorithm have been reported. By far, random initialization of the first population is the most common method. This approach requires the least knowledge acquisition
effort, provides a lot of diversity for the genetic algorithm to work with, and presents the
maximum challenge to the learning algorithm. Another approach is to seed the initial population with existing knowledge . The rule language of SAMUEL was
designed to facilitate the inclusion of available knowledge. Future studies with SAMUEL
on EM will concern the improvement of manually developed knowledge, but such knowledge
was not available for the current study. As a third alternative, we have developed an approach
called adaptive initialization. Each plan starts out as a set of completely general rules,
but its rules are specialized according to its early experiences. Specifically, each plan in
the initial population consists of nine maximally general rules—each such rule says:
for any sensor readings, turn X
where X is one of the nine possible values for the turning rate. A plan consisting of only
such rules executes a random walk, since every rule matches on every cycle, and all rules
start with equal strength. Although each plan in the initial population executes this random
walk policy, it does not follow that they all have the same performance, since the initial
conditions for the episodes used to evaluate the plans are selected at random.
In order to introduce plausible new rules, a plan modification operator called SPECIALIZE
is applied after each evaluation of a plan. SPECIALIZE is similar in spirit to Holland's triggered operators . The trigger in this case is the conjunction of the following conditions:
J.J. GREFENSTETTE, C.L. RAMSEY, A.C. SCHULTZ
1. There is room in the plan for at least one more rule.
2. A maximally general rule fired during an episode that ended with a successful evasion.
If these conditions hold, SPECIALIZE creates a new rule with the same right-hand side as
the maximally general rule, but with a more specialized left-hand side. For each sensor,
the condition for the sensor in the new rule covers approximately half the legal range for
that sensor, splitting the difference between the extreme legal values and the sensor reading
obtained in (2) above. For example, suppose the initial plan contains the maximally general
Rule 6: if (
) then (turn 90)
Suppose further that the following step is recorded in the evaluation trace during the evaluation of this plan:
sensors: ... (time 4) (range 500) (bearing 6) .
act ion: (turn 90)
r u l e f i r e d : R u l e 6
Then SPECIALIZE would create the following new rule:
(and . . . (t ime 2 11) ( range 300 1000) (bear i ng 3 9) . . . )
then (turn 90)
The resulting rule is given a high initial strength, and added to the plan. The new rule
is plausible, since its action is known to be successful in at least one situation that matches
its left-hand side. Of course, the new rule is likely to need further modification, and is
subject to further competition with the other rules.
3.2.2.2. Evaluation. Each plan is evaluated by invoking CPS, using the given plan as rule
memory. CPS executes a fixed number of episodes, and returns the average payoff as the
fitness for the plan. The updated strengths of the rules are also returned to the learning
module. Each episode begins with randomly selected initial conditions, and thus represents
a single sample of the performance of the plan on the space of all possible initial condition
of the world model. There are several important questions about this sampling procedure:
First, how is the distribution of initial conditions created? What if the distribution used
for evaluating plans differs from the true distribution of initial conditions that arise in the
LEARNING SEQUENTIAL DECISION RULES
actual task environment? How many samples must be taken from a given distribution to
give the genetic algorithm sufficient information to guide the search for high performance
plans? The experiments below address these issues.
3.2.2.3. Selection. Plans are selected for reproduction on the basis of their overall fitness
scores returned by CPS. The topic of reproductive selection in genetic algorithms is discussed
in the literature . One new aspect to SAMUEL'S
selection algorithm concerns the issue of scaling—that is, how to maintain selective pressure
as the overall performance rises within the population . In SAMUEL,
the fitness of each plan is defined as the difference between the average payoff received
by the plan and some baseline performance measure. The baseline is adjusted to track the
mean payoff received by the population, minus one standard deviation. The baseline is
adjusted slowly to provide a moderately consistent measure of fitness. Plans whose payoff
fall below the baseline are assigned a fitness measure of 0, resulting in no offspring. This
mechanism appears to provide a reasonable way to maintain consistent selective pressure
toward higher performance.
3.2.2.4. Genetic operators: CROSSOVER and MUTATION. Selection alone merely produces
clones of high performance plans. CROSSOVER works in concert with selection to create
plausible new plans. In SAMUEL, CROSSOVER treats rules as indivisible units. Since the
rule ordering within a plan is irrelevant, the process of recombination can be viewed as
simply selecting rules from each parent to create an offspring plan. Many genetic algorithms
permit recombination within individual rules as a way of creating new rules . While such operators are easily defined for SAMUEL'S
rule language , we prefer to use CROSSOVER solely to explore the space
of rule combinations, and leave rule modification to other operators (i.e., SPECIALIZE and
MUTATION).
In SAMUEL, CROSSOVER assigns each rule in two selected parent plans to one of two
offspring plans. CROSSOVER attempts to cluster rules that are temporally related before assigning them to offspring. For example, suppose that the traces of the previous evaluations of
the parent plans are as follows:
Trace for parent #1:
8. R1,3 -» R1,1 -> Rl,7 -» Rl,5 Successful Maneuver
9. R1,2 -» R1,8 -» R1,4
JJ. GREFENSTETTE, C.L. RAMSEY, A.C. SCHULTZ
Trace for parent #2:
4. R2j7 -* R2,s
5. R26 -* R2,2 ~* ^2,4
Successful Maneuver
where R,j is the fh rule in plan i. Then one possible offspring would be:
The idea is that rules that fire in sequence to achieve a successful maneuver should be
treated as a group during recombination, in order to increase the likelihood that the offspring plan will inherit some of the better behavior patterns of its parents. Of course, the
offspring may not behave identically to either one of its parents, since the probability that
a given rule fires depends on the context provided by all the other rules in the plan.
CROSSOVER is restricted so that no plan receives duplicate copies of the same rule. This
restriction seems to be necessary to avoid plans containing a large number of copies of
the same rule. Given the conflict resolution algorithm in CPS, duplicate copies have no
effect on the performance of the plan (other than to take up space), so this restriction seems
reasonable. Note that since every rule occurring in either parent is inherited by one of
the offspring, any rule that occurs in both parents also occurs in both offspring. The effect
is that small groups of rules that are associated with high performance propagate through
the population of plans, and serve as building blocks for new plans.
The final genetic operator, MUTATION, introduces new rules by making random changes
to existing rules. For example, MUTATION might alter a condition within a rule from
(range 500 1000) to (range 200 1000), or it might change the action from ( t u r n 45)
to ( t u r n -90). In the current studies, the new values produced by mutation are chosen
randomly from the set of legal values for the given condition or action. Many other forms
of mutation are possible. Davis uses a local mutation operator called CREEP that
makes only small changes, e.g., from (range 500 1000) to (range 400 1000). Future
studies with SAMUEL will investigate such operators.
4. Evaluation of the method
This section presents empirical studies of the performance of SAMUEL on the EM problem. The first two studies focus on aspects of the genetic algorithm itself, and the last
two focus on issues concerning the differences between the simulation model and the target
environment in which the learned knowledge will be used.
LEARNING SEQUENTIAL DECISION RULES
4.1. Experimental design
The learning curves shown in this section reflect our assumptions about the methodology
of simulation-assisted learning. In particular, we make a distinction between the world model
used for learning and the target environment. Let E denote the target environment for which
we want to learn decision rules. Let M denote a simulation model of E that can be used
for learning. The genetic algorithm in SAMUEL evaluates each plan by measuring the performance of the given plan when solving tasks in model M. At periodic intervals (10 generations in the current experiments), a single plan is extracted from the current population
to represent the learning system's current hypothetical plan. The extraction is accomplished
by re-evaluating the top 20% of the current population on 100 randomly chosen episodes
on the simulation model M. The plan with the best performance in this phase is designated
the current hypothesis of the learning system. This plan is tested in the environment E
for 100 randomly chosen problem episodes. The plots show the sequence of results of testing
on E, using the current plans periodically extracted from the learning system. The assumption
is that learning continues indefinitely in the background using system M, while the plan
being used on E is periodically updated with the current hypothetical plan of the learning
This way of measuring the learning rate of a genetic algorithm is a generalization of
the offline performance metric defined by De Jong . In De Jong's work and in later
followup studies , the offline performance measure assumes that the target environment E is identical to the evaluation model M. Distinguishing these two systems permits the study of how robust the learned
plans are if E varies significantly from M, as is likely in practice.
Because SAMUEL employs probabilistic learning methods, all graphs represent the mean
performance over 20 independent runs of the genetic algorithm, each run using a different
seed for the random number generator. Given our initial assumption that SAMUEL is designed to continue learning indefinitely, it seems inappropriate to compare results by, say,
running two variations of the system for a fixed amount of time and comparing the performance of the final plans. Instead, when two learning curves are plotted on the same graph,
a vertical line between the curves indicates that there is a statistically significant difference
between the means represented by the respective plots (with significance level a = 0.05).
This device allows the reader to see significant differences between two approaches at various
points during the learning process.
Unless otherwise noted, all experiments were run with the following parameters in effect:
The population contained 100 plans, each plan contained at most 32 rules, the psp rate
was 0.01, the crossover rate was 0.8, and the mutation rate was 0.01.
4.2. Tradeoffs between population size and evaluation
SAMUEL represents an intensively empirical approach to learning, requiring the evaluation
of thousands of alternative plans. Fortunately, genetic algorithms map nicely onto coarsegrained multiprocessors such as the BBN Butterfly. We are currently running SAMUEL
on a 128-node Butterfly at the Naval Research Laboratory. By executing a copy of CPS
and the world model at each node, up to 128 plans can be evaluated simultaneously.
J.J. GREFENSTETTE, C.L. RAMSEY, A.C. SCHULTZ
Two parameters that most directly affect the computational effort required by SAMUEL
are the population size and the number of episodes required to evaluate a given plan. Fitzpatrick and Grefenstette show that genetic algorithms are especially well-suited for
problems whose complexity requires the use of statistical techniques in the evaluation phase.
This follows from the observation that even if individual plans are evaluated by sampling
procedures, the performance estimates associated with the various patterns of rules, or
building blocks, in the population are much more accurate than the performance estimates
of the individual plans. The implication for SAMUEL is that the amount of problem solving activity required to test individual plans can be fairly limited without adverse effects
on the learning rate, as long as the population size is adjusted accordingly. In particular,
Fitzpatrick and Grefenstette show that, given a fixed number of samples per generation,
it is better to distribute the samples sparsely over a large population than to perform concentrated sampling over a small population. They validated their analysis with a case study
of an image registration problem. In this section, we report the results of similar experiments
performed with SAMUEL on the EM problem.
Experiments were performed with SAMUEL on the EM problem to test the effects of
varying both the population size and the number of episodes per evaluation. For all runs,
the total number of episodes per generation was kept constant. Since the simulation model
dominated the computational effort associated with the rest of the system, this means that
a single generation took approximately the same amount of time in all runs. Three pairs
of parameter settings were tested — 4, 20 and 100 episodes per evaluation, with corresponding population sizes of 500, 100, and 20, respectively. Results are shown in Figure 4.
Fitzpatrick and Grefenstette report that performance generally improves as the population size increases and the number of samples per evaluation decreases. Our results with
SAMUEL are not entirely consistent with their conclusion. However, the differences may
be explained by the differences between SAMUEL's genetic algorithm and Fitzpatrick and
Grefenstette's. In particular, the clustering phase in SAMUEL's CROSSOVER operator is sensitive to the number of episodes per evaluation. When the number of episodes per evaluation is small, clustering is less effective, especially during the early stages of a run when
the number of successful episodes is small. Later, when the number of successful episodes
increases, more effective clusters can be formed. The effects of clustering can be seen in
the shape of the curve for the (population = 500, episodes = 4) case in Figure 4, which
starts out slower but eventually catches up to the (population = 100, episodes = 20) case.
This is consistent with previous experiments in which clustering contributed to faster learning . The runs with (population = 20, episodes = 100), on the other
hand, exhibit rapid improvement early, but taper off when the smaller population converges.
This is also consistent with previous genetic algorithms studies that show that small population size cannot support sustained exploration of a large search space. Overall, these results
are encouraging in that rapid learning is shown for as few as 20 episodes per evaluation,
and this number was adopted for the remaining experiments. The impact of this result is
magnified when SAMUEL is run on parallel processors, since it means that the entire population of plans can be evaluated in the time it takes to perform 20 episodes.
LEARNING SEQUENTIAL DECISION RULES
Figure 4. Tradeoffs between population size and evaluation sampling rate.
4.3. Effects of CROSSOVER and MUTATION
An experiment was conducted to test the relative contributions of CROSSOVER and MUTATION
in the EM domain. Two sets of runs were conducted, with the only difference being that
in one case the CROSSOVER operator was disabled. If CROSSOVER is disabled, then the resulting
search looks like a kind of parallel simulated annealing: random changes are made to structures, and the changes are more likely to be kept if they lead to improved performance.
The selection pressure in the genetic algorithm serves the same role as temperature in a
simulated annealing algorithm: random changes are likely to survive early in the run, but
as the average fitness rises, harmful changes are more likely to be rejected (that is, they
will not have offspring). This is a much more powerful search method than pure random
search, and thus provides a nontrivial baseline against which to measure the full genetic
algorithm. The learning curves are shown in Figure 5.
In this case, the difference between the performance of the plans learned with and without
CROSSOVER is statistically significant over the entire run. This is consistent with a number
of previous studies that show that a genetic algorithm with recombination outperforms a
genetic algorithm with mutation alone . Given the many differences between
the genetic algorithm in SAMUEL and many previous genetic algorithms, confirmation
of this conclusion strengthens our confidence that recombination, even broadly defined,
is a powerful search operator.
4.4. Effects
of generality of training conditions
Ideally, a simulation model adequately reflects all the important aspects of a target environment. In practice, the validation of a complex simulation model is often very difficult.
Consequently, perhaps the most important questions in simulation-assisted learning concern
how well knowledge learned using a simulation model transfers to a target environment that
J.J. GREFENSTETTE, C.L. RAMSEY, A.C. SCHULTZ
Figure 5. Effects of CROSSOVER.
differs from the model. One approach to these questions is to study how the plans learned
with a given model perform when tested on a variety of target environments. In the next
two sections, we perform this kind of sensitivity analysis by using different versions of
the simulator in the roles of training model and target environment.
The first experiment concerns the generality of training conditions. Two classes of initial
conditions are considered. Let the term fixed initial conditions mean that each episode
begins with the following conditions:
heading = 0
1 < bearing < 12
These conditions correspond to the missile being placed at a random position along the
circumference of a circle of radius 1000, aiming directly at the plane. Let the term variable
initial conditions mean that each episode begins with the following conditions:
800 < range < 1200
-72 < heading < 72
560 < speed < 840
1 < bearing < 12
That is, each of the first three variables was allowed to randomly vary by up to 20% of
the initial values for fixed initial condition, and bearing is again chosen at random. Each
class of initial conditions defines an environment. There are four possible experimental
conditions, depending on which environment is used for the simulation model and which
is used for the target environment, as shown in Table 1.
LEARNING SEQUENTIAL DECISION RULES
Table 1. Experimental conditions over initial conditions.
Model Fixed
Model Variable
Target Fixed
(Fixed, Fixed)
(Variable, Fixed)
Target Variable
(Fixed, Variable)
(Variable, Variable)
For each experimental condition, the genetic algorithm was executed for 200 generations,
using the indicated environments for the simulation model and target environment. The
results are shown in Figures 6 and 7.
Figure 6 shows the learning curves for experimental conditions in the first row of Table
1. That is, the training model used by the genetic algorithm presented episodes with fixed
initial conditions. The two curves in Figure 6 show the effect of varying the target environment between fixed and variable initial conditions. While the learned plans perform quite
well when the training environment matches the target environment, the learned plans perform much less satisfactorily when the target environment includes the more general initial conditions. This is an expected result, given the opportunistic nature of genetic
algorithms: The fixed initial conditions in the training model allow, and perhaps even encourage, the learning system to exploit special features of such scenarios. For example,
since the missile speed always has the same initial value, the learning system might reward
a plan based on timed responses—Wait three steps and make a hard right turn—that would
fail if the initial missile speed were different.
Figure 6. Sensitivity to initial conditions when trained with fixed initial conditions.
J.J. GREFENSTETTE, C.L. RAMSEY, A.C. SCHULTZ
Figure 7. Sensitivity to initial conditions when trained with variable initial conditions.
The two curves in Figure 7 show the effect of varying the target environment between
fixed and variable initial conditions when the training model has variable initial conditions.
In this case, there is a significant difference between the two curves for the first part of
the learning session, during which time the learned plans perform better on the target environment with variable initial conditions than on the target environment with fixed initial
conditions. A likely interpretation of the latter case is that the learning system initially
sees very few instances that match the target environment, and so it is slower to learn
appropriate decision rules for that special case.
One may also compare the corresponding curves across Figures 6 and 7. It is clear that,
if the target environment has fixed initial conditions, then it is better to have fixed initial
conditions in the training model as well. On the other hand, the difference between final
portions of the dashed curves in the two figures suggests that it is far less risky to have
a training model with overly general initial conditions than to have one with overly restricted
initial conditions. If the training model is overly general, then good decision rules can
be learned, but at a slower rate.
In order to assess the effects of small changes in the target environments, the best plan
from each run in the preceding experiments was tested on 21 target environments in which
the initial values for the missile features (range, heading, and speed) for each episode were
gradually varied between the fixed initial conditions and the variable initial conditions.
Each plan was tested against each environment for 200 episodes, and the results are plotted
in Figure 8.
Figure 8 shows that the performance of the plans learned with fixed initial conditions
declines steadily as a broader range of initial conditions are encountered, indicating that
the learned plans do in fact exploit the regularities of the conditions under which they were
trained. Unfortunately, there is no reason to expect SAMUEL to learn plans for situations
LEARNING SEQUENTIAL DECISION RULES
Figure & Performance of learned plans tested against gradually variable initial conditions.
it has not encountered. This is a mixed blessing. It is encouraging that the learning system
exploits regularities in its training environment, but this places a burden on the simulation
designer to avoid unintended regularities. Figure 8 also shows that the best plans learned
with variable initial conditions exhibit high performance over a wide variety of test environments. However, note that the plans learned under variable initial conditions were
slightly less effective than the plans learned under fixed initial conditions, when tested against
the fixed initial conditions. These results again suggest mat training against more general
environmental conditions yields slower learning, but the final results are likely to be much
more robust.
4.5. Sensitivity to sensor noise
Noise is an important topic in machine learning research, since real environments cannot
be expected to behave as nicely as laboratory ones. While there are many aspects of a real
environment that are likely to be noisy, we can identify three major sources of noise in
the kind of sequential decision tasks for which SAMUEL is designed: sensor noise, effector
noise, and payoff noise. Recall that we assume the performance module cannot directly
access the state of the world, but must instead take its input from sensors. Sensor noise
refers to errors in sensor data caused by imperfect sensing devices. For example, if the
radar indicates that the range to an object is 1000 meters when in fact the range is 875
meters, the performance system has received noisy data. Likewise, we assume that the performance module affects the world by setting the value of control variables, which in turn
control effector modules. Effector noise refers to errors arising when effectors fail to perform
the action indicated by the current control settings. For example, in the EM world, an effector command might be (turn 45), meaning that the effectors should initiate a 45 degree left
J.J. GREFENSTETTE, C.L. RAMSEY, A.C. SCHULTZ
turn. If the plane turns at a different rate, the effector has introduced some noise. An additional source of noise can arise during the learning phase, if the critic gives noisy feedback. For example, a noisy critic might issue a high payoff value for an episode in which
the plane is hit. Notice that this third source of noise has a different qualitative character
than the first two, since it reflects errors caused by the teacher (or those specifying the
desired performance of the system) rather than by the interaction of a performance module
with the target environment.
While all of these types of noise are interesting, we restrict our attention to the noise
caused by sensors. To test the effects of sensor noise on SAMUEL, two environments were
defined. In one environment, the sensors are noise-free. In the second environment, noise
is added to each of the four external sensors that indicate the missile's range, bearing,
heading, and speed. Noise consists of a random draw from a normal distribution with mean
0.0 and standard deviation equal to 10% of the legal range for the corresponding sensor.
The resulting value is then discretized according to the defined granularity of the sensor.
For example, suppose the missile's true heading is 66 degrees. The noise consists of a random draw from a normal distribution with standard deviation 36 (10% of 360 degrees),
resulting in a value of, say, 22. The noisy result, 88, is then discretized to the nearest 10
degree boundary (the user-defined granularity of the sensor), and the final sensor reading
is 90. As this example shows, the amount of noise in this environment is rather substantial.
As in the previous section, given a noisy environment and a noise-free environment,
there are four possible experimental conditions, depending on which environment is used
for the simulation model and which is used for the target environment.5 For each experimental
condition, the genetic algorithm was executed for 200 generations, and the results are shown
in Figures 9 and 10.
Figure 9. Sensitivity to sensor noise when trained with noise-free environment.
LEARNING SEQUENTIAL DECISION RULES
Figure 10. Sensitivity to sensor noise when trained with noisy environment.
Once again, these experiments show that SAMUEL learns best when the training environment matches the target environment. Figure 9 shows that plans learned with noise-free
sensors do quite poorly when the target environment has noisy sensors. On the other hand,
the plans trained under noisy conditions exhibit no significant loss of performance under
noise-free conditions, as shown in Figure 10. Note the similarity between Figure 10 and
Figure 7. These results suggest that using a training environment that is less regular (in
this case, more noisy) than the target environment is better than having a training model
with spurious regularities (e.g., noise-free sensors) that do not occur in the target
environment.
5. Summary and further research
The studies described here illustrate the kind of investigations one might pursue in simulationassisted learning with SAMUEL. One important lesson of the empirical studies is that
SAMUEL is an opportunistic learner, and will tailor the plans that it learns to the regularities
it finds in the training model. It follows that the closer the training model matches the
conditions expected in the target environment—in terms of initial conditions and sensor
noise—the better the learned plans will be. However, in the absence of a perfect match
between training model and target environment, it is better to have too little regularity (e.g.,
more general initial conditions, more sensor noise) in the training model than to learn with
a simulation model with regularities that do not occur in the target environment.
The current results suggest a number of topics that require further work. The following
are some of the areas we will focus on in the future.
J.J. GREFENSTETTE, C.L. RAMSEY, A.C. SCHULTZ
5.1. Explanation-based learning
The high-performance plans that SAMUEL learns can generate expert behavior that might
serve as the input for analytic learning techniques. We would like the system to explain
why the plans found by SAMUEL perform well. Our first step is to interpret traces of
the behavior of a learned rule set. For example, if the following rule
(and (last-turn -1350) (time2 16) (range 0 1000)
(bearing 6 9) (heading 50 30) (speed 100 600))
then (turn 45)
fires in a state specified by the feature vector;
( l a s t - t u r n O ) (time 3) (range 300) (bearing 3) (heading290) (speed 400)
then a possible interpretation of this rule firing is:
m i s s i l e
m i s s i Ie = mediurn at
s o f t l y
m i s s i l e
For the next step, we will construct a domain theory that elaborates and motivates these
explanations. We are attempting to adapt Qualitative Process Theory , which
provides a language well-suited to describing processes, for the interpretation of the empirical learned rules. The interpretations are expected to be helpful in creating new rules
for SAMUEL.
5.2. Generation of plausible initial plans
Currently, the initial plans are generated using a weak model consisting of knowledge about
legal values for sensors. We are investigating alternative methods for generation plausible
rules using available background knowledge. For example, in the EM domain, we might
want to use a Half-Order Theory to generate symmetric variants
of rules. That is, if GENCOVER creates a rule that says, If the missile is on the left, turn
hard left, we may also want to create a rule that says, If the missile is on the right, turn
hard right.
5.3. Traditional rule learning operators
SAMUEL provides a testbed for investigating several rule modification operators besides
the genetic operators, such as specialization, generalization, merging, and discrimination
 . We expect that the competitive mechanisms of SAMUEL will enable the
LEARNING SEQUENTIAL DECISION RULES
effective use of these operators without making unreasonably strong assumptions about
the critic's ability to assign credit and blame. We also plan to investigate adaptive methods
 for selecting which operator to apply.
5.4. More complex problems
The current statement of the EM problem assumes a two-dimensional world. Future experiments will adopt a three-dimensional model and will address problems with multiple control
variables, such as controlling both the direction and the speed of the plane. We plan to
augment the task environment to test SAMUEL'S ability to learn control rules for more
realistic tactical scenarios. Multiple incoming threats will be considered, as well as multiple control variables (e.g., accelerations, directions, weapons, etc.).
In summary, experience with SAMUEL indicates that machine learning techniques may
enable the design of high performance rules through the interaction of a learning system
with a simulation of the task environment. As simulation technology improves, it will become
possible to provide learning systems with high fidelity simulations of tasks whose complexity
or uncertainty precludes the use of traditional knowledge engineering methods. No matter
what the degree of sophistication of the simulator, it is important to assess the effects on
any learning method of the differences between the simulation model and the target environment. These initial studies with a simple tactical problem have shown that it is possible
for learning systems based on genetic algorithms to effectively search a space of knowledge
structures and discover sets of rules that provide high performance in a variety of target
environments. Further developments along these lines can be expected to reduce the manual
knowledge acquisition effort required to build systems with expert performance on complex
sequential decision tasks.
1. If payoff is accumulated over an infinite period, the total payoff is usually defined to be a (finite) time-weighted
sum .
2. SAMUEL stands for Strategy Acquisition Method Using Empirical Learning. The name also honors Art Samuel,
one of the pioneers in machine learning.
3. If there is more than one control variable, the conflict resolution phase is executed independently for each
control variable. As a result, the settings for different control variables may be recommended by distinct
rules. This situation does not arise in EM, since there is only one control variable.
4. The idea of including the variance in the bidding phase in classifier systems was proposed independently
by Goldberg .
5. For these experiments, both the noisy and noise-free environment used the variable initial conditions, as described
in the previous section.