Deep Learning Face Attributes in the Wild∗
Ziwei Liu1
Xiaogang Wang2
Xiaoou Tang1
1Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{lz013,pluo,xtang}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, 
Predicting face attributes in the wild is challenging due
to complex face variations.
We propose a novel deep
learning framework for attribute prediction in the wild.
It cascades two CNNs, LNet and ANet, which are ﬁnetuned jointly with attribute tags, but pre-trained differently.
LNet is pre-trained by massive general object categories for
face localization, while ANet is pre-trained by massive face
identities for attribute prediction. This framework not only
outperforms the state-of-the-art with a large margin, but
also reveals valuable facts on learning face representation.
(1) It shows how the performances of face localization
(LNet) and attribute prediction (ANet) can be improved
by different pre-training strategies.
(2) It reveals that
although the ﬁlters of LNet are ﬁne-tuned only with imagelevel attribute tags, their response maps over entire images
have strong indication of face locations. This fact enables
training LNet for face localization with only image-level
annotations, but without face bounding boxes or landmarks,
which are required by all attribute recognition works. (3)
It also demonstrates that the high-level hidden neurons of
ANet automatically discover semantic concepts after pretraining with massive face identities, and such concepts are
signiﬁcantly enriched after ﬁne-tuning with attribute tags.
Each attribute can be well explained with a sparse linear
combination of these concepts.
1. Introduction
Face attributes are beneﬁcial for multiple applications
such as face veriﬁcation , identiﬁcation , and
retrieval. Predicting face attributes from images in the wild
is challenging, because of complex face variations such as
poses, lightings, and occlusions as shown in Fig.1.
Attribute recognition methods are generally categorized
into two groups: global and local methods. Global methods
extract features from the entire object, where accurate
locations of object parts or landmarks are not required.
∗This work has been accepted to appear in ICCV 2015. This is the preprinted version. Content may slightly change prior to the ﬁnal publication.
Arched Eyebrows Receding Hairline
(a) HOG(landmarks)+SVM
(b) Our Method
5 attributes
10 attributes
20 attributes
40 attributes
Figure 1. (a) Inaccurate localization and alignment lead to prediction
errors on attributes by existing methods (b) LNet localizes face regions by
averaging the response maps of attribute ﬁlters. ANet predicts attributes
without alignment (c) Face localization with the averaged response map
when LNet is trained with different numbers of attributes. (Best viewed in
They are not robust to deformations of objects . Recent
local models ﬁrst detect object parts
and extract features from each part. These local features
are concatenated to train classiﬁers. For example, Kumar et
al. predicted face attributes by extracting hand-crafted
features from ten face parts. Zhang et al. recognized
human attributes by employing hundreds of poselets 
to align human body parts. These local methods may fail
when unconstrained face images with complex variations
are present, which makes face localization and alignment
difﬁcult. As shown in Fig.1 (a), HOG+SVM fails because
the faces or landmarks are wrongly localized or misaligned.
Thus the features are extracted at wrong positions .
Recent research shows that face localization and alignment
are still not well solved problems, especially in the wild
condition, although much progress has been achieved in the
past decade. It is also proved by our experimental result.
This work revisits global methods by proposing a novel
deep learning framework, which integrates two CNNs,
 
LNet and ANet, where LNet locates the entire face region
and ANet extracts high-level face representation from the
located region. The novelties are in three aspects. Firstly,
LNet is trained in a weakly supervised manner, i.e. only
image-level attribute tags of training images are provided,
making data preparation much easier. This is different from
training face and landmark detectors, where face bounding
boxes and landmark positions are required. LNet is pretrained by classifying massive general object categories,
such that its pre-trained features have good generalization
capability on handling large background clutters. LNet is
then ﬁne-tuned by attributes tags. We demonstrate that features learned in this way are effective for face localization
and also can distinguish subtle differences between human
faces and analogous patterns, such as a cat face.
Secondly, ANet extracts discriminative face representation, making attribute recognition from the entire face
region possible. ANet is pre-trained by classifying massive
face identities and is ﬁne-tuned by attributes. We show that
the pre-training step enables ANet to account for complex
variations in the unconstrained face images.
Thirdly, within the rough locations of face regions
provided by LNet, averaging the predictions of multiple
patches can improve the performance.
A simple way is
to evaluate the feed-forward pass for each single patch.
However, it is slow and has a lot of redundant computation.
A novel fast feed-forward scheme is proposed to replace
patch-by-patch evaluation. It evaluates images with arbitrary sizes with only one-pass feed-forward operation. It
becomes non-trivial if the ﬁlters are locally shared, while
studies showed that locally shared ﬁlters perform
better in face related tasks. This is solved by proposing an
interweaved operation.
Besides proposing new methods, our framework also
reveals valuable facts on learning face representation. They
not only motivate this work but also beneﬁt future research
on face and deep learning. (1) It shows how pre-training
with massive object categories and massive identities can
improve feature learning for face localization and attribute
recognition, respectively. (2) It demonstrates that although
ﬁlters of LNet are ﬁne-tuned by attribute tags, their response
maps over the entire image have strong indication of face
location. Good features for face localization should be able
to capture rich face variations, and more supervised information on these variations improves the learning process.
The examples in Fig. 1 (a) show that as the number of
attributes decreases, the localization capability of learned
neurons gets reduced dramatically. (3) ANet is pre-trained
with massive face identities. It discloses that the pre-trained
high-level hidden neurons of ANet implicitly learn and
discover sematic concepts that are related to identity, such
as race, gender, and age.
It indicates that when a deep
model is pre-trained for face recognition, it implicitly learns
attributes. The performance of attribute prediction drops
without this pre-training stage.
The main contributions are summarized as follows.
(1) We propose a novel deep learning framework, which
combines massive objects and massive identities to pre-train
two CNNs for face localization and attribute prediction,
respectively. It achieves state-of-the-art attribute classiﬁcation results on both the challenging CelebFaces and
LFW datasets, improving existing methods by 8 and
13 percent, respectively.
(2) A novel fast feed-forward
algorithm for CNN with locally shared ﬁlters is devised. (3)
Our study reveals multiple valuable facts on leaning face
representation by deep models. (4) We also contribute a
large facial attribute database with more than eight million
attribute labels and it is 20 times larger than the largest
publicly available dataset.
1.1. Related Work
Extracting hand-crafted features at pre-deﬁned landmarks has become a standard step in attribute recognition
 . Kumar et al. extracted HOG-like features
on various face regions to tackle attribute classiﬁcation and
face veriﬁcation.
To improve the discriminativeness of
hand-crafted features given a speciﬁc task, Bourdev et al.
 built a three-level SVM system to extract higher-level
information. Deep learning 
recently achieved great success in attribute prediction, due
to their ability to learn compact and discriminative features.
Razavian et al. and Donahue et al. demonstrated
that off-the-shelf features learned by CNN of ImageNet 
can be effectively adapted to attribute classiﬁcation. Zhang
et al. showed that better performance can be achieved
by ensembling learned features of multiple pose-normalized
CNNs. The main drawback of these methods is that they
rely on accurate landmark detection and pose estimation in
both training and testing steps. Even though a recent work
 can perform automatic part localization during test, it
still requires landmark annotations of the training data.
2. Our Approach
Framework Overview Fig.2 illustrates our pipeline
where LNet locates the entire face region in a coarse-to-
ﬁne manner as shown in (a) and (b), while ANet extracts
features for attribute recognition as shown in (c).
Different from existing works that rely on accurate face
and landmark annotations, LNet is trained in a weakly supervised manner with only image-level annotations. Specifically, it is pre-trained with one thousand object categories
of ImageNet and ﬁne-tuned by image-level attribute
The former step accounts for background clutters,
while the latter step learns features robust to complex
face variations.
Learning LNet in this way not only
signiﬁcantly reduces data labeling, but also improves the
Linear SVM
High Cheekbones
(d) Extracting features to predict attributes
Linear SVM
Linear SVM
Figure 2. The proposed pipeline of attribute prediction (Best viewed in color)
accuracy of face localization. Both LNeto and LNets have
network structures similar to AlexNet , whose hyper
parameters are speciﬁed in Fig.2 (a) and (b) respectively.
The ﬁfth convolutional layer (C5) of LNeto indicates headshoulders while C5 of LNets indicates faces, with their
highly responsed regions in their averaged response maps.
Moreover, the input xo of LNeto is a m × n image, while
the input xs of LNets is the head-shoulder region, which is
localized by LNeto and resized to 227 × 227.
As illustrated in Fig.2 (c), ANet is learned to predict
attributes y by providing the input face region xf, which is
detected by LNets and properly resized. Speciﬁcally, multiview versions of xf are utilized to train ANet. Furthermore, ANet contains four convolutional layers, where the
ﬁlters of C1 and C2 are globally shared and the ﬁlters of C3
and C4 are locally shared. The effectiveness of local ﬁlters
have been demonstrated in many face related tasks .
To handle complex face variations, ANet is pre-trained by
distinguishing massive face identities, which facilitates the
learning of discriminative features.
Fig.2 (d) outlines the procedure of attribute recognition.
ANet extracts a set of feature vectors (FCs) by cropping
overlapping patches on xf.
An efﬁcient feed-forward
algorithm is developed to reduce redundant computation
in the feature extraction stage.
SVMs are trained to
predict attribute values given each FC. The ﬁnal prediction
is obtained by averaging all these values, to cope with small
misalignment of face localization.
2.1. Face Localization
The cascade of LNeto and LNets accurately localizes
face regions by being trained on image-level attribute tags.
Pre-training LNet Both LNeto and LNets are pretrained with 1, 000 general object categories from the
ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge
(ILSVRC) 2012 , containing 1.2 million training images
and 50 thousands validation images.
All the data is
employed for pre-training except one third of the validation
data for choosing hyper-parameters .
We augment
data by cropping ten patches from each image, including
one patch at the center and four at the corners, and their
horizontal ﬂips. We adopt softmax for object classiﬁcation,
which is optimized by stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
with back-propagation (BP) .
As shown in Fig.3
(a.2), the averaged response map in C5 of LNeto already
indicates locations of objects including human faces after
pre-training.
Fine-tuning LNet Both LNeto and LNets are ﬁne-tuned
with attribute tags. Additional output layers are added to
the LNets individually for ﬁne-tuning and then removed for
evaluation. LNeto adopts the full image xo as input while
LNets uses the highly responsed region xs in the averaged
response map in C5 of LNeto as input, which roughly respond to head-shoulders. The cross-entropy loss is used for
attribute classiﬁcation, i.e. L = P
i=1 yi log p(yi|x)+(1−
 1 −p(yi|x)
, where p(yi = 1|x) =
1+exp(−f(x))
is the probability of the i-th attribute given image x. As
shown in Fig.3 (a.3), the response maps after ﬁne-tuning
become much more clean and smooth, indicating that the
ﬁlters learned by attribute tags can detect face patterns with
complex variations. To appreciate the effectiveness of pretraining, we also include the averaged response map in C5
of being directly trained from scratch with attribute tags but
without pre-training in Fig.3 (a.4). It cannot separate face
regions from background and other body parts well.
Thresholding and Proposing Windows We show that
the responses of C5 in LNet are discriminative enough
to separate faces and background by simply searching a
threshold, such that a window with response larger than
this threshold corresponding to face and otherwise is back-
Response on Face Images
Response on Bg. Images
Maximum Score
Percentage of Images
Figure 3. (a.1) Original image. (a.2)-(a.4) are averaged response maps
in C5 of LNeto after pre-training (a.2), ﬁne-tuning (a.3) and directly
training from scratch with attribute tags but without pre-training (a.4). (b)
Determine threshold.
ground. To determine the threshold, we select 2000 images,
each of which contains a single face, and 2000 background
images from SUN dataset . For each image, EdgeBox
 is adopted to propose 500 candidate windows, each of
which is measured by a score that sums over its response
values normalized by its window size.
A larger score
indicates the localized pattern is more likely to be a face.
Each image is then represented by the maximum score over
all its windows. In Fig.3 (b), the histogram of the maximum
scores shows that these scores clearly separate face images
from background images. The threshold is chosen as the
decision boundary as shown in Fig.3 (b).
More results
are given in Fig.6 (a), showing that the above strategy can
precisely localize face within a single test image. Since each
training image only contains one single face, we localize a
face region using the window with the largest score during
Pruning Multiple Faces within a single Window. For
some challenging cases in the testing stage, it encounters
difﬁculty when multiple faces are presented within a single
window, such that there may be multiple regions with high
responses.
We predict attributes based one face region
which generates the largest response1. Similar to , a
fast density peak identiﬁcation technique is devised.
calculates a special geodesic distance for each position i in
the response map, di = (ρ2
i )1/2, where ρi is the density
intensity in position i, σi = minj:ρj>ρi(sij) and sij is the
spatial distance between i and j. Then density peaks are
identiﬁed by selecting extreme large di. This process can
be further accelerated, as the averaged response map in C5
is sparse. We propose the correct window by cropping the
region with the highest density.
To understand why rich attribute information enables
accurate face localization, one could consider the examples
If only a single detector is used to
classify all the positive and negative samples in Fig.4 (a),
it is difﬁcult to handle complex face variations. Therefore,
multi-view face detectors were developed in Fig.4 (b),
i.e. face images in different views are handled by different
1In CelebFaces and LFW, it is assumed that each image has a
“dominant” face, based on which the attribute tags were labeled by users.
(b) multi-view detector
(c) face localization by attributes
(a) single detector
Attr Config 1
Brown Hair
Attr Config N
Black Hair
Sunglasses
Figure 4. Face localization by attributes
detectors. View labels were used in training detectors and
the whole training set is divided into subsets according to
views. If views are treated as one type of face attributes,
learning face representation by predicting attributes with
deep models actually extends this idea to extreme.
shown in Fig.4 (c), a ﬁlter (or a group of ﬁlters) functions
as a detector of an attribute.
When a subset of neurons
are activated, they indicate the existence of face images
with a particular attribute conﬁguration.
The neurons at
different layers can form many activation patterns, implying
that the whole set of face images can be divided into
many subsets based on attribute conﬁgurations, and each
activation pattern corresponds to one subset (e.g. ‘pointy
nose’, ‘rosy cheek’, and ‘smiling’).
Therefore, it is not
surprising that ﬁlters learned by attributes lead to effective
representations for face localization.
2.2. Attribute Prediction
As shown in Fig.2 (c) and (d), ANet is learned to
extract features and SVM classiﬁers are used to predict
attributes. Speciﬁcally, in the pre-training stage, ANet is
trained by classifying massive face identities. In the ﬁnetuning stage, we ﬁrst extend the localized face region, which
is properly resized, with a small factor to incorporate more
context information. Then, multiple patches are cropped
from the enlarged face region and utilized as inputs of
ANet. ANet is ﬁne-tuned by attributes to learn the highlevel feature FC. Furthermore, as shown in Fig.2 (d), each
feature vector is adopted to train SVM classiﬁer for attribute
prediction.
The above strategy is similar to the multiview data augmentation , increasing the robustness of
attribute recognition.
In the testing stage, attributes are
predicted by averaging the SVM scores over all the patches.
Pre-training of ANet We introduce how to learn discriminative features by pre-training ANet with a large number of identities. We select eight thousand face identities
from the CelebFaces dataset, where each identity
has around twenty images. There are over 160 thousand
training images in total.
A simple way to train ANet
is to classify eight thousand categories with the softmax
However, it is challenging because the number of
samples of each identity is limited to maintain the intraclass invariance.
To improve intra-class invariance, we
employ the similarity loss similar to . It decreases
the distances between samples of the same identity. We
(a) global convolution
(b) local convolution
(c) feature extraction with
interweaved operation
(d) interweaved operation
Figure 5. Detailed pipeline of efﬁcient feature extractions in ANet.
have L = P|D|
i=1,yi=yj ∥FCi −FCj∥2
2, where FCi and FCj
denote the feature vectors of the i-th and j-th face images
respectively, and yi = yj indicates the identities of these
samples are the same. In summary, ANet is pre-trained by
combining the softmax loss and the similarity loss.
Efﬁcient Feature Extractions In test, ANet is evaluated
on multiple patches of the face region as shown in Fig.2 (d),
leading to redundant convolutional computations because
of the large overlaps in these patches. When all the ﬁlters
are globally-shared, the computational cost can be reduced
by applying , which convolves the ﬁlters in the input
image and then obtains a feature vector for each patch by
pooling over the last convolutional layer. Given a simple
example with one convolutional layer as shown in Fig.5 (a),
the feature vector FC for each patch (e.g. rectangle in red)
can be extracted by pooling in the corresponding region of
the response map h(1), without evaluating convolutions in
the input image patch-by-patch. Therefore, it shares the
convolutions for every patch.
However, this scheme is not applicable when we have
more than two convolutional layers whose ﬁlters are
locally-shared. An example is illustrated in Fig.5 (b), where
each patch is equally divided into 3 × 3 = 9 cells and
we learn different ﬁlters for different cells.
computations in the ﬁrst convolutional layer, each local
ﬁlter can be applied on the entire image, resulting in the
response map with nine channels, i.e. h(1)
and i = 1...9.
The ﬁnal response map h(1) is obtained by cropping and
padding the regions (i.e. rectangles in black) in these 9
channels. As a result, each feature vector FC can be pooled
from h(1), without convolving the input image patchby-patch.
Nevertheless, since h(1) is corresponded to a
patch of the input image, the succeeding local convolutions
have to be handled patch-by-patch, leading to redundant
computations.
To this end, we propose an interweaved operation, which
is a fast feed-forward method for CNN with locally-shared
ﬁlters. Suppose we have four local ﬁlters in the next locally
convolutional layer and each ﬁlter is applied on 2 × 2 cells
of h(1) as shown in (b). These cells are the receptive ﬁelds
of the ﬁlters, including {1, 2, 4, 5}, {2, 3, 5, 6}, {4, 5, 7, 8},
and {5, 6, 8, 9}. Instead of directly applying the local ﬁlters
on h1, the interweaved operation generates an interweaved
for each ﬁlter, where i = 1...4. Each local ﬁlter
is then apply on its corresponding interweaved map. Since
the interweaved map capturing the entire image, each local
ﬁlter is turned into a global ﬁlter such that its computation
can be shared across different patches.
Speciﬁcally, each interweaved map, e.g. I(1)
1 , is achieved
by padding the cells of the corresponding channels in an
interweaved manner, e.g. h(1)
i={1,2,4,5}, as shown in Fig.5
(d). All of the interweaved maps are illustrated in Fig.5
(c). After that, each of the four local ﬁlters is applied on its
corresponding interweaved map, leading to four response
i , where i = 1...4. As a result, the feature vector
FC is pooled and concatenated from the receptive ﬁelds of
the ﬁlters, which are the rectangles in black as shown in (c).
Intuitively, instead of padding cells according to the
receptive ﬁelds of all the local ﬁlters (e.g. h(1) in (b)),
which has to be performed in a patch-by-patch way, the
interweaved operation pads the cells with respect to the
receptive ﬁeld of each local ﬁlter over the entire image. It
enables extracting multiple feature vectors with only onepass of feed-forward evaluation.
This operation can be
repeated when more locally convolutional layers are added.
The proposed feature extraction scheme has achieved 6×
speedup empirically when compared with patch-by-patch
scanning. It is applicable to CNNs with local ﬁlters and
compatible to all existing CNN operations.
3. Experiments
Large-scale Data Collection We construct two face
attribute datasets, namely CelebA and LFWA, by labeling
images selected from two challenging face datasets, Celeb-
Faces and LFW . CelebA contains ten thousand
identities, each of which has twenty images.
two hundred thousand images in total. LFWA has 13, 233
images of 5, 749 identities.
Each image in CelebA and
LFWA is annotated with forty face attributes and ﬁve key
Figure 6. Averaged response maps of LNet, including (a) CelebA, (b) MobileFaces, (c) some failure cases. (Best viewed in color)
False Positive Per Image
True Positive Rates
ACF Multi-view 
SURF Cascade 
Face++ 
False Positive Per Image
True Positive Rates
ACF Multi-view 
SURF Cascade 
Face++ 
Overlap Ratio
Recall Rates (FPPI = 0.1)
ACF Multi-view 
SURF Cascade 
LNet (w/o pre-training)
Number of Attributes
Recall Rates (FPPI = 0.1)
Figure 7. ROC curves on (a) CelebA (b) MobileFaces. (c) Recall rates
w.r.t. overlap ratio (FPPI = 0.1). (d) Recall rates w.r.t. number of
attributes (FPPI = 0.1)
points by a professional labeling company.
CelebA and
LFWA have over eight million and ﬁve hundred thousand
attribute labels, respectively.
CelebA is partitioned into three parts.
Images of the
ﬁrst eight thousand identities (with 160 thousand images)
are used to pre-train and ﬁne-tune ANet and LNet, and
the images of another one thousand identities (with twenty
thousand images) are employed to train SVM. The images
of the remaining one thousand identities (with twenty
thousand images) are used for testing. LFWA is partitioned
into half for training and half for testing. Speciﬁcally, 6, 263
images are adopted to train SVM and the remaining images
for test. When being evaluated on LFWA, LNet and ANet
are trained on CelebA.
Methods for Comparisons The proposed method is
compared with three competitive approaches, i.e.
Tracer , PANDA-w , and PANDA-l .
Tracer extracts HOG and color histograms in several important functional face regions and then trains SVM for
attribute classiﬁcation. We extract these functional regions
referring to the ground truth landmark points. PANDA-w
and PANDA-l are based on PANDA , which was proposed recently for human attribute recognition by ensem-
Input Image
Attractive
Input Image
Under Eyes
Input Image
Brown Hair
Figure 9. Attribute-speciﬁc regions discovery.
bling multiple CNNs, each of which extracts features from
a well-aligned human part. These features are concatenated
to train SVM for attribute recognition. It is straightforward
to adapt this method to face attributes, since face parts can
be well-aligned by landmark points. Here, we consider two
settings. PANDA-w obtains the face parts by applying the
state-of-the-art face detection and alignment on
wild images, while PANDA-l attains the face parts by using
ground truth landmark points. For fair comparison, all the
above methods are trained with the same data as ours.
3.1. Effectiveness of the Framework
This section demonstrates the effectiveness of the framework. All experiments in this section are done on CelebA.
Performance Comparison We compare LNet with four
state-of-the-art face detectors, including DPM , ACF
Multi-view , SURF Cascade , and Face++ .
We evaluate them by using ROC curves when IoU 2≥0.5.
As plotted in Fig.7(a), when FPPI = 0.01, the true
positive rates of Face++ and LNet are 85% and 93%;
when FPPI = 0.1, our method outperforms the other
three methods by 11, 9 and 22 percent respectively. We
also investigate how these methods perform with respect to
overlap ratio (IoU), following . Fig.7(c) shows that
2IoU indicates Intersection over Union.
High Resp.
Test Image
High Resp.
Hair Color
Face Shape
Brown Hair
Pale Skin Narrow Eyes High Cheek.
Eyeglasses
Black Hair
Blond Hair Wear. Lipstick Asian
Activations
Figure 8. Visualization of neurons in ANet (a) after pre-training (b) after ﬁne-tuning (Best viewed in color)
Identity-related Attributes
Identity-non-related Attributes
100% 90% 80% 70% 60% 50% 40% 30% 20% 10%
Average Accuracy
Percentage of Best Performing Neurons Used
ANet (After fine-tuning)
HOG (After PCA)
single best
performing
Smiling Wearing
White Black
Figure 10. (a) Layer-wise comparison of ANet after pre-training (b) Best
performing neurons analysis of ANet after ﬁne-tuning. Best performing
neurons are different for different attributes. The proposed accuracies are
averaged over attributes which select their own subsets of best performing
LNet generally provides more accurate face localization,
leading to good performance in the subsequent attribute
prediction.
Further Analysis LNet signiﬁcantly outperforms LNet
(without pre-training) by 74 percent when the overlap
ratio equals to 0.5, which validates the effectiveness of
pre-training, as shown in Fig.7(c).
We then explore
the inﬂuence of the number of attributes on localization.
Fig.7(d) illustrates rich attribute information facilitates face
localization. To examine the generalization ability of LNet,
we collect another 3, 876 face images for testing, namely
MobileFaces, which comes from a different source3 and has
a different distribution from CelebA. Several examples of
MobileFaces are shown in Fig.6(b) and the corresponding
ROC curves are plotted in Fig.7(b).
We observe that
LNet constantly performs better and still gains 7 percent
improvement (FPPI = 0.1) compared with other face
detectors. Despite some failure cases due to extreme poses
and large occlusions, LNet accurately localize faces in the
wild as demonstrated in Fig.6. More results of LNet under
3MobileFaces was collected by normal users with mobile phones,
while CelebA and LFWA collected face images of celebrities taken by
professional photographers.
5_o_Clock_Shadow
Wearing_Necktie
Arched_Eyebrows
Bags_Under_Eyes
Bushy_Eyebrows
Double_Chin
Narrow_Eyes
Receding_Hairline
Wearing_Earrings
Wearing_Necklace
Attractive
Brown_Hair
Heavy_Makeup
Pointy_Nose
Rosy_Cheeks
Wearing_Lipstick
Black_Hair
Straight_Hair
Blond_Hair
Wearing_Hat
Eyeglasses
High_Cheekbones
Mouth_Slightly_Open
5_o_Clock_Shadow
Wearing_Necktie
Arched_Eyebrows
Bags_Under_Eyes
Bushy_Eyebrows
Double_Chin
Narrow_Eyes
Receding_Hairline
Wearing_Earrings
Wearing_Necklace
Attractive
Brown_Hair
Heavy_Makeup
Pointy_Nose
Rosy_Cheeks
Wearing_Lipstick
Black_Hair
Straight_Hair
Blond_Hair
Wearing_Hat
Eyeglasses
High_Cheekbones
Mouth_Slightly_Open
5_o_Clock_Shadow
Wearing_Necktie
Arched_Eyebrows
Bags_Under_Eyes
Bushy_Eyebrows
Double_Chin
Narrow_Eyes
Receding_Hairline
Wearing_Earrings
Wearing_Necklace
Attractive
Brown_Hair
Heavy_Makeup
Pointy_Nose
Rosy_Cheeks
Wearing_Lipstick
Black_Hair
Straight_Hair
Blond_Hair
Wearing_Hat
Eyeglasses
High_Cheekbones
Mouth_Slightly_Open
5_o_Clock_Shadow
Wearing_Necktie
Arched_Eyebrows
Bags_Under_Eyes
Bushy_Eyebrows
Double_Chin
Narrow_Eyes
Receding_Hairline
Wearing_Earrings
Wearing_Necklace
Attractive
Brown_Hair
Heavy_Makeup
Pointy_Nose
Rosy_Cheeks
Wearing_Lipstick
Black_Hair
Straight_Hair
Blond_Hair
Wearing_Hat
Eyeglasses
High_Cheekbones
Mouth_Slightly_Open
Figure 11. Automatic attributes grouping.
different circumstances (lighting, pose, occlusion, image
resolution, background clutter etc.) are shown in Fig.14.
Attribute-speciﬁc Regions Discovery Different attribute captures information from different region of face.
We show that LNet automatically learns to discover these
regions. Given an attribute, by converting fully connected
layers of LNet into fully convolutional layers following
 , we can locate important region of this attribute. Fig.9
shows some examples.
The important regions of some
attributes are locally distributed, such as ‘Bags Under Eyes’,
‘Straight Hair’ and ‘Wearing Necklace’, but some are globally distributed, such as ‘Young’, ‘Male’ and ‘Attractive’.
Pre-training Discovers Semantic Concepts We show
that pre-training of ANet can implicity discover semantic
concepts related to face identity. Given a hidden neuron
at the FC layer of ANet as shown in Fig.2(c), we partition
the face images into three groups, including the face images
with high, medium, and low responses at this neuron. The
face images of each group are then averaged to obtain
the mean face. We visualize these mean faces for several
neurons in Fig.8(a). Interestingly, these mean face changes
smoothly from high response to low response, following a
high-level concept. Human can easily assign each neuron
with a semantic concept it measures (i.e. the text in yellow).
For example, the neurons in (a.1) and (a.4) correspond
to ‘gender’ and ‘race’, respectively.
It reveals that the
high-level hidden neurons of ANet can implicitly learn
to discover semantic concepts, even though they are only
Arch. Eyebrows
Attractive
Bags Un. Eyes
Black Hair
Blond Hair
Brown Hair
Bushy Eyebrows
Double Chin
Eyeglasses
Heavy Makeup
H. Cheekbones
FaceTracer 
PANDA-w 
PANDA-l 
LNets+ANet(w/o)
LNets+ANet
FaceTracer 
PANDA-w 
PANDA-l 
LNets+ANet(w/o)
LNets+ANet
Mouth S. O.
Narrow Eyes
Pointy Nose
Reced. Hairline
Rosy Cheeks
Straight Hair
Wear. Earrings
Wear. Lipstick
Wear. Necklace
Wear. Necktie
FaceTracer 
PANDA-w 
PANDA-l 
LNets+ANet(w/o)
LNets+ANet
FaceTracer 
PANDA-w 
PANDA-l 
LNets+ANet(w/o)
LNets+ANet
Table 1. Performance comparison of attribute prediction. (Note that FaceTracer and PANDA-l attains the face parts by using ground truth landmark points.)
optimized for face recognition using identity information
and attribute labels are not used in pre-training. We also
observe that most of these concepts are intrinsic to face
identity, such as the shape of facial components, gender,
To better explain this phenomena, we compare the
accuracy of attribute prediction using features at different
layers of ANet right after pre-training. They are FC, C4,
and C3. The forty attributes are roughly separated into two
groups, which are identity-related attributes, such as gender
and race, and identity-non-related attributes, e.g. attributes
of expressions, wearing hat and sunglasses.
some representative attributes for each group and plot the
results in Fig.10(a), which shows that the performance of
FC outperforms C4 and C3 in the group of identity-related
attributes, but they are relatively weaker when dealing with
identity-non-related attributes. This is because the top layer
FC learns identity features, which are insensitive to intrapersonal face variations.
Fine-tuning Expands Semantic Concepts Fig.8 shows
that after ﬁne-tuning, ANet can expand these concepts to
more attribute types. Fig.8(b) visualizes the neurons in the
FC layer, which are ranked by their responses in descending
order with respect to several test images. Human can assign
semantic meaning to each of these neurons. We found that
a large number of new concepts can be observed. Remarkably, these neurons express diverse high-level meanings
and cooperate to explain the test images. The activations
of all the neurons are visualized in Fig.8(b), and they are
In some sense, attributes presented in each test
image are explained by a sparse linear combination of these
concepts. For instance, the ﬁrst image is described as “a
lady with bangs, brown hair, pale skin, narrow eyes and high
cheekbones”, which well matches human perception.
To validate this, we explore how the number of neurons
inﬂuences attribute prediction accuracies. Best performing
neurons for each attribute are identiﬁed by sorting corresponding SVM weights.
Fig.10(b) illusatrates that only
10% of ANet best performing neurons are needed to achieve
90% of the original performance of a particular attribute4.
In contrast, HOG+PCA does not have the sparse nature
and need more than 95% features Besides, the best single
performing neuron of ANet outperforms that of HOG+PCA
by 25 percent in average prediction accuracy.
Automatic Attributes Grouping Here we show that the
weight matrix at the FC layer of ANet can implicitly capture
relations between attributes.
Each column vector of the
weight matrix can be viewed as a decision hyperplane to
partition the negatives and positive samples of an attribute.
By simply applying k-means to these vectors, the clusters
show clear grouping patterns, which can be interpreted
4Best performing neurons are different for different attributes.
FaceTracer 
LNets+ANet
Table 2. Performance comparison on extended attributes. (Performance are measured by the average of true positive rates and true negative rates.)
FaceTracer 
PANDA-w 
PANDA-l 
LNets+ANet
Figure 12. Performance comparison of FaceTracer , PANDA-w ,
PANDA-l and LNets+ANet on LFWA+.
LNets+ANet
Dataset Size
Figure 13. Performances of different training dataset sizes.
semantically. As shown in Fig.11, Group #1, Group #2 and
Group #4 demonstrate co-occurrence relationship between
attributes, e.g. ‘Attractive’ and ‘Heavy Makeup’ have high
correlation.
Attributes in Group #3 share similar color
descriptors, while attributes in Group #6 correspond to
certain texture and appearance traits.
3.2. Attribute Prediction
Performance Comparison The attribute prediction performance is reported in Table.1. On CelebA, the prediction
accuracies of FaceTracer , PANDA-w , PANDA-l
 , and our LNets+ANet are 81, 79, 85, and 87 percent
respectively, while the corresponding accuracies on LFWA
are 74, 71, 81, and 84 percent. Our method outperforms
PANDA-w by nearly 10 percent. Remarkably, even when
PANDA-l is equipped with groundtruth bounding boxes
and landmark positions, our method still achieves 3 percent
gain. The strength of our method is illustrated not only
on global attributes, e.g. “Chubby” and “Young”, but also
on ﬁne-grained facial traits, e.g. “Mastache” and “Pointy
We also report performance on 19 extended attributes and compare our result with and . The evaluation protocol is the same as . In Table 2, LNets+ANet
outperforms them by 10 and 7 percent respectively.
Further Analysis When compared with +ANet,
LNets accounts for nearly 6 percentage improvement over
using an off-the-shelf face detector .
We also experiment with the case of providing ANet with localized
face region by LNets, but without pre-training, denoted as
LNets+ANet(w/o). The average accuracies have dropped
4 and 5 percent on CelebA and LFWA, which indicate
pre-training with massive facial identities helps discover
semantic concepts.
Performance on LFWA+ To further examine whether
the proposed approach can be generalized to unseen attributes, we manually label 30 more attributes for the testing
images on LFWA and denote this extended dataset as
LFWA+. To test on these 30 attributes, we directly transfer
weights learned by deep models to extract features, and only
re-train SVMs using one third of the images. LNets+ANet
leads to 8, 10, and 3 percent average gains over the other
three approaches (FaceTracer, PANDA-w, and PANDA-l).
It demonstrates that our method learns discriminative face
representations and has good generalization ability.
Size of Training Dataset We compare the attribute
prediction accuracy of the proposed method with the accuracy of PANDA-l, regarding different sizes of training
Only the training data of ANet is changed in
our method for fair comparison. Fig.13 demonstrates that
LNets+ANet performs well when dataset size is small, but
the performance of PANDA-l drops signiﬁcantly.
Time Complexity For a 300 ∗300 image, LNets takes
35ms to localize face region while ANet takes 14ms to
extract features on GPU. In contrast, a na¨ıve patch-bypatch scanning needs nearly 80 ms to extract features. Our
framework has large potential in real-world applications.
4. Conclusion
This paper has proposed a novel deep learning framework for face attribute prediction in the wild. With carefully
designed pre-training strategies, our method is robust to
background clutters and face variations. We devise a new
fast feed-forward algorithm for locally shared ﬁlters to save
redundant computation, which enables evaluating image
with arbitrary size in realtime. It allows taking images of
arbitrary sizes as input without normalization.
also revealed multiple important facts about learning face
representation, which shed a light on new directions of face
localization and representation learning.