Deep Reinforcement Learning that Matters
Peter Henderson,1∗Riashat Islam,1,2∗Philip Bachman,2
Joelle Pineau,1 Doina Precup,1 David Meger1
1 McGill University, Montreal, Canada
2 Microsoft Maluuba, Montreal, Canada
{peter.henderson,riashat.islam}@mail.mcgill.ca, 
{jpineau,dprecup}@cs.mcgill.ca, 
In recent years, signiﬁcant progress has been made in solving
challenging problems across various domains using deep reinforcement learning (RL). Reproducing existing work and
accurately judging the improvements offered by novel methods is vital to sustaining this progress. Unfortunately, reproducing results for state-of-the-art deep RL methods is seldom
straightforward. In particular, non-determinism in standard
benchmark environments, combined with variance intrinsic
to the methods, can make reported results tough to interpret.
Without signiﬁcance metrics and tighter standardization of
experimental reporting, it is difﬁcult to determine whether improvements over the prior state-of-the-art are meaningful. In
this paper, we investigate challenges posed by reproducibility,
proper experimental techniques, and reporting procedures. We
illustrate the variability in reported metrics and results when
comparing against common baselines and suggest guidelines
to make future results in deep RL more reproducible. We aim
to spur discussion about how to ensure continued progress in
the ﬁeld by minimizing wasted effort stemming from results
that are non-reproducible and easily misinterpreted.
Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is the study of how an agent
can interact with its environment to learn a policy which
maximizes expected cumulative rewards for a task. Recently,
RL has experienced dramatic growth in attention and interest
due to promising results in areas like: controlling continuous
systems in robotics , playing Go , Atari , and competitive video
games .
Figure 1 illustrates growth of the ﬁeld through the number
of publications per year. To maintain rapid progress in RL
research, it is important that existing works can be easily
reproduced and compared to accurately judge improvements
offered by novel methods.
However, reproducing deep RL results is seldom straightforward, and the literature reports a wide range of results
for the same baseline algorithms . Reproducibility can be affected by extrinsic factors (e.g. hyperparameters or codebases) and intrinsic factors . All rights reserved.
Figure 1: Growth of published reinforcement learning papers.
Shown are the number of RL-related publications (y-axis)
per year (x-axis) scraped from Google Scholar searches.
fects of random seeds or environment properties). We investigate these sources of variance in reported results through
a representative set of experiments. For clarity, we focus
our investigation on policy gradient (PG) methods in continuous control. Policy gradient methods with neural network function approximators have been particularly successful in continuous control and are competitive with value-based
methods in discrete settings. We note that the diversity of
metrics and lack of signiﬁcance testing in the RL literature
creates the potential for misleading reporting of results. We
demonstrate possible beneﬁts of signiﬁcance testing using
techniques common in machine learning and statistics.
Several works touch upon evaluating RL algorithms. Duan
et al. benchmark several RL algorithms and provide
the community with baseline implementations. Generalizable RL evaluation metrics are proposed in . Machado et al. revisit the Arcade Learning
Environment to propose better evaluation methods in these
benchmarks. However, while the question of reproducibility
and good experimental practice has been examined in related
ﬁelds , to the best of
our knowledge this is the ﬁrst work to address this important
question in the context of deep RL.
In each section of our experimental analysis, we pose questions regarding key factors affecting reproducibility. We ﬁnd
that there are numerous sources of non-determinism when
reproducing and comparing RL algorithms. To this end, we
The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)
show that ﬁne details of experimental procedure can be critical. Based on our experiments, we conclude with possible
recommendations, lines of investigation, and points of discussion for future works to ensure that deep reinforcement
learning is reproducible and continues to matter.
Technical Background
This work focuses on several model-free policy gradient
algorithms with publicly available implementations which
appear frequently in the literature as baselines for comparison against novel methods. We experiment with Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) ,
Deep Deterministic Policy Gradients (DDPG) , Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) , and Actor Critic using Kronecker-Factored
Trust Region (ACKTR) . These methods
have shown promising results in continuous control MuJoCo
domain tasks from OpenAI Gym . Generally, they optimize
ρ(θ, s0) = Eπθ [∞
t=0 γtr(st)|s0], using the policy gradient
s μπθ(s|s0) 
Qπθ(s, a).
Here, μπθ(s|s0) = ∞
t=0 γtP(st = s|s0) . TRPO and PPO use constraints and advantage estimation to perform this update, reformulating the optimization problem
as: maxθ Et
πθold(at|st)At(st, at)
. Here, At is the generalized advantage function . TRPO uses
conjugate gradient descent as the optimization method with
a KL constraint: Et [KL [πθold(·|st), πθ(·|st)]] ≤δ. PPO reformulates the constraint as a penalty (or clipping objective).
DDPG and ACKTR use actor-critic methods which estimate
Q(s, a) and optimize a policy that maximizes the Q-function
based on Monte-Carlo rollouts. DDPG does this using deterministic policies, while ACKTR uses Kronecketer-factored
trust regions to ensure stability with stochastic policies.
Experimental Analysis
We pose several questions about the factors affecting reproducibility of state-of-the-art RL methods. We perform a set
of experiments designed to provide insight into the questions
posed. In particular, we investigate the effects of: speciﬁc
hyperparameters on algorithm performance if not properly
tuned; random seeds and the number of averaged experiment trials; speciﬁc environment characteristics; differences
in algorithm performance due to stochastic environments;
differences due to codebases with most other factors held
constant. For most of our experiments1, except for those comparing codebases, we generally use the OpenAI Baselines2
implementations of the following algorithms: ACKTR , PPO , DDPG , TRPO . We use the Hopperv1 and HalfCheetah-v1 MuJoCo environments from OpenAI Gym . These two environments provide contrasting dynamics (the former being more unstable).
To ensure fairness we run ﬁve experiment trials for each
evaluation, each with a different preset random seed (all
experiments use the same set of random seeds). In all cases,
we highlight important results here, with full descriptions of
experimental setups and additional learning curves included
in the supplemental material. Unless otherwise mentioned,
we use default settings whenever possible, while modifying
only the hyperparameters of interest.
We use multilayer perceptron function approximators in
all cases. We denote the hidden layer sizes and activations
as (N, M, activation). For default settings, we vary the hyperparameters under investigation one at a time. For DDPG
we use a network structure of (64, 64, ReLU) for both actor
and critic. For TRPO and PPO, we use (64, 64, tanh) for the
policy. For ACKTR, we use (64, 64, tanh) for the actor and
(64, 64, ELU) for the critic.
Hyperparameters
What is the magnitude of the effect hyperparameter settings
can have on baseline performance?
Tuned hyperparameters play a large role in eliciting the best
results from many algorithms. However, the choice of optimal hyperparameter conﬁguration is often not consistent
in related literature, and the range of values considered is
often not reported3. Furthermore, poor hyperparameter selection can be detrimental to a fair comparison against baseline
algorithms. Here, we investigate several aspects of hyperparameter selection on performance.
Network Architecture
How does the choice of network architecture for the policy
and value function approximation affect performance?
In , it is shown that policy network architecture can signiﬁcantly impact results in both TRPO and DDPG.
Furthermore, certain activation functions such as Rectiﬁed
Linear Unit (ReLU) have been shown to cause worsened
learning performance due to the “dying relu” problem . As such, we examine network architecture and activation functions for both policy and value function approximators. In the literature, similar lines of investigation have
shown the differences in performance when comparing linear
approximators, RBFs, and neural networks . Tables 1 and 2 summarize the ﬁnal evaluation performance of all architectural variations after training on 2M
samples (i.e. 2M timesteps in the environment). All learning
curves and details on setup can be found in the supplemental
material. We vary hyperparameters one at a time, while using
a default setting for all others. We investigate three multilayer
perceptron (MLP) architectures commonly seen in the literature: (64, 64), (100, 50, 25), and (400, 300). Furthermore,
we vary the activation functions of both the value and policy
networks across tanh, ReLU, and Leaky ReLU activations.
Results Figure 2 shows how signiﬁcantly performance can
be affected by simple changes to the policy or value network
3A sampled literature review can be found in the supplemental.
Average Return
HalfCheetah-v1 (PPO, Policy Network Structure)
(100,50,25)
Average Return
HalfCheetah-v1 (TRPO, Policy Network Activation)
leaky relu
Figure 2: Signiﬁcance of Policy Network Structure and Activation Functions PPO (left), TRPO (middle) and DDPG (right).
Average Return
HalfCheetah-v1 (DDPG, Reward Scale, Layer Norm)
Average Return
HalfCheetah-v1 (DDPG, Reward Scale, No Layer Norm)
Figure 3: DDPG reward rescaling on HalfCheetah-v1, with and without layer norm.
activations. We ﬁnd that usually ReLU or Leaky ReLU activations perform the best across environments and algorithms.
The effects are not consistent across algorithms or environments. This inconsistency demonstrates how interconnected
network architecture is to algorithm methodology. For example, using a large network with PPO may require tweaking
other hyperparameters such as the trust region clipping or
learning rate to compensate for the architectural change4.
This intricate interplay of hyperparameters is one of the reasons reproducing current policy gradient methods is so dif-
ﬁcult. It is exceedingly important to choose an appropriate
architecture for proper baseline results. This also suggests a
possible need for hyperparameter agnostic algorithms—that
is algorithms that incorporate hyperparameter adaptation as
part of the design—such that fair comparisons can be made
without concern about improper settings for the task at hand.
Reward Scale
How can the reward scale affect results? Why is reward
rescaling used?
Reward rescaling has been used in several recent works
 to improve results for
DDPG. This involves simply multiplying the rewards generated from an environment by some scalar (ˆr = rˆσ) for
training. Often, these works report using a reward scale
of ˆσ = 0.1. In Atari domains, this is akin to clipping the
rewards to . By intuition, in gradient based methods
(as used in most deep RL) a large and sparse output scale
can result in problems regarding saturation and inefﬁciency
in learning . Therefore clipping or rescaling rewards compresses the space of estimated
4We ﬁnd that the KL divergence of updates with the large network (400, 300) seen in Figure 2 is on average 33.52 times higher
than the KL divergence of updates with the (64, 64) network.
expected returns in action value function based methods such
as DDPG. We run a set of experiments using reward rescaling
in DDPG (with and without layer normalization) for insights
into how this aspect affects performance.
Results Our analysis shows that reward rescaling can have
a large effect (full experiment results can be found in the
supplemental material), but results were inconsistent across
environments and scaling values. Figure 3 shows one such example where reward rescaling affects results, causing a failure
to learn in small settings below ˆσ = 0.01. In particular, layer
normalization changes how the rescaling factor affects results,
suggesting that these impacts are due to the use of deep networks and gradient-based methods. With the value function
approximator tracking a moving target distribution, this can
potentially affect learning in unstable environments where
a deep Q-value function approximator is used. Furthermore,
some environments may have untuned reward scales (e.g.
the HumanoidStandup-v1 of OpenAI gym which can reach
rewards in the scale of millions). Therefore, we suggest that
this hyperparameter has the potential to have a large impact
if considered properly. Rather than rescaling rewards in some
environments, a more principled approach should be taken
to address this. An initial foray into this problem is made
in , where the authors adaptively
rescale reward targets with normalized stochastic gradient,
but further research is needed.
Random Seeds and Trials
Can random seeds drastically alter performance? Can one
distort results by averaging an improper number of trials?
A major concern with deep RL is the variance in results due
to environment stochasticity or stochasticity in the learning
process (e.g. random weight initialization). As such, even
averaging several learning results together across totally different random seeds can lead to the reporting of misleading
results. We highlight this in the form of an experiment.
Environment
2674 ± 227
2674 ± 227
2772 ± 211
 
HalfCheetah-v1
1791 ± 224
1939 ± 140
1939 ± 140
3041 ± 161
 
HalfCheetah-v1
2865 ± 189
 
HalfCheetah-v1
-155 ± 188
1045 ± 114
2592 ± 196
 
HalfCheetah-v1
-1180 ± 444
2201 ± 323
1314 ± 340
2201 ± 323
2971 ± 364
2895 ± 365
1419 ± 313
1632 ± 459
2142 ± 436
1491 ± 205
1632 ± 459
1384 ± 285
 
HalfCheetah-v1
5579 ± 354
4198 ± 606
5600 ± 601
5325 ± 281
4198 ± 606
4094 ± 233
 
HalfCheetah-v1
2845 ± 589
2771 ± 535
1638 ± 624
1638 ± 624
2771 ± 535
 
HalfCheetah-v1
1573 ± 385
1224 ± 553
1311 ± 271
1573 ± 385
2577 ± 529
2287 ± 946
2835 ± 503
2718 ± 434
 
HalfCheetah-v1
2653 ± 408
2691 ± 231
2498 ± 112
2621 ± 381
2160 ± 151
2691 ± 231
Table 1: Results for our policy architecture permutations across various implementations and algorithms. Final average ±
standard error across 5 trials of returns across the last 100 trajectories after 2M training samples. For ACKTR, we use ELU
activations instead of leaky ReLU.
Environment
3011 ± 171
2674 ± 227
2782 ± 120
2674 ± 227
 
HalfCheetah-v1
1939 ± 140
1673 ± 148
1939 ± 140
 
HalfCheetah-v1
2969 ± 111
2687 ± 144
 
HalfCheetah-v1
1523 ± 297
2201 ± 323
1807 ± 309
2201 ± 323
1227 ± 462
1419 ± 312
1632 ± 458
1569 ± 453
 
HalfCheetah-v1
5600 ± 601
4197 ± 606
4713 ± 374
3908 ± 293
4197 ± 606
5324 ± 280
 
HalfCheetah-v1
1373 ± 678
1717 ± 508
1868 ± 620
1128 ± 511
1717 ± 508
1208 ± 423
 
HalfCheetah-v1
1095 ± 139
1311 ± 271
1095 ± 139
1930 ± 185
1589 ± 225
1930 ± 185
 
HalfCheetah-v1
3018 ± 386
2554 ± 219
2547 ± 172
3362 ± 682
Table 2: Results for our value function (Q or V ) architecture permutations across various implementations and algorithms. Final
average ± standard error across 5 trials of returns across the last 100 trajectories after 2M training samples. For ACKTR, we use
ELU activations instead of leaky ReLU.
Figure 4: Performance of several policy gradient algorithms across benchmark MuJoCo environment suites
Environment
HalfCheetah-v1
5037 (3664, 6574)
3888 (2288, 5131)
1254.5 (999, 1464)
3043 
1632 (607, 2370)
2546 (1875, 3217)
2965 (2854, 3076)
2715 (2589, 2847)
Walker2d-v1
1582 (901, 2174)
2285 (1246, 3235)
3072 (2957, 3183)
2926 (2514, 3361)
Swimmer-v1
31 (21, 46)
50 (42, 55)
214 (141, 287)
107 (101, 118)
Table 3: Bootstrap mean and 95% conﬁdence bounds for a subset of environment experiments. 10k bootstrap iterations and the
pivotal method were used.
Average Return
HalfCheetah-v1 (TRPO, Diﬀerent Random Seeds)
Random Average (5 runs)
Random Average (5 runs)
Figure 5: TRPO on HalfCheetah-v1 using the same hyperparameter conﬁgurations averaged over two sets of 5 different
random seeds each. The average 2-sample t-test across entire
training distribution resulted in t = −9.0916, p = 0.0016.
Results We perform 10 experiment trials, for the same
hyperparameter conﬁguration, only varying the random seed
across all 10 trials. We then split the trials into two sets of
5 and average these two groupings together. As shown in
Figure 5, we ﬁnd that the performance of algorithms can
be drastically different. We demonstrate that the variance
between runs is enough to create statistically different distributions just from varying random seeds. Unfortunately, in
recent reported results, it is not uncommon for the top-N trials to be selected from among several trials or averaged over only small number of trials (N < 5) . Our experiment
with random seeds shows that this can be potentially misleading. Particularly for HalfCheetah, it is possible to get learning
curves that do not fall within the same distribution at all, just
by averaging different runs with the same hyperparameters,
but different random seeds. While there can be no speciﬁc
number of trials speciﬁed as a recommendation, it is possible
that power analysis methods can be used to give a general
idea to this extent as we will discuss later. However, more
investigation is needed to answer this open problem.
Environments
How do the environment properties affect variability in reported RL algorithm performance?
To assess how the choice of evaluation environment can affect the presented results, we use our aforementioned default
set of hyperparameters across our chosen testbed of algorithms and investigate how well each algorithm performs
across an extended suite of continuous control tasks. For
these experiments, we use the following environments from
OpenAI Gym: Hopper-v1, HalfCheetah-v1, Swimmer-v1 and
Walker2d-v1. The choice of environment often plays an important role in demonstrating how well a new proposed algorithm performs against baselines. In continuous control tasks,
often the environments have random stochasticity, shortened
trajectories, or different dynamic properties. We demonstrate
that, as a result of these differences, algorithm performance
can vary across environments and the best performing algorithm across all environments is not always clear. Thus it is
increasingly important to present results for a wide range of
environments and not only pick those which show a novel
work outperforming other methods.
Results As shown in Figure 4, in environments with stable dynamics (e.g. HalfCheetah-v1), DDPG outperforms all
other algorithsm. However, as dynamics become more unstable (e.g. in Hopper-v1) performance gains rapidly diminish.
As DDPG is an off-policy method, exploration noise can
cause sudden failures in unstable environments. Therefore,
learning a proper Q-value estimation of expected returns is
difﬁcult, particularly since many exploratory paths will result
in failure. Since failures in such tasks are characterized by
shortened trajectories, a local optimum in this case would be
simply to survive until the maximum length of the trajectory
(corresponding to one thousand timesteps and similar reward
due to a survival bonus in the case of Hopper-v1). As can be
seen in Figure 4, DDPG with Hopper does exactly this. This
is a clear example where showing only the favourable and stable HalfCheetah when reporting DDPG-based experiments
would be unfair.
Furthermore, let us consider the Swimmer-v1 environment
shown in Figure 4. Here, TRPO signiﬁcantly outperforms
all other algorithms. Due to the dynamics of the water-like
environment, a local optimum for the system is to curl up and
ﬂail without proper swimming. However, this corresponds
to a return of ∼130. By reaching a local optimum, learning
curves can indicate successful optimization of the policy over
time, when in reality the returns achieved are not qualitatively
representative of learning the desired behaviour, as demonstrated in video replays of the learned policy5. Therefore,
it is important to show not only returns but demonstrations
of the learned policy in action. Without understanding what
the evaluation returns indicate, it is possible that misleading
results can be reported which in reality only optimize local
optima rather than reaching the desired behaviour.
Are commonly used baseline implementations comparable?
In many cases, authors implement their own versions of baseline algorithms to compare against. We investigate the OpenAI baselines implementation of TRPO as used in , the original TRPO code ,
and the rllab Tensorﬂow implementation of
TRPO. We also compare the rllab Theano ,
rllabplusplus , and OpenAI baselines implementations of DDPG. Our goal is to
draw attention to the variance due to implementation details
across algorithms. We run a subset of our architecture experiments as with the OpenAI baselines implementations using
the same hyperparameters as in those experiments6.
Results We ﬁnd that implementation differences which
are often not reﬂected in publications can have dramatic
impacts on performance. This can be seen for our ﬁnal evaluation performance after training on 2M samples in Tables 1
5 
6Differences are discussed in the supplemental (e.g. use of different optimizers for the value function baseline). Leaky ReLU
activations are left out to narrow the experiment scope.
Average Return
HalfCheetah-v1 (TRPO, Codebase Comparison)
Schulman 2015
Schulman 2017
Average Return
HalfCheetah-v1 (DDPG, Codebase Comparison)
Plapper 2017
Figure 6: TRPO codebase comparison using our default set
of hyperparameters (as used in other experiments).
and 2, as well as a sample comparison in Figure 6. This
demonstrates the necessity that implementation details be
enumerated, codebases packaged with publications, and that
performance of baseline experiments in novel works matches
the original baseline publication code.
Reporting Evaluation Metrics
In this section we analyze some of the evaluation metrics
commonly used in the reinforcement learning literature. In
practice, RL algorithms are often evaluated by simply presenting plots or tables of average cumulative reward (average
returns) and, more recently, of maximum reward achieved
over a ﬁxed number of timesteps. Due to the unstable nature of many of these algorithms, simply reporting the maximum returns is typically inadequate for fair comparison;
even reporting average returns can be misleading as the range
of performance across seeds and trials is unknown. Alone,
these may not provide a clear picture of an algorithm’s range
of performance. However, when combined with conﬁdence
intervals, this may be adequate to make an informed decision given a large enough number of trials. As such, we
investigate using the bootstrap and signiﬁcance testing as in
ML to evaluate algorithm performance.
Online View vs. Policy Optimization An important distinction when reporting results is the online learning view
versus the policy optimization view of RL. In the online view,
an agent will optimize the returns across the entire learning
process and there is not necessarily an end to the agent’s
trajectory. In this view, evaluations can use the average cumulative rewards across the entire learning process (balancing
exploration and exploitation) as in ,
or can possibly use ofﬂine evaluation as in . The alternate view corresponds to policy optimization,
where evaluation is performed using a target policy in an of-
ﬂine manner. In the policy optimization view it is important to
run evaluations across the entire length of the task trajectory
with a single target policy to determine the average returns
that the target can obtain. We focus on evaluation methods
for the policy optimization view (with ofﬂine evaluation), but
the same principles can be applied to the online view.
Conﬁdence Bounds The sample bootstrap has been a popular method to gain insight into a population distribution
from a smaller sample . Bootstrap methods are particularly popular for A/B testing, and
we can borrow some ideas from this ﬁeld. Generally a bootstrap estimator is obtained by resampling with replacement
many times to generate a statistically relevant mean and con-
ﬁdence bound. Using this technique, we can gain insight into
what is the 95% conﬁdence interval of the results from our
section on environments. Table 3 shows the bootstrap mean
and 95% conﬁdence bounds on our environment experiments.
Conﬁdence intervals can vary wildly between algorithms and
environments. We ﬁnd that TRPO and PPO are the most
stable with small conﬁdence bounds from the bootstrap. In
cases where conﬁdence bounds are exceedingly large, it may
be necessary to run more trials (i.e. increase the sample size).
Power Analysis Another method to determine if the
sample size must be increased is bootstrap power analysis . If we use our
sample and give it some uniform lift (for example, scaling uniformly by 1.25), we can run many bootstrap simulations and
determine what percentage of the simulations result in statistically signiﬁcant values with the lift. If there is a small percentage of signiﬁcant values, a larger sample size is needed
(more trials must be run). We do this across all environment
experiment trial runs and indeed ﬁnd that, in more unstable
settings, the bootstrap power percentage leans towards insigniﬁcant results in the lift experiment. Conversely, in stable
trials (e.g. TRPO on Hopper-v1) with a small sample size,
the lift experiment shows that no more trials are needed to
generate signiﬁcant comparisons. These results are provided
in the supplemental material.
Signiﬁcance An important factor when deciding on an
RL algorithm to use is the signiﬁcance of the reported gains
based on a given metric. Several works have investigated
the use of signiﬁcance metrics to assess the reliability of
reported evaluation metrics in ML. However, few works in
reinforcement learning assess the signiﬁcance of reported
metrics. Based on our experimental results which indicate
that algorithm performance can vary wildly based simply on
perturbations of random seeds, it is clear that some metric is
necessary for assessing the signiﬁcance of algorithm performance gains and the conﬁdence of reported metrics. While
more research and investigation is needed to determine the
best metrics for assessing RL algorithms, we investigate an
initial set of metrics based on results from ML.
In supervised learning, k-fold t-test, corrected resampled ttest, and other signiﬁcance metrics have been discussed when
comparing machine learning results . However, the assumptions
pertaining to the underlying data with corrected metrics do
not necessarily apply in RL. Further work is needed to investigate proper corrected signiﬁcance tests for RL. Nonetheless,
we explore several signiﬁcance measures which give insight
into whether a novel algorithm is truly performing as the stateof-the-art. We consider the simple 2-sample t-test (sorting all
ﬁnal evaluation returns across N random trials with different
random seeds); the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test ;
and bootstrap percent differences with 95% conﬁdence intervals. All calculated metrics can be found in the supplemental. Generally, we ﬁnd that the signiﬁcance values match
up to what is to be expected. Take, for example, comparing
Walker2d-v1 performance of ACKTR vs. DDPG. ACKTR
performs slightly better, but this performance is not signiﬁcant due to the overlapping conﬁdence intervals of the two:
t = 1.03, p = 0.334, KS = 0.40, p = 0.697, bootstrapped
percent difference 44.47% (-80.62%, 111.72%).
Discussion and Conclusion
Through experimental methods focusing on PG methods
for continuous control, we investigate problems with reproducibility in deep RL. We ﬁnd that both intrinsic (e.g. random
seeds, environment properties) and extrinsic sources (e.g. hyperparameters, codebases) of non-determinism can contribute
to difﬁculties in reproducing baseline algorithms. Moreover,
we ﬁnd that highly varied results due to intrinsic sources
bolster the need for using proper signiﬁcance analysis. We
propose several such methods and show their value on a
subset of our experiments.
What recommendations can we draw from our experiments?
Based on our experimental results and investigations, we
can provide some general recommendations. Hyperparameters can have signiﬁcantly different effects across algorithms
and environments. Thus it is important to ﬁnd the working set which at least matches the original reported performance of baseline algorithms through standard hyperparameter searches. Similarly, new baseline algorithm implementations used for comparison should match the original codebase
results if available. Overall, due to the high variance across
trials and random seeds of reinforcement learning algorithms,
many trials must be run with different random seeds when
comparing performance. Unless random seed selection is
explicitly part of the algorithm, averaging multiple runs over
different random seeds gives insight into the population distribution of the algorithm performance on an environment.
Similarly, due to these effects, it is important to perform
proper signiﬁcance testing to determine if the higher average
returns are in fact representative of better performance.
We highlight several forms of signiﬁcance testing and ﬁnd
that they give generally expected results when taking conﬁdence intervals into consideration. Furthermore, we demonstrate that bootstrapping and power analysis are possible ways
to gain insight into the number of trial runs necessary to make
an informed decision about the signiﬁcance of algorithm performance gains. In general, however, the most important step
to reproducibility is to report all hyperparameters, implementation details, experimental setup, and evaluation methods for
both baseline comparison methods and novel work. Without
the publication of implementations and related details, wasted
effort on reproducing state-of-the-art works will plague the
community and slow down progress.
What are possible future lines of investigation?
Due to the signiﬁcant effects of hyperparameters (particularly reward scaling), another possibly important line of
future investigation is in building hyperparameter agnostic
algorithms. Such an approach would ensure that there is no
unfairness introduced from external sources when comparing algorithms agnostic to parameters such as reward scale,
batch size, or network structure. Furthermore, while we investigate an initial set of signiﬁcance metrics here, they may
not be the best ﬁt for comparing RL algorithms. Several
works have begun investigating policy evaluation methods
for the purposes of safe RL , but further
work is needed in signiﬁcance testing and statistical analysis.
Similar lines of investigation to would be helpful to determine the
best methods for evaluating performance gain signiﬁcance.
How can we ensure that deep RL matters?
We discuss many different factors affecting reproducibility of
RL algorithms. The sensitivity of these algorithms to changes
in reward scale, environment dynamics, and random seeds
can be considerable and varies between algorithms and settings. Since benchmark environments are proxies for realworld applications to gauge generalized algorithm performance, perhaps more emphasis should be placed on the applicability of RL algorithms to real-world tasks. That is, as there
is often no clear winner among all benchmark environments,
perhaps recommended areas of application should be demonstrated along with benchmark environment results when presenting a new algorithm. Maybe new methods should be
answering the question: in what setting would this work be
useful? This is something that is addressed for machine learning in and may warrant more discussion for
RL. As a community, we must not only ensure reproducible
results with fair comparisons, but we must also consider what
are the best ways to demonstrate that RL continues to matter.
Acknowledgements
We thank NSERC, CIFAR, the Open Philanthropy Project,
and the AWS Cloud Credits for Research Program for their
generous contributions.