The Diploid Genome Sequence
of an Individual Human
Samuel Levy1*, Granger Sutton1, Pauline C. Ng1, Lars Feuk2, Aaron L. Halpern1, Brian P. Walenz1, Nelson Axelrod1,
Jiaqi Huang1, Ewen F. Kirkness1, Gennady Denisov1, Yuan Lin1, Jeffrey R. MacDonald2, Andy Wing Chun Pang2,
Mary Shago2, Timothy B. Stockwell1, Alexia Tsiamouri1, Vineet Bafna3, Vikas Bansal3, Saul A. Kravitz1, Dana A. Busam1,
Karen Y. Beeson1, Tina C. McIntosh1, Karin A. Remington1, Josep F. Abril4, John Gill1, Jon Borman1, Yu-Hui Rogers1,
Marvin E. Frazier1, Stephen W. Scherer2, Robert L. Strausberg1, J. Craig Venter1
1 J. Craig Venter Institute, Rockville, Maryland, United States of America, 2 Program in Genetics and Genomic Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, and Molecular and
Medical Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 3 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California San Diego, La Jolla,
California, United States of America, 4 Genetics Department, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain
Presented here is a genome sequence of an individual human. It was produced from ;32 million random DNA
fragments, sequenced by Sanger dideoxy technology and assembled into 4,528 scaffolds, comprising 2,810 million
bases (Mb) of contiguous sequence with approximately 7.5-fold coverage for any given region. We developed a
modified version of the Celera assembler to facilitate the identification and comparison of alternate alleles within this
individual diploid genome. Comparison of this genome and the National Center for Biotechnology Information human
reference assembly revealed more than 4.1 million DNA variants, encompassing 12.3 Mb. These variants (of which
1,288,319 were novel) included 3,213,401 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), 53,823 block substitutions (2–206
bp), 292,102 heterozygous insertion/deletion events (indels)(1–571 bp), 559,473 homozygous indels (1–82,711 bp), 90
inversions, as well as numerous segmental duplications and copy number variation regions. Non-SNP DNA variation
accounts for 22% of all events identified in the donor, however they involve 74% of all variant bases. This suggests an
important role for non-SNP genetic alterations in defining the diploid genome structure. Moreover, 44% of genes were
heterozygous for one or more variants. Using a novel haplotype assembly strategy, we were able to span 1.5 Gb of
genome sequence in segments .200 kb, providing further precision to the diploid nature of the genome. These data
depict a definitive molecular portrait of a diploid human genome that provides a starting point for future genome
comparisons and enables an era of individualized genomic information.
Citation: Levy S, Sutton G, Ng PC, Feuk L, Halpern AL, et al. The diploid genome sequence of an individual human. PLoS Biol 5(10): e254. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.
Introduction
Each of our genomes is typically composed of DNA
packaged into two sets of 23 chromosomes; one set inherited
from each parent whose own DNA is a mosaic of preceding
ancestors. As such, the human genome functions as a diploid
entity with phenotypes arising due to the sometimes complex
interplay of alleles of genes and/or their noncoding functional regulatory elements.
The diploid nature of the human genome was ﬁrst observed
as unbanded and banded chromosomes over 40 years ago , and karyotyping still predominates in clinical laboratories
as the standard for global genome interrogation. With the
advent of molecular biology, other techniques such as
chromosomal ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and
microarray-based genetic analysis provided incremental
increases in the resolution of genome analysis. Notwithstanding these approaches, we suspect that only a small proportion
of genetic variation is captured for any sample in any one set
of experiments.
Over the past decade, with the development of highthroughput DNA sequencing protocols and advanced computational analysis methods, it has been possible to generate
assemblies of sequences encompassing the majority of the
human genome . Two versions of the human genome
currently available are products of the Human Genome
Sequencing Consortium and Celera Genomics , derived
from clone-based and random whole genome shotgun
sequencing strategies, respectively. The Human Genome
Sequencing Consortium assembly is a composite derived
from haploids of numerous donors, whereas the Celera
version of the genome is a consensus sequence derived from
ﬁve individuals. Both versions almost exclusively report DNA
variation in the form of single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs). However smaller-scale (,100 bp) insertion/deletion
sequences (indels) or large-scale structural variants 
also contribute to human biology and disease and
warrant an extensive survey.
Academic Editor: Edward M. Rubin, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratories,
United States of America
Received May 9, 2007; Accepted July 30, 2007; Published September 4, 2007
Copyright:  2007 Levy et al. This is an open-access article distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted
use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author
and source are credited.
Abbreviations: CGH, comparative genomic hybridization; CHBþJPT, grouped Han
Chinese and Japanese; CNV, copy number variant; CEU, Caucasian; BAC, bacterial
artificial chromosome; FISH, fluorescence in situ hybridization; LD, linkage
disequilibrium; MNP, mulit-nucleotide polymorphism; QV, quality value; SINE,
short interspersed nuclear element; SNP, single nucleotide polymorphism; WGSA,
whole-genome shotgun assembly; YRI, Yoruban
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: 
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
October 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 10 | e254
PLoS BIOLOGY
The ongoing analyses of these DNA sequence resources
have offered an unprecedented glimpse into the genetic
contribution to human biology. The simpliﬁcation of our
collective genetic ancestry to a linear sequence of nucleotide
bases has permitted the identiﬁcation of functional sequences
to be made primarily through sequence-based searching
alignment tools. This revealed an unexpected paucity of
protein coding genes (20,000–25,000) residing in less than 2%
of the DNA examined, suggesting that alternative transcription and splicing of genes are equally important in
development and differentiation . The sequencing of
DNA of various eukaryotic genomes, such as for murine
 and primate as well as many others, has
enabled a comparative genomics strategy to reﬁne the
identiﬁcation of orthologous genes. These genomic datasets
have also enabled the identiﬁcation of additional functional
sequence such as cis-regulatory DNA as well as both
noncoding and microRNA .
Building on the existing genome assemblies, numerous
initiatives have explored variation at the population level, in
particular to generate markers and maps as a means of
understanding how sequence variation evolves and can
contribute to phenotype. The initial drafts of the two human
genomes provided an excess of 2.4 million SNPs 
providing a platform for the initial phase of the HapMap
project . This ambitious project initially catalogued
genetic variation at more than 1.2 million loci in 269 humans
of four ethnicities, enabling a deﬁnition of common
haplotypes and resulting in tag SNP sets for these populations. The use of these data has already allowed the mapping
and identiﬁcation of susceptibility genes and loci involved in
complex diseases such as asthma , age related macular
degeneration , and type II diabetes . Notwithstanding,
there are limitations with current SNP-based genome-wide
association studies, because they rely on reconstructing
haplotypes based on population data and can be uninformative or misleading in regions of low linkage disequilibrium
(LD). Further, association studies have been designed to
detect common disease variants and are not optimized to
detect rare etiological variants .
The ability to generate a diploid genome structure via
haplotype phasing for the HapMap samples is limited by the
SNPs that were genotyped and their spacing. By using LD
measures, it was possible to identify diploid blocks of DNA
averaging 16.3 kb for Caucasians (CEU), 7.3 kb for Yorubans
(YRI), and 13.2 kb for grouped Han Chinese and Japanese
(CHBþJPT) . However, LD varies across the genome, and
regions of low LD, i.e., high recombination, cannot be
represented by haplotype blocks. Furthermore, these diploid
blocks are incomplete because there may be unknown
variants between the SNP loci sampled. These results do not
permit a comprehensive deﬁnition of the sequence present at
each allele nor the information that produces the relevant
allelic combinations, which are essential in identifying the
differences of biological information encoded by the diploid
state. The ability to perform, in a practical manner, wholegenome sequencing in large disease populations would
enable the construction of haplotypes from individuals’
genomes, thus phasing all variant types throughout the
genome without assumptions about population history.
Clearly, to enable the forthcoming ﬁeld of individualized
genomic medicine, it is important to represent and understand the entire diploid genetic component of humans,
including all forms of genetic variation in nucleotide
sequences, as well as epigenetic effects.
To understand fully the nature of genetic variation in
development and disease, indeed the ideal experiment would
be to generate complete diploid genome sequences from
numerous controls and cases. Here we report our endeavor to
fully sequence a diploid human genome. We used an
experimental design based on very high quality Sanger-based
whole-genome shotgun sequencing, allowing us to maximize
coverage of the genome and to catalogue the vast majority of
variation within it. We discovered some 4.1 million variants in
this genome, 30% of which were not described previously,
furthering our understanding of genetic individuality. These
variants include SNPs, indels, inversions, segmental duplications, and more complex forms of DNA variation. We used
the variant set coupled with the sequence read information
and mate pairs to build long-range haplotypes, the boundaries of which provide coverage of 11,250 genes (58% of all
genes). In this manner we achieved our goal of the
construction of a diploid genome, which we hope will serve
as a basis for future comparison as more individual genomes
are produced.
Donor Pedigree and Karyotype
The individual whose genome is described in this report is
J. Craig Venter, who was born on 14 October 1946, a selfidentiﬁed Caucasian male. The DNA donor gave full consent
to provide his DNA for study via sequencing methods and to
disclose publicly his genomic data in totality. The collection
of DNA from blood with attendant personal, medical, and
phenotypic trait data was performed on an ongoing basis.
Ethical review of the study protocol was performed annually.
Additionally, we provide here an initial foray into individualized genomics by correlating genotype with family history
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
October 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 10 | e254
Diploid Genome Sequence of an Individual Human
Author Summary
We have generated an independently assembled diploid human
genomic DNA sequence from both chromosomes of a single
individual (J. Craig Venter). Our approach, based on whole-genome
shotgun sequencing and using enhanced genome assembly
strategies and software, generated an assembled genome over half
of which is represented in large diploid segments (.200 kilobases),
enabling study of the diploid genome. Comparison with previous
reference human genome sequences, which were composites
comprising multiple humans, revealed that the majority of genomic
alterations are the well-studied class of variants based on single
nucleotides (SNPs). However, the results also reveal that lesserstudied genomic variants, insertions and deletions, while comprising
a minority (22%) of genomic variation events, actually account for
almost 74% of variant nucleotides. Inclusion of insertion and
deletion genetic variation into our estimates of interchromosomal
difference reveals that only 99.5% similarity exists between the two
chromosomal copies of an individual and that genetic variation
between two individuals is as much as five times higher than
previously estimated. The existence of a well-characterized diploid
human genome sequence provides a starting point for future
individual genome comparisons and enables the emerging era of
individualized genomic information.
and phenotype; however, a more extensive analysis will be
presented elsewhere.
The donor’s three-generation pedigree is shown in Figure
1A. The donor has three siblings and one biological son, his
father died at age 59 of sudden cardiac arrest. There are
documented cases of family members with chronic disease
including hypertension and ovarian and skin cancer. According to the genealogical record, the donor’s ancestors can be
traced back to 1821 (paternal) and the 1700s (maternal) in
England. Genotyping and cluster analysis of 750 unique SNP
loci discovered through this project support that the donor is
indeed 99.5% similar to individuals of European descent
(Figure 1B), consistent with self-reporting. This is further
corroborated by an extensive ﬁve-generation family history
provided by the donor (unpublished data). Cytogenetic
analysis through G-banded karyotyping and spectral karyotypic chromosome imaging reveals no obvious chromosomal
abnormalities (Figure 2) that need to be considered in
interpretation of genome assembly results or phenotypic
association analyses.
Genome Sequencing and Assembly
The assembly, herein referred to as HuRef, was derived of
approximately 32 million sequence reads (Table S1) generated by a random shotgun sequencing approach using the
open-source Celera Assembler. The approach used is similar
in many respects to the whole-genome shotgun assembly
(WGSA) reported previously , but there are three major
differences: (i) HuRef was assembled entirely from shotgun
reads from a single individual, whereas WGSA was based on
shotgun reads from ﬁve individuals , albeit the
majority of reads were from the same individual as HuRef;
(ii) the approximate depth of sequence coverage for HuRef
was 7.5 versus 5.3 for WGSA, although the clone coverage was
about the same for both (Table 1) ; and (iii) the release
of Celera Assembler as an open-source project has allowed us
and others to continue to improve the assembly algorithms.
As a consequence, we made modiﬁcations for the speciﬁcation of consensus sequence differences found at distinct
alleles. The multiple sequence alignment methodology was
improved and reads were grouped by allele, thus allowing the
determination of alternate consensus sequences at variant
sites (see Materials and Methods).
HuRef is a high-quality draft genome sequence as
evidenced from the contiguity statistics (Table 2). Improving
the assembly algorithms and increasing the sequencing depth
of coverage (compared to WGSA) resulted in a 68% decrease
in the number of gaps within scaffolds from 206,552 (WGSA)
to 66,815 (HuRef) as previously predicted . We also
observed a more than 4-fold increase in the N50 contig size
(the length such that 50% of all base pairs are contained in
contigs of the given length or larger) to 106 kb (HuRef) from
23 kb (WGSA). We used a fairly standard, but arbitrary, cutoff
of 3,000 bp (similar to what was used for WGSA) to
distinguish between scaffolds that were part of the HuRef
assembly proper versus partially assembled and poorly
incorporated sequence (see Materials and Methods). This
resulted in 4,528 scaffolds (containing 2,810 Mb) of which 553
scaffolds were at least 100 kb in size (containing 2,780 Mb),
whereas WGSA had 4,940 scaffolds (containing 2,696 Mb) of
which 330 scaffolds were at least 100 kb (containing 2,669
Mb). The scaffold lengths for HuRef (N50 ¼ 19.5 Mb) were
somewhat shorter than WGSA (N50¼29 Mb) primarily due to
the difference in insert size for bacterial artiﬁcial chromosome (BAC) end mate pairs—HuRef 91 kb versus WGSA .
150 kb (Table 2) . We determined that 144 of the 553 large
HuRef scaffolds could be joined by two or more of the WGSA
BAC mate pairs, and 98 more by a single WGSA BAC mate
pair (see Materials and Methods), suggesting that use of large
insert BAC libraries (.150 kb) would generate larger
scaffolds.
Assembly-to-Assembly Mapping
Genomic variation was observed by two approaches. First,
we identiﬁed heterozygous alleles within the HuRef sequence.
This variation represents differences in the maternal and
paternal chromosomes. In addition, a comparison between
HuRef and the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) version 36 human genome reference assembly,
herein referred to as a one-to-one mapping, also served as a
Figure 1. DNA Donor Pedigree and Relatedness to Ethnogeographic
Populations
(A) Three-generation pedigree showing the relation of ancestors to study
DNA sample. The donor is identified in red. (B) Cluster analysis based on
750 SNP genotype information to infer the ancestry of the HuRef donor.
The figure shows the proportion of membership of the HuRef donor
(yellow) to three pre-defined HapMap populations (CEU ¼ Northern and
Western Europe, YRI ¼ Yoruban, Ibadan, Nigeria, and JPTþCHB ¼
Japanase, Tokyo, and Han Chinese, Beijing). The results indicate that
the HuRef donor clusters with 99.5% similarity to the samples of northern
and western European ancestry.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.g001
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
October 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 10 | e254
Diploid Genome Sequence of an Individual Human
Figure 2. Results of Cytogenetic Analysis
(A) HuRef donor G-banded karyotype. (B) Spectral karyotype analysis.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.g002
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
October 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 10 | e254
Diploid Genome Sequence of an Individual Human
source for the identiﬁcation of genomic variation. These
comparisons identiﬁed a large number of putative SNPs as
well as small, medium, and large insertion/deletion events and
some major rearrangements described below. For the most
part, the one-to-one mapping showed that both sequences are
highly congruent with very large regions of contiguous
alignment of high ﬁdelity thus enabling the facile detection
of DNA variation (Table S2).
The one-to-one mapping to NCBI version 36 (hereafter
NCBI) was also used to organize HuRef scaffolds into
chromosomes. HuRef scaffolds were only mapped to HuRef
chromosomes if they had at least 3,000 bp that mapped and
the scaffold was mostly not contained within a larger scaffold.
With the exception of 12 chimeric joins, all scaffolds were
placed in their entirety with no rearrangement onto HuRef
chromosomes. The 12 chimeric regions represent the
misjoining of a small number of chimeric scaffold/contigs
by the Celera Assembly , as detected with mate pair
patterns , and are also apparent by comparison to
another assembly (Materials and Methods). The 12 chimeric
joins in the HuRef scaffolds were split when these scaffolds
were assigned to build HuRef chromosomes. Inversions and
translocations within the nonchimeric scaffolds relative to
NCBI are thus maintained within the HuRef chromosomes.
The ﬁnal set of 24 HuRef chromosomes were thus assembled
from 1,408 HuRef assembly scaffolds and contain 2,782 Mb of
ordered and oriented sequence.
The NCBI autosomes are on average 98.3% and 97.1%
represented by runs and matches, respectively, in the one-toone mapping to HuRef scaffolds (Table S3). A match is a
maximal high-identity local alignment, usually terminated by
indels or sequence gaps in one of the assemblies. Runs may
include indels and are monotonically increasing or decreasing sets of matches (linear segments of a match dot plot) with
no intervening matches from other runs on either axis.
The Y chromosome is 59% covered by the one-to-one
mapping due to difﬁculties when producing comparison
between repeat rich chromosomes. In addition, the Y
chromosome is more poorly covered because of the difﬁculties in assembling complex regions with sequencing depth of
coverage only half that of the autosomal portion of the
genome. The X chromosome coverage with HuRef scaffolds is
at 95.2%, which is typical of the coverage level of autosomes
(mean 98.3% using runs). However it is clear that the X
chromosome has more gaps, as evidenced by the coverage
with matches (89.4%) compared with the mean coverage of
autosomes using matches (97.1%). The overall effects of lower
sequence coverage on chromosomes X and Y are clearly
evident as a sharp increase in number of gaps per unit length
and shorter scaffolds compared to the autosomes (Figure 3).
Similarity between the sex chromosomes is another source of
assembly and mapping difﬁculties. For example, there is a 1.5-
Mb scaffold that maps equally well to identical regions of the
X and Y chromosomes and therefore cannot be uniquely
mapped to either (see Materials and Methods and Figure 3).
From our one-to-one mapping data, we are also able to detect
the enrichment of large segmental duplications on
Chromosomes 9, 16, and 22, resulting in reduced coverage
based on difﬁculties in assembly and mapping (Table S3).
Since NCBI, WGSA, and HuRef are all incomplete
assemblies with sequence anomalies, assembly-to-assembly
mappings also reﬂect issues of completeness and correctness.
We compared three sets of chromosome sequences to
evaluate this issue (see Materials and Methods): NCBI with
the exclusion of the small amount of unplaced sequences,
HuRef, and WGSA (Table S2) were thus compared in a
pairwise manner. The comparison of WGSA and HuRef
Table 2. Summary of HuRef Assembly Statistics and Comparison to the Human NCBI Genome
Assembly Subset
Number of Scaffolds
Number of Contigs
Gaps within Scaffolds
ACGT Bases
NCBI Chromosomes
2,858,012,806
3,080,419,480
2,870,607,502
3,093,104,542
WGSA Chromosomes
2,659,468,408
2,993,154,503
HuRef Assembly
Chromosomes
2,782,357,138
2,809,547,336
Scaffolds  100 kb
2,779,929,229
2,806,091,853
Scaffolds  3 kb
2,809,774,459
2,844,046,670
All scaffolds
3,002,932,476
3,037,726,076
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.t002
Table 1. Clone Insert Library Types and Reads Used for HuRef Genome Assembly
Summary Library Types
Number of Reads
Number of Mate Pairs
Read Coverage
Mate-Pair Clone Coverage
28,599,696
Plasmid Celera only
19,253,711
31,862,710
11,548,794
Note that not all reads have a clone mate pair relationship. Therefore the number of mates pairs is not approximately equal to (but less than) the number reads divided by two.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.t001
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
October 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 10 | e254
Diploid Genome Sequence of an Individual Human
revealed 83 Mb more sequence in HuRef in matched
segments of these genomes. This sequence is predominantly
from HuRef that ﬁlls gaps in WGSA. Comparisons of HuRef
and WGSA to NCBI showed the considerable improvement of
HuRef over WGSA. Correspondingly, in HuRef there are
approximately 120 Mb of additional aligned sequence,
composed of 47 Mb of HuRef sequence that aligns to NCBI
that was not aligned in WGSA and 73 Mb within aligned
regions that ﬁll gaps in WGSA. This comparison also showed
an improvement factor of two in rearrangement differences
(order and orientation) from WGSA to HuRef when mapped
to the NCBI reference genome at small (,5 kb), medium (5–
50 kb), and large (.50 kb) levels of resolution (Table S2).
HuRef includes 9 Mb of unmatched sequence that ﬁll gaps in
NCBI or are identiﬁed as indel variants. An additional 14 Mb
of HuRef chromosome sequence outside of aligned regions
with NCBI represents previously unknown human genome
sequence. The large regions of novel HuRef sequence are
identiﬁed to be either: (a) gap ﬁlling or insertions, (b)
unaligned NCBI chromosome regions, or (c) large scaffolds
not mapped to NCBI chromosomes. Some of these were
investigated using FISH analysis and are discussed below.
Although we were able to organize HuRef scaffolds into
HuRef chromosome sequence, all of the subsequent analyses
in this report were accomplished using HuRef scaffold
sequences.
Identification of DNA Variants
Variant identiﬁcation internal to the one-to-one map. The
HuRef assembly and the one-to-one mapping between the
HuRef genome and the NCBI reference genome resulted in
the identiﬁcation of 5,061,599 putative SNPs, heterozygous
indels, and a variety of multi-nucleotide variations events (see
Figure 4 for a deﬁnition), of which 62% are in the database
for DNA variants (dbSNP; 
A signiﬁcant fraction of these putative variants resulted from
sequence reads with variant base having reduced quality value
(QV) scores, the presence of variants in homopolymer runs
and erroneous base calls at the beginning and end of reads.
The inclusion of these reads was important to the assembly
process, and therefore we chose to perform post-assembly
processing to ﬁlter these variants to reduce false positives
while limiting false negatives (column %red/%FN in Table 3
and detailed discussion in Material and Methods). The ﬁlters
deemed most productive in creating a high-conﬁdence
variant set involved the application of a minimal QV
threshold and testing for the location of a variant in sequence
read. In addition, we applied the ﬁlter that a variant required
supporting evidence from at least two reads and that the
second allele had a minimum fraction of representative reads
(20% reads with minor allele for heterozygous SNP and 25%
for heterozygous indels). As indicated in Table 3, a signiﬁcant
improvement in reducing false positives while limiting false
negatives is possible when the ﬁlters are applied independently on QV and read location–ﬁltered variants. However, the
maximum beneﬁt from this ﬁltering approach was achieved
by applying ﬁlters cumulatively, and it was the three
aforementioned ﬁlters (bold rows in Table 3) that were
applied ultimately. After applying the ﬁlters, 81% of
heterozygous indels, 29% of heterozygous SNPs, 7% of
homozygous SNPs, and 19% homozygous indels were
removed from the initial set. The ﬁltering mainly affects
Figure 3. Sequencing Continuity Plot for the HuRef Autosomes Compared to HuRef X and Y Chromosomes
Note that the autosomes have more contiguous sequence with fewer gaps compared to chromosomes X and Y, probably due to half the read depth
compared to the autosomes and the presence of extensive sequence similarity between the sex chromosomes.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.g003
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
October 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 10 | e254
Diploid Genome Sequence of an Individual Human
heterozygous variants by reducing the number of reads that
can be used for support. The cumulative application of the
ﬁlters generated a set of variants from which a subset of
95,733 could be combined further into clusters. The ﬁrst case
where variants were clustered was when two SNPs were within
2 bp of each other. We clustered these, because there was
more accuracy in classifying whether the variant caused a
change in protein coding and not because they necessarily
represent single mutational events. The second scenario for
clustering involved non-SNP variants within 10 bp of other
non-SNP variants, such as indels or complex variants. We
decided to cluster these variants because extensive manual
inspection showed that closely spaced indels were frequently
better deﬁned as one variant after realignment. Consequently, the clustering of variant positions was coupled with
a localized realignment of sequence reads to deﬁne either two
distinct alleles or haplotypes. Overall, the ﬁltering and
clustering reﬁnements that were applied to the ‘‘raw’’ variant
set resulted in a set of 3,325,530 variants within the one-toone HuRef-to-NCBI mapping, of which 85% were found in
dbSNP (Table 4).
Variant identiﬁcation external to the one-to-one map. The
one-to-one mapping of HuRef to NCBI produced approximately 150 Mb of unaligned HuRef sequence inclusive of
partially mapped and nonmapped HuRef scaffolds. Within
this unaligned HuRef sequence, we identiﬁed 233,796
heterozygous variants including SNPs, indels, and complex
variants after application of the same ﬁlters described above
(see Table 4, variants labeled External HuRef-NCBI map).
Other sources of variant external to the one-to-one mapping
between the HuRef and NCBI human genome assemblies are
putative homozygous insertions, deletions, and inversions
(see Figure 4 for deﬁnitions), of which 693,941 were detected.
This number of putative insertions and deletions was reduced
by 19% by the application of a series of ﬁlters designed to
eliminate the bulk of spurious variation. Therefore, variants
were not called at the read margins (thresholds were the same
as previously used for SNP and indels internal to the HuRef-
NCBI map), and any identiﬁed variants required the
supporting evidence of at least two reads and one satisﬁed
mate pair with no ambiguous bases constituting the sequence
of the insertion or deletion.
In addition to the aforementioned ﬁltering approach, a
small fraction (;1%) of the 693,941 putative homozygous
insertion/deletion variants were subsequently characterized
as heterozygous variants. This was accomplished by ﬁnding
exact matches of 100-bp sequence 59 and 39 of the insertion
point sequence and the deletion sequence in both HuRef
scaffolds and unassembled reads. This fraction of heterozygotes is likely to be a conservative estimate of the total
Figure 4. The Different Variant Types Identified from the HuRef Assembly and the HuRef-NCBI Assembly-to-Assembly Mapping
HuRef consensus sequence (in red) with underlying sequence reads (in blue). Homozygous variants are identified by comparing the HuRef assembly
with NCBI reference assembly. Heterozygous variants are identified by base differences between sequence reads. SNP ¼ single nucleotide
polymorphism; MNP ¼ multi-nucleotide polymorphism, which contains contiguous mismatches.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.g004
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
October 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 10 | e254
Diploid Genome Sequence of an Individual Human
number of true heterozygotes (see below). The alternate
alleles of these heterozygous variants were primarily found
(96% of the time) in scaffolds less than 5,000 bp long or in
unassembled reads. This highlights the value of small scaffolds
and unassembled reads in deﬁning the variant set in an
assembled genome and suggests that these elements are a rich
source of genomic variation. Therefore, subsequent to the
removal of the variants by read-based ﬁltering (19%
mentioned above) and the recategorization as heterozygous
variants (1% above), the remaining variants included approximately equal numbers of insertion (275,512) and
deletion (283,961) alleles and 90 inversions as outlined in
In summary, using the combined identiﬁcation and ﬁltering approaches, it was possible to identify an initial ‘‘raw’’ set
of 5,775,540 variants, from which we generated a higherconﬁdence set of 4,118,889 variants, of which 1,288,319
variants are novel relative to current databases (dbSNP).
Initial Characterization of Variants
To examine sequence diversity in the genome, we
estimated nucleotide diversity using the population mutation
parameter h . This measure is corrected for sample size
and the length of the region surveyed. In the case of a single
genome with two chromosomes, h simpliﬁes to the number of
heterozygote variants divided by the number of base pairs
(see Materials and Methods). We deﬁne hSNP as the nucleotide
diversity for SNPs (number of heterozygous SNPs/number of
base pairs) and hindel as the diversity for indels (number of
heterozygous indels/number of base pairs) . For both hSNP
and hindel, the 95% conﬁdence interval would be [0, 3h] due to
the small number of chromosomes (n ¼ 2) being sampled (see
Materials and Methods).
Across all autosomal chromosomes, the observed diversity
values for SNPs and indels are 6.15 3 104 and 0.84 3 104
respectively. When restricted to coding regions only, hSNP ¼
3.59 3 104 and hindel ¼ 0.07 3 104, indicating that 42% of
SNPs and 91% of indels have been eliminated by selection in
coding regions. The strong selection against coding indels is
not surprising, because most will introduce a frameshift and
produce a nonfunctional protein. Our observed hSNP falls
within the range of 5.4 3 104 to 8.3 3 104 that has been
previously reported by other groups .
Our observed hindel (0.84 3 104) is approximately 2-fold
Table 4. Identification of Variants Found within the HuRef-NCBI
One-to-One Assembly Map (Internal HuRef-NCBI map) and Those
Variants in HuRef Sequence Not Aligned to NCBI ,
which was derived from directed resequencing of 330 genes
in 23 individuals of European descent . The values of hindel
in repetitive sequence regions are 1.2 3 104 for regions
identiﬁed by RepeatMasker ( and
4.93 104 for regions identiﬁed by TandemRepeatFinder ,
respectively. Thus, the indel diversity in repetitive regions is
between 1.4 and 5.8 times higher than the genome-wide rate.
This suggests that the high value of hindel over all loci is likely
mediated by the abundance of indels in repetitive sequence. It
is also possible that repetitive regions in genic sequence are
under stronger selective pressure and therefore have lower
indel diversity. These are precisely the regions that have been
targeted in previous resequencing projects from which
indel diversity values have been determined. Additionally,
repetitive regions also have more erroneous variant calls due
to technical difﬁculties in sequencing and assembly of these
types of regions. Therefore, our estimate for hindel is likely a
combination of both a true higher mutation rate in repetitive
regions and sequencing errors.
Values of hindel are consistent among the chromosomes
(Figure 5). Chromosomes with high hindel values also have a
larger fraction of tandem repeats. For example, Chromosome
19 has the highest hindel (1.1 3 104 compared with the
chromosomal average of 0.86 3 104), and it also has the
highest proportion of tandem repeats (13% compared with
the chromosomal average of 7%). The fraction of tandem
repeats of a chromosome is positively correlated with the
value of hindel for each chromosome (r ¼ 0.73), so that the
diversity of indels is associated with the underlying sequence
composition.
The SNP variants identiﬁed in the HuRef genome include a
larger-than-expected number of homozygous variants than
those commonly observed in population-based studies
(compare ratios of heterozygous SNP:homozygous SNP in
Table 5). Our homozygous variants are detected as differences between the HuRef genome and the NCBI genome.
One common interpretation of a homozygous variant is that
given a common allele A and a rare allele B, the homozygous
SNP is BB. However, because not all variant frequencies are
known, we cannot determine if a position may carry the
minor B allele in homozygous form. We analyzed ENCODE
data using this deﬁnition and found the ratio of heterozygous
SNPs to homozygous SNPs is 4.9 in an individual . For our
dataset, the observed ratio of heterozygous to homozygous
SNP, where our ‘‘homozygous’’ SNPs are detected as bases
differing from the NCBI human genome, is 1.2. To resolve
this discrepancy, we examined the homozygous positions in
the HuRef assembly and found that the increased frequency
of homozygous SNPs results from the presence of minor
alleles (BB) in the NCBI genome assembly. We observed that
75% of the homozygous positions in HuRef also had a SNP
identiﬁed by the ENCODE . A comparison of the alleles at
these positions revealed that in 56% of the instances the
HuRef genome had the more common allele, whereas the
NCBI genome contained the minor allele. The remaining
homozygous SNPs tended to be common minor alleles (76%
had minor allele frequency [MAF]  0.30), consistent with
their observation in homozygous form in the HuRef genome.
Therefore, we conﬁrmed that a large fraction of homozygous
alleles from HuRef are real, and that differences between the
Figure 5. Diversity for SNPs and Indels in Autosomes
This is most likely an under-estimate of the true diversity, because a fraction of real heterozygotes were missed due to insufficient read coverage.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.g005
Table 5. Modeling the Occurrence of Heterozygous to
Homozygous Variant in a Shotgun Assembly
Observed from
SeattleSNPs
Heterozygous SNP:Homozygous SNP
Heterozygous Indel:Homozygous Indel
Heterozygous SNP:Heterozygous Indel
Homozygous SNP:Homozygous Indel
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.t005
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
October 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 10 | e254
Diploid Genome Sequence of an Individual Human
HuRef and NCBI assemblies are due to NCBI containing the
minor allele at a given SNP position, or HuRef containing a
common SNP in homozygous form.
We also modeled the inter/intraindividual genome comparison using directed resequencing data from SeattleSNPs
data (see Materials and Methods) to determine if our variant
detection frequencies were commonly found for different
types of variants. By sampling and comparing the genotypes
of two individuals from the SeattleSNPs data, we were able to
simulate the conditions for calling ‘‘heterozygous’’ and
‘‘homozygous’’ variants as we have deﬁned them in an
independently generated set (Table 5). The ratio of heterozygous variants to homozygous variants from the modeled
SeattleSNPs is lower in the HuRef genome compared with the
SeattleSNPs data. This suggests that there are an overabundance of homozygous variants and/or an under-representation of heterozygous variants, and this trend is more
pronounced for indels compared to SNPs. A possible
explanation for this is that homozygous genotypes are
actually heterozygous and the second allele is missed due to
low sequence coverage. Our attempts to explain this
phenomenon using statistical modeling did support our
hypothesis that low sequence coverage resulted in excess
homozygous over heterozygous variant calls. Indeed, our
modeling provided us with a bound on the missed heterozygous calls for both indels (described below) and SNPs (see
section below titled: Experimental Validation of SNP Variants).
In an attempt to explain the discrepancy in the heterozygous to homozygous indel ratio (Table 5), we modeled the
rate of identiﬁcation of true heterozygous variants given the
depth of coverage of HuRef sequencing reads and the various
variant ﬁltering criteria. This enabled us to determine that
between 44% and 52% of the time, heterozygous indels will
be missed due to insufﬁcient read coverage at 7.5-fold
redundancy and these indels be erroneously called homozygous. Therefore, the projection for the true number of
homozygous indels is between 418,731 and 459,639, a
reduction of 17%–25% from the original number of
559,473 homozygous indels, and the corresponding ratio of
heterozygous to homozygous indels is between 1:1 and 1.3:1.
Furthermore, our modeling also allowed us to determine that
approximately 203 sequence coverage would be required to
detect a heterozygous variant with 99% probability in unique
sequence given our current ﬁltering criteria of random
shotgun sequence reads.
Another further explanation for the overabundance of
homozygous indels is the error-prone nature of repeat
regions. Using a subset of genes (55) completely sequenced
by SeattleSNPs, we found that 28% of the potential 92 HuRef
homozygous indels overlap with indels in these genes, as
opposed to 75% conﬁrmation rate for homozygous SNPs
described earlier. When one categorizes the repeat status of a
homozygous indel, a higher conﬁrmation rate (46%) is seen
for indels excluded from regions identiﬁed by RepeatMasker
or TandemRepeatFinder. The conﬁrmation rate for an indel
in a transposon or tandem repeat region is much lower at
16%. Therefore, indels in nonrepetitive loci have a higher
probability of authenticity than indels in repeat regions.
The ratio of SNPs to indels is lower in the HuRef assembly
than what is observed by the SeattleSNPs data (Table 5),
indicating that relatively fewer SNPs or relatively more indels
are called. This is likely due to relatively more indels being
identiﬁed, as discussed above. We note that a large fraction of
indels occur in repeat sequence (Table 6), which has higher
indel frequency as well as higher incidence of sequencing
error. Moreover, SeattleSNPs resequencing data is focused on
variant discovery in genic regions, which may not reﬂect
genome-wide indel rates.
We identiﬁed in the HuRef assembly 263,923 heterozygous
indels spanning 635,314 bp, with size ranges from 1 to 321 bp.
The characteristics of the indels we detected, their distribution of sizes ,5 bp, and the inverse relationship of the
number of indels to length are similar to previous observations (Figure 6A and 6B). As noted previously (Table
6), there are 2-fold more homozygous indels (559,473) than
heterozygous indels, and these span 5.9 Mb and range from 1
to 82,771 bp in length. We observe that genome-wide, evenlength indels are more frequent than odd-length indels
(Figure 6C and 6D, v2 ¼ 12.4; p , 0.001, see Materials and
Methods). One possible explanation for these results is that
tandem repeats often have motif sizes that occur in even
numbers, such as through the expansion of dinucleotide
repeats. In fact, based on RepeatMasker, the majority of
simple repeats are composed of even-numbered–sized motifs
rather than odd-numbered–sized motifs (73%). Furthermore,
Table 6. Summary of Variant Types Identified in the HuRef Genome Assembly
of Variants
% Variants in
Repeat Sequence
heterozygous SNP
homozygous SNP
heterozygous MNP
homozygous MNP
heterozygous indel
homozygous insertion
homozygous deletion
12,290,978
Variant is characterized as being repetitive if its location is also identified as repeat sequence by either RepeatMasker or Tandem Repeat Finder.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.t006
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
October 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 10 | e254
Diploid Genome Sequence of an Individual Human
of the heterozygous indels that occur in simple repeats
identiﬁed by RepeatMasker, 79% occur in even-numbered bp
repeats. This suggests that the preponderance of even-base–
sized indels likely results from the inherent composition of
simple repeats.
There are 6,535 homozygous indels that are at least 100
bases in length for which both ﬂanks of the indel can be
located precisely on HuRef and NCBI assemblies. These
comprise 3,431 insertions uniquely occurring on HuRef,
totaling 2.13 Mb, and 3,104 deletions, totaling 1.82 Mb, found
only on NCBI (Figure 7). These homozygous indels have a
higher representation of repetitive elements (66%–67%) than
the overall HuRef and NCBI assemblies (each 49%). This
enrichment derives mainly from a higher relative content of
short interspersed nuclear elements (SINEs), simple repeats,
and unclassiﬁed SVAs (Table 7). For 657 (19% of the total)
insertions with a minimum length of 100 bp, at least 50% of
the segment length (mean ¼ 95%) is composed of a single
SINE insertion. Most of these SINE insertions (88%) belong to
the youngest Alu family (AluY), for which insertion polymorphisms are well documented in the human genome
 . Similarly, for 26% of deletions at least 100 bp in
length, an average of 95% of the segment consists of a single
SINE element, and 92% of these elements are classiﬁed as
AluY. Interestingly, the combined total of 1,316 AluY
insertions that differ between HuRef and NCBI include 703
(53%) that are not currently identiﬁed in the most
comprehensive database of human bimorphic SINE insertions, the database of retrotransposon insertion polymor-
Figure 6. Distribution of Indel Length in the HuRef Genome
Distributions of heterozygous (A) and homozygous (B) indels lengths of 1–100 bp (A and B, respectively) and at greater detail in the range 1–20 bp (C
and D, respectively). Note that heterozygous indels range from 1–321 bp and homozygous indels between 1–82,711 bp, however both polymorphisms
type have greater than 47% of indel events being single base. Also even-length indels appear to be overrepresented.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.g006
Figure 7. Number and Length Distribution of Apparent Homozygous
Insertion and Deletion Sequences Greater than 100 bp
Note that the number of indel events are similar but that there are more
longer insertions than deletions.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.g007
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
October 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 10 | e254
Diploid Genome Sequence of an Individual Human
phisms in human (dbRIP;1625 loci; 
org:9090/) (Table S4) .
Experimental Validation of SNP Variants
To evaluate the accuracy and validity of SNP calling from
the sequencing reads, the donor DNA was interrogated using
hybridization-based SNP microarrays: the Affymetrix Mapping 500K Array Set, which targets 500,566 SNP markers, and
the Illumina HumanHap650Y Genotyping BeadChip, which
targets 655,362 SNPs. The Affymetrix array experiment was
performed twice to provide a technical replicate for
genotyping error estimation, and 0.12% of genotype calls
were discordant. Of the 92,144 assays with an annotation in
dbSNP that overlap between the two different platforms,
99.87% were concordant (0.13% discordant). Thus, the
discordance rate between platforms was similar to that
between Affymetrix technical replicates. Genotype calls that
were discordant between technical replicates or between the
Affymetrix and Illumina platforms were excluded from
further analysis. This resulted in 1,029,688 nonredundant
SNP calls from the two genotyping platforms, which were
then compared to the HuRef assembly and to the single
nucleotide variants extracted from the sequencing data. Of
these, 943,531 genotypes (91.63%) were concordant between
the genotyping platforms and the HuRef assembly (Table 8).
Of the 86,157 discordant genotype calls, the vast majority
(83.9%) were identiﬁed as heterozygous in the merged
genotyping platform data, but called as homozygous in the
HuRef assembly (Table 9). This is consistent with a predictable effect of ﬁnite sequence coverage in the HuRef dataset:
assuming uniform random sampling of both haplotypes,
21.6% of true heterozygous SNPs are expected to be missed
given 7.53 coverage of the diploid genome and the requirements for calling a heterozygous SNP (i.e., at least two
instances of each allele and 20% of reads conﬁrming the
minor allele). This is close to the observed false-negative error
of 24.6% (Table 9 and Figure 8). Consistent with this
explanation, the level of coverage is signiﬁcantly lower for
the missed heterozygous SNPs than for the heterozygous
SNPs detected in the HuRef assembly (average read depth 5.2
and 8.8, respectively) (Figure 9).
Another possible form of error would be to erroneously
call a truly homozygous position a heterozygous variant. Of
the 65,337 homozygote calls that were concordant between
the Affymetrix and Illumina platforms, none were called as
heterozygous in the HuRef assembly. Therefore, the upper
bound for the false-positive rate is 0.0046% (one-tailed 95%
conﬁdence interval), and one would expect false-positive
heterozygote calls approximately once every 22 kb from the
upper bound of this conﬁdence interval. However, this
estimate may be lower than the genome-wide false-positive
error, because it is based on the positions chosen by the
microarray platforms, which tend to be biased away from
repetitive, duplicated, and homopolymeric regions. Approximately three-quarters of the novel heterozygous SNPs (73%)
and novel heterozygous indels (75%) are in a region
identiﬁed by RepeatMasker, TandemRepeatFinder, or a
segmental duplication. Therefore, approximately three-quarters of the novel heterozygous variants are in regions that are
most likely underrepresented in the microarrays. Consequently, we cannot readily extrapolate the false-positive error
determined from the microarrays to be the discovery rate of
Table 7. Repetitive Elements in the Complete HuRef Assembly, Homozygous Insertions and Deletions Were Identified Using
RepeatMasker
Repeat Class
HuRef (3,002,932,476 bp)
Homozygous Insertion (2,135,699 bp)
Homozygous Deletion (1,821,890 bp)
394,651,621
605,081,366
LTR elements
245,133,418
DNA elements
84,711,286
Unclassified
Satellites
103,452,000
Simple repeats
30,257,488
Low complexity
17,408,153
1,484,291,355
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.t007
Table 8. Concordancy in SNP Genotyping Validation Comparing Independent Genotype Calls Using Affymetrix 500K, Illumina
HumanHap650Y in Comparison with Sequence from the HuRef Assembly
Homozygous
Heterozygous
Total Overlap
Affymetrix
339,690 (78.42%)
93,459 (21.58%)
448,434 (75.35%)
146,717 (24.65%)
Nonredundant
723,799 (76.71%)
219,732 (23.29%)
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.t008
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
October 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 10 | e254
Diploid Genome Sequence of an Individual Human
the HuRef variant set. The repetitive regions are likely to
have a higher false-positive rate due to sequencing error and
misassembly. Further, they are not represented in the current
estimate of the false-positive rate. However, they also exhibit
a higher rate of authentic variation.
Computational Validation of Indels
Homozygous and heterozygous insertions and deletions
identiﬁed in the HuRef assembly were computationally
validated by comparison to previously published datasets.
As indicated in Figure 4, the homozygous insertion and
deletions variants are operationally deﬁned as either inserted
or deleted sequence in the HuRef genome respectively since
there is no other read evidence for heterozygosity. The
homozygous nature of these variants does not imply any
notion of ancestral allele. The largest set of indel variants that
has been published is based on mapping of trace reads to the
NCBI human genome reference assembly . This approach
can be used to identify deletions of any size and insertions
that are small enough to be spanned by sequence reads. In
this analysis, the 216,179 deletions and 177,320 insertions
from Mills et al. were compared to the insertions and
deletions identiﬁed from the HuRef assembly. Based on this
analysis, we found support for 37,893 homozygous deletions
and 46,043 homozygous insertions that overlapped between
the two datasets (Table 11). Comparison with the heterozygous deletions and insertions from the HuRef assembly
yielded support for 9,431 deletions and 7,738 insertions,
respectively (Table 10). These values represent a lower limit
due to possible alignment issues in regions with tandem
repeats. This dataset produced the largest overlap with the
HuRef variant set compared to all others discussed below.
However the Mills et al. published dataset used reads from the
NCBI TraceArchive that we also used during assembly (i.e.,
Celera reads, donor HuBB). This suggests that essentially the
same dataset used by two different groups produced an
Figure 8. Modeling the Rate of SNP Detection from Microarray Experiments
Model of the false-negative rate of heterozygous SNP detection found on Affymetrix or Illumina genotyping platforms in relation to the number of
supporting reads found in the HuRef assembly at these loci. The observed false-negative rate of detected heterozygous SNPs in the HuRef assembly
closely follows the modeled rate given a Poisson model. The predicted false-negative error is based on the thresholds of requiring at least 20% of the
reads supporting the minor allele, two reads minimum. The increased false-negative error at 11 is due to the increased number of reads required to call
the minor allele compared to two reads being required at 43–103 coverage. Therefore, at 113–153 coverage, three reads are required. The additional
read changes the binomial distribution and increases false-negative error (See Materials and Methods).
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.g008
Table 9. Discordant Calls in SNP Genotyping Validation Using Affymetrix 500K, Illumina HumanHap650Y in Comparison with Sequence
from the HuRef Assembly
Affymetrix/Ilumina
Homozygous (HuRef)
Heterozygous (HuRef)
Total Overlap
Affymetrix
Homozygous
4,886 (13.98%)
245 (0.70%)
Heterozygous
29,826 (85.31%)
Homozygous
7,093 (13.09%)
56 (0.10%)
Heterozygous
46,892 (86.54%)
142 (0.26%)
Non-redundant
Homozygous
14,035 (16.29%)
253 (0.29%)
Heterozygous
71,673 (83.89%)
145 (0.17%)
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.t009
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
October 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 10 | e254
Diploid Genome Sequence of an Individual Human
overlapping result by using different methods. As a consequence, we cannot determine which part of the overlapped
variants with the Mills et al. data came from non-Celera
sources, and therefore we cannot comment on novelty or
polymorphic supporting evidence for HuRef variants.
Next, the HuRef homozygous deletions were compared to
three other sets of previously identiﬁed deletion polymorphisms . However, the overlap with these datasets was
minimal, possibly due to the larger size of these variants
(Table 11). Finally, the set of HuRef homozygous insertions
was compared to those variants identiﬁed in an assembly
comparison approach , and support was found for
additional 243 insertion variants.
We sought further evidence in support of the longest indels
identiﬁed by the one-to-one HuRef–NCBI mapping. We
focused on the 20 longest insertions (9–83 kb) and the 20
longest deletions (7–20 kb) and examined the presence of
these large indels in the genomes of eight other individuals by
identifying fosmid clones that map to these 40 loci (Table S5).
The fosmid mapping provided support for all 20 insertions,
and 17 of 20 deletions. The lack of support for two of the
deletions (Unique Identiﬁers 1104685056026, 1104685093410)
is likely due to their location at the ends of HuRef scaffolds,
which greatly reduces the possibility of mapping fosmids that
span the insertion site. Support from multiple fosmids
provides the strongest evidence for variation in indels
between individuals. For example, the presence of a 24 kb
Chromosome
1104685552590) is supported by 13–17 fosmids in three
individuals (with no evidence for absence), whereas its absence
is supported by 19 fosmids in another individual (with no
evidence for presence). These data suggest that the majority of
large indels deﬁned by the one-to-one HuRef–NCBI mapping
are genuine variations among human genomes.
Experimental Verification of Heterozygous Indel Variants
We selected 19 non-genic heterozygous indels in a nonrandom manner, ranging in length from 1 to 16 bp, for
experimental validation using PCR coupled with PAGE
detection of allelic forms. We ensured that the read depth
coverage was in an acceptable range (not greater than 15
reads), suggesting that these loci were not in segmental
duplications and would therefore not produce spurious PCR
ampliﬁcation. Three Coriell DNA samples and HuRef donor
DNA were examined, and 15 out of 19 PCR assays assessed
generated results consistent with the positive and negative
controls. The indel lengths that yielded experimental data
ranged from 1 to 8 bp in length. In four out of 15 indels, the
heterozygote variant was identiﬁed in all four DNA samples,
and in three out of 15, it was only found the HuRef donor
DNA. For the remaining eight out of 15 cases, the indels were
differentially observed among the four DNA samples (Figure
Experimental Verification of Characterized Homozygous
Insertion/Deletion Variants
We selected 51 putative homozygous HuRef insertions in a
nonrandom manner for validation in 93 Coriell DNA samples
Table 10. Comparison of HuRef Heterozygous Indels to Indel
Variants Identified from Other Studies
Mills et al. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.t010
Figure 9. Distribution of HuRef Read-Depth Coverage for Genotyped SNPs
Distribution plot of number of underlying reads (average number of reads ¼ 8.8) in HuRef heterozygous SNPs confirmed by the Affymetrix and Illumina
genotyping platforms. This is compared to a distribution (average number of reads ¼ 5.2) for SNP detected by the platforms but missed in the HuRef
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.g009
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
October 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 10 | e254
Diploid Genome Sequence of an Individual Human
based on their proximity to annotated genes, their size range
of 100–1,000 bp, the absence of transposon repeat or tandem
repeat sequence, uniqueness in the HuRef genome, and the
absence of any similarity to chimpanzee sequence. The
experimental results (Table S6) indicated that for 43 of 51
insertions (84%), we were able to generate speciﬁc PCR
products for which the size of PCR products were as
predicted and fell within the detectable range of the gel.
For 84% of these 43 cases, insertions were identiﬁed in HuRef
and additional DNA samples, and most follow Hardy-
Weinberg equilibrium in CEU samples. Approximately 7%
of the insertions tested (3 of 43) were false positives, because
the HuRef donor DNA and all the 93 Coriell DNAs were
homozygous for no insertion. In four insertions (9%), all of
the tested Coriell samples displayed normal Hardy-Weinberg
equilibrium; however, the insertion was absent in the HuRef
sample. The inability to observe the insertion in the HuRef
sample in these instances might be due to allelic dropout in
the PCR process for the HuRef sample. This could be caused
by speciﬁc SNPs at the primer annealing sites that were not
accounted for during the primer design process.
In 22 (61%) conﬁrmed experiments, the HuRef donor
bears homozygous insertions in agreement with our computational analyses. There are four insertions in this set, among
the 22, where the HuRef donor and all 93 Coriell DNA donors
tested were homozygous for insertions. This suggests that
these sequences were either not assembled in the NCBI
human genome assembly or that the NCBI donor DNA
sequenced had a rare deletion in these regions.
For the remaining 14 insertions (39%), the HuRef donor
was heterozygous for the insertion instead of homozygous as
was predicted by our indel detection pipeline. We searched
for these alternative shorter alleles in the HuRef assembly and
observed that two of the alternative alleles matched degenerate scaffolds and two matched singleton unassembled reads.
These are sequence elements that are typically small or
unassembled elements respectively, signifying that the assembly process selected one allele.
We note that many of the insertions tested (84%) are
polymorphic in the Coriell panel tested, and although many
are intronic, there are instances of UTR and exonic insertions
whose impact on function may be more directly ascertained.
Analysis of Segmental Duplications
It has previously been shown that extended regions of high
sequence identity complicate de novo genome assembly
 . An analysis was undertaken to assess how well
the segmental duplications (identiﬁed as regions of .5 kb
with .90% sequence identity) annotated in the NCBI
assembly are represented in the HuRef genome sequence.
We analyzed the NCBI sequence (90.1 Mb) external to the
one-to-one mapping with the NCBI assembly for segmental
duplication content by comparison to the Human Segmental
Duplication Database ( .
More than 70% of these nucleotides (63.6 Mb) are contained
within segmental duplications, compared with 5.14% across
the entire NCBI assembly. This suggests that the regions of
the NCBI assembly that are not aligned to HuRef likely result
from the absence of assembled segmental duplication regions
in HuRef. This is further supported by the fact that only
57.2% of all regions annotated as segmental duplications in
NCBI are present in HuRef. Clearly, these are some of the
most difﬁcult regions of the genome to represent accurately
with a random shotgun approach and de novo assembly.
However, it is also important to note that at least 25% of
segmental duplication regions differ in copy number between
individuals , and the annotation of such sequences will
certainly differ between independent genomes.
Copy Number Variants
Copy number variants (CNVs) have been identiﬁed to be a
common feature in the human genome . However, such variants can be difﬁcult to identify and assemble
from sequence data alone, because they are often associated
with the repetition of large segments of identical or nearly
identical sequences. We tested for CNVs experimentally to
compare against those annotated computationally, and also
to discover others not represented in the HuRef assembly. We
used comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) with the
Agilent 244K array and Nimblegen 385K array, as well as
Table 11. Comparison of HuRef Homozygous Indels to Indel
Variants Identified from Other Studies
et al. 
1,001–10,000
1,001–10,000
et al. 
1,001–10,000
10,001–100,000
100,001—1,000,000
et al. 
1,001–10,000
10,001–100,000
100,001–1,000,000
et al. 
1,001–10,000
10,001–100,000
100,001–1,000,000
et al. 
1,001–10,000
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.t011
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
October 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 10 | e254
Diploid Genome Sequence of an Individual Human
comparative intensity data from the Affymetrix and Illumina
SNP genotyping platforms (using three analysis tools for
Affymetrix and one for Illumina). In total, 62 CNVs (32 losses
and 30 gains) were identiﬁed from these experiments (Table
S7). It is noteworthy that the Agilent and Nimblegen CGH
experiments, as well as the analysis of Affymetrix data using
the GEMCA algorithm, were run against a single reference
sample (NA10851). Therefore, a subset of the regions
reported as variant may reﬂect the reference sample rather
than the HuRef donor, even though all previously identiﬁed
variants in the reference sample were removed from the
ﬁnal list of CNV calls in the present study. The majority of the
variant regions were detected by only one platform, reﬂecting
the difference in probe coverage and sensitivity among
various approaches . As an independent form of
validation, the CNVs detected here were compared to those
reported in the Database of Genomic Variants (DGV) ,
and 54 of the variants (87%) have been described previously
(with the thresholds used for these analyses we expect
approximately 5% of calls to be false positive). A summary
of the genomic features overlapped by these CNVs is
presented in Table 12. Approximately 55% of the CNVs
overlap with annotated segmental duplications, which is
slightly higher than reported in previous studies . The
CNVs also overlap 95 RefSeq genes, seven of which are
described in the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man
database (OMIM) as linked to a speciﬁc phenotype (Table
S7). These include blood group determinants such as RHD
and XG, as well as a gain overlapping the coagulation factor
VIII gene.
FISH of Unmapped HuRef Scaffolds
Numerous HuRef sequences that span the entire or partial
scaffolds did not have a matching sequence in the NCBI
genome. Some had putative chromosomal location assignments (e.g., sequences extending into NCBI gaps), whereas
others were unanchored scaffolds with no mapping information. We selected sequences .40 kb in length with no match
to the NCBI genome and identiﬁed fosmids (derived from the
Coriell DNA NA18552) mapping to these sequences based
clone end-sequence data. The fosmids were then used as FISH
probes with the aim of conﬁrming annotated locations for
anchored sequences and assigning chromosomal locations to
unanchored scaffolds. Fosmids were hybridized to metaphase
spreads from two different cells lines. At least 10 metaphases
were scored for each probe, and a differentially labeled
control fosmid was included for each hybridization. For 23
regions, there was no mapping information available from
mate-pair data or the one-to-one mapping comparison. Of
the remaining 26 regions, 24 had a speciﬁc chromosomal
location assigned at the nucleotide level (Figure 10A and
10B), whereas two regions were assigned to speciﬁc chromosomes but lacked detailed mapping information. The results
of the FISH experiments are outlined in Table S8. Of the 23
regions with no prior mapping information, 13 gave a single
primary mapping location (Figure 10C). The majority of the
remaining 10 regions located to multiple centromeric regions
(Figure 10D), suggesting that there are large euchromatic-like
sequences present as low-copy repeats in the current
centromeric assembly gaps. For the 26 regions with mapping
information, the expected signal was observed for 22 (85%).
However, in six of these hybridizations, there were additional
signals of equal intensity at other locations. Ten of the
scaffolds chosen for FISH extend into contig or clone gaps in
the current reference assembly. Of these 10 regions, the
expected localization was corroborated for seven. The
combined data indicate that the HuRef assembly contributes
signiﬁcant amounts of novel sequence important for generating more complete reference assemblies.
Haplotype Assembly
Haplotypes have more power than individual variants in
the context of association studies and predicting disease risk
 and also permit the selection of reduced sets of
‘‘tagging’’ SNPs, where linkage disequilibrium is strong
enough to make groups of SNPs largely redundant .
The potential for shotgun sequences from a single individual
to be used to separate haplotypes has been examined
previously . For a given polymorphic site, sequencing
reads spanning that variant can be separated based on the
allele they contain. For data from a single individual, this
amounts to separation based on chromosome of origin. When
two or more variant positions are spanned by a single read, or
occur on paired reads derived from the same shotgun clone,
alleles can be linked to identify larger haplotypes. This is
sometimes known as ‘‘haplotype assembly.’’ When single
shotgun reads are considered, the problem is computationally
tractable but the resulting partial haplotypes would be
quite short with reads produced by existing sequencing
technology, given the observed density of polymorphisms in
the human genome (R. Lippert, personal communication).
Mate pairing has the potential to increase the degree of
‘‘haplotype assembly,’’ but ﬁnding the optimal solution in the
presence of errors in the data has been shown to be
computationally intractable . Nevertheless, we show that
the character and quality of the data is such that heuristic
solutions, while not guaranteed to ﬁnd the best possible
solution, can provide long, high-quality phasing of heterozygous variants.
The set of autosomal heterozygous variants described
above (n ¼ 1,856,446) was used for haplotype assembly. The
average separation of these variants on the genome was
;1500 bp (twice the average read length). Fewer than 50% of
variants could be placed in ‘‘chains’’ of six or more variants
where successive variants were within 1 kb of one another.
Consequently, single reads cannot connect these variants into
large haplotypes. However, the effect of mate pairing is
Table 12. Copy Number Variants Identified on the HuRef Sample
Number CNVsa
Number Unique Featuresb
RefSeq Genes
OMIM Disease Genes
DGV Entries
WSSD Duplications
a Number CNVs refers to the number of unique CNV records in the HuRef dataset for
which one or more genomic features were found.
b Number Unique Features refers to the number of unique features in functional elements
(e.g., genes or miRNAs) found within all of the individual’s CNV.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.t012
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
October 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 10 | e254
Diploid Genome Sequence of an Individual Human
substantially greater than would be observed simply by
doubling the length of a read, as shown in Figure 11: variants
are linked to an average of 8.7 other variants.
Using this dataset, haplotype assembly was performed as
described in Materials and Methods. Half of the variants were
assembled into haplotypes of at least 401 variants, and
haplotypes spanning .200 kb cover 1.5 Gb of genome
sequence. The full distributions of haplotype sizes, both in
terms of bases spanned and in terms of numbers of variants
per haplotype, are shown in Figure 12. Although haplotypes
inferred in this fashion are not necessarily composed of
continuous variants, haplotypes do in fact contain 91% of the
variants they span. More than 75% of the total autosomal
chromosome length is in haplotypes spanning at least four
variants, and 89% of the variants are in haplotypes that
include at least four heterozygous HapMap (phase I) variants.
Both internal consistency checks and comparison to
HapMap data indicate that the HuRef haplotypes are highly
accurate. Comparing individual clones against the haplotypes
to which they are assigned, 97.4% of variant calls were
consistent with the assigned haplotype. Moreover, the HuRef
haplotypes were strongly consistent with those inferred as
part of the HapMap project . Where a pair of variants is in
strong LD according to the HapMap haplotypes, the correct
phasing of the HuRef data would be expected to match the
more frequent phasing in the HapMap set in most cases.
Exceptions would require a rare recombination event,
convergent mutation in the HuRef genome, or an error in
the HapMap phasing in multiple individuals.
We accessed the 120 phased CEU haplotypes from HapMap
and identiﬁed the subset of heterozygous HuRef SNP variants
that also coincided with the HapMap data. For adjacent pairs
of such variants that were in strong LD (r2  0.9; n ¼ 197,035),
fewer than 1 in 40 of the HuRef-inferred haplotypes
conﬂicted with the preferred HapMap phasing. Figure 13
shows more generally the consistency of HuRef haplotypes
with the HapMap population data as a function of r2 and D9.
Because the inference of HuRef haplotypes is completely
independent of the data and methods used to infer HapMap
haplotypes, this is a remarkable conﬁrmation of the HuRef
haplotypes.
The restriction to variants in strong LD has no clear
selection bias with respect to our inferred haplotypes. On the
other hand, it provides only weaker conﬁrmation for the
HapMap phasing, since it is restricted to the easiest cases for
phasing using population data—namely only those pairs of
variants in strong linkage disequilibrium.
The lengths and densities of the inferred HuRef haplotypes
described above are possible due to the use of paired end
reads from a variety of insert sizes. Given the relatively simple
means that were used for separating haplotypes, the high
accuracy of phasing is likewise due to the quality of the
Figure 10. Non-Mapped HuRef Sequences Mapped to Coriell DNA Samples by FISH
Sequences from the HuRef donor that had no match based on the one-to-one mapping or BLAST when compared to the NCBI Human reference
genome were tested by FISH. Fosmids were used as probes and the experiments were run, using Coriell DNA, to confirm the localization of the contigs
or to map contigs with no prior mapping information. Shown here are four representative results. (A) An insertion at 7q22 where the FISH confirmed
the HuRef mapping, (B) FISH result confirming the mapping of a sequence extending into a gap at 1p21. (C) Localization of a contig with no prior
mapping information to chromosomal band 1q42. (D) An example of euchromatic-like sequence with no prior mapping information, which hybridizes
to multiple centromeric locations.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.g010
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
October 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 10 | e254
Diploid Genome Sequence of an Individual Human
underlying sequence data, the genome assembly, and the set
of identiﬁed variants. The rate of conﬂict with HapMap with
regard to variants in high LD can be further decreased by
ﬁltering the variants more aggressively (particularly excluding indels; unpublished data), although at the expense of
decreasing haplotype size and density. It is also possible to
improve the consistency measures described above by using
more sophisticated methods for haplotype separation. One
possibility we have explored is to use the solutions described
above as a starting point in a Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) algorithm. This produces solutions for which the
fraction of high LD conﬂicts with HapMap is reduced by
;30%. This approach has other advantages as well: MCMC
sampling provides a natural way to assess the conﬁdence of a
partial haplotype assignment. Assessment of this and other
measures of conﬁdence is a topic for future investigation.
We used the generated haplotypes to view how well they
span the current gene annotation. We were able to identify
84% (19,407 out of 23,224 protein coding genes) of Ensembl
version 41 genes partially contained within a haplotype block
and 58% of protein coding genes completely contained
within a haplotype block. We note that in population-based
haplotypes, denser sampling of SNPs in regions of low LD
leads to reduction in the size of the average haplotype block
 . In contrast to this ﬁnding, detection of additional true
heterozygous variants through personal sequencing, regardless of LD, would lead to larger partial haplotypes, because
additional variants increase the density of variants and thus
their linkage to one another.
Gene-Based Variation in HuRef
The sequencing, assembly, and cataloguing of the variant
set and the corresponding haplotypes of the HuRef donor
provided unprecedented opportunity to study gene-based
variation using the vast body of scientiﬁc literature and
extensively curated databases like OMIM and Human
Genetic Mutation Database (HGMD, ). A preliminary
assessment indicates that 857 OMIM genes have at least one
heterozygous variant in the coding or UTR regions, and 314
OMIM genes have at least one nonsynonymous SNP (Figure
14A). Overall, we observed 11,718 heterozygous and 9,434
homozygous coding SNPs and 236 heterozygous and 627
homozygous coding indels (Figure 14B). In addition, 4,107
genes have 6,114 nonsynonymous SNPs indicating that at
least 17% (4,107/23,224) of genes encode differential proteins.
The nonsynonymous SNPs deﬁne a lower limit of a
potentially impacted proteome, because 44% of genes
(10,208/23,224) have at least one heterozygous variant in the
UTR or coding region and these variants could also affect
protein function or expression. Therefore, almost half of the
genes could have differential states in this diploid human
genome, and this estimate does not include variation in
nonexonic regions involved in gene regulation such as
promoters and enhancers.
Understanding potential genotype-to-phenotype relationships will require many more extensive population-based
studies. However, the complexities of assessing genotype–
phenotype relationships begin to emerge even from a very
preliminary glimpse of an individual human genome (Table
13). For Mendelian conditions such as Huntington disease
(HD), the predictive nature of the genomic sequence is more
deﬁnitive. Our data reveal the donor to be heterozygous
(CAG)18/(CAG)17 in the polymorphic trinucleotide repeat
located in the HD gene (HD affected individuals have more
than 29 CAG repeats) . The genotype matches the
phenotype in this case, since the donor does not have a
family history of Huntington disease and shows no sign of
disease symptoms, even though he is well past the average
onset age. The HuRef donor’s predisposition status for
multifactorial diseases is, as expected, more complicated.
For example, the donor has a family history of cardiovascular
disease prompting us to consider potentially associated
alleles. The HuRef donor is heterozygous for variants in the
KL gene; F352V (r9536314) and C370S (rs9527025). It has
previously been observed that these heterozygous alleles
present a lower risk for coronary artery disease .
Figure 11. Degree of Linkage of Heterozygous Variants
The distribution of the number of other variants to which a given variant can be linked using sequencing reads only or using mated reads as well is
shown. Linkage of variants based on individual sequencing reads is limited, regardless of sequence coverage beyond a modest level, but is substantially
increased by the incorporation of mate pairing information. The size of the effect is considerably more than simply doubling read length, due to
variation in insert size; consequently, benefits of increasing sequencing coverage drop off much more slowly.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.g011
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
October 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 10 | e254
Diploid Genome Sequence of an Individual Human
However, the donor is also homozygous for the 5A/5A in
rs3025058 in the promoter of the matrix metalloproteinase-3
(MMP3) . This genotype is associated with higher intraarterial levels of stromelysin and has a higher risk of acute
myocardial infarction. This observation highlights the forthcoming challenge toward assessing the effects of the complex
interactions in the multitude of genes that drive the
development and progression of phenotypes. On occasion,
these variant alleles may provide either protective or
deleterious effects, and the ascertainment of resulting
phenotypes are based on probabilities and would need to
account for impinging environmental effects.
In our preliminary analysis of the HuRef genome, we also
identiﬁed some genetic changes related to known disease
risks for the donor. For example, approximately 50% of the
Caucasian population is heterozygous for the GSTM1 gene,
where the null mutation can increase susceptibly to environmental toxins and carcinogens . The HuRef assembly
identiﬁes the donor to be heterozygous for the GSTM1 gene.
Currently, it is not possible without further testing (including
somatic analysis) and comparison against larger datasets to
determine if this variant contributes to the reported health
status events experienced by the donor, such as skin cancer.
We also found some novel changes in the HuRef genome
for which the biological consequences are as yet unknown.
For example, we found a 4-bp novel heterozygous deletion in
Acyl-CoA Oxidase 2 (ACOX2) causing a protein truncation.
ACOX2 encodes an enzyme activity found in peroxisomes and
associates intimately with lipid metabolism and further was
found to be absent from livers of patients with Zellweger
syndrome . The deletion identiﬁed would likely abolish
peroxisome targeting, but the biological function of the
mutation remains to be tested.
We have also been able to detect inconsistencies between
detected genotypes in the donor’s DNA and the expected
phenotype based on the literature given the known phenotype of the HuRef donor. For example, the donor’s LCT
genotype should confer adult lactose tolerance according to
published literature , but this does not match with the
self-reported phenotype of the donor’s lactose intolerance.
Apparent inconsistencies of this nature may be explained by
considering the modifying effect of other genes and their
products, as well as environmental interactions.
Discussion
We describe the sequencing, de novo assembly, and
preliminary analysis of an individual diploid human genome.
In the course of our study, we have developed an experimental
framework that can serve as a model for the emerging ﬁeld of
en masse personalized genomics . The components of our
strategy involve: (i) sample consent and assessment, (ii) genome
sequencing, (iii), genome assembly, (iv) comparative (one-toone) mapping, (v) DNA variation detection and ﬁltering, (vi)
haplotype assembly, and (vii) annotation and interpretation of
the data. We were able to construct a genome-wide representation of all DNA variants and haplotype blocks in the
context of gene annotations and repeat structure identiﬁed in
the HuRef donor. This provides a unique glimpse into the
diploid genome of an individual human (Poster S1).
The most signiﬁcant technical challenge has been to develop
an assembly process (points ii–v) that faithfully maintains the
integrity of the allelic contribution from an underlying set of
reads originating from a diploid DNA source. As far as we
know, the approach we developed is unique and is central to
the identiﬁcation of the large number of indels less than 400
bp in length. We attempted de novo recruitment of sequence
reads to the NCBI human reference genome, using mate
pairing and clone insert size to guide the accurate placement
of reads . Although this approach can produce useful
results, it does limit variant detection to completed regions of
the reference genome and, like genome assembly, can be
confounded by segmentally duplicated regions.
The genome assembly approach with allelic separation
allows the detection of heterozygous variants present in the
individual genome with no further comparison. The one-toone mapping of our HuRef assembly against a nearly
Figure 12. Distribution of Inferred Haplotype Sizes
(A) Reverse cumulative distribution of haplotype spans (bp) (N50 ; 350
kb). (B) Reverse cumulative distribution of variants per haplotype (N50 ;
400 variants).
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.g012
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
October 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 10 | e254
Diploid Genome Sequence of an Individual Human
completed reference genome permits the detection of the
remaining variants. These variants arise from sequence
differences found within and also outside the mapped regions,
where the precision of the compared regions is being
provided by the genome-to-genome comparison . The
ability to provide a highly conﬁdent set of DNA variants is
challenging, because more than half of the variants are a
single base in length but include both SNPs and indels. A
ﬁltering approach was used that accounts for the positional
error proﬁle in a Sanger sequenced electropherogram in
relation to the called variant. Additional ﬁltering considerations necessitated minimal requirements for read coverage
and for the proportional representation of each allele. The
ﬁltering approaches were empirical and used the large
amounts of previously described data on human variation
(dbSNP). The utility of using paired-end random shotgun
reads and the variant set deﬁned on the reads via the assembly
enabled the construction of long-range haplotypes. The
haplotypes are remarkably well constructed given that the
density of the variant map is comparable to those used in
other studies , reﬂecting the utility of underlying sequence
reads beyond just genome assembly. To understand how an
individual genome translates into an individual transcriptome
and ultimately a functional proteome, it is important to deﬁne
the segregation of variants among each chromosomal copy.
While several new approaches for DNA sequencing are
available or being developed , we chose to use proven
Sanger sequencing technology for this HuRef project. The
choice was obviously motivated in part for historical reasons
 , but not solely. We attached a high importance to
generating a de novo assembly including maximizing coverage
and sensitivity for detecting variation. We further anticipated
that long read lengths (in excess of 800 nucleotides),
compatibility with paired-end shotgun clone sequencing, and
well-developed parameters for assessing sequencing accuracy
would be required. High sequence accuracy is essential to
avoid calling large numbers of false-positive variants on a
genome-wide scale. Long paired-end reads are especially
useful for achieving the best possible assembly characteristics
in whole-genome shotgun sequencing and for providing
sufﬁcient linkage of variants to determine large haplotypes.
We have been able to categorize a signiﬁcant amount of
DNA variation in the genome of a single human. Of great
interest is the fact that 44% of annotated genes have at least
one, and often more, alterations within them. The vast
majority—3,213,401 events (78%) of the 4.1 million variants
detected in the HuRef donor—are SNPs. However, the
remaining 22% of non-SNP variants constitute the vast
majority, about 9 Mb or 74%, of variant bases in the donor.
Using microarray-based methods, we also detected another
62 copy number variable regions in HuRef, estimated to add
some 10 Mb of additional heterogeneity. Given these
potential sources of measured DNA variation, we can, for
the ﬁrst time, make a conservative estimate that a minimum
of 0.5% variation exists between two haploid genomes (all
heterozygous bases, i.e., SNP, multi-nucleotide polymorphisms [MNP], indels, [complex variants þ putative alternate
alleles þ CNV]/genome size; [2,894,929 þ 939,799 þ
10,000,000]/2,809,547,336) namely those that make up the
diploid DNA of the HuRef assembly. We also note that there
will be signiﬁcantly more DNA variation discovered in
heterochromatic regions of the genome , which largely
escaped our analysis in this study.
We had mixed success when attempting to ﬁnd support for
the experimentally determined CNVs in the HuRef assembly
itself or the data from which it was derived. More than 50% of
the CNVs overlapped segmental duplications, and these
regions are underrepresented in HuRef, which complicated
the analysis. We attempted to map the sequence reads onto
the NCBI human genome and then identify CNVs by
detecting regions with signiﬁcant changes in read depth.
However, we found signiﬁcant local ﬂuctuations in read
depth across the genome, limiting the ability for comparison
and suggesting that a higher coverage of reads may be
required to use this approach effectively.
As we have emphasized throughout, a major difference of
the genomic assembly we have described is our approach to
maintain, wherever possible, the diploid nature of the
Figure 13. Consistency of HuRef Haplotypes with HapMap Data
Haplotypes inferred from the HuRef data are strongly consistent with HapMap haplotypes. The probability in the HapMap CEU panel of the observed
genotypes being phased as per the HuRef haplotypes is high for variants in strong LD (as measured either by D9 or r2).
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.g013
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
October 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 10 | e254
Diploid Genome Sequence of an Individual Human
genome. This is in contrast to both the NCBI and WGSA
genomes, which are each consensus sequences and, therefore,
a mosaic of haplotypes that do not accurately display the
relationships of variants on either of the autosomal pairs. For
BAC-based genome assemblies such as the NCBI genome
assembly, the mosaic fragments are generally genomic clone
size (e.g., cosmid, PAC, BAC), with each clone providing
contiguous sequence for only one of the two haplotypes at
any given locus. Moreover, there are substantial differences in
the clone composition of different chromosomes due to the
historical and hierarchical mapping and sequencing strategies used to generate the NCBI reference assemblies .
In contrast, for WGSA, the reads that underlie most of the
consensus sequence are derived from both haplotypes. This
can result in very short-range mosaicism, where the consensus
of clustered allelic differences does not actually exist in any of
the underlying reads. To address this issue, the Celera
assembler was modiﬁed to consider all variable bases within
a given window and to group the sequence forms supporting
each allele before incorporation into a consensus sequence
(see Materials and Methods). In our experience, this reduces
the incidence of local mosaicism, although, between windows,
the consensus sequence remains a composite of haplotypes.
Efforts to build haplotypes from the genome assembly
(Haplotype Assembly) will likely lead to future modiﬁcation
of the assembler, allowing it to output longer consensus
sequences for both haplotypes at many loci. Clearly, a single
consensus sequence for a diploid genome, whether derived
Figure 14. Distribution of HuRef Variants in OMIM and Ensembl Genes
(A) The distribution of the OMIM genes in Ensembl version 41 protein coding genes that contain one or more SNP or indel in their coding and/or UTR
regions. (B) A similar distribution for the variants found in coding and/or UTR regions for all Ensembl version 41 genes.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.g014
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
October 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 10 | e254
Diploid Genome Sequence of an Individual Human
Table 13. Genotypes for Some Traits in the HuRef Donor
Phenotype Associated
Allele/Haplotypes
Associated Common Trait
Confidence of Genotype
Genotype in
Phased Haplotype
Probability Missing
Heterozygous Allele
Based on Coverage
rs1801260(3111C/T)
Evening preference
Advanced sleep phase syndrome (ASPA)
rs4988235(C/T-13910)
Adult-type hypolactasia
rs182549(G/A-22018)
Adult-type hypolactasia
C/C(Arg305Arg)
Link to blue eye, fair skin color
G/G(Arg419Arg)
Link to blue eye, fair skin color
rs7495174(T/T), rs6497268(rs4778241)G/G
and rs11855019 (rs4778138) T/T are
in one major haplotype block TGT/TGT
link to blue eye
rs6497268(rs4778241)
rs11855019 (rs4778138)
rs17822931(538G –. A )
AA:dry type; G/A&G/G: wet type.
Human earwax type(AA,Dry;
G/A&G/G are wet type)
40-bp VNTR in 3’UTR
10/10 allele
9/9 allele
Substance abuse
DRD4 III Exon
3 VNTR polymorphism
4-repeat (short form)
Long forms (6–11 repeat) are associated
with higher Novelty Seeking scores and
more prevalent in substance abusers than
short form (2–5 repeat).
Novelty seeking
(DRD4,-521C/T, promoter)
C/C genotype exhibited the highest
novelty seeking scores
Novelty seeking
(DRD3 Ball polymorphism)
A/A(allele 1)
Allele 1(aGC:S) showed significantly
lower Novelty Seeking scores compared
to patients without this allele. Allele
2(gGC:G) was associated with increased
rates of obsessive personality disorder
symptomatology
Novelty seeking
rs1800497(DRD2TaqIA
polymorphism,
3’ down stream )
A2 allele, G/G
A1 allele(A)is more prevalence in
alcohol-dependent males than
A2 allele(G).
Alcohol-dependent
Tobacco addiction protection
rs16969968
Tobacco addiction
Tobacco addiction
Tobacco addiction
Tobacco addiction
Tobacco addiction
rs10958726
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
October 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 10 | e254
Diploid Genome Sequence of an Individual Human
Table 13. Continued.
Phenotype Associated
Allele/Haplotypes
Associated Common Trait
Confidence of Genotype
Genotype in
Phased Haplotype
Probability Missing
Heterozygous Allele
Based on Coverage
Tobacco addiction
Tobacco addiction
MAOA-uVNTR
Hemizygosity 4 copies
3.5 or 4 copies nMAOA-uVNTR transcribed
2 to 10 times more efficiently than those
with 3 or 5 copies,low MAOA activity allele
were much more likely to develop antisocial
behavior, conduct disorder.
Antisocial behavior, conduct disorder,
rs13306281
G/G (Val158Val)
(A/A)158Met/158Met
Alcoholism
Myocardial infarction and severity of
coronary artery stenosis
Coronary artery disease and hypertension
rs6489738 (rs5443)
Hypertension, obesity, insulin-resistance
and left ventricular hypertrophy
Acute myocardial infarction
Germline mutation not found
Missense mutation, small or gross indels
Lipoprotein lipase deficiency,
hypertriglyceridaemia,
Germline mutation not found
Missense/nonsense, splicing,
regulatory and small or gross indels
Lipoprotein lipase deficiency,
hypertriglyceridaemia,
G/G(glu/glu)
Myocardial infarction and stenosed arteries
27bp repeat
in intron 4
Homozygous 5 copies,
long form,
Short form (4 tandem 27-bp repeats)
CA repeats
in intron 13
30 CA repeats
13 CA repeat
Coronary artery disease, and stroke
Alzheimer disease
rs12285364
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
October 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 10 | e254
Diploid Genome Sequence of an Individual Human
from BACs or WGS, has limitations for describing allelic
variants (and speciﬁc combinations of variants) within the
genome of an individual.
Partial haplotypes can be inferred for an individual from
laboratory genotype data (e.g., from SNP microarrays) in
conjunction with population data or genotypes of family
members. However, at least in the absence of sets of related
individuals (e.g., family trios), it is difﬁcult to determine
haplotypes from genotype data across regions of low LD. We
have shown that sequencing with a paired-end sequencing
strategy can provide highly accurate haplotype reconstruction that does not share these limitations. The assembled
haplotypes are substantially larger than the blocks of SNPs in
strong LD within the various populations investigated by the
HapMap project. In addition to being larger, haplotypes
inferred in our approach can link variants even where LD in a
population is weak, and they are not restricted to those
variants that have been studied in large population samples
(e.g., HapMap variants). We note that in addition to the
implications for human genetics, this approach could be
applied to separating haplotypes of any organism of
interest—without the requirement for a previous reference
genome, family data, or population data—so long as polymorphism rates are high enough for an acceptable fraction of
reads or mate pairs to link variants.
There are several avenues for extending our inference of
haplotypes. As noted, although the naive heuristics used here
give highly useful results, other approaches may give even
more accurate results, as we have observed with an MCMC
algorithm. There are various natural measures of conﬁdence
that can be applied to the phasing of two or more variants,
including the minimum number of clones that would have to
be ignored to unlink two variants, or a measure of the degrees
of separation between two variants. The analysis presented
here provides phasing only for sites deemed heterozygous,
but data from apparently homozygous sites can be phased as
well, so we can tell with conﬁdence whether a given site is
truly homozygous (i.e., the same allele is present in both
haplotypes) or whether the allele at one or even both
haplotypes cannot be determined, as occurs as much as
20% of the time with the current dataset. Lastly, it should be
possible to combine our approach with typical genotype
phasing approaches to infer even larger haplotypes.
Our project developed over a 10-year period and the
decisions regarding sample selection, techniques used, and
methods of analysis were critical to the current and
continued success of the project. We anticipated that beyond
mere curiosity, there would be very pragmatic reasons to use
a donor sample from a known consented individual. First and
foremost, as we show in a preliminary analysis, genome-based
correlations to phenotype can be performed. Due to the still
rudimentary state of the genotype-phenotype databases it can
be argued that at the present time, DNA sequence comparisons do not reveal much more information than a proper
family history. Even when a disease, predisposition, or
phenotypically-relevant allele is found, further familial
sampling will usually be required to determine the relevance.
Eventually, however, populations of genomes will be sequenced, and at some point, a critical mass will dramatically
change the value of any individual initiative providing the
potential for proactive rather than reactive personal health
care. In a simple analogy, absent of family history, genea-
Table 13. Continued.
Phenotype Associated
Allele/Haplotypes
Associated Common Trait
Confidence of Genotype
Genotype in
Phased Haplotype
Probability Missing
Heterozygous Allele
Based on Coverage
C/C(Arg/Arg)
Alzheimer disease, hyperlipidemia
T/C(Cys/Arg)
Genotypes were established directly from the HuRef assembly. Phenotypes were determined from OMIM, HGMD and PubMed. Confidence of genotype is determined by whether it is in a phased haplotype (þ). In the case of homozygous calls a
probability is provided that an alternative allele is missing ie heterozygous variant, as calculated in Material and Methods. The SNP column contains the dbSNP identifier or mutation reported. Additionally, if available, the commonly used term in the
literature sources is provided.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.t013
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
October 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 10 | e254
Diploid Genome Sequence of an Individual Human
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
October 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 10 | e254
Diploid Genome Sequence of an Individual Human
logical studies can now be quite accurate in reconstructing
ancestral history based purely on marker-frequency comparisons to databases. Here, with a near-unlimited amount of
variation data available from the HuRef assembly, we can
reconstruct the chromosome Y ethno-geneographic lineage
(Figure 15), which is not only consistent with, but better
deﬁnes the self-reported family tree data (Figure 1A and
unpublished data).
There are always issues regarding the generation and study
of genetic data and these may amplify as we move from what
are now primarily gene-centric studies to the new era where
genome sequences become a standard form of personal
information. For example, there are often concerns that
individuals should not be informed of their predisposition (or
fate) if there is nothing they can do about it. It is possible,
however, that many of the concerns for predictive medical
information will fall by the wayside as more prevention
strategies, treatment options, and indeed cures become
realistic. Indeed we believe that as more individuals put their
genomic proﬁles into the public realm, effective research will
be facilitated, and strategies to mitigate the untoward effects
of certain genes will emerge. The cycle, in fact, should
become self-propelling, and reasons to know will soon
outweigh reasons to remain uninformed.
Ultimately, as more entire genome sequences and their
associated personal characteristics become available, they will
facilitate a new era of research into the basis of individuality.
The opportunity for a better understanding of the complex
interactions among genes, and between these genes and their
host’s personal environment will be possible using these
datasets composed of many genomes. Eventually, there may
be true insight into the relationships between nature and
nurture, and the individual will then beneﬁt from the
contributions of the community as a whole.
Materials and Methods
External data sources. We used the assembled chromosome
sequence of the human genome available as NCBI version 36. The
gene annotation of this genome was provided by Ensembl ( 
ensembl.org) version 41, which incorporates dbSNP version 126.
Haplotype map data was obtained from 
Release version 21a. Celera-generated chromatograms for the HuBB
individual were obtained from the NCBI trace archive. These
included reads from two tissues sources: blood and sperm. Sequence
reads were generated from these traces using Phred version 020425.c
 and a modiﬁed version of Paracel TraceTuner (http://
sourceforge.net/projects/tracetuner/). This reprocessing signiﬁcantly
improved accuracy and quality in the 59 portion of the reads,
increasing their usable length by 7%, and reducing variants encoding
spurious protein truncations, as well as reducing apparent heterozygous variants in the assembly.
DNA extraction. 200-ll aliquots of thawed, whole blood were
processed using the MagAttract DNA Blood Mini M48 Kit and the
MagAttract DNA Blood .200 ll Blood protocol on the BioRobot M48
Workstation running the GenoM-48 QIAsoft software (version 2.0)
(Qiagen; Tris:EDTA (10:0.1) was used for the
ﬁnal 200 ll elution step. A260/A280 readings (SPECTRAmax Plus
spectrophotometer (Molecular Devices; 
com) or an ND-1000 spectrophotometer (NanoDrop Technologies;
 and gel images were used to quantify the
DNA and to conﬁrm that high-quality, high–molecular weight DNA
was available for downstream processing. 1.0 ll of extracted DNA was
run on a 0.8% agarose gel containing ethidium bromide, for 4 h at 60
V and imaged using Gel Doc and Quantity One Software (Bio-Rad
Laboratories; 
Cytogenetic analysis. Phytohemagglutin-stimulated lymphocytes
from peripheral blood were cultured for 72 h with thymidine
synchronization. G-banding analysis was performed on metaphase
spreads from peripheral blood lymphocytes using standard cytogenetic techniques.
Spectral karyotyping. Spectral karyotyping was performed on
metaphase spreads from cultured lymphocytes. SkyPaint probes were
used according to manufacturer’s instructions (Applied Spectral
Imaging; Metaphases were viewed
with a Zeiss epiﬂuorescence microscope and spectral images were
acquired with an SD300 SpectraCube system and analyzed using
SkyView software 1.6.2 (Applied Spectral Imaging).
High-throughput Applied Biosystems 3730xl Sanger sequencing
processing. Plasmid and Fosmid Library Construction. We nebulized
genomic DNA to produce random fragments with a distribution of
approximately 1–25 kb, end-polished these with consecutive BAL31
nuclease and T4 DNA polymerase treatments, and size selected using
gel electrophoresis on 1% low–melting-point agarose. After ligation
to BstXI adapters, we puriﬁed DNA by three rounds of gel electrophoresis to remove excess adapters, inserted fragments into BstXIlinearized medium-copy pBR322 plasmid vectors, and inserted the
resulting library into GC10 cells by electroporation. To ensure that
plasmid libraries contained few clones without inserts and no clones
with chimeric inserts, we used vectors (pHOS) that include several
features: (i) the sequencing primer sites immediately ﬂank the BstXI
cloning site to avoid sequencing of vector DNA, (ii) there are no
strong promoters oriented toward the cloning site, and (iii) BstXI sites
for cloning facilitate a high frequency of single inserts and rare noinsert clones. Sequencing from both ends of cloned inserts produced
pairs of linked sequences of ;800 bp each. We constructed fosmid
libraries with approximately 30 lg of DNA that was sheared using
bead beating and repaired by ﬁlling with dNTPs. We used a pulsed-
ﬁeld electrophoresis system to select for 39–40 kb fragments, which
we ligated to the blunt-ended pCC1FOS vector.
Clone Picking and Inoculation. Libraries were propagated on largeformat (16 3 16 cm) diffusion plates and colonies were picked for
template preparation using a Q-bot or Q-Pix colony-picking robots
(Genetix; and inoculated into 384-well blocks.
DNA Template Preparation. We prepared plasmid DNA using a
robotic workstation custom built by Thermo CRS, based on the
alkaline lysis miniprep , modiﬁed for high-throughput processing
in 384-well plates. The typical yield of plasmid DNA from this method
was approximately 600–800 ng per clone, providing sufﬁcient DNA
for at least four sequencing reactions per template.
Sequencing Reactions. Sequencing protocols were based on the dideoxy sequencing method . Two 384-well cycle-sequencing
reaction plates were prepared from each plate of plasmid template
DNA for opposite-end, paired-sequence reads. Sequencing reactions
were completed using Big Dye Terminator (BDT) chemistry version
3.1 Cycle Sequencing Ready Reaction Kits (Applied Biosystems) and
standard M13 forward and reverse primers. Reaction mixtures,
thermal cycling proﬁles, and electrophoresis conditions were
optimized to reduce volume and extend read lengths. Sequencing
reactions were set-up by the Biomek FX (Beckman Coulter; http://
www.beckmancoulter.com) pipetting workstations. Templates were
combined with 5-ll reaction mixes consisting of deoxy- and
ﬂuorescently labeled dideoxynucleotides, DNA polymerase, sequencing primers, and reaction buffer. Bar coding and tracking promoted
error-free transfer. Ampliﬁed reaction products were transferred to a
3730xl DNA Analyzer (Applied Biosystems).
Genome assembly and initial variant identiﬁcation. The Celera
Assembler Software ( 
 generated contiguous sequences (contigs) that could be
linked via mate-pair information into scaffolds. It has a phase for
Figure 15. Chromosome Y ethno-genogeographic lineage
The HuRef donor Y chromosome haplotype suggests descent from several European/US groups given the Y chromosome ethno-geographic markers.
The haplogroup membership is R1b6 with includes individuals from the United Kingdom, Germany, Russia, and the United States, which is consistent
with the self-reported family tree provided by the HuRef donor. The thick red line denotes the markers needed to trace the haplotype from the
mapping of the chromosome Y markers to the HuRef genome. Data and figure from the Y Chromosome Consortium; 
nomenclature_system/frontpage.html.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.g015
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
October 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 10 | e254
Diploid Genome Sequence of an Individual Human
splitting initial apparently chimeric contigs (referred to as unitigs),
but this process is not repeated for the ﬁnal set of contigs and
scaffolds as with some other assemblers (Arachne 2 ). This leaves a
small number of chimeric scaffolds, which can be detected and split
as described below. All assemblers fail to discriminate alternate alleles
in polymorphic regions from distinct regions of the genome. These
polymorphic regions, containing highly repetitive sequence with
short unique anchoring sequence and simple algorithmic failures,
result in a number of small scaffolds that are highly redundant.
Although there are valuable data in these small scaffolds, they are
usually not treated as part of the assembled sequence.
For this project we made speciﬁc modiﬁcations to the Celera
Assembler to enable the grouping of reads into separate alleles when
heterozygous variants were encountered. Instead of taking a columnby-column approach to determine the consensus sequence from a set
of aligned reads, the region of variation was considered as a whole,
deﬁned as that between at least 11 bp nonvariant columns. In
practice, variant regions would most frequently be single columns
(SNPs), but the new algorithm only applied to longer regions. The
reads spanning a variant region were split between alleles. An allele,
for this purpose, was one or more spanning reads sharing an identical
sequence for the variant region, and was considered conﬁrmed if
represented by two or more reads. Each allele was assigned a score
equal to the sum of average quality values for the spanning portions
of its reads. The highest-scoring conﬁrmed allele was used for the
consensus sequence. Alternate conﬁrmed allele sequences were
reported separately. As expected, there were usually two conﬁrmed
alleles in each region of sequence variation. Regions with more than
two apparent conﬁrmed alleles represented either collapsed repetitive sequence or a group of reads with systematic base calling error,
rather than true genetic variation.
BAC end mapping. The set of The Institute for Genome Research
(TIGR) BAC ends used in the WGSA assembly were aligned
to the 553 HuRef scaffolds of at least 100 kb in length. We kept BAC
ends that mapped uniquely to a single scaffold and near the end of a
scaffold, such that their mate was likely to reside outside of the
scaffold. Mate pairs were kept if both BAC ends passed the above
criterion, and these indicated a possible joining of two scaffolds in a
certain orientation. There were 144 consistent scaffold joins with at
least two supporting mate pairs and 98 with one supporting mate
pair. Using these scaffold joins would result in 409 or 311 scaffolds,
respectively, of at least 100 kb, with a concomitant increase in the
scaffold N50 length.
Assembly-to-assembly mapping. We used open-source software
( to generate a one-toone comparison between HuRef and NCBI human genome reference
assembly. For sequences that do not contain very large, nearly
identical duplications, this mapping is accurate . Nearly identical
duplicated regions tend to be underrepresented in whole-genome
shotgun assemblies such as HuRef . Segments that are duplicated
in one sequence but not the other (for instance when failing to merge
overlapping contigs) cannot be fully included in any one-to-one
mapping. For example the ﬁrst few megabases of NCBI version 36
Chromosomes X and Y are identical; therefore, a 1.5-Mb scaffold
from HuRef that maps to both of these regions is not part of the oneto-one mapping. Tandem repeats with variable unit copy number are
also problematic for a one-to-one mapping.
For each one-to-one mapping we determined three levels: matches,
runs, and clumps. A match is a maximal high-identity local alignment,
usually terminated by indels or sequence gaps in one of the
assemblies. Runs may include indels, and are monotonically increasing or decreasing sets of matches (linear segments of a match dot
plot) with no intervening matches from other runs on either axis.
Clumps are similar to runs but allow small intervening matches/runs
(such as small inversions) to be skipped over. The total number of
base pairs in matches is a measurement of how much of the sequence
is shared between assemblies. Within a run, the number of base pairs
in each assembly is different, because indels are allowed among
matches in the run. These could be gaps that are ﬁlled in one
assembly but not the other, polymorphic insertions or deletions, or
artifactual sequence. Runs span regions in both assemblies that have
no rearrangements with respect to each other, providing a direct
measure of the order and orientation differences between a pair of
assemblies. Clumps provide a similar measure of rearrangement but
allow for small differences that may be due to noise or polymorphic
inversions. Remaining sequence may be unique to one assembly or
the other, but some will also be large repetitive regions without good
one-to-one mapping but present in some copy number in both
assemblies. Apparently unique sequence may also represent some
form of contaminant.
We determined an initial set of potentially chimeric scaffolds by
ﬁnding those that contained more than one clump of at least 5,000 bp
relative to NCBI version 36. By mapping all HuRef and Coriell fosmid
mate pairs to NCBI human reference genome and to HuRef, we
assessed whether mate pair constraints were violated at the
potentially chimeric junctions. Accordingly, we split 12 scaffolds.
Variant reﬁnement process. DNA variants were characterized by
alignment of sequencing reads in the HuRef assembly and by
comparison of regions of difference in the one-to-one HuRef to
NCBI reference genome map. The contribution of each sequence
read to a single position in the HuRef consensus was evaluated both
during and after the assembly process to identify positions that
contain more than one allele. This process identiﬁed heterozygous
SNPs and indel polymorphisms, and typically two or more reads were
required for the initial identiﬁcation of an alternate allele.
Homozygous SNPs and MNPs were identiﬁed when (respectively)
single or multiple contiguous loci differed in the one-to-one
mapping, and all underlying HuRef reads supported one allele.
Finally, homozygous insertion or deletion loci were identiﬁed where
the HuRef assembly had or lacked sequence relative to the NCBI
assembly, respectively. These were commonly referred to as homozygous indels unless it was relevant for analysis purposes, computational or experimental, to refer to a homozygous insertion or
deletion as a way of indicating presence or absence of the sequence,
respectively, in the HuRef assembly.
Filtering of variants. DNA variations were identiﬁed by examining
the base changes within the HuRef assembly multialignment and
between the HuRef assembly and the NCBI reference human genome.
5,061,599 SNPs and heterozygous variants were identiﬁed initially,
after which ﬁlters were applied to eliminate erroneous calls. For a
potential SNP, each read supporting that SNP was considered, and if
the QV was ,15 at the putative SNPs position in the read, then the
read was considered invalid and was discarded as evidence for that
particular variant. We also observed that deletions were overcalled at
the beginnings and ends of reads, and insertions were overcalled at
the ends of reads (Figure S2). By using the relative positions in the
read where overcalling was detected, we were able to invalidate reads
contributing to indel variant calls. We further observed that the
relative read positions at which overcalling occurred was dependant
on whether the read source was produced at Celera or The J. Craig
Venter Institute (JCVI). Thus, any Celera read containing a putative
deletion at a relative read position 0.18 or 0.76 was considered
invalid for that particular deletion. Correspondingly, any JCVI read
containing a putative deletion, at the relative read position 0.07 or
0.81 was deemed invalid in contributing to that particular variant
call. Any Celera read was deemed invalid if it contained an insertion
at a relative read position 0.70, and any JCVI read with an insertion
at relative read position 0.77 was discarded as evidence. These
thresholds were determined by plotting the frequency of insertions
and deletions with respect to read position, and choosing the value
where the call frequency was twice that of baseline (Figure S2).
Subsequent to the quality value and read location ﬁltering the
remaining variants were inspected for the percentage, number, and
directionality of reads supporting the alternate alleles. Additionally
these variants were inspected for the total number of reads in their
assembled locus and the repeat sequence status (transposon and
tandem repeat). Transposon repeats were identiﬁed using the
RepeatMasker program ( and tandem
repeats were identiﬁed using the Tandem RepeatFinder program
 . The distribution of the percentage of reads containing the
minor allele for heterozygous SNP and indels in Figure S3 shows that
a large fraction of those putative variants that are found in dbSNP
version 126 have a ‘‘minor allele frequency’’ (fraction of reads
supporting the allele with fewer reads) of at least 20% and 25% for
SNPs and indels, respectively. Therefore, we decided to apply the
following ﬁlters separately to the QV and read location ﬁltered
variants, calculating at each ﬁlter step the fraction of passing variants
that could be found in dbSNP. The ﬁlters applied to allow variants to
be counted as bona-ﬁde were: (i) 20% reads support minor allele for
heterozygous SNP and 25% reads support minor allele for heterozygous indels, and (ii) two or more reads supporting the variant. The
results of this analysis are presented in Table 3 and discussed in the
Results section.
Clustering variants. Manual inspection showed that some neighboring variants identiﬁed within the one-to-one mapping of HuRef
to the NCBI genome reference would be more precisely represented
as one larger variant after realignment. To address these regions of
clustered variants, we identiﬁed these problematic regions by
clustering SNPs within 2 bp of each other or any non-SNP variants
with 10 bp of another variant. For these variable regions, we recalled
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
October 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 10 | e254
Diploid Genome Sequence of an Individual Human
the variant(s) using the variant calling algorithm developed as part of
the consensus sequence generation found in the Celera assembler.
Filtering of homozygous insertion/deletion. Homozygous insertion/
deletions were ﬁltered in the same manner as SNPs and heterozygous
variants. All variants that were not conﬁrmed by two or more reads
were eliminated, as were those that did not fulﬁll minimal requirements of at least one spanning mate pair, and that the inserted
sequence on the HuRef assembly or deleted sequence on the NCBI
assembly not contain any ambiguous bases
Diversity. We estimate the population mutation parameter (h) 
h ¼ K=aL; Sð^hÞ ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ahL þ bðhLÞ2
ði  1Þ; b ¼
where K is the number of variants identiﬁed, L is the number of base
pairs, and n is the number of alleles. For indels, K is the number of
indel events. In the case of a single diploid genome, n ¼ 2, so a and b
reduce to 1. Then h ¼ K/L, which is simply the number of
heterozygous variants divided by the length sequenced. The standard
deviation of h reduces to h:
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ahL þ bðhLÞ2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
when n ¼ 2; a ¼ 1; b ¼ 1
’ h when L is large; which is the case for genomic sequences
Thus, the 95% conﬁdence interval for h is [0, hþ2h] or [0, 3h].
Estimating homozygous and heterozygous variant ratios from
directed resequencing data. Two individuals of European ancestry
were randomly selected from the SeattleSNPs data ( 
washington.edu/) . For the ﬁrst individual, we constructed a
haploid representation (without phasing) by randomly choosing one
allele at each variant position. This reconstructed sequence is
analogous to the NCBI genome sequence that we used to call HuRef
homozygous variants. For the second individual, all variant positions
were examined and scored. If the second individual was heterozygous
at a position, then the heterozygous count was incremented by one. If
the second individual had a homozygous genotype that did not match
the allele seen in the reconstructed sequence then the homozygous
variant was incremented by one. The second individual is analogous
to the HuRef assembly sequence, and this procedure mimics our
variant-calling algorithm and our deﬁnitions for heterozygous and
homozygous variants. One caveat is that the NCBI human genome
sequence, while only being one sequence, represents multiple
individuals, and thus possibly contains more rare alleles in its
Modeling false-negative rate of heterozygous variants. We developed a statistical model based on our assembly read coverage in the
single diploid genome and on the ﬁltering criteria used for calling
high conﬁdence variants. We assumed that chromosomes containing
each of the two alleles are equally likely to be sampled and that allele
loci are independent. At a given heterozygous locus, the probability
of observing both alleles in at least x reads follows the binomial
distribution with p ¼ 0.50 and n ¼ depth of coverage, where x is
deﬁned by the ﬁltering criteria. To calculate the false-negative rate
genome wide, a Poisson distribution is also incorporated to estimate
sequence depth at different loci, where k is set to the genome
sequence coverage (7.5 for SNPs, 5.5 for insertions, 4.9 for deletions,
after read ﬁltering is taken into account).
Experimental veriﬁcation of heterozygous indels. A number of
heterozygous indels between 1 and 20 bp were manually selected for
experimental validation by verifying trace quality in the region of the
indel, read coverage depth, and repeat sequence status. In order to
detect heterozygous indels from the HuRef assembly, we ran PCRampliﬁed genomic DNA on PAGE to look for homoduplex and
heteroduplex bands. Large insertions and deletions were also
recognized by this process.
Primers were designed by centering the targeted indel to produce
amplicons 150–250 bp in length with the melting temperatures of
these amplicons ranging between 70 8C and 86 8C. PCR for polymorphism analysis was carried out in 10-ll volume reactions
containing 30 ng of puriﬁed genomic DNA, 13 PCR buffer, 20 lM
deoxynucleoside triphosphates, 2 mM MgCl2, 8% glycerol, 0.18 lM
primers, and 0.0375 U AmpliTaq Gold DNA polymerase. Postampliﬁcation treatment of each sample involved digestion with shrimp
alkaline phosphatase (0.5 U) and exonuclease I (1.76 U) for 45 min at
37 8C, 15 min at 50 8C, with heat inactivation for 15 min at 72 8C.
PAGE was carried out at room temperature for 4 h at 650 V
(constant) in a standard vertical gel measuring 1 mm thick, 20 cm
wide, and 30 cm long (apparatus Model SG-400–20, CBS Scientiﬁc
Company Inc, The native gel consisted of 10%
acrylamide with the 40% acrylamide stock solution having an
acrylamide/ N,N9-methylenebisacrylamide ratio of 29:1. The running
buffer consisted of 13 TBE. A loading dye consisting of 23 BlueJuice
(Invitrogen) was added to each ampliﬁed sample and 5 ll was loaded
per gel lane. After electrophoresis, the DNA bands were visualized by
staining with a 1:10,000 dilution of SYBR Gold (Invitrogen).
Experimental validation of homozygous insertion. Fifty-one
apparent homozygous insertions in the HuRef assembly were selected
based on assembly structure (appropriate read depth coverage and
supporting mate pair evidence), their proximity to annotated genes,
and their size. The insertion sequences were from 100 to 1,200 bp
with few repeat sequences, and no detectable alignments to human
(NCBI 36) or chimpanzee genomes. We tested 93 Coriell DNA
donors in addition to the HuRef DNA sample: 21 samples of
European origin (CEU - NA06985, NA07056, NA11832, NA11839,
NA11840, NA11881, NA11882, NA11992, NA11993, NA11994,
NA11995, NA12057, NA12156, NA12239, NA12750, NA12751,
NA12813, NA12814, NA12815, NA12891, NA12892), 12 Han Chinese
samples (NA18524, NA18526, NA18537,NA18545, NA18552,
NA18562, NA18566, NA18572, NA18577, NA18609, NA18621,
NA18635), 11 Japanese (Tokyo) samples (NA18940, NA18942,
NA18945, NA18949, NA18953, NA18961, NA18964, NA18967,
NA18981, NA18994, NA18998), 22 samples of Hispanic origin
(NA17438, NA17439, NA17440, NA17441, NA17442, NA17443,
NA17444, NA17445, NA17446, NA17448, NA17449, NA17450,
NA17451, NA17452, NA17453, NA17454, NA17456, NA17457,
NA17458, NA17459, NA17460, NA17461, 15 samples of African
American origin (NA17101, NA17102, NA17103, NA17104, NA17105,
NA17106, NA17107, NA17108, NA17109, NA17110, NA17111,
NA17112, NA17113, NA17114, NA17115) and 12 samples of Yoruban
origin (NA18502, NA18504, NA18855, NA18870, NA19137, NA19144,
NA19153, NA19200, NA19201, NA19203, NA19223, NA19238). A 200bp amplicon was designed for each insertion. By design, a
homozygous insertion sequence yielded a single high–molecular
weight band of (200 bp þ the insertion size) on the agarose gel.
Absence of the insertion would be detected as a single low molecular
band of 200 bp alone and a heterozygous indel would be detected as
presence of both bands.
The amplicons were classiﬁed according to theoretical melting
temperatures (Tm). Standard GC content and high GC content
amplicons (82 8C , Tm , 87 8C) were processed separately in the
laboratory using optimized high-throughput PCR protocols enabling
all ampliﬁcations to be performed in 384-well plates in a volume of 10
ll. The standard GC content PCR protocol was composed of 3.0 ll of
0.4 lM mixed forward and reverse primers, 3.0 ll of DNA (1.67 ng/ll)
and 0.05 ll (0.25 Us) of AmpliTaq Gold DNA polymerase (Applied
Biosystems). The high-GC PCR protocol comprised 3.0 ll of 1.2 lM
mixed forward and reverse primers, 3.0 ll of DNA (10.0 ng/ll), and
0.075 ll (0.375 U) of AmpliTaq Gold DNA polymerase (Applied
Biosystems). PCR was set up using a Biomek FX (Beckman Coulter)
pipetting robot and a Pixsys 4200 (Cartesian Technologies; http://
www.cartesiantech.com/) nanoliter dispenser. All PCR ampliﬁcations
were performed on dual 384-well GeneAmp PCR System 9700
thermal cyclers (Applied Biosystems) under the following program:
96 8C for 5 min (13); 94 8C for 30 s, 60 8C for 45 s, 72 8C for 45 s (403);
72 8C for 10 min (13); and a 10 8C ﬁnal hold.
2.0 ll of PCR product was combined with 5.0 ll of diluted loading
dye (Invitrogen) and run on a 2.0% agarose gel, containing ethidium
bromide. Gels were run for 45 min at 90 V and imaged using a Gel
Doc and Quantity One Software (Bio-Rad Laboratories). Gel images
were manually evaluated for the presence or absence of expected
Conﬁrmation of large indels by mapping fosmid clones from
multiple individuals. Segments of the human genome that were found
exclusively in either HuRef or NCBI version 36 represent potential
misassemblies or genuine variations. In order to distinguish between
these possibilities, we attempted to conﬁrm the existence of the
largest one-to-one HuRef–NCBI indels in a collection of fosmid
clones, derived from eight individuals (see Table S5 legend). Fosmid
end reads were downloaded from the Trace Archive, and mapped to
HuRef and NCBI human reference genome using Snapper (http://
sourceforge.net/projects/kmer/). To avoid short allelic variants of
single loci, the HuRef assembly included only scaffolds that spanned
at least 30 kb. The initial alignments required a unique best score
with at least 90% nucleotide identity for at least 25% of the read
length. Pairs of end read alignments were then ﬁltered sequentially to
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
October 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 10 | e254
Diploid Genome Sequence of an Individual Human
retain only those that mapped to the same scaffold (HuRef genome)
or chromosome (NCBI reference genome), in a tail-to-tail orientation, and within three standard deviations of the mean insert length.
First, regions of the HuRef genome that failed to map to NCBI
reference genome in the one-to-one mapping and were spanned to
an average depth of 10x by fosmids that failed to map to the NCBI
reference genome were identiﬁed as potentially novel segments.
Their sequences were aligned to NCBI using ncbi-blastn (-W 100), and
novelty was deﬁned by the absence of nucleotide identity (98%) for
lengths of 1 kb in spans of at least 35 kb. Second, the mapping
coordinates of clones that mapped discordantly to either HuRef or
NCBI were intersected with the 40 largest one-to-one HuRef-NCBI–
derived indels to identify fosmid clones that support the existence of
these indels in other human genomes. To deﬁne inserted DNA, we
required one fosmid end to map within the insert exclusive to one
assembly, the other to map within ﬂanking sequence common to both
assemblies, and inconsistent mapping to the genome assembly that
lacked the insertion. Deﬁning absence of inserted DNA required the
fosmid mapping to span the putative insertion point in the assembly
that lacked the insertion, and inconsistent mapping to the assembly
that contains the insertion.
Haplotype assembly. Haplotypes of heterozygous variants were
inferred using a greedy heuristic with iterative reﬁnement of the
initial solution.
Data Encoding. An SNP matrix (rows ¼ reads or mate pairs, columns
¼variants) was constructed as follows: for each variant location, reads
whose sequence matched the consensus sequence were assigned state
‘‘0,’’ while reads not matching the consensus were assigned state ‘‘1.’’
A pair of mated reads was merged into a single row only if they were
in the same scaffold, with the expected orientation and separated by
the expected distance (6 3 SD). Thus, a row in the matrix correspond
to one of the following: (i) a pair of mated reads with consistent
placements and (ii) a single unmated read or single mated read whose
mate is not consistently placed.
Initial Haplotype Construction. Initial partial haplotypes were constructed by repeating the following sequence of steps until all rows
were assigned. From the remaining set of unassigned rows (initially
all), choose the row with fewest missing elements. Use this row to seed
a partial haplotype pair (i.e., assign the row to one haplotype, which is
initialized with the non-missing states from this row, and initialize the
other haplotype with the complementary states). Until no more rows
share non-missing information, identify the row that has the
strongest signal (i.e., number of columns indicating one haplotype
minus number of columns indicating the other haplotype is
maximal), and assign that row to the indicated haplotype, extending
the haplotypes to include any additional columns that are nonmissing for that row. When no unassigned rows overlap the current
haplotypes, consider this pair of partial haplotypes ﬁnal and go back
to the beginning.
Iterative Haplotype Reﬁnement. When all rows have been assigned to
partial haplotypes, each haplotype pair and the rows it includes can
be reﬁned iteratively, repeating the following two steps until no
changes result. First, for each column (variant position) in the
haplotypes, determine by majority rule the state assignment of each
haplotype. Second, for each row (read or mate pair), determine the
haplotype assignment by majority rule.
Measurement of Haplotype Sizes. For each pair of partial haplotypes,
two measures of size are natural: the number of variants that are
phased and the distance in bp from the ﬁrst to the last variant. In
addition to the average of such values, the N50 statistic indicates a
haplotype size that encompasses at least half of the variants.
Comparison of Phasing to HapMap. Consistency of HuRef haplotypes
with HapMap haplotypes was assessed as follows. Within each partial
HuRef haplotype, variants that were present in Phase I HapMap data
were identiﬁed (henceforth ‘‘HapMap variants’’). For each pair of
HapMap variants that were adjacent in a HuRef haplotype, two
measures were determined. The ﬁrst was the degree of LD between
the paired variants from the HapMap CEU panel. The second was the
conditional probability of observing the HuRef haplotype in the
CEU panel given the observed genotypes. When r2  0.9 and the
conditional probability was ,0.5, this was considered a clear conﬂict
of HuRef and HapMap haplotypes.
Affymetrix microarray experiments and data analysis. The HuRef
sample was genotyped in duplicate on each of the GeneChip Human
(500K) Mapping NspI and StyI Array Sets (Affymetrix; 
affymetrix.com), according to the manufacturer’s instructions and as
described previously . Each array contains an average of 250,000
SNP markers. The arrays were scanned using the Gene Chip Scanner
3000 7G and Gene Chip Operating System. The call rate was .96%
for all four all hybridizations; 0.1% discordant genotype calls between
the technical replicates were excluded from further analysis.
The NspI and StyI array scans were analyzed for copy number
variation using a combination of DNA Chip Analyzer (dChip) ,
Copy Number Analysis for GeneChip (CNAG) , and Genotyping
Microarray-based CNV Analysis (GEMCA) . Analysis with dChip
( was performed using a Hidden Markov Model
(HMM) as previously described , and a set of 50 samples run in
the same facility were used as reference. For analyses with CNAG
version 2.0 ( the copy number changes
were inferred using a HMM built into CNAG . GEMCA analysis
was performed essentially as described , except that we used one
designated DNA samples (NA10851) as reference for pair-wise
comparison. This sample has been screened for CNVs in a previous
study and the CNVs known to be present in the reference
genome were excluded.
Illumina HumanHap650Y Genotyping BeadChip. The HuRef
sample was genotyped using the Sentrix HumanHap650Y Genotyping
BeadChip according to the manufacturer’s instructions. All chips
were scanned using the Sentrix Bead-Array reader and the Sentrix
Beadscan software application. The results from the BeadChip were
analyzed for CNV content using QuantiSNP as previously described
Human genome Agilent 244K CGH arrays. The Agilent human
genome CGH array contains 244,000 60mer probes on a single slide.
The experiment was run using 2.5 lg of genomic DNA for Cy3/Cy5
labeling for each hybridization, with a standard dye-swap experimental design. DNA sample NA10851 was used as a reference. The
slides were scanned at 5-lm resolution using the Agilent G2565
Microarray Scanner System (Agilent Technologies; 
com). Feature extraction was performed using Feature Extraction
v9.1 and results were analyzed using CGH Analytics v3.4.27.
Nimblegen human whole-genome 385K CGH array. CGH was
performed using the Nimblegen human genome CGH array. The
array contains 385,000 isothermal probes yielding a median spacing
of 6 kb across the human genome. The experiment was performed as
previously described with a standard dye-swap experimental
design. Results were analyzed using the CNVﬁnder algorithm .
One of the dye-swap experiments did not meet the quality control
cut-offs, and because of this, the Nimblegen CNV calls were only
employed for conﬁrmation of CNV identiﬁed by the other platforms,
and not used for identiﬁcation of additional CNVs
FISH. FISH analysis was performed to ﬁnd the location of DNA
segments present in the HuRef DNA but either missing or
represented by gaps in HuRef assembly. The FISH analysis was
performed as previously described . Initially, fosmids representing 107 different regions were chosen and end-sequenced to conﬁrm
that they mapped to the intended scaffolds. After excluding fosmids
for which the original mapping was erroneous or uncertain, 88
fosmids remained. The entire sequence for each fosmid was then
computationally excised from the scaffolds sequence and analyzed for
repeat content using RepeatMasker. Fosmids with more than 6 kb
(;17%) satellite repeat content were excluded from further analysis.
All fosmids that passed these ﬁltering criteria were analyzed on
metaphase spreads from two different cell lines (GM10851 and
GM15510) to determine the chromosomal location of the fosmid
probe. At least 10 metaphases were scored for each probe, all in
duplicate by two experienced cytogeneticists.
Supporting Information
Figure S1. Detection of an 8-bp Indel in the HuRef and Three Coriell
DNA Donors
PAGE detection of an 8-bp indel (GATAAGTG/——————) in three
Coriell DNA samples (lane 1 ¼ NA05392 , lane 2 ¼ NA05398, lane 3 ¼
NA07752, and lane 4 ¼ HuRef donor DNA). Note the detection of two
bands signifying the presence of two allelic forms in individual
NA05392 and HuRef and the short and long alleles in individuals
NA05398 and NA07752 respectively.
Found at doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.sg001 (118 KB PDF).
Figure S2. The Distribution of the Relative Position of SNPs and
Heterozygous Indels Found in Sequence Reads
Note the increased occurrence of variant at the beginning and end of
reads. The relative position of increased rate of variant identiﬁcation
was used and reads calling variant outside these threshold were
removed as positive evidence for the presence of that particular
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
October 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 10 | e254
Diploid Genome Sequence of an Individual Human
variant. This approach led to a signiﬁcant improvement in the quality
of the variant sets and was used as part of the variant ﬁltering process.
Found at doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.sg002 (132 KB PDF).
Figure S3. The Distribution of the Percentage of Reads Supporting
the Alternate (i.e., Non–Consensus Sequence Reads) for All Raw SNP
and Heterozygous Indels
The dbSNP distribution indicates which ‘‘raw’’ variant have been
previously reported in dbSNP. The intersection point of these two
distributions at lower values determines the minimum percentage of
minor allele threshold with which variant could be ﬁltered to
improve their quality using dbSNP as a guide. These threshold values
were deemed to be 25% for SNP and 20% for indels. Indels are
referred to separately as insertions and deletions depending on
whether the shorter or longer form, respectively, was used in the
HuRef consensus sequence. Ultimately these variant loci are all
determined heterozygous indels as indicated in Figure 4.
Found at doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.sg003 (121 KB PDF).
Table S1. Detailed Speciﬁcation of Libraries Used for Sequencing of
the HuRef Donor
Found at doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.st001 (82 KB DOC).
Table S2. Four-Way Comparison of the Genome Assemblies Using
WGSA, HuRef all Scaffolds, HuRef Chromosomes, and Human NCBI
Version 36
Matches are maximal high identity local aligned segments with no
indels. Runs are sequentially adjacent matches with no intervening
matches from other genomic sequences with the possibility of indels.
Clumps are the same as runs but allow small intervening matches/runs
to be skipped over in addition to indels (small is a settable
parameter). This allows for example small inversions not to interrupt
a longer alignment. All subsequent analyses (i.e., variant detection
and analysis) discussed in the manuscript were performed using
HuRef scaffolds. N50 is the scaffold length such that 50% of all base
pairs are contained in scaffolds of this length or larger.
Found at doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.st002 (64 KB DOC).
Table S3. Percentage Coverage of NCBI Chromosomes with HuRef
Chromosomes
Matches are maximal local identical alignments with no indels. Runs
are monotonically increasing sets of matches with no intervening
matches with indels allowed. The values in the table denote the
percentage of the NCBI chromosome found in matches or runs
counting alignments containing bases (i.e., no ambiguous or gaps, Ns.)
Found at doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.st003 (44 KB DOC).
Table S4. AluY Insertions That Differ between the HuRef Genome
and the NCBI Human Reference Genome
Found at doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.st004 (205 KB XLS).
Table S5. Mapping of Fosmid Clones from Multiple Individuals to
the Sites of the Longest ATAC-Derived Indels
Fosmid clones were mapped to the sites of large insertions that are
predicted to occur uniquely on HuRef (insertions) or NCBI
(deletions) as described in the Materials and Methods. For each
example of inserted DNA, the table lists the assembly source (HuRef
scaffold or NCBI chromosome), the start and end coordinates for the
inserted DNA, the span of the inserted DNA, and the predicted
insertion point on the assembly that lacks the insertion. Fosmid
clones that support the presence or absence of inserted DNA are
termed (þ) insert fosmids and () insert fosmids, respectively. For
each (þ) insert fosmid, one end of the fosmid clone was mapped
within the unique insert DNA while the other was mapped to
common ﬂanking DNA. For each () insert fosmid, the mapped ends
span the site of insertion, but the implied insert length suggests that
insert DNA is absent from the clone. Fosmid clones that support the
presence (þ) or absence () of inserted DNA were derived from the
following Coriell cell lines; A, NA18517; B, NA18507; C, NA18956; D,
NA19240, E, NA18555; F, NA12878; G, NA18552; H, NA15510.
Found at doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.st005 (168 KB DOC).
Table S6. Homozygous Insertions Tested in 93 Coriell DNA Samples
and the HuRef Donor DNA
I/I provides the number of Coriell DNA samples that are homozygous
for the inserted sequence, heterozygous (I/N), and homozygous for no
insertion (N/N). The Hardy-Weinberg p-value is based on CEU
individuals.
Found at doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.st006 (95 KB DOC).
Table S7. CNV Identiﬁed in the Donor DNA Overlapping Genes
Found at doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.st007 (59 KB XLS).
Table S8. FISH Performed Using Coriell Fosmid Clones and Coriell
DNA Metaphase Spreads
Found at doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.st008 (24 KB XLS).
Poster S1. The Diploid Genome Sequence of J. Craig Venter
This genome-wide view attempts to illustrate the wide spectrum of
DNA variation in the diploid chromosome set of an individual
human, J. Craig Venter. The genome sequence is displayed on a
nucleotide scale of approximately 1Mb/15 mm. The background of
the chromosome tracks shows an approximate correspondence of
features from the chromosome cytogenetic map. The different data
tracks are grouped into two major sections: a representation of a
current set of transcription units and a set of summary plots for
different variation features at sequence level.
For each DNA strand (forward and reverse), each mapped gene is
shown at genomic scale and is color-coded according to the presence
of transcript isoforms (see Gene Variants panel on ﬁgure key). A total
of 54,253 transcript isoforms were mapped. The genes are given a
minimum length of 10 kb for display purposes at this level. The
largest transcript isoform for all genes that are between 2.5 kb and
250 kb and have at least ﬁve exons are shown, in an additional pair of
tracks, expanded to a resolution close to 100 kb /15 mm. Due to their
high gene density, the resolution is smaller for Chromosomes 17, 19,
and 22 at approximately 80 kb/15 mm.
In these expanded tiers, exons are depicted as black boxes and
introns are color coded according to a set of Gene Ontology
categories (GO, as shown in the
corresponding panel on the ﬁgure key. Gene symbols appear close
to the corresponding expanded transcript when space permits,
Ensembl transcript identiﬁers are shown if there is no Hugo gene
symbol associated with that transcript. In order to produce more
compact labels the ‘‘ENST0þ’’ preﬁx has been replaced by ‘‘ET.’’
Between the forward and the reverse strand annotations, two color
gradients show the nucleotide exon coverage detected in 5-kb-long
sliding windows for each strand.
Below the reverse strand annotations track there is the copy number
variation (CNV) track. Here, results from four different experimental
platforms (Affymetrix, Illumina, Agilent, and Nimblegen) determine
regions where a CNV gain or loss was detected, shown as green or red
boxes respectively. Nonoverlapping haplotype blocks are distributed
into nine tracks, using distinct colors to enhance visibility. The
longest blocks at each given loci are drawn as yellow boxes with a red
outline to highlight them from the rest. A summary of the variation
features deﬁned for all the haplotype blocks is shown as a gray-scale
gradient. Alternating color gradient tracks display count densities for
homozygous SNP, heterozygous SNP, multiple nucleotide (MNPs),
insertion/deletion polymorphisms, and complex forms of variation.
The last two gradients contain count densities for tandem repeats
and transposon repeats respectively. All these color gradients were
produced using a 5-kb sliding window.
The ﬁgure was generated with ‘‘gff2ps’’ ( 
software/gfftools/GFF2PS.html), a genome annotation tool that
converts General Feature Formatted records ( 
uk/Software/formats/ GFF/) to a PostScript output [J F Abril, R Guigo´
 gff2ps: Visualizing genomic annotations. Bioinformatics 16:
743–744]. To navigate the interactive poster, go to 
org/plosbiology/suppinfo/pbio.0050254/sd001.php.
Found at doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050254.sd001 (88 MB PDF).
Accession Numbers
The GenBank ( accession number for sequences discussed in the paper are: AADD00000000 (WGSA)
and ABBA01000000 (the consensus sequences of both HuRef
scaffolds and chromosomes).
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Dr. Roderic Guigo for discussion on
generating the HuRef genome poster and Dr. Douglas Smith
(Agencourt Bioscience) for producing and making publicly available
fosmid end sequence data from six HapMap individuals. Dr. Victor A.
McKusick provided many helpful discussions during this study. Mr.
PLoS Biology | www.plosbiology.org
October 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 10 | e254
Diploid Genome Sequence of an Individual Human
Adam Resnick acquired trace ﬁles from the trace archive and
reprocessed both Celera and Joint Technology Center traces. Mr.
Justin Johnson submitted the scaffold and chromosome consensus
sequences to GenBank, and Dr. Sarah Shaw Murray provided
thoughtful comments on the manuscript. We would like to thank
Ms. Jasmine Pollard and Mr. Matthew LaPointe for their assistance in
creating the ﬁgures and the genome poster, respectively. The authors
wish to thank The Centre for Applied Genomics at The Hospital for
Sick Children including the Cytogenetics laboratory for technical
assistance.
Author contributions. SL, GS, PCN, LF, ALH, BPW, NA, JH, EFK,
GD, VB, KAR, YHR, MEF, SWS, RLS, and JCV conceived and designed
the experiments. SL, GS, PCN, LF, ALH, BPW, NA, JH, EFK, GD, VB,
YL, JRM, AWCP, MS, AT, DAB, KYB, TCM, JG, JB, and YHR
performed the experiments. All authors analyzed the data. NA, GD,
YL, TBS, and VB contributed analysis tools. SL, GS, PCN, LF, ALH,
BPW, JH, EFK, GD, TBS, AT, YHR, MEF, SWS, RLS, and JCV wrote the
Funding. Funding was provided from the J. Craig Venter Institute,
Genome Canada/Ontario Genomics Institute, The Hospital for Sick
Children Foundation, the McLaughlin Centre for Molecular Medicine, and the Canada Foundation for Innovation. SWS is an
Investigator of the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR)
and a Fellow of the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research. LF is
supported by CIHR scholarship.
Competing interests. The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.