Edge-Labeling Graph Neural Network for Few-shot Learning
Jongmin Kim∗1,3, Taesup Kim2,3, Sungwoong Kim3, and Chang D.Yoo1
1Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
2MILA, Universit´e de Montr´eal
3Kakao Brain
In this paper, we propose a novel edge-labeling graph
neural network (EGNN), which adapts a deep neural network on the edge-labeling graph, for few-shot learning.
The previous graph neural network (GNN) approaches in
few-shot learning have been based on the node-labeling
framework, which implicitly models the intra-cluster similarity and the inter-cluster dissimilarity. In contrast, the
proposed EGNN learns to predict the edge-labels rather
than the node-labels on the graph that enables the evolution
of an explicit clustering by iteratively updating the edgelabels with direct exploitation of both intra-cluster similarity and the inter-cluster dissimilarity. It is also well suited
for performing on various numbers of classes without retraining, and can be easily extended to perform a transductive inference. The parameters of the EGNN are learned
by episodic training with an edge-labeling loss to obtain a
well-generalizable model for unseen low-data problem. On
both of the supervised and semi-supervised few-shot image
classiﬁcation tasks with two benchmark datasets, the proposed EGNN signiﬁcantly improves the performances over
the existing GNNs.
1. Introduction
A lot of interest in meta-learning has been recently arisen in various areas including especially taskgeneralization problems such as few-shot learning , learn-to-learn , non-stationary reinforcement learning , and
continual learning .
Among these meta-learning
problems, few-shot leaning aims to automatically and ef-
ﬁciently solve new tasks with few labeled data based on
knowledge obtained from previous experiences. This is in
∗Work done during an internship at Kakao Brain. Correspondence to
 
Alternative node and edge feature update in
EGNN with edge-labeling for few-shot learning
contrast to traditional (deep) learning methods that highly
rely on large amounts of labeled data and cumbersome manual tuning to solve a single task.
Recently, there has also been growing interest in graph
neural networks (GNNs) to handle rich relational structures
on data with deep neural networks . GNNs iteratively perform a feature aggregation from neighbors by message passing, and
therefore can express complex interactions among data instances.
Since few-shot learning algorithms have shown
to require full exploitation of the relationships between a
support set and a query , the use of GNNs
can naturally have the great potential to solve the few-shot
learning problem.
A few approaches that have explored
GNNs for few-shot learning have been recently proposed
 . Speciﬁcally, given a new task with its few-shot support set, Garcia and Bruna proposed to ﬁrst construct a
graph where all examples of the support set and a query are
densely connected. Each input node is represented by the
embedding feature (e.g. an output of a convolutional neural
network) and the given label information (e.g. one-hot encoded label). Then, it classiﬁes the unlabeled query by iteratively updating node features from neighborhood aggregation. Liu et al. proposed a transductive propagation network (TPN) on the node features obtained from a deep neuarXiv:1905.01436v1 [cs.LG] 4 May 2019
ral network. At test-time, it iteratively propagates one-hot
encoded labels over the entire support and query instances
as a whole with a common graph parameter set. Here, it
is noted that the above previous GNN approaches in fewshot learning have been mainly based on the node-labeling
framework, which implicitly models the intra-cluster similarity and inter-cluster dissimilarity.
On the contrary, the edge-labeling framework is able to
explicitly perform the clustering with representation learning and metric learning, and thus it is intuitively a more conducive framework for inferring a query association to an existing support clusters. Furthermore, it does not require the
pre-speciﬁed number of clusters (e.g. class-cardinality or
ways) while the node-labeling framework has to separately
train the models according to each number of clusters. The
explicit utilization of edge-labeling which indicates whether
the associated two nodes belong to the same cluster (class)
have been previously adapted in the naive (hyper) graphs for
correlation clustering and the GNNs for citation networks or dynamical systems , but never applied to
a graph for few-shot learning. Therefore, in this paper, we
propose an edge-labeling GNN (EGNN) for few-shot leaning, especially on the task of few-shot classiﬁcation.
The proposed EGNN consists of a number of layers
in which each layer is composed of a node-update block
and an edge-update block. Speciﬁcally, across layers, the
EGNN not only updates the node features but also explicitly adjusts the edge features, which reﬂect the edgelabels of the two connected node pairs and directly exploit
both the intra-cluster similarity and inter-cluster dissimilarity. As shown in Figure 1, after a number of alternative
node and edge feature updates, the edge-label prediction
can be obtained from the ﬁnal edge feature. The edge loss
is then computed to update the parameters of EGNN with a
well-known meta-learning strategy, called episodic training
 . The EGNN is naturally able to perform a transductive inference to predict all test (query) samples at once as a
whole, and this has shown more robust predictions in most
cases when a few labeled training samples are provided. In
addition, the edge-labeling framework in the EGNN enables
to handle various numbers of classes without remodeling or
retraining. We will show by means of experimental results
on two benchmark few-shot image classiﬁcation datasets
that the EGNN outperforms other few-shot learning algorithms including the existing GNNs in both supervised and
semi-supervised cases.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:
• The EGNN is ﬁrst proposed for few-shot learning with
iteratively updating edge-labels with exploitation of
both intra-cluster similarity and inter-cluster dissimilarity. It is also able to be well suited for performing
on various numbers of classes without retraining.
• It consists of a number of layers in which each layer is
composed of a node-update block and an edge-update
block where the corresponding parameters are estimated under the episodic training framework.
• Both of the transductive and non-transductive learning
or inference are investigated with the proposed EGNN.
• On both of the supervised and semi-supervised fewshot image classiﬁcation tasks with two benchmark
datasets, the proposed EGNN signiﬁcantly improves
the performances over the existing GNNs. Additionally, several ablation experiments show the beneﬁts
from the explicit clustering as well as the separate utilization of intra-cluster similarity and inter-cluster dissimilarity.
2. Related works
Graph Neural Network
Graph neural networks were
ﬁrst proposed to directly process graph structured data with
neural networks as of form of recurrent neural networks
 . Li et al. further extended it with gated recurrent units and modern optimization techniques. Graph
neural networks mainly do representation learning with a
neighborhood aggregation framework that the node features
are computed by recursively aggregating and transforming
features of neighboring nodes.
Generalized convolution
based propagation rules also have been directly applied to
graphs , and Kipf and Welling especially
applied it to semi-supervised learning on graph-structured
data with scalability. A few approaches have explored GNNs for few-shot learning and are based on the
node-labeling framework.
Edge-Labeling Graph
Correlation clustering (CC) is a
graph-partitioning algorithm that infers the edge labels of the graph by simultaneously maximizing intracluster similarity and inter-cluster dissimilarity. Finley and
Joachims considered a framework that uses structured
support vector machine in CC for noun-phrase clustering
and news article clustering.
Taskar derived a maxmargin formulation for learning the edge scores in CC for
producing two different segmentations of a single image.
Kim et al. explored a higher-order CC over a hypergraph for task-speciﬁc image segmentation. The attention mechanism in a graph attention network has recently
extended to incorporate real-valued edge features that are
adaptive to both the local contents and the global layers
for modeling citation networks . Kipf et al. introduced a method to simultaneously infer relational structure
with interpretable edge types while learning the dynamical
model of an interacting system. Johnson introduced the
Gated Graph Transformer Neural Network (GGT-NN) for
natural language tasks, where multiple edge types and several graph transformation operations including node state
update, propagation and edge update are considered.
Few-Shot Learning
One main stream approach for fewshot image classiﬁcation is based on representation learning
and does prediction by using nearest-neighbor according to
similarity between representations. The similarity can be a
simple distance function such as cosine or Euclidean distance. A Siamese network works in a pairwise manner using trainable weighted L1 distance. A matching network further uses an attention mechanism to derive an
differentiable nearest-neighbor classiﬁer and a prototypical
network extends it with deﬁning prototypes as the mean
of embedded support examples for each class. DEML 
has introduced a concept learner to extract high-level concept by using a large-scale auxiliary labeled dataset showing that a good representation is an important component to
improve the performance of few-shot image classiﬁcation.
A meta-learner that learns to optimize model parameters
extract some transferable knowledge between tasks to leverage in the context of few-shot learning. Meta-LSTM 
uses LSTM as a model updater and treats the model parameters as its hidden states. This allows to learn the initial
values of parameters and update the parameters by reading few-shot examples. MAML learns only the initial
values of parameters and simply uses SGD. It is a model
agnostic approach, applicable to both supervised and reinforcement learning tasks. Reptile is similar to MAML
but using only ﬁrst-order gradients. Another generic metalearner, SNAIL , is with a novel combination of temporal convolutions and soft attention to learn an optimal learning strategy.
In this section, the deﬁnition of few-shot classiﬁcation
task is introduced, and the proposed algorithm is described
in detail.
3.1. Problem deﬁnition: Few-shot classiﬁcation
The few-shot classiﬁcation aims to learn a classiﬁer
when only a few training samples per each class are given.
Therefore, each few-shot classiﬁcation task T contains a
support set S, a labeled set of input-label pairs, and a query
set Q, an unlabeled set on which the learned classiﬁer is
evaluated. If the support set S contains K labeled samples
for each of N unique classes, the problem is called N-way
K-shot classiﬁcation problem.
Recently, meta-learning has become a standard methodology to tackle few-shot classiﬁcation. In principle, we can
train a classiﬁer to assign a class label to each query sample with only the compact support set of the task. However, a small number of labeled support samples for each
task are not sufﬁcient to train a model fully reﬂecting the
inter- and intra-class variations, which often leads to unsatisfactory classiﬁcation performance. Meta-learning on
explicit training set resolves this issue by extracting transferable knowledge that allows us to perform better few-shot
learning on the support set, and thus classify the query set
more successfully.
As an efﬁcient way of meta-learning, we adopt episodic
training which is commonly employed in various literatures . Given a relatively large labeled training
dataset, the idea of episodic training is to sample training
tasks (episodes) that mimic the few-shot learning setting of
test tasks. Here, since the distribution of training tasks is assumed to be similar to that of test tasks, the performances of
the test tasks can be improved by learning a model to work
well on the training tasks.
More concretely, in episodic training, both training and
test tasks of the N-way K-shot problem are formed as
follows: T
= S S Q where S = {(xi, yi)}N×K
Q = {(xi, yi)}N×K+T
i=N×K+1. Here, T is the number of query
samples, and xi and yi ∈{C1, · · · CN} = CT ⊂C are the
ith input data and its label, respectively. C is the set of all
classes of either training or test dataset. Although both the
training and test tasks are sampled from the common task
distribution, the label spaces are mutually exclusive, i.e.
Ctrain ∩Ctest = ∅. The support set S in each episode serves
as the labeled training set on which the model is trained to
minimize the loss of its predictions over the query set Q.
This training procedure is iteratively carried out episode by
episode until convergence.
Finally, if some of N ×K support samples are unlabeled,
the problem is referred to as semi-supervised few-shot classiﬁcation. In Section 4, the effectiveness of our algorithm
on semi-supervised setting will be presented.
3.2. Model
This section describes the proposed EGNN for few-shot
classiﬁcation, as illustrated in Figure 2. Given the feature
representations (extracted from a jointly trained convolutional neural network) of all samples of the target task, a
fully-connected graph is initially constructed where each
node represents each sample, and each edge represents the
types of relationship between the two connected nodes;
Let G = (V, E; T ) be the graph constructed with samples
from the task T , where V := {Vi}i=1,...,|T | and E :=
{Eij}i,j=1,...,|T | denote the set of nodes and edges of the
graph, respectively. Let vi and eij be the node feature of Vi
and the edge feature of Eij, respectively. |T | = N ×K +T
is the total number of samples in the task T . Each groundtruth edge-label yij is deﬁned by the ground-truth node labels as:
if yi = yj,
otherwise.
Figure 2: The overall framework of the proposed EGNN model. In this illustration, a 2-way 2-shot problem is presented as
an example. Blue and green circles represent two different classes. Nodes with solid line represent labeled support samples,
while a node with dashed line represents the unlabeled query sample. The strength of edge feature is represented by the color
in the square. Note that although each edge has a 2-dimensional feature, only the ﬁrst dimension is depicted for simplicity.
The detailed process is described in Section 3.2.
Each edge feature eij = {eijd}2
d=1 ∈ 2 is a 2dimensional vector representing the (normalized) strengths
of the intra- and inter-class relations of the two connected
nodes. This allows to separately exploit the intra-cluster
similarity and the inter-cluster dissimilairity.
Node features are initialized by the output of the convolutional embedding network v0
i = femb(xi; θemb), where
θemb is the corresponding parameter set (see Figure 3.(a)).
Edge features are initialized by edge labels as follows:
if yij = 1 and i, j ≤N × K,
if yij = 0 and i, j ≤N × K,
[0.5||0.5],
otherwise,
where || is the concatenation operation.
The EGNN consists of L layers to process the graph,
and the forward propagation of EGNN for inference is an
alternative update of node feature and edge feature through
In detail, given vℓ−1
from the layer ℓ−1, node
feature update is ﬁrstly conducted by a neighborhood aggregation procedure. The feature node vℓ
i at the layer ℓ
is updated by ﬁrst aggregating the features of other nodes
proportional to their edge features, and then performing the
feature transformation; the edge feature eℓ−1
at the layer
ℓ−1 is used as a degree of contribution of the corresponding neighbor node like an attention mechanism as follows:
where ˜eijd =
k eikd , and f ℓ
v is the feature (node) transformation network, as shown in Figure 3.(b), with the parameter set θℓ
v. It should be noted that besides the conventional intra-class aggregation, we additionally consider
inter-class aggregation. While the intra-class aggregation
provides the target node the information of “similar neighbors”, the inter-class aggregation provides the information
of “dissimilar neighbors”.
Then, edge feature update is done based on the newly
updated node features. The (dis)similarities between every
pair of nodes are re-obtained, and the feature of each edge is
updated by combining the previous edge feature value and
the updated (dis)similarities such that
k; θℓe)eℓ−1
k(1 −f ℓe(vℓ
k; θℓe))eℓ−1
e is the metric network that computes similarity
scores with the parameter set θℓ
e (see Figure 3.(c)). In spe-
Figure 3: Detailed network architectures used in EGNN.
(a) Embedding network femb. (b) Feature (node) transformation network f ℓ
v. (c) Metric network f ℓ
ciﬁc, the node feature ﬂows into edges, and each element
of the edge feature vector is updated separately from each
normalized intra-cluster similarity or inter-cluster dissimilarity. Namely, each edge update considers not only the
relation of the corresponding pair of nodes but also the relations of the other pairs of nodes. We can optionally use
two separate metric networks for the computations of each
of similarity or dissimilarity (e.g. separate fe,dsim instead
of (1 −fe,sim)).
After L number of alternative node and edge feature updates, the edge-label prediction can be obtained from the
ﬁnal edge feature, i.e. ˆyij = eL
ij1. Here, ˆyij ∈ can be
considered as a probability that the two nodes Vi and Vj are
from the same class. Therefore, each node Vi can be classi-
ﬁed by simple weighted voting with support set labels and
edge-label prediction results. The prediction probability of
node Vi can be formulated as P(yi = Ck|T ) = p(k)
{j:j̸=i∧(xj,yj)∈S}
ˆyijδ(yj = Ck)
where δ(yj = Ck) is the Kronecker delta function that is
equal to one when yj = Ck and zero otherwise. Alternative
approach for node classiﬁcation is the use of graph clustering; the entire graph G can be ﬁrst partitioned into clusters,
using the edge prediction and an optimization for valid partitioning via linear programming , and then each cluster
can be labeled with the support label it contains the most.
However, in this paper, we simply apply Eq. (7) to obtain the classiﬁcation results. The overall algorithm for the
Algorithm 1: The process of EGNN for inference
1 Input: G = (V, E; T ), where T = S S Q,
S = {(xi, yi)}N×K
, Q = {xi}N×K+T
2 Parameters: θemb ∪{θℓ
3 Output: {ˆyi}N×K+T
4 Initialize: v0
i = femb(xi; θemb), e0
5 for ℓ= 1, · · · , L do
/* Node feature update
for i = 1, · · · , |V | do
i ←NodeUpdate({vℓ−1
/* Edge feature update
for (i, j) = 1, · · · , |E| do
ij ←EdgeUpdate({vℓ
/* Query node label prediction
13 {ˆyi}N×K+T
i=N×K+1 ←Edge2NodePred({yi}N×K
EGNN inference at test-time is summarized in Algorithm 1.
The non-transductive inference means the number of query
samples T = 1 or it performs the query inference one-byone, separately, while the transductive inference classiﬁes
all query samples at once in a single graph.
3.3. Training
Given M training tasks {T train
m=1 at a certain iteration during the episodic training, the parameters of the proposed EGNN, θemb ∪{θℓ
ℓ=1, are trained in an end-toend fashion by minimizing the following loss function:
λℓLe(Ym,e, ˆY ℓ
where Ym,e and ˆY ℓ
m,e are the set of all ground-truth query
edge-labels and the set of all (real-valued) query-edge predictions of the mth task at the ℓth layer, respectively, and the
edge loss Le is deﬁned as binary cross-entropy loss. Since
the edge prediction results can be obtained not only from
the last layer but also from the other layers, the total loss
combines all losses that are computed in all layers in order
to improve the gradient ﬂow in the lower layers.
4. Experiments
We evaluated and compared our EGNN 1 with state-ofthe-art approaches on two few-shot learning benchmarks,
i.e. miniImageNet and tieredImageNet .
 
4.1. Datasets
miniImageNet
It is the most popular few-shot learning benchmark proposed by derived from the original
ILSVRC-12 dataset . All images are RGB colored, and
of size 84 × 84 pixels, sampled from 100 different classes
with 600 samples per class. We followed the splits used
in - 64, 16, and 20 classes for training, validation and
testing, respectively.
tieredImageNet
miniImageNet
tieredImageNet is also a subset of ILSVRC-12 .
Compared with miniImageNet, it has much larger number
of images (more than 700K) sampled from larger number
of classes (608 classes rather than 100 for miniImageNet).
Importantly, different from miniImageNet, tieredImageNet
adopts hierarchical category structure where each of
608 classes belongs to one of 34 higher-level categories
sampled from the high-level nodes in the Imagenet. Each
higher-level category contains 10 to 20 classes, and divided
into 20 training (351 classes), 6 validation (97 classes) and
8 test (160 classes) categories.
The average number of
images in each class is 1281.
4.2. Experimental setup
Network Architecture
For feature embedding module,
a convolutional neural network, which consists of four
blocks, was utilized as in most few-shot learning models
 without any skip connections 2. More concretely,
each convolutional block consists of 3 × 3 convolutions, a
batch normalization and a LeakyReLU activation. All network architectures used in EGNN are described in details in
Evaluation
For both datasets, we conducted a 5-way 5shot experiment which is one of standard few-shot learning settings. For evaluation, each test episode was formed
by randomly sampling 15 queries for each of 5 classes,
and the performance is averaged over 600 randomly generated episodes from the test set. Especially, we additionally conducted a more challenging 10-way experiment on
miniImagenet, to demonstrate the ﬂexibility of our EGNN
model when the number of classes are different between
meta-training stage and meta-test stage, which will be presented in Section 4.5.
The proposed model was trained with Adam optimizer with an initial learning rate of 5 × 10−4 and weight
decay of 10−6. The task mini-batch sizes for meta-training
were set to be 40 and 20 for 5-way and 10-way experiments, respectively. For miniImageNet, we cut the learn-
2Resnet-based models are excluded for fair comparison.
(a) miniImageNet
5-Way 5-Shot
Matching Networks 
Reptile 
Prototypical Net 
Reptile + BN 
Relation Net 
MAML+Transduction 
TPN (Higher K) 
EGNN+Transduction
(b) tieredImageNet
5-Way 5-Shot
Reptile 
Prototypical Net 
Reptile + BN 
Relation Net 
MAML+Transduction 
EGNN+Transduction
classiﬁcation
accuracies
miniImageNet and tieredImageNet. All results are averaged
over 600 test episodes. Top results are highlighted.
ing rate in half every 15,000 episodes while for tieredImageNet, the learning rate is halved for every 30,000 because
it is larger dataset and requires more iterations to converge.
All our code was implemented in Pytorch and run with
NVIDIA Tesla P40 GPUs.
4.3. Few-shot classiﬁcation
The few-shot classiﬁcation performance of the proposed
EGNN model is compared with several state-of-the-art
models in Table 1a and 1b.
Here, as presented in ,
all models are grouped into three categories with regard
to three different transductive settings; “No” means nontransductive method, where each query sample is predicted
independently from other queries, “Yes” means transductive method where all queries are simultaneously processed
and predicted together, and “BN” means that query batch
statistics are used instead of global batch normalization parameters, which can be considered as a kind of transductive
inference at test-time.
The proposed EGNN was tested with both transductive and non-transductive settings. As shown in Table 1a,
EGNN shows the best performance in 5-way 5-shot setting, on both transductive and non-transductive settings on
miniImagenet. Notably, EGNN performed better than nodelabeling GNN , which supports the effectiveness of our
edge-labeling framework for few-shot learning. Moreover,
EGNN with transduction (EGNN + Transduction) outperformed the second best method (TPN ) on both datasets,
especially by large margin on miniImagenet.
shows that the transductive setting on tieredImagenet gave
the best performance as well as large improvement compared to the non-transductive setting. In TPN, only the labels of the support set are propagated to the queries based on
the pairwise node feature afﬁnities using a common Laplacian matrix, so the queries communicate to each other only
via their embedding feature similarities. In contrast, our
proposed EGNN allows us to consider more complicated
interactions between query samples, by propagating to each
other not only their node features but also edge-label information across the graph layers having different parameter
sets. Furthermore, the node features of TPN are ﬁxed and
never changed during label propagation, which allows them
to derive a closed-form, one-step label propagation equation. On the contrary, in our EGNN, both node and edge
features are dynamically changed and adapted to the given
task gradually with several update steps.
4.4. Semi-supervised few-shot classiﬁcation
For semi-supervised experiment, we followed the same
setting described in for fair comparison. It is a 5-way
5-shot setting, but the support samples are only partially labeled. The labeled samples are balanced among classes so
that all classes have the same amount of labeled and unlabeled samples. The obtained results on miniImagenet are
presented in Table 2. Here, “LabeledOnly” denotes learning with only labeled support samples, and “Semi” means
the semi-supervised setting explained above. Different results are presented according to when 20% and 40%, 60%
of support samples were labeled, and the proposed EGNN
is compared with node-labeling GNN . As shown in Table 2, semi-supervised learning increases the performances
in comparison to labeled-only learning on all cases. Notably, the EGNN outperformed the previous GNN by a
large margin (61.88% vs 52.45%, when 20% labeled) on
semi-supervised learning, especially when the labeled portion was small. The performance is even more increased
on transductive setting (EGNN-Semi(T)). In a nutshell, our
EGNN is able to extract more useful information from unlabeled samples compared to node-labeling framework, on
both transductive and non-transductive settings.
4.5. Ablation studies
The proposed edge-labeling GNN has a deep architecture that consists of several node and edge-update layers.
Therefore, as the model gets deeper with more layers, the
Labeled Ratio (5-way 5-shot)
Training method
GNN-LabeledOnly 
GNN-Semi 
EGNN-LabeledOnly
EGNN-LabeledOnly(T)
EGNN-Semi(T)
Table 2: Semi-supervised few-shot classiﬁcation accuracies
on miniImageNet.
# of EGNN layers
Feature type
Intra & Inter
Intra Only
Table 3: 5-way 5-shot results on miniImagenet with different numbers of EGNN layers and different feature types
interactions between task samples should be propagated
more intensively, which may leads to performance improvements. To support this statement, we compared the few-shot
learning performances with different numbers of EGNN
layers, and the results are presented in Table 3. As the number of EGNN layers increases, the performance gets better. There exists a big jump on few-shot accuracy when the
number of layers changes from 1 to 2 (67.99% →73.19%),
and a little additional gain with three layers (76.37 %).
Another key ingredient of the proposed EGNN is to use
separate exploitation of intra-cluster similarity and intercluster dissimilarity in node/edge updates.
To validate
the effectiveness of this, we conducted experiment with
only intra-cluster aggregation and compared the results with
those obtained by using both aggregations. The results are
also presented in Table 3. For all EGNN layers, the use of
separate inter-cluster aggregation clearly improves the performances.
It should also be noted that compared to the previous
node-labeling GNN, the proposed edge-labeling framework
is more conducive in solving the few-shot problem under
arbitrary meta-test setting, especially when the number of
few-shot classes for meta-testing does not match to the one
used for meta-training. To validate this statement, we conducted a cross-way experiment with EGNN, and the result
is presented in Table 4. Here, the model was trained with 5way 5-shot setting and tested on 10-way 5-shot setting, and
vice versa. Interestingly, both cross-way results are similar
to those obtained with the matched-way settings. Therefore, we can observe that the EGNN can be successfully
extended to modiﬁed few-shot setting without re-training
of the model, while the previous node-labeling GNN is
Prototypical 
Prototypical
Prototypical
Prototypical
Table 4: Cross-way few-shot learning results on miniImagenet 5-shot setting.
not even applicable to cross-way setting, since the size of
the model and parameters are dependent on the number of
Figure 4 shows t-SNE visualizations of node features for the previous node-labeling GNN and EGNN. The
GNN tends to show a good clustering among support samples after the ﬁrst layer-propagation, however, query samples are heavily clustered together, and according to each label, query samples and their support samples never get close
together, especially even with more layer-propagations,
which means that the last fully-connect layer of GNN actually seems to perform most roles in query classiﬁcation.
In contrast, in our EGNN, as the layer-propagation goes on,
both the query and support samples are pulled away if their
labels are different, and at the same time, equally labeled
query and support samples get close together.
For further analysis, Figure 5 shows how edge features
propagate in EGNN. Starting from the initial feature where
all query edges are initialized with 0.5, the edge feature
gradually evolves to resemble ground-truth edge label, as
they are passes through the several EGNN layers.
5. Conclusion
This work addressed the problem of few-shot learning,
especially on the few-shot classiﬁcation task. We proposed
the novel EGNN which aims to iteratively update edgelabels for inferring a query association to an existing support clusters. In the process of EGNN, a number of alternative node and edge feature updates were performed using
explicit intra-cluster similarity and inter-cluster dissimilarity through the graph layers having different parameter sets,
and the edge-label prediction was obtained from the ﬁnal
edge feature. The edge-labeling loss was used to update
the parameters of the EGNN with episodic training. Ex-
Figure 4: t-SNE visualization of node features. From top to
bottom: GNN , EGNN. From left to right: initial embedding, 1st layer, 2nd layer, 3rd layer. ’x’ represents query, ’o’
represents support. Different colors mean different labels.
Figure 5: Visualization of edge feature propagation. From
left to right:
initial edge feature, 1st layer, 2nd layer,
ground-truth edge labels. Red color denotes higher value
(eij1 = 1), while blue color denotes lower value (eij1 = 0).
This illustration shows 5-way 3-shot setting, and 3 queries
for each class, total 30 task-samples. The ﬁrst 15 samples
are support set, and latter 15 are query set.
perimental results showed that the proposed EGNN outperformed other few-shot learning algorithms on both of the
supervised and semi-supervised few-shot image classiﬁcation tasks. The proposed framework is applicable to a broad
variety of other meta-clustering tasks. For future work, we
can consider another training loss which is related to the
valid graph clustering such as the cycle loss . Another
promising direction is graph sparsiﬁcation, e.g. constructing K-nearest neighbor graphs , that will make our algorithm more scalable to larger number of shots.
Acknowledgement
This work was supported by the National Research
Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT)(No.
NRF-2017R1A2B2006165)
and Institute for Information & communications Technology Promotion(IITP) grant funded by the Korea government(MSIT) .
Also, we thank the
Kakao Brain Cloud team for supporting to efﬁciently use
GPU clusters for large-scale experiments.