A Hybrid Computer-aided-diagnosis System for Prediction of Breast
Cancer Recurrence (HPBCR) Using Optimized Ensemble Learning
Mohammad R. Mohebian a, Hamid R. Marateb a,b, Marjan Mansourian c,⁎,
Miguel Angel Mañanas b, Fariborz Mokarian d,e
a Biomedical Engineering Department, Engineering Faculty, University of Isfahan, Hezar Jerib St., 81746-73441, Isfahan, Iran
b Department of Automatic Control, Biomedical Engineering Research Center, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, BarcelonaTech (UPC), C. Pau Gargallo, 5, 08028 Barcelona, Spain
c Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, School of Public Health, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Hezar Jerib St., 81745 Isfahan, Iran
d Cancer Prevention Research Center, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran
e Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran
a b s t r a c t
a r t i c l e
Article history:
Received 30 August 2016
Received in revised form 24 November 2016
Accepted 26 November 2016
Available online 06 December 2016
Cancer is a collection of diseases that involves growing abnormal cells with the potential to invade or spread to
the body. Breast cancer is the second leading cause of cancer death among women. A method for 5-year breast
cancer recurrence prediction is presented in this manuscript. Clinicopathologic characteristics of 579 breast
cancer patients (recurrence prevalence of 19.3%) were analyzed and discriminative features were selected
using statistical feature selection methods. They were further reﬁned by Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) as
the inputs of the classiﬁcation system with ensemble learning (Bagged Decision Tree: BDT). The proper combination of selected categorical features and also the weight (importance) of the selected interval-measurementscale features were identiﬁed by the PSO algorithm. The performance of HPBCR (hybrid predictor of breast cancer
recurrence) was assessed using the holdout and 4-fold cross-validation. Three other classiﬁers namely as supported vector machines, DT, and multilayer perceptron neural network were used for comparison. The selected
features were diagnosis age, tumor size, lymph node involvement ratio, number of involved axillary lymph
nodes, progesterone receptor expression, having hormone therapy and type of surgery. The minimum sensitivity,
speciﬁcity, precision and accuracy of HPBCR were 77%, 93%, 95% and 85%, respectively in the entire crossvalidation folds and the hold-out test fold. HPBCR outperformed the other tested classiﬁers. It showed excellent
agreement with the gold standard (i.e. the oncologist opinion after blood tumor marker and imaging tests, and
tissue biopsy). This algorithm is thus a promising online tool for the prediction of breast cancer recurrence.
© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Research Network of Computational and Structural
Biotechnology. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( 
Breast cancer
Cancer recurrence
Computer-assisted diagnosis
Machine learning
1. Introduction
Computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) is using computers and software to
interpret medical information. The purpose of CAD is to improve the
diagnosis accuracy. In fact, CAD is used as a second opinion by the
physicians to make the ﬁnal diagnosis decision .
Nowadays, CAD is used in many different ﬁelds in medicine including, but not limited to, early detection of breast cancer , lung cancer
diagnosis , arrhythmia detection and dental and maxillofacial
lesions diagnosis . Several studies have been reported in the
literature focusing on the application of CAD for cancer diagnosis and
prognosis .
Cancer is a collection of diseases that involves growing abnormal
cells with the potential to spread to other parts of the body . There
are over 200 types of cancer. The most common types of cancer in
women are breast, colorectal, lung, and cervical .
Cancer is the leading cause of death worldwide, accounting for
8.2 million deaths in 2012 . The most common causes of cancer
death are: lung (1.59 million deaths), liver (745,000), stomach
(723,000), colorectal (694,000), breast (521,000), and esophageal
(400,000) . More than 60% of world's total new annual cancer
cases occur in Africa, and Central and South America . The cancer
Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal 15 75–85
Abbreviations: CAD, computer-aided diagnosis; DT, decision tree; FH, family history of
cancer; HPBCR, the proposed hybrid predictor of breast cancer recurrence; HRT, hormone
therapy; I. Node, number of involved axillary lymph nodes; NR, lymph node involvement
ratio; T. Node, number of dissected axillary lymph nodes; TS, tumor size; XRT,
radiotherapy.
⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: (M.R. Mohebian),
 , (H.R. Marateb),
 (M. Mansourian), 
(M.A. Mañanas), (F. Mokarian).
 
2001-0370/© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Research Network of Computational and Structural Biotechnology. This is an open access article under the CC BY
license ( 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/csbj
incidence in Asia is also high . It is expected that annual cancer cases
will rise from 14 million in 2012 to 22 million within the next 2 decades
 . Worthwhile, among all types of cancer, breast cancer is the
second leading cause of cancer death among women .
In Iran, cancer is the third cause of death after coronary heart
disease, and accidents . Breast cancer is the leading type of cancer
in Iranian females, accounting for 24.6% of all cancers. In Iran, the
average women age with breast cancer is 49.6 years . Among all of
the provinces in Iran, Isfahan Province is the biggest and most important
area located at a desert border in the center of Iran . The rate of
cancer is increasing rapidly in Isfahan Province. Cancer control and
comprehensive prevention plan is thus necessary .
Breast cancer, a complex heterogeneous disease, occurs with a set of
different clinical symptoms. It is usually diagnosed using blood tests,
MRI, mammography, and CT scan and biopsy. The pathology results
from biopsy samples indicate whether the suspicious area is cancerous.
Cancer patients, then, undergo a systematic treatment procedure
dependent on the cancer stage and additional lab tests such as hormone
receptor status .
Cancer staging (assigning an ordinal numbers I–IV) is in fact the
process to determine the extent to which a cancer has been spread
and is based on the following four characteristics: 1) the tumor size,
2) whether the cancer is invasive or non-invasive, 3) the spread of the
tumor into the lymph nodes, and 4) the spread of the tumor into
other parts of the body (i.e. metastasis). Stage I is an isolated cancer
(tumor size ≤20 mm in greatest dimension) while stage IV is a metastasis cancer. Most cancer deaths are due to cancer that has spread from its
primary site to other organs .
Breast cancer is usually treated with surgery, which may be followed
by chemotherapy, radiation, and hormone therapies . When the
cancer patient is initially treated, the disease can recur at any time.
However, most recurrences happen in the ﬁrst 5 years after treatment
 . The recurrence could be local (near the mastectomy scar), regional
(spread to nearby lymph nodes) or metastatic (spread to other parts of
the body not near the breast). Some of the most common sites of recurrence outside the breast are the lymph nodes, bones, liver, lungs, and
brain .
An important issue is whether we can optimize the treatments to increase the therapeutic efﬁcacy. In fact, 5-year recurrence-free survival is
an important treatment quality measure. In principle, it is possible to
predict 5-year cancer recurrence using clinicopathologic characteristics
of cancer patients . Such a prediction could be used by doctors to
make proper treatment plan to considerably prolong patient life .
The prediction systems were used for cancer diagnosis in the literature . However, there are few studies focusing on cancer prognosis
(including recurrence or survival analysis). Since the focus of the current study is prediction of cancer recurrence, the literature review on
cancer recurrence prediction models is provided. Meanwhile, the table
of available methods was provided in the Supplementary material S1.
Zeng suggested a mixture classiﬁcation model containing a twolayer structure called mixture of rough set and support vector machine
(SVM) for breast cancer prognosis with the average accuracy of 91%
The Nottingham prognostic index (NPI) is a prognostic regression
model proposed by Galea et al. based on tumor size, histological
grade, and lymph node status. The NPI calculation equation is as follows: tumor size (cm) × 0.2 + histological grade + lymph node point
(negative nodes = 1; 1–3 positive nodes = 2; ≥4 positive nodes = 3).
The patients were then classiﬁed into the low-risk (NPI point b3.4)
and high-risk groups (NPI point ≥3.4) .
Kim et al. used normalized mutual information index for feature
selection and supported vector machines (SVM), Cox-proportional hazard regression model, and artiﬁcial neural network classiﬁers for classi-
ﬁcation in a sample size of 679 patients (the recurrence prevalence of
28.6%). The following features were used in their prognosis system:
local invasion of tumor, number of tumors, number of metastatic
lymph nodes, the histological grade, tumor size, estrogen receptor,
and lymphovascular invasion and reached the sensitivity, speciﬁcity
and area under the curve of 89%, 73% and 0.85, respectively for the
best classiﬁer (SVM). Although the statistical power of their system
is acceptable (Power = 89% N 80%), the Type I error is beyond the
acceptable range (α = 0.17 N 0.05).
Ahmad et al. used the SVM, decision tree, and multilayer
perceptron artiﬁcial neural network classiﬁers with feature selection
in a sample size of 547 patients (the recurrence prevalence of 21.4%).
The predictors were age at diagnosis, menarche and menopause,
tumor size, number of involved and dissected axially lymph nodes,
grade and HER2. The best classiﬁer (SVM) had sensitivity, speciﬁcity
and accuracy of 96%, 91% and 94%, respectively. Despite the high performance of the algorithm proposed by the authors, cases with primary
metastasis, a metastasis diagnosed at the time of registry, were not
excluded from the analysis. In fact, having metastasis was one of the
attributes primarily used by their proposed system. This necessary
exclusion has been implemented in similar studies . The reason
for such an exclusion is that the survival rate of patients with stage IV
(metastasis) breast cancer within 5 years is about 10% to 15%. Thus,
most of patients with primary metastasis experience cancer recurrence.
The discriminative prognosis predictors vary regionally in different
studies . Also, such prognosis tools have been recently used to
optimize the treatment protocol. An example is including the cancer
recurrence risk to breast cancer treatment guidelines by the American
Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) and the National Comprehensive
Cancer Network (NCCN). Thus, there is a need to design prognosis
tools in regions that are different based on cancer epidemiology.
Meanwhile, it is necessary to validate the cancer prognosis system
using extensive diagnosis validation criteria. Therefore, the aim of this
study was to reliably and accurately predict breast cancer recurrence
using pathological and demographics features of the patients. In the
proposed CAD system, HPBCR (hybrid predictor of breast cancer
recurrence), a hybrid technique including statistical features selection,
meta-heuristic population-based optimization and ensemble learning
were used to predict breast cancer recurrence in the ﬁrst 5 years after
the diagnosis.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in the next section, information about the experimental protocol and the pattern recognition
methods used in this study is presented. Section 3 provides the results
of HPBCR and its comparison with the state-of-the-art. The discussion
is provided in Section 4 and ﬁnally, the conclusions are summarized in
Section 5.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. The Cohort Dataset
In this study we used a 16-year registry cohort database on 1085 women who diagnosed with breast cancer in Isfahan
Sayed-o-Shohada cancer research center. History of clinical conditions
and therapy of patients was continued until death or lost to follow up.
Characteristics of variables and tumor have been recorded by interview
and reported as pathology results. Time to recurrence was based on the
physicians' opinion. The following information was extracted from each
patient: age at diagnosis of breast cancer, lymph node involvement ratio
(NR) deﬁned as ratio of involved to dissected lymph nodes , age of
menarche, number of pregnancy (No. Preg), primary tumor size (TS),
cellular marker for proliferation (Ki67), number of involved (I. Node)
and dissected (T. Node) axillary lymph nodes, number of chemotherapies (No. Chemo) and categorical covariates of family history of cancer
(FH: negative/positive), having more than one tumor in the breast
(multifocal: negative/positive), estrogen receptor expression (ER: negative (also known as absent)/positive), progesterone receptor expression
(PR: negative (also known as absent)/positive), tumor protein 53 (p53:
negative/positive), type of surgery 75–85
BCS: breast-conserving surgery, Mast: mastectomy), epidermal
growth factor receptor-2 (Her2: negative/positive (also known as
overexpressed)), Cathepsin-D protein status (Cathepsin: negative/
positive), hormone therapy (HRT: negative/positive), radiotherapy
(XRT: negative/positive) and the histological grade of tumor (1 to 4).
Moreover, ﬁve main molecular subtypes of breast cancer were extracted
as shown to affect recurrence prognosis in the literature. They were
calculated using ER, PR, HER2 and Ki-67 (the cutoff value of 14% to deﬁne
‘low’ and ‘high’) status. These subtypes are: luminal A (ER and/or
PR-positive/HER2 negative/low Ki-67), luminal B (ER- and/or PRpositive/HER2-negative/high Ki-67), HER2-positive luminal B (ER- and/
or PR-positive/HER2 positive/any Ki-67), non-luminal HER2-positive
(ER and PR negative/HER2 positive) and triple negative (ER and PR
negative/HER2-negative) . The brief description of the above features
used in our study was provided in the Supplementary material S2.
Eighty nine subjects were excluded from the analysis because of
primary metastasis, a metastasis diagnosed at the time of registry .
A number of 579 breast cancer patients with complete information
were involved in our analysis. All subjects gave informed consent to
the experimental procedure. The experimental protocol was approved
by the Isfahan University of Medical Sciences Panel on Medical Human
Subjects and conformed to the Declaration of Helsinki.
The structure of HPBCR is depicted in Fig. 1. First, the statistical
features' selection was used to identify signiﬁcant discriminative
Fig. 1. The structure of the proposed prognosis system (HPBCR). Other classiﬁers such as SVM and MLP could be used instead of BDT. The pseudo-code of HPBCR is provided in the
Supplementary material S3. The input features in HPBCR were: diagnosis age, nodal ratio, menarche age, the number of pregnancy, tumor size, Ki67, the number of involved and
dissected nodes, as interval features, type of surgery, molecular subtypes, family history of cancer, multifocal tumor, estrogen and progesterone receptor status, p53 mutation, Her2
expression, Cathepsin-D protein status, using hormone therapy, and radiotherapy as nominal features and the tumor grade as an ordinal feature. Brieﬂy, the input features are ﬁrst
selected using statistical feature selection. The selected features were used by Bagged Decision Tree to build the classiﬁer. The optimal feature set and the weight of features are
estimated using Particle Swarm Optimization during learning. The algorithm stops if no signiﬁcant improvement is seen in the objective function or the maximum number of
iterations (set to 100 in our study) is reached.
M.R. Mohebian et al. / Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal 15 75–85
features. Among such features, categorical features (i.e. nominal or ordinal measurement scales ) used in the Bagged Decision Tree (BGD)
were selected by Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO). The features
with the interval measurement scale used by BGD were assigned
weights being also tuned by PSO. The ﬁtness function of the PSO was
the F-score of the classiﬁer on the training set (Eq. (1)). In the following,
the details HPBCR are discussed. The pseudo-code of the HPBCR was
presented in the Supplementary material S3.
fitness ¼ FScoretrain
2.2. Statistical Feature Selection
Feature selection (FS), the process of selecting a subset of relevant
features, is divided into wrapper, embedded and ﬁlter methods. Filter
method selects subsets of variables as a pre-processing step, independently from the chosen classiﬁer while the other two methods, are
used during machine learning procedure . In wrapper methods,
the selection of a features set is formulated as a search problem, in
which different feature combinations are evaluated. Embedded
methods, on the other hand, learn which set best contribute to the
model accuracy while the model is being created. The former method
searches the entire feature subsets while in the later one, search is
guided by learning process which is prone to less over-ﬁtting .
In fact, Filter FS also known as Statistical FS (SFS) applies a statistical
measure to assign a score to each feature . Such features are then
ranked and selected based on the resulting score. Univariate SFS was
ﬁrst used in our analysis. Accordingly, the normality of the features
with interval measurement scale was assessed using the Kolmogorov–
Smirnov (KS) test . Then, independent-sample t-test was used to
identify statistically discriminative normally-distributed features.
Meanwhile, Wilcoxon Mann–Whitney test was used to distinguish discriminative features with ordinal or non-normal interval measurement
scales (Fig. 1).
Chi-square test was used to check whether a nominal-measurementscale feature was discriminative. The discriminative features were
selected and further reﬁned as the inputs of the classiﬁcation system
(BDT), next discussed.
2.3. Bagged Decision Tree
Decision tree builds classiﬁcation models in the form of a tree structure. It divides a dataset into small subsets to incrementally develop an
associated decision tree with decision and leaf nodes . It uses entropy to calculate the homogeneity of samples to build the tree . We
used the statistical classiﬁer C4.5 decision tree with pruning in
HPBCR. C4.5 sorts the data at every node of the tree to determine the
best splitting attribute. When the tree is constructed, pruning is carried
out from the leaves to the root. The redundant sub-trees are removed
and thus the prediction error decreases. C4.5 handles both continuous
and discrete attributes and is thus suitable for our application. Moreover, the online implementation of the resulting tree is simple.
Decision tree has been applied to many ﬁelds; for example in prediction of breast cancer relapse after surgery , classiﬁcation mass spectrometry of blood serum samples from people with and without lung
cancer and gene expression data for cancer classiﬁcation . In
fact, decision trees are reliable and effective decision making techniques
used in different areas of medical decision making . Meanwhile, in
evidence-based medicine, it was used for clinical decision analysis .
Bagging is a method for improving results of machine learning classiﬁcation algorithms. This method was formulated by Breiman and its
name was deduced from the phrase “bootstrap aggregating”. The details
of bagging could be found in . Bagging is usually applied to
decision tree methods, though it can be used with other classiﬁers. In
summary bagged tree, resamples the training dataset several times
(bootstrapping), and builds a decision tree model from each; then aggregate these models together for a ﬁnal classiﬁer. This method was
used for breast cancer classiﬁcation , gene expression data analysis
 and prostate cancer classiﬁcation . In our study, the number
of trees was set to 10 for bagging.
The proper combination of categorical selected features and also the
weight (importance) of the selected interval-measurement-scale
features were identiﬁed using a meta-heuristics population-based stochastic optimization method entitled as Particle Swarm Optimization
(PSO) (Fig. 1), discussed in the next chapter.
2.4. Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO)
PSO is an evolutionary computational method inspired by ﬂocking
birds , applied in many different areas, including manufacturing
 , civil engineering , optimum design , computational
neuroscience and breast cancer detection . PSO is initialized
with a population of random solutions known as particles, growing
over generations to ﬁnd optimal solutions. In a population, each particle
has a velocity (i.e. rate of change in solutions) to enable them to ﬂy
through the problem space. Therefore, each particle is represented by
a position and a velocity . The current velocity of a particle depends
on its previous velocity and on the distances of the particle from the personal (cognitive term) and neighborhood (social term) best positions
(Eq. (2)).
where w is the inertia weight; c1, c2 are the cognitive and social acceleration coefﬁcients; i is the particle number, r1 and r2 are independent
random numbers whose elements are uniformly distributed in ;
n denotes the iteration number, pi is the personal best of the ith particle
and pg is the neighborhood best.
Each particle records its best position (personal best) so far and the
best position achieved in the group (neighborhood best) among all
personal bests. Then, the new position of a particle is determined based
on its previous position information and its current velocity (Eq. (3)).
The objective is to ﬁnd the particle that best maximizes the target
ﬁtness function (Eq. (1)). Moreover, the neighborhood of each particle
is the entire swarm in our method (star topology).
In HPBCR, the acceleration coefﬁcients c1 and c2 were set to 2. A large
value of inertia weight supports global search (“exploration”), while a
small value favors local search (“exploitation”). A suitable strategy is
to ﬁrst motivate exploration, and then exploitation . Thus, the
inertia coefﬁcient was set to 1.00 at the ﬁrst iteration and was linearly
decreased with the damping coefﬁcient of 0.99 at each iteration,
and the number of particles was set to 20 and 100 iterations were
performed. Moreover, in order to increase the convergence possibility,
velocity clamping (Vmax = 4) was used.
PSO algorithm was used to ﬁlter categorical features and to estimate
the weights of interval features (Fig. 1). In categorical features, the
position of the particles was rounded to 0 and 1 (Binary PSO) but for
interval features, such values were real numbers between zero and
one. The pseudo-code of the embedded feature selection based on PSO
was provided in the Supplementary material S3 (section B).
2.5. State-of-the-art
In our study, other classiﬁcation methods namely as MLP, SVM and
DT were used for comparison. Such methods were proposed in similar
studies in the literature . The selected features using SFS were
used as the input to these classiﬁers.
M.R. Mohebian et al. / Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal 15 75–85
MLP is a feed-forward artiﬁcial neural network model that maps sets
of input data onto a set of appropriate outputs. It consists of multiple
fully connected layers of nodes in which learning happens by changing
connection weights through back propagation. It is a modiﬁcation of the
standard linear perceptron and can be used for classiﬁcation of data that
are not linearly separable . In this study the MLP with 1 hidden layer
with 10 neurons and sigmoid activation function was used. Such an
activation function was reported by Isa et al. to be suitable for the
prediction of breast cancer . Meanwhile, the sensitivity analysis
was performed on the number of neurons. Cross-validation on the
training set (70% of data) was performed. When increasing the number
of neurons up to 10, the prediction accuracy increased and did not improve considerably afterwards. Thus, ten neurons were used as to avoid
over-ﬁtting problem.
SVM constructs a hyper plane or set of hyper planes in a high or
inﬁnite-dimensional space, which can be used for classiﬁcation .
The SVM algorithm has been widely applied in the biological and
many other ﬁelds . In our study, the radial basis function (RBF)
kernels were used. The soft-margin parameter and the radius of the
RBF kernel should be set properly, because inappropriate parameter settings result in poor classiﬁcation. The method proposed by Wu and
Wang was used to set the soft-margin and RBF kernel parameters.
2.6. Validation
2.6.1. The Performance Indices for Each Classiﬁer
The performance of the classiﬁers was assessed using the holdout
method, an approach to out-of-sample evaluation, where the dataset
was split into two mutually exclusive sets (70% training and 30% test
sets). The classiﬁers were then trained on the ﬁrst set and tested on
the other set . Additionally, 4-fold cross-validation was used to assess the performance of the best classiﬁer to overcome a possible biased
error estimate . A comprehensive list of performance indices
 was selected and reported for each classiﬁer to identify different statistical errors which is crucial in medical diagnosis especially in
cancer studies. The performance measures of the classiﬁers are listed
in Table 1, along with their deﬁnitions. Discriminant power (DP) was
characterized as “poor” when DP b 1, “limited” when DP b 2, “fair”
when DP b 3 and “good” in other cases . Among those measures
AUC ROC is a global measure of diagnosis accuracy. ROC (receiver operating characteristic) curve is a plot of true positive rate (i.e. sensitivity)
versus false positive rate (i.e. 1-specificity) of the diagnosis system as its
discrimination threshold is varied. AUC (area under roc curve) is an
effective and combined measure of the validity of the diagnosis test,
which is also known as balanced accuracy deﬁned the average of the
sensitivity and speciﬁcity of the diagnosis system . Its ranges for excellent, very good and good diagnosis accuracy are (0.9–1.0), (0.8–0.9)
and (0.7–0.8) respectively .
Along with such indices, the agreement rate between the output of
the classiﬁer and the gold standard was assessed using Cohen's kappa
coefﬁcient . Kappas over 0.75 was characterized as excellent, 0.40
to 0.75 as fair to good, and below 0.40 as poor . A diagnosis system
was considered as reliable if (1) its sensitivity and speciﬁcity were at
least 80% (the minimum statistical power of 80%) and 95% (the
maximum Type I error of 0.05), respectively , and (2) its false
discovery rate (FDR = 1-precision) is as low as 5% . Moreover, as a
general rule, diagnosis tests with positive likelihood ratio (LR+) greater
than 10 or negative likelihood ratio (LR−) less than 0.1 are preferred
 . The application of sensitivity and speciﬁcity is highly dependent
on the prevalence of the disease. A conservative method could be fulﬁlling both LR conditions (i.e. DOR greater than 100). An illustration of the
validation criteria was presented in the Supplementary material S4.
2.6.2. Comparison Between Different Classiﬁers
McNemar's test, also known as the Gillick test, was used to compare
different classiﬁers to identify whether one classiﬁer statistically significantly outperforms the other or not . It was originally used to
analyze retrospective case–control studies, where each case is matched
to a particular control or it can be used to analyze experimental studies,
where two treatments are given to match subjects .
To compare two classiﬁers A and B, z statistics is estimated as:
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
where x is the number of samples misclassiﬁed by A but not B and y is
number of samples misclassiﬁed by B but not A. The null hypothesis
(that the classiﬁers have the same error) can be rejected (with probability
of incorrect rejection of 0.05) if |z| N 1.96 . In such a case, a classiﬁer
with higher DP value was reported as superior to the other one.
All data processing was performed off-line using Matlab version 8.6
(The MathWorks Inc., Natick, MA, USA). All statistical analysis and calculations were performed using the SPSS statistical package, version
18.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA).
2.7. Online Web-based HPBCR Implementation
Ten extracted rules were obtained from BDT whose feature weights
were optimized using PSO. The prognosis system was written in C# language and used in ASP.net5 which is an open-source framework from
Microsoft Corporation. The prediction model is freely available in the
website ( A snapshot of the developed online
program is shown in the Supplementary material S5.
3. Results
The average age of the participants was 46.8 ± 10.0 years. Among
the number of 579 patients participated in our study, 19.3% had cancer
recurrence during ﬁve years after diagnosis. The demographic and
pathological characteristics of the participants, grouped by their classiﬁcation with/without recurrence, are depicted in Tables 2, 3 and 4 for
the features with interval, nominal and ordinal measurement scales,
respectively. In fact for the features with binary, nominal with more
than two categories, ordinal and interval measurement scales, their existence, category, rank and value is important in the diagnosis system.
Among the interval measurement scale features, only age at diagnosis
The classiﬁcation performance measures used in our study.
TPþTNþFPþFN
Alpha = 1−Sp
Beta = 1−Se
F-score = 2 PrSe
2  ðSp þ SeÞ
TPTN−FPFN
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ðTPþFPÞðTPþFNÞðTNþFPÞðTNþFNÞ
π Þ  logðDORÞ
True positive (TP): subjects with cancer recurrence, correctly identiﬁed; false positive (FP): subjects without recurrence, incorrectly identiﬁed; true negative (TN): subjects without recurrence, correctly identiﬁed; false negative (FN): subjects with recurrence, incorrectly identiﬁed; Se: sensitivity = Power; Sp: speciﬁcity; Acc: Accuracy; Pr: precision; AUC: area under the
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve; LR: likelihood ratio; DOR: diagnosis odds ratio; MCC: Matthews correlation coefﬁcient; DP: discriminant power.
M.R. Mohebian et al. / Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal 15 75–85
and TS were normally distributed in the recurrence group. Thus, due to
the rejection of class dependence normality, Mann–Whitney test was
used for SFS in interval features. Selected discriminative features using
SFS were: age at diagnosis, NR, TS, I. Node, T. Node, Ki67, PR, HRT,
surgery and cancer subtypes.
In our study, discretization was used on the following attribute intervals: age at diagnosis, NR and TS. In machine learning, discretization refers to the procedure of partitioning continuous attributes to discretized
variables as to improve the classiﬁcation performance . We used
a set of cut points taken from the literature, indicating the diagnosis
properties of individual attributes as below to create categorical
variables.
Age was categorized (Age.cat) as less than 40 years and more than
40 years . NR was categorized (NR.cat) in ≤0.25 and N0.25 .
TS was also categorized (TS.cat) as ≤2 (T1), (2,5) (T2) and N5 (cm)
(T3) .
The value of the ﬁtness function (F-score on the training set) and the
test set performance (F-score on the test set) at some iteration were
shown in Fig. 2. The following categorical features were kept after running PSO and BDT: PR, HRT, Surgery, age.cat, TS.cat and NR.cat. Among
the features with interval measurement scale, Ki67 and T. Node were
not selected by BDT. In fact BDT uses entropy principle to choose the
best discriminative features . The estimated weight of the selected
interval-scale feature I. Node was 0.74.
The performance of the classiﬁers on the test set (when trained on
the training set) using the hold-out validation method was shown in
Table 5. The performance of the classiﬁers was further assessed using
4-fold cross validation (Table 6). The confusion matrix of HPBCR on
the test set was shown in Table 7. The performance of HPBCR was statistically signiﬁcantly higher than that of three other classiﬁers
(McNemar's test; P b 0.05). HPBCR showed limited discriminant
power (DP = 1.28), very good diagnosis accuracy (AUC = 0.90), and excellent agreement with the gold standard (Kappa = 0.83). The minimum statistical power and maximum Type I error (α) were 77% and
0.07, respectively in HPBCR (Table 6). Overall, the average statistical
power and Type I error of HPBCR was 80% and 0.04, respectively
(Table 6). The training time of HPBCR, SVM, DT and MLP was
412.10 ± 14.50 (s), 66.20 ± 11.75 (s), 52.00 ± 4.50 (s) and 132.45 ±
15.50 (s), while the validation time was 0.62 ± 0.31 (s), 0.49 ± 0.24 (s),
0.39 ± 0.33 (s) and 0.49 ± 0.31 (s), respectively. The average running
time was the average of 10 runs over 405 and 174 subjects in the training and test sets respectively (hold-out 70%) on an Intel Core-i7 2 GHz
CPU with 4 GB of RAM.
4. Discussion
4.1. The Risk Factors of the Cancer Recurrence
In our study, the following risk factors were selected by HPBCR to
predict breast cancer recurrence: Age at diagnosis, TS, NR, I. Node, PR,
HRT and type of surgery. Approximately 7% of women with breast
cancer are diagnosed before the age of 40 years. It has been shown in
the literature that younger age is not only an independent predictor of
adverse outcome in survival rate , but it is also a risk factor in recurrence metastasis . Bock et al. showed a hazard ratio of 2.8 for local
recurrence in patients less than 35 years compared to those above
Comparison of clinical and biochemical features (with interval measurement scale) of included subjects with/without cancer recurrence in μ ± σ [min, max].
With recurrence
Without recurrence
45.4 ± 10.1 (ND)
[27.0, 68.0]
47.2 ± 9.9
[24, 75.0]
0.47 ± 0.36
[0.0, 1.0]
0.24 ± 0.32
[0.0, 1.0]
13.3 ± 1.3
[11.0, 17.0]
13.4 ± 1.4
[10.0, 17.0]
[0.0, 10.0]
[0.0, 10.0]
4.0 ± 1.7 (ND)
[1.0, 8.5]
[0.5, 11.0]
21.1 ± 12.6
[6.0, 74.0]
18.0 ± 11.8
[1.0, 86.0]
[0.0, 39.0]
[0.0, 36.0]
12.8 ± 6.1
[1.0, 39.0]
11.4 ± 5.4
[1.0, 36.0]
[4.0, 10.0]
[1.0, 9.0]
Age (age at diagnosis); NR (lymph node involvement ratio); menarche (menarche age);
No. Preg (number of pregnancy); TS (tumor size); Ki67 (Ki67 proliferation marker); I.
Node: number of involved auxiliary lymph nodes; T. Node: number of dissected auxiliary
lymph nodes; No. Chemo: number of chemotherapy; ND: normally distributed. The
sample size was 579 and the recurrence prevalence was 19.3%.
⁎ Statistically signiﬁcant features (P b 0.05).
Comparison of clinical and biochemical features (with nominal measurement scale) of
included subjects with/without cancer recurrence in percentage.
With recurrence
Without recurrence
Multifocal
FH (family history of cancer); multifocal (having more than one tumor in the breast); ER
(estrogen receptor); PR (progesterone receptor); P53 (tumor protein 53); surgery: type of
surgery (MRM: modiﬁed radical mastectomy, BCS: breast-conserving surgery, Mast: mastectomy); Her2 (epidermal growth factor receptor-2); Cathepsin (Cathepsin-D); HRT (hormone therapy); XRT (radiotherapy); subtypes: cancer molecular subtypes (LA: luminal A,
LB: luminal B; HLB: HER2-positive luminal B, NLH: non-luminal Her2, 3N: triple negative).
The characteristics were shown as positive and negative percentages (i.e. relative frequent
table) for binary variables, respectively and the mode was underlined. The sample size was
579 and the recurrence prevalence was 19.3%.
⁎ Statistically signiﬁcant features (P b 0.05).
Comparison of the tumor “histological grade” feature (with ordinal measurement scales)
of included subjects with/without cancer recurrence.
Grade categories
With recurrence
Without recurrence
The characteristics were shown as percentages (i.e. relative frequent table), and the mode
(the most frequent item) was underlined in each category (recurrent or non-recurrent
patient groups). Tumor grade was not statistically signiﬁcant in subjects with/without
recurrence. The sample size was 579 and the recurrence prevalence was 19.3%.
M.R. Mohebian et al. / Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal 15 75–85
50 years . Bharat et al. estimated the risk of breast cancer recurrence
for women diagnosed below the age of 40 to be 1.53 times higher than
in those diagnosed above 40 years . In our study, the ﬁrst and second
age quartile for patients without recurrence was 41 and 47 years
compared with 38 and 43 years for those with recurrence. Meanwhile,
patients who were less than 40 years old had 33.5% higher hazard of
recurrent metastasis in comparison with more than 40 year old patients
 . In fact, the odds of recurrence in the young (b40 years) and old
(N40 years) population in our study was 0.43 and 0.19, respectively.
Such a trend is in agreement with the literature. Meanwhile, in recurrent cancer patients, the odds ratio (OR) associated with age ≤40
compared with age N 40 was 1.8, indicating that discretized age was a
good feature for the developed prognosis system.
TS is an independent prognostic factor, with distant recurrence rates
increasing with larger tumor size . It has been in fact an important
recurrence prognosis factor in several studies . It has been
shown in the literature that the median time to the development of
metastatic disease shortens as tumor size increases . In our
study, the recurrence odds for TS ≤2 (T1), 2 b TS ≤5 (T2), and TS N 5
(T3) was 0.13, 0.27 and 0.29, respectively showing that increased
tumor size is associated with higher probability of cancer recurrence.
NR was shown to be a prognosis factor for cancer recurrence in the
literature . Voordeckers et al. showed that NR is one of the main
prognosis risk factors for cancer recurrence . Elkhodary et al.
showed that the hazard ratio of breast cancer recurrence risk increases
when NR increases . Tazhibi et al. indicated that NR (≤0.25 vs.
N0.25) is associated with hazard of distance recurrence . In our
study, the recurrence odds for the NR ≤0.25, and NR N 0.25 was 0.14,
and 0.43, respectively showing that increased NR is associated with
higher probability of cancer recurrence. Meanwhile, in recurrent cancer
patients, the OR associated with NR N 0.25 compared with NR ≤0.25 was
1.6, indicating that discretized NR was a good feature for the developed
prognosis system.
It was shown in the literature that I. Node is an important predictive
factor for recurrence risk . T. Node was also considered a
predictor for cancer recurrence . Although SFS selected this
feature, it was not used in BDT. One explanation could be that in our
dataset, I. Node and T. Node were moderately correlated (r = 0.56;
P b 0.001). Also, NR deﬁned as the ratio between I. Node to T. Node,
was also used by the classiﬁer. Thus, adding T. Node could not increase
the amount of information in the prognosis system. In fact, reducing the
number of correlated features improves the classiﬁcation accuracy
 . Higher Ki67 expression, on the other hand, was shown to be a
prognosis indicator of increased cancer recurrence in the literature
 . In our study, the second quartile of Ki67 was 14.3 and 17.4 in
non-recurrent and recurrent cancer patient, respectably. Although SFS
selected this feature, it was not used in BDT either. In our study, Higher
Ki67 index tumors showed larger size (TS), and more lymph node
Iteration Number
Fig. 2. The value of the ﬁtness function (F-Score of the proposed classiﬁer (HPBCR) on the training set-solid line) and the F-Score on the test set (dash-dot line) during optimization
procedure. The termination criterion was only the maximum number of iterations (i.e. 100) in this plot.
The holdout performance estimate (%) of the selected classiﬁers.
Decision tree
Se: sensitivity, Sp: speciﬁcity, Acc: accuracy, Pr: precision, AUC: area under the curve, MCC: Matthews correlation coefﬁcient, DOR: diagnostics odds ratio; DP: discriminant power; SVM:
supported vector machines; MLP: multilayer perceptron artiﬁcial neural network. Seventy percent of the data was used for training and the rest for validation.
M.R. Mohebian et al. / Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal 15 75–85
involvement (I. Node), which is in agreement with what was reported
in the literature . This could be the justiﬁcation that the ﬁnal
prognosis system did not use Ki67 expression.
PR expression was shown to be an independent recurrence prognostic variable in breast cancer in the literature . Purdie et al.
showed that absent PR expression was signiﬁcantly associated with
poor cancer recurrence prognosis . In our study, the recurrence
odds for the PR+ and PR−was 0.20, and 0.31, respectively which is
in agreement with what was mentioned in the literature. Meanwhile,
in non-recurrent cancer patients, such odds associated with PR+
compared with PR−was 1.6, indicating that PR was a distinctive feature
for the developed prognosis system.
It was shown that HRT reduces the risk of breast cancer recurrence in
the literature . In our study, the recurrence odds for the HRT+ and
HRT−was 0.20, and 0.35, respectively which is in agreement with what
was mentioned in the literature. Meanwhile, in non-recurrent cancer
patients, the recurrence odds associated with HRT+ compared with
HRT−was 2.4, indicating that HRT was a suitable predictor for the
developed prognosis system. It was proposed in the literature that the
impact of type of surgery on the breast cancer recurrence might be dependent on age . In our study, the non-recurrence odds for young
and old patients underwent MRM surgery was 2.8 and 5.4, respectively.
Such odds for the BCS surgery was 4.8 and 8.3. This could in principal
support that the performance of the surgery is age dependent.
4.2. The Properties and Performance of HPBCR
In our study, among 1085 breast cancer patients, only 579 subjects
with complete information and without primary metastasis were
included in the prediction. Thus, subjects with missing data were
excluded from the analysis. Missing data can introduce bias and reduce
efﬁciency . It is possible to use multiple imputation to handle such
incomplete data. Although multiple imputation has potential to
improve the validity of medical research, it requires the user to
model the missing variable distribution. The validity of the imputed
results highly depends on such modeling and underlying assumptions
In our algorithm, SFS was ﬁrst used to identify the discriminative
features. Such a selection was then reﬁned by PSO and also the importance of the interval features, represented by the estimated weights,
was identiﬁed. Overall, the embedded FS was used in our study where
FS is performed as part of the learning procedure. PSO is a metaheuristics population-based stochastic optimization method. In principle, it is possible to use any other method in this category that could
deal with continuous (feature weights) and discreet (feature selection)
problems. We also tested genetic algorithm (GA) . In multiple
runs, both PSO and GA converged to an identical optimum solution.
However, GA required about 150 iterations in comparison with 50 iterations in PSO (Fig. 2), for converging.
An alternative FS method is using multivariate FS namely as multiple
logistic regression (MLR), taking into account the relationship between
different features. MLR, known as feature vector machine in machine
learning, can be used to select statistically signiﬁcant features .
MLR was also tested in our study. However, due to the lack of ﬁt of
the MLR model, univariate SFS was used.
In HPBCR, F-score was used as the ﬁtness function. When the dataset
is imbalanced, for example in our case where the recurrence prevalence
was 19.3, overall accuracy is not a suitable ﬁtness measure. In fact,
choosing the wrong objective function while developing a classiﬁcation
model can introduce bias towards majority . Meanwhile HPBCR
could be used for other mixed data where each instance in a data set
is described by more than one type of measurement scale attribute
 . In this case, different attributes must be treated differently. In our
algorithm, different attributes were manipulated distinctly.
The average sensitivity and speciﬁcity of HPBCR are estimated as 80%
and 96% (Table 6). Also, considering the maximum Types I (α = 0.07)
and II errors (β = 0.23), maximum false discovery rate (FDR = 5%),
guarding against testing hypotheses suggested by the data (Type III errors ) done by cross-validation, very good diagnosis accuracy
(AUC = 0.90), and ﬁnally the “excellent agreement” between the gold
standard and the outcome of the system (Kappa = 0.83), HPBCR is
promising for clinical prognosis tests. HPBCR signiﬁcantly outperformed
the other systems namely as MLP, DT and SVM (McNemar's test;
P b 0.05). The other three tested classiﬁers showed poor DP, good diagnosis accuracy and good agreement with the gold standard (Table 5).
The Types I and II errors of the proposed algorithm were better than
those obtained by the other classiﬁes (Tables 5 and 6). In HPBCR the average Type I error was less than 0.05 while the average statistical power
was higher than 80% in the hold-out (Table 5) and cross validation
(Table 6). However, the maximum Type I error (0.07) and minimum
power (77%) in the folds used for cross validation were beyond the
acceptable clinical ranges and must be improved. The variation of the
performance indices in different folds was low (Table 6), showing
consistency in the results of HPBCR.
The performance of HPBCR was further compared with the state-ofthe-art. Kim et al. used hold-out validation method (70%: training
set; 30% test set) and reported the performance of the algorithm on
the test set as the AUC of 0.85, sensitivity of 89%, speciﬁcity of 73%,
precision of 75% (FDR = 25%) and accuracy of 85%. In a similar setting
(Table 5), HPBCR had AUC of 0.90, sensitivity of 81%, speciﬁcity of 98%,
The performance of the classiﬁers in percent based on 4-fold cross-validation (mean ± SD) [min, max].
Sensitivity
Speciﬁcity
Proposed method
80.0 ± 0.3
[77.0, 80.5]
96.1 ± 1.0
[93.0, 95.0]
89.2 ± 0.6
[85.0, 89.0]
96.5 ± 1.0
[95.0, 98.2]
73.0 ± 1.0
[66.0, 74.0]
85.3 ± 1.2
[80.0, 89.0]
77.6 ± 0.4
[76.1, 78.9]
82.1 ± 0.3
[80.0, 84.8]
Decision tree
74.0 ± 0.9
[71.8, 76.0]
77.0 ± 0.8
[75.1, 78.5]
77.1 ± 0.2
[76.6, 77.5]
78.1 ± 0.6
[77.3, 80.2]
67.5 ± 0.2
[66.2, 67.9]
84.3 ± 1.0
[80.8, 85.0]
76.0 ± .0.3
[75.0, 76.8]
84.2 ± 1.8
[79.9, 86.0]
SVM: supported vector machines; MLP: multilayer perceptron artiﬁcial neural network.
The overall confusion matrix of HPBCR on the test set.
Total population
Condition (as determined by “gold standard”)
Condition positive
Condition negative
Test outcome Test outcome positive True positive
False positive
(Type I error)
Test outcome negative False negative
(Type II error)
True negative
Gold standard: recurrent cancer; test outcome: the decision of the proposed diagnosis
system (HPBCR). The classiﬁer was trained on the training set (70% of the samples) and
its performance was shown on the test set.
M.R. Mohebian et al. / Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal 15 75–85
precision of 97% (FDR = 3%) and accuracy of 90%. Our algorithm
outperformed the other prediction method in terms of AUC, FDR and
NPI method proposed by Galea et al. was implemented and
tested in our dataset. The value of the performance measures AUC,
sensitivity, speciﬁcity, precision, and accuracy were 0.51, 100%, 2%,
25% and 26%, respectively. This method is not suitable in our study
because of high Type I error (α = 0.98).
4.3. Additional Analysis
The contribution of BDT and PSO to the overall classiﬁcation performance was also considered. PSO was excluded from the algorithm ﬂowchart and the resulting hold-out performance was reported in Table 8
(Scenario 1), compared with what obtained in the HPBCR (baseline).
HPBCR signiﬁcantly outperformed the modiﬁed prognosis system
(McNemar's test; P b 0.05). Particularly, discriminant power is deteriorated when excluding PSO in the developed algorithm. Moreover, the
modiﬁed system is not clinically reliable (Power = 78%, Type I
error = 0.09). PSO is in fact used for embedded feature selection and
is a necessary section of the program.
Moreover, SVM (Scenario 2) and MLP (Scenario 3) classiﬁers were
used instead of BDT whose features were tuned using PSO. The performance of these two modiﬁed prognosis systems was comparable to
what obtained in HPBCR (Table 8; McNemar's test; P N 0.05). Thus,
BDT could be substituted by SVM and MLP. However, it was shown in
the literature that BDT is as good as SVM and MLP . Meanwhile,
bagging avoids over-ﬁtting. Using BDT, it was possible to implement
HPBCR online efﬁciently (Section 2.7).
However, the performance of SVM or MLP when PSO is used for embedded feature selection (Table 8) was signiﬁcantly better than that of
SVM or MLP without using PSO (Table 5). This is the reason that hybrid
feature selection performed by PSO is essential in the proposed prognosis system. Also, the training time of SVM + PSO, and MLP + PSO was
415.77 ± 10.50 (s) and 710.02 ± 22.55 (s), while the validation time
was 0.50 ± 0.27, and 0.50 ± 0.33, respectively (hold-out 70%). Since
at each iteration, feature sets are calculated for each 20 particle, the
training time is more than cases where PSO is not used.
4.4. Final Considerations
This study was a validation of the prognostic performance of HPBCR.
The limitation of the current study is that it was a retrospective, singleinstitution study. The results might have been biased on the basis of
available specimen and patterns of referral to the hospital. The sample
size must be increased as to improve the statistical power in our prognosis system . The output of the classiﬁcation system is not fuzzy.
It will be useful to add risk assessment to the algorithm and report the
risk of recurrence which is the focus of our future activity.
5. Conclusions
We proposed a computer-aided prognosis system to identify breast
cancer recurrence within 5 years after diagnosis. This method is
accurate and precise and could be possibly used by clinicians to make
proper treatment plan.
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at 
doi.org/10.1016/j.csbj.2016.11.004.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the People Programme (Marie Curie
Actions) of the European Union Seventh Framework Programme under REA grant agreement no. 600388 (TECNIOspring
Programme), from the Agency for Business Competitiveness of the Government of Catalonia, ACCIÓ and from Spanish Ministry of Economy and
Competitiveness- Spain (project DPI2014-59049-R). This work was
supported in part by the University of Isfahan and Isfahan University
of Medical Sciences.