Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
A Robot Learning from Demonstration Framework to Perform
Force-based Manipulation Tasks
Received: date / Accepted: date
Abstract This paper proposes an end-to-end learning from demonstration framework for teaching forcebased manipulation tasks to robots. The strengths of
this work are many-fold: ﬁrst, we deal with the problem of learning through force perceptions exclusively.
Second, we propose to exploit haptic feedback both
as a means for improving teacher demonstrations and
as a human-robot interaction tool, establishing a bidirectional communication channel between the teacher
and the robot, in contrast to works using kinesthetic
teaching. Third, we address the well-known what to imitate? problem from a diﬀerent point of view, based on
the mutual information between perceptions and actions. Lastly, the teacher’s demonstrations are encoded
using a Hidden Markov Model, and the robot execution
phase is developed by implementing a modiﬁed version
of Gaussian Mixture Regression that uses implicit temporal information from the probabilistic model, needed
when tackling tasks with ambiguous perceptions. Experimental results show that the robot is able to learn
and reproduce two diﬀerent manipulation tasks, with a
performance comparable to the teacher’s one.
Keywords Programming by demonstration · Imitation learning · Haptic perception · Mutual Information ·
HMM · GMR · Robotic Manipulation
1 Background and Related Work
One of the main challenges in Robotics is to develop
robots that can interact with humans in a natural way,
sharing the same dynamic and unstructured environments. Learning from demonstration (LfD)1 is a type
of human-robot interaction (HRI) whose purpose is to
transfer knowledge or skills to the robot. Here, a human user carries out examples of a given task while a
robot observes these executions and extracts relevant
information for learning, representing and reproducing
the taught task under unknown conditions .
HRI requires suitable communication channels for
conveying information between a human and a robot
 . In LfD, most existing works rely on vision or on
motion sensors as input channels to the robotic system.
As for vision-based input, positional information about
the objects in the scene is captured with a set of cameras, which are also used to locate and follow markers
placed on the teacher’s body . Most state-of-theart approaches consider vision as the best choice for
extracting information from teacher examples, as human beings do in everyday tasks . However, visionbased systems must deal with typical problems as occlusion, appearance changes and complex human-robot
kinematics mapping, which can be partly solved by using motion sensors instead. Such type of sensors allows
to track the teacher’s motion more precisely and to establish a simpler mapping, which make them appropriate to teach tasks to humanoid robots .
In contrast to these works, we are concerned with
learning from force-based perceptions. Force conveys
relevant information for several tasks where vision or
motion sensors can not provide suﬃcient data to learn
a motion or a set of primitives. In many daily tasks, people use force-based perceptions to perform successfully.
Examples include assembly processes, opening doors,
pulling drawers, cutting slices of bread, etc. Robots
1 Also known as programming by demonstration or imitation learning.
Leonel Rozo · Pablo Jiménez · Carme Torras
Fig. 1 Entire learning framework. (Top) Task learning stage. (Bottom) Robot execution stage. The ﬁltering module consists
of the signal processing to achieve a high ﬁdelity bidirectional communication channel. The feature selection block corresponds
to the proposed solution for the What to Imitate? problem through mutual information analysis.
may also take advantage of force-torque information for
learning this kind of tasks. Evrard et al. proposed
a learning structure similar to ours, where a humanoid
robot learns to carry out collaborative manipulation
tasks (object-lifting along a vertical axis) using force
data. An extension of this research , combines LfD
and adaptive control for teaching the task, endowing
the robot with variable impedance and an adaptive algorithm to generate diﬀerent reference kinematic pro-
ﬁles depending on the perceived force. Kormushev et
al. proposed to use a haptic device for deﬁning the
force proﬁle of contact-based tasks (ironing and door
opening) while the robot follows a previously learned
trajectory. This cited work uses kinesthetic guidance
and does not exploit haptic feedback as a tool for improving teacher demonstrations, thus avoiding several
challenging problems arising when clean and realistic
signals are to be displayed to the human during the
demonstrations. We contribute a complete force databased learning framework that includes ﬁltering processes and high-ﬁdelity haptic feedback. This establishes a force-based bidirectional communication channel, which has seldom been exploited as a human-robot
interaction tool in LfD in contrast to kinesthetic-based
teaching and vision-based systems.
Another point to be addressed in LfD is related to
the learning level of the task. Teacher demonstrations
may be encoded at a symbolic level, where the task is
often represented as state-action pairs in a graph-like
structure , or as motion primitives following hierarchical approaches . At trajectory level, on the
other hand, the aim is that the robot extracts a generalized trajectory (movement) from slightly diﬀerent
teacher executions . Unlike the cited works, our
contribution mixes concepts from these two levels as
the same goal may be reached from diﬀerent trajectories or initial states of the task. We propose to encode
the demonstrations through a set of states using a Hidden Markov Model (HMM) and to execute the skill
using a modiﬁed version of Gaussian Mixture Regression (GMRa) that exploits the temporal coherence of
the task at hand.
Regardless of the particular approach, researchers
have to deal with three main problems: what to imitate?, how to imitate? and when to imitate? . The
ﬁrst question refers to extracting the most relevant information of the task necessary to learn and reproduce
it successfully. The second key question addresses the
problem of how the robot can reproduce the task based
on the teacher executions. The third problem is related
to the timing of the learning phase based on the robot
perceptions (observations). In this paper, we propose to
solve the ﬁrst issue through Mutual Information (MI)
analysis, and to tackle the second problem through an
HMM/GMRa-based framework, as shown in Figure 1.
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes our experimental setup and the two manipulation tasks taught to the robot. Section 3 explains how
we tackle the what to imitate? problem by extracting
the most relevant features of the tasks via MI. After, in
Sections 4 and 5, the learning and reproduction phases
are described respectively, ﬁrst, illustrating the statistical encoding of the demonstrations by using an HMM
and then, showing how the implicit temporal information in HMM is exploited at the execution stage (the
entire process is shown in Figure 1). Section 6 shows
computational and robot execution results. Finally, the
conclusions of this paper and future work are presented
in Section 7.
A Robot Learning from Demonstration Framework to Perform Force-based Manipulation Tasks
2 Experimental Setups
To test our learning framework based on force perceptions, we constructed an experimental setup to teach a
robotic manipulator to carry out two diﬀerent manipulation tasks using exclusively haptic data. In both scenarios a human user holding the end-eﬀector of a 6-DoF
haptic interface (Delta device from Force Dimension)
teleoperates a robotic arm (RX60 from St¨aubli) which
has a force-torque sensor (Shunk FTC-050) placed on
its wrist.
Force-based perceptions are feedback to the teacher
in order to establish a bidirectional communication channel during the demonstration stage. This implies to
work at a minimum frequency of 1000 Hz to have a
high ﬁdelity force reﬂection and a stable teleoperation
system, which greatly depend on the executed processes
between the position sensing of the haptic device and
when the sensed force is reﬂected on it. Our experimental setup takes such requirement into account and guarantees a high bandwidth communication in the haptic
Two diﬀerent tasks are proposed to test and analyze the performance of the proposed framework. Their
particular features are described below.
2.1 Ball-in-box Task
In this task the robot holds a plastic container with
a steel sphere inside it, as shown in Figure 2. At the
demonstration phase, the teacher repeatedly carries out
the task to be learned, which consists of taking the ball
out of the box through the hole, following a speciﬁc motion strategy: Starting at some predeﬁned initial positions, the ball is driven towards the wall adjacent to the
hole, and then forced to roll along this wall to the hole
(see Figure 2). During the demonstrations, the teacher
feels at the end-eﬀector of the haptic device the forcetorque sensed at the robotic wrist. Note that the teacher
has an additional information source by watching the
scene directly. No visual data are provided to the robot.
We like to emphasize that this particular manipulation
task has been chosen because it is well-deﬁned and simple enough to permit analyzing each stage of the proposed LfD framework separately and in depth.
2.1.1 Filtering Processes
A ﬁrst experimental ﬁnding derived from the use of
haptic feedback in this bidirectional learning framework is the need for ﬁltering. Several people tested
the experimental setting, by teleoperating the robotic
Fig. 2 Experimental scenario of the ball-in-box task. (At the
bottom right corner) Initial positions of the ball for the training phase and motion strategy followed by the teacher. Numbering is counterclockwise.
arm through the haptic interface while receiving forcetorque feedback from the sensor mounted on the robotic
wrist. Initially, they teleoperated the robot while feeling both the container’s mass and the ball’s dynamics.
Then, they carried out the same task just feeling the
ball’s dynamics. All the participants argued that the
presence of the container’s mass was a very distracting
factor making the task more diﬃcult to teach. Thus,
ﬁltering and dynamic compensation are necessary to
obtain better demonstrations and to improve the bidirectional communication channel, as explained below.
Formally, the force-torque signals from the sensor
can be expressed as:
F /T s = F /T b + F /T m + ε
where F /T b corresponds to the ball dynamics, F /T m
represents the container mass and ε is the noise (where
we include the container vibrations). For achieving a
clean and stable communication channel between the
human and the robot, it is necessary to display only relevant force-torque signals to the teacher, that is, those
corresponding to the dynamics of the ball inside the
container. Therefore force-torque produced by noise and
the container’s mass must be removed before sending
force information to the haptic controller.
Since the box is not a perfectly rigid structure, it vibrates as the robot moves. These unwanted vibrations
introduce noise in the teleoperation system, leading to
unstable behavior. To avoid this, we implemented a
low-pass digital ﬁlter that cuts out all vibration signals on the force-torque sensor in such a way that the
ε eﬀects in Equation 1 are greatly reduced, in a similar way as done in for suppressing residual vibrations in ﬂexible payloads carried by robot manipulators. We computed the signals’ fundamental frequency
by subjecting the container – with the ball inside –
to vibrations through a force applied perpendicularly
to the container’s base, at the front edge of it. Then,
the frequency spectrum of the generated data was analyzed, from which we obtained the fundamental frequency (7.5Hz) as the cutoﬀfrequency of our low-pass
ﬁlter. Using MAT LAB R⃝’s FDAtool, we designed the
ﬁlter by implementing the Constrained Least Squares
technique whose order was 75 .
2.1.2 Dynamic Compensation
During the demonstration stage, most of the people acting as teachers declared that having to compensate the
container’s mass while executing the demonstrations
makes it considerably harder to focus on the task’s goal.
Therefore, we model the eﬀects of the container’s mass
dynamics on the force-torque signals with the aim of
removing them and just sending perceptions conveying
the ball’s motion (similarly as in ). Considering
the system shown in Figure 3, let p denote the position
of the center of gravity of the container, ω its angular velocity, m its mass, I its moment of inertia, F /T s
and F /T e the sensor and external forces/torques respectively, and rs and re the vectors from the center
of gravity of the container to the sensor and external
forces frames. Then, using the Newton-Euler equations,
we obtain:
F = m¨p = mg + F e + F s
T = I ˙ω + ω × Iω = T s + rs × F s + T e + re × F e
If we assume very low linear and angular accelerations as well as very low angular velocities, we obtain
the following approximation:
F s = −mg −F e
T s + rs × F s = −T e −re × F e
Determining the force and torque values generated
by the container’s mass via the sensor measurements
without the ball inside, and using the former equations,
it is possible to remove these undesirable force-torque
signals from sensor readings and to return just the ball
dynamics eﬀects. The users agree that the felt forcetorque values at the end-eﬀector after compensation are
realistic enough as to provide a clear understanding of
how their actions translate into motions of the ball.
Fig. 3 Dynamic compensation model for removing container’s mass eﬀects from the force-torque perceptions sent
to the haptic controller.
2.2 Pouring task
The second task consists of pouring drinks. Here, the
robotic arm holds a 1 liter plastic bottle full of tiny
metallic spheres, which play the role of a ﬂuid (this solution was adopted to avoid spilling liquid during tests).
The teacher teleoperates the robot in order to demonstrate how to pour 100 ml drinks into a plastic glass,
as shown in Figure 4. Every sample of the task starts
from an unique predeﬁned initial pose of the bottle,
which is also the stop conﬁguration once the robot has
poured a drink. Initially, the bottle is completely full,
and the teacher carries out several demonstrations until
the bottle is empty. Thus, the initial force-torque values
for each example vary according to how much “ﬂuid”
has been poured previously. It is worth to highlight that
such changes in the input variables at the beginning of
the demonstrations are similar to those observed in the
ball-in-box task for each initial position of the sphere
inside the container.
Again, it was necessary to implement a smoothing ﬁlter to reduce the noise from the sensor readings,
this time generated by the tiny metallic spheres. On
the other hand, the dynamic compensation model presented previously was also used here for removing the
bottle mass eﬀects from the sensor readings, in order
to feedback the teacher with only the external forcestorques generated by the “ﬂuid” at the demonstration
phase. Note that in this task, the teacher is also able
to watch the scene directly, thus he/she can know the
location of the glass in the robot workspace. Such information is not provided to the robot during the execution phase because the glass position is predeﬁned in
advance and ﬁxed across the examples.2
2 Note that a camera system may also be used to know the
location of the glass in the robot frame, so that the demonstrations would also be dependent on this parameter.
A Robot Learning from Demonstration Framework to Perform Force-based Manipulation Tasks
4 Experimental scenario of the pouring task. The
teacher demonstrates the robot how to pour 100 ml drinks
into a plastic glass by teleoperation.
Tamosiunaite et al. tackled the same task using reinforcement learning, which was applied to improve the initial encoding obtained from human demonstrations modeled through dynamic motion primitives.
Thus, this task allows to show that the proposed framework can be used for learning more realistic force-based
skills like the ones that an inexperienced human wish
to teach to a home service robot .
3 Feature Selection through Mutual
Information
The what to Imitate? problem means to determine which
information of the demonstrations is relevant for learning the task at hand successfully . Most works tackle
this problem by analyzing the variability across demonstrations of the task at trajectory level. Those parts
with large variances do not have to be learned precisely,
whereas low variance suggests that the corresponding
motion segment is signiﬁcant and deserves to be learned
 . This approach exploits variance for constructing task constraints as well as for determining secure interaction zones in a robot coaching framework
 . However, the cited works do not focus on the relative relevance of each individual input dimension for the
task to be learned. But irrelevant or redundant information may actually be present across input dimensions,
which can increase the computational cost of the learning stage and make the task harder to learn. The point
is to select the most relevant subset of input variables.
The beneﬁts in computational cost and noise reduction
during the learning stage do outperform a hypothetical and marginal loss of information. Furthermore, this
approach is compatible with the previously described
variance-based analysis criterion.
In literature, two types of approaches tackle the
problem of selecting a subset of variables from the original data. Feature selection methods keep only useful
features and discard others, while feature transform techniques construct new variables out of the original ones
 . In LfD, feature selection may be preferable to transforms because it could be essential to retain some of
the original features. For instance, in active learning,
the robot may let the teacher know which perceptions
it has selected, in order to get feedback about how well
or how convenient its selection was according to the
human knowledge of the task. Such human assistance
will not be available if the robot carries out the selection from input transforms. This fact may occur in ,
where the authors propose to project the human samples onto a latent space obtained from a principal component analysis to diminish redundancies, where the
transformed variables do not have a clear interpretation for a human teacher anymore. Also, this analysis
is applied to the input variables of the problem, without taking into account how these inﬂuence the output
variables. In addition, when the number of irrelevant
perceptions exceeds the number of relevant inputs by
orders of magnitude, learning a transform reliably may
require excessive amounts of training data.
Since our framework may be used as the basis of
LfD structures, it is more generic and suitable if it
may provide clear information about what the robot
considers that should be imitated. Thus, feature selection methods are preferred in this context. Here we use
the Mutual Information (MI) criterion, which allows to
establish which input variables give more information
with respect to their eﬀects on the outputs (i.e., how
force-torque perceptions aﬀect the teacher actions). In
contrast to other techniques (e.g., correlation criterion),
MI detects non-linear dependencies between inputs and
outputs . The purpose of this method in feature selection is the reduction of the output data uncertainty provided by each input variable. In our context,
depending on how the uncertainty of the output data is
reduced, a robot perception gives more or less information about the desired actions. Note that this approach
has shown satisfactory results in sensor fusion and
vision-based positioning of a robotic arm .
In order to apply MI analysis to our resulting training data (after ﬁltering and dynamic compensation), let
us deﬁne the MI value between two continuous variables
x and y as follows (more details in ):3
p(x, y) log p(x, y)
3 The basic division and product rules of log can be applied
for numerical stability.
(a) MI for all the input-output pairs.
(b) Conditional MI given Tx.
(c) Conditional MI given Tx and Ty.
Fig. 5 MI values at each variable selection phase for the ball-in-box task.
(a) MI for all the input-output pairs.
(b) Conditional MI given Tx.
(c) Conditional MI given Tx and Fz.
Fig. 6 MI values at each variable selection phase for the pouring task.
Fig. 7 Torques map representing clusters for each initial position of the ball inside the container. Plotting the ﬁrst samples of the variables most relevant to the current task, Tx vs.
Ty, it is observed they do describe where the ball is in the
3.1 Ball-in-box Task
Let us deﬁne the inputs of this manipulation task as
the wrench ϑ = {Fx, Fy, Fz, Tx, Ty, Tz}, i.e., the
sensed forces and torques in the robot’s frame, and
the outputs as the joint velocities of the robot deﬁned
by ω = {ω1, . . . , ωNq}, where Nq is the number of
joints of the robot. Using equation 4, the MI value is
computed for each input-output pair using entire data
streams obtained at the demonstration phase. Both the
marginal and joint probabilities are approximated using
histogram-based densities, which are computed from
discrete partitions of the dataspace.4 The quantization
error in the conversion from continuous variables to discrete ones is bounded by some constant value which depends only on the number of partitions that divide the
continuous space .
Figure 5(a) shows the diﬀerent MI values for all the
input-output pairs in the task. In general terms, the
input variables Fy and Tz show less relevance whereas
Tx and Ty are the most correlated variables with the
4 Other type of non-parametric density may also be used,
such as Parzen windows.
outputs. This does make sense as they are the variables
that give the most useful information for knowing where
the ball is inside the box (see Figure 7). These results
conﬁrm what we intuitively expected about which input variables were the most relevant for this task. Note
that this technique can be also applied in more complex
problems where the important perceptions can not be
easily detected. Nonetheless, once MI values have been
computed, the problem is to select a subset Ωof k
perceptions from the original set Ψ of n inputs, that
is “maximally informative” about the robot actions. In
this context, the computed MI values provide a ranking
that can be used for selecting the most relevant input.
However, to choose the remaining k −1 perceptions,
the redundancy among inputs must be taken into consideration. To achieve this, we resort to a greedy selection algorithm known as “mutual information-based
feature selection deduced from uniform distributions”
(MIFS-U) , which was adapted to our learning
framework as described in Algorithm 1. The core of this
technique is to select the rest of variables by maximizing I(y; xi|xs), this means to choose the input xi that
provides most information about y given xs. In this
approach, the computation of the conditional mutual
information is approximated as follows:
I(y; xi|xs) = I(y; xi) −I(y; xs)
H(xs) I(xs; xi),
where H(xs) represents the entropy of xs (details in
 ). Note that the algorithm can be extended to a
multidimensional output case assuming a set of Nm input variables X = {x1, . . . , xNm} and output dataspace Y = {y1, . . . , yNn} of dimensionality Nn.
For this task, we set k = 3 and carried out the
MIFS-U to choose the perceptions to be used in next
stages of the learning framework. The selected variables
were the subset Ω= {Tx, Ty, Fx}, as shown in Figures 5(b) and 5(c). It should be noted that the MI val-
A Robot Learning from Demonstration Framework to Perform Force-based Manipulation Tasks
Algorithm 1 MIFS-U
1: Initialization: Set Ω←{}, and Ψ ←X
2: Compute MI: Obtain I(yj, xi), ∀xi ∈X, and ∀yj ∈Y
3: Mean MI: I(Y , xi) =
j=1 I(yj, xi), ∀xi ∈X
4: Select the most relevant input: Find the input
xs = arg maxxi∈X I(Y , xi), and set Ω←{xs}, Ψ \ {xs}
5: Greedy selection:
for t = 1 →k −1 do
5.1: Compute the conditional MI I(Y , xi|xs), ∀xi ∈X
5.2: Find xs = arg maxxi∈X I(Y , xi|xs), and set Ω←
{xs}, Ψ \ {xs}
6: Output the set Ω
ues for Fx and Fz are very similar for most outputs
initially (see Figure 5(a)), however, MIFS-U automatically chooses Fx and discards Fz. This is in accordance
to intuition, since Fz is the force along the vertical axis
in the robot frame, which represents the gravitational
force of the ball. Such force generates the torques about
the axes x and y, thus there is a high correlation between Fz and {Tx, Ty}.
3.2 Pouring Task
In this task the input variables also are the wrench ϑ,
but the output variables are the joint robot position de-
ﬁned by q = {q1, . . . , qNq} at instant t + 1 for the given
ϑ at t. Such change of output variables for this task
is aimed at showing the generic signiﬁcance of the proposed learning framework for diﬀerent representations
of the task state. Again, the MI value was computed
for all the input-output pairs (as shown in Figure 6(a))
in order to select the most important input variable,
Tx in this case. Note that Tx and Fz display nearly
the same MI value for all the robot joints. This is an
expected result because Fz is the vertical force in the
robot frame representing the gravitational component
of the load (i.e., the bottle and ﬂuid masses), while Tx
is approximately the torque generated by such a load.
This means that both variables are providing similar
information with respect to the robot movements, because they signiﬁcantly vary as the ﬂuid comes out of
the bottle.
Subsequently, Algorithm 1 was applied to select the
remaining k −1 variables (with k = 3), from which
the resulting “most informative” set of inputs was Ω=
{Tx, Fz, Ty}. The selection process and the values of
the conditional mutual information are shown in Figures 6(b) and 6(c). There is an interesting aspect to
highlight from this result: the third selected variable
Ty shows slight variations when the robot rotates the
bottle to pour a drink, which are likely produced by
the location change of the center of mass of the load
due to the “ﬂuid dynamics” into the bottle. Note that
such dynamics may be hardly modeled as reported in
 , but the algorithm was able to detect that Ty was
non-linearly correlated to the robot motion encapsulating part of the ﬂuid dynamics (also conﬁrmed after a
detailed analysis of the data streams). In sum, MI is
shown to be a good and advisable tool for extracting
the perceptions that are relevant in a LfD framework.
An interesting aspect to highlight is that MIFS-U often gives more preference to redundant variables over irrelevant ones during the selection process, as also noted
in . In this case the variables Tx and Fz provide
nearly the same information about the task, but both
are chosen even being redundant, because their relevance with respect to the outputs keeps high despite
one of them has been selected previously. We consider
that such behavior is not a drawback in the LfD context, because our aim is to extract the relevant perceptions of the task (even if several of them provide similar
information). Nonetheless, this fact opens an attractive
issue of research to be tackled in near future works.
3.3 Automatic selection of input variables
As shown previously, the number of inputs to be selected was predeﬁned in advance, however it would be
desirable to have a measure to decide on the optimal
number of components selected by MIFS-U. In this direction, let us deﬁne a new variable ζt that computes
the ratio at iteration t between the information a candidate input variable xt
c provides and the one already
given by the current subset of selected perceptions Ωt
as follows,
ζt = I(Y , xt
I(Y , Ωt) ,
c = arg maxxi∈X I(Y , xi|xs) and I(Y , Ωt) =
j=1 I(Y , xj
). Such conditional mutual information ratio shows how much information the next input
to be selected provides taking into consideration the
accumulated conditional MI given by the current selected variables. In this sense, it is desired that ζt is
greater than a predeﬁned threshold 0 < φ ≤1, which
controls what is the minimum information ratio that
allows to select one more input variable (i.e., the minimum mutual information that a variable should provide). It is worth mentioning that this new selection
criterion would modify step 5 in Algorithm 1, where
the greedy selection is now controlled by ζt, which is
evaluated at each iteration before selecting the next input. Thus, the algorithm keeps selecting variables while
the condition ζt ≥φ is satisﬁed. Note that the higher
φ, the more selective the algorithm.
We again subjected the training data of both manipulation tasks to MI analysis, but this time using the
modiﬁed version of Algorithm 1 with φ = 0.3. Regarding the ball-in-box task, the resulting subset of selected
inputs was again Ω= {Tx, Ty, Fx}, supporting the
analysis explained in Section 3.1. In contrast, for the
pouring task, the resulting selected perceptions were
Ω= {Tx, Fz}. This tells us that Ty might not provide enough information about the robot actions when
Tx and Fz have been already selected. We will assess
the framework performance using these last subsets of
input variables in Section 6.
4 Learning the Task
Previous research in LfD , has proposed to use Gaussian Mixture Models (GMM) for encoding manipulation tasks. However, this algorithm does not extract
temporal information from data, and time must explicitly be considered as an input variable if required by
the type of task to be learned (as in Calinon et al. ).
Force-torque signals tend to show very large time discrepancies, which may be tackled using techniques as
dynamic time warping, but increasing the complexity
of the learning framework. To avoid including this explicit temporal dependency in the model we resort to
HMM, which treats and exploits the sequential patterns
in the data and it is therefore more appropriate to encode the features of our tasks without using time as
an additional input variable, which would signiﬁcantly
constrain the generalization capabilities. HMM can be
interpreted as an extension of GMM in which the choice
of the mixture component for each observation depends
also on the choice of the component for the previous observation. This technique has been widely used in several computer science areas as speech recognition ,
human motion patterns encoding and LfD applications , among others.
Most of LfD works using HMM address the problem by learning trajectories from human demonstrations or by encoding a task with predeﬁned states
as in assembly processes that can be represented at a
symbolic level . However, our problem diﬀers from
these and other works in the following points:
– The task goal may be achieved by executing diﬀerent trajectories depending on the initial conditions
of the task (e.g., initial position of the ball inside
the container for the ball-in-box task or the ﬂuid
quantity inside the bottle for the pouring skill).
– We do not use time as an additional input variable.
Formally, given our experimental setting described
in Section 2 and following the notation of , let us
denote a training datapoint as dm
∈ℜD, with m =
1, 2, . . ., M and p = 1, 2, . . . , P, where M is the number of demonstrations, P is the number of datapoints
collected along demonstration m, and D is the total
number of input and output variables. We used an N states ergodic HMM deﬁned as λ = (A, B, π) where:
– A = {aij} is the state transition probability matrix,
with 1 ≤i, j ≤N.
– B = {bj(k)} is the observation symbol probability matrix, with 1 ≤k ≤(M ∗P) and assuming
continuous observation densities deﬁned as normal
distributions N(O; µj, Σj).
– π = {πi} is the initial state probability vector, with
– N is the number of model states.
The main idea is to adjust the model to maximize
P(O|λ), where O = {O1, O2, . . . , OT } is an observation sequence with each Ot corresponding to a training datapoint dm
p . The Baum-Welch method is used to
achieve such an objective (more details in ). In order to describe the procedure for re-estimation of HMM
parameters, it is necessary to deﬁne the following variables:
ξt(i, j) =
αt(i)aijbj(Ot+1)βt+1(j)
j=1 αt(i)aijbj(Ot+1)βt+1(j)
where α and β are called forward and backward variables, respectively, and are deﬁned as:
α1(i) = πibi(O1)
βT (i) = 1
aijbj(Ot+1)βt+1(j)
From equations 7 and 8, the HMM parameters are
iteratively estimated as follows:
πi = γ1(i)
t=1 ξt(i, j)
t=1 γt(j, k)Ot
t=1 γt(j, k)
t=1 γt(j, k)(Ot −µjk)(Ot −µjk)⊤
t=1 γt(j, k)
A Robot Learning from Demonstration Framework to Perform Force-based Manipulation Tasks
(a) 3-states HMM trained with positions {1,2,3,4}
(b) 3-states HMM trained with positions {7,8,9,10}
Fig. 8 Resulting HMM for two diﬀerent training datasets of the ball-in-box task. Top: Input space composed of the most
relevant inputs {Tx,Ty}. Bottom: Output space composed of robot joint velocities playing the most important role for the
given task. For both cases, the hidden left-to-right structure is obtained after convergence (having an ergodic HMM at the
beginning).
These equations permit obtaining a suitable trained
HMM that represents the teacher demonstrations statistically through a states model capturing the robot
motion for given force-based perceptions and taking
temporal coherence into account from the resulting matrix A.
4.1 Ball-in-box Task
For encoding this task, inputs are the force-torque sensed
at the robotic wrist and outputs are the velocity commands ωl at each robot joint ql with l = 1, . . . , Nq. Note
that joint velocities were chosen as outputs because
they do represent the robot actions to be performed
according to the force-torque perceptions. As explained
in Section 3, we found the subset Ωof selected inputs
as those needed to learn the task successfully, because
they showed to contain the most relevant information
about the task outputs. Thus, each training datapoint
is deﬁned as dm
p = {Tx, Ty, Fx, ω1, . . . , ωNq}.
In other words, λ is encoding the joint distribution P(Ω, ω). To understand better this idea, Figure 8
shows the HMM convergence for two diﬀerent datasets:
Figure 8(a) displays a 3-states HMM trained with similar demonstrations starting from positions {1,2,3,4},
while Figure 8(b) shows another 3-states model trained
with samples starting from positions {7,8,9,10}. Observe how the hidden left-to-right structure is obtained
after convergence (having an ergodic HMM at the beginning), which is the appropriate topology for learning
these datasets separately. For both cases, the resulting
vector π gives as initial state the blue Gaussian, that
corresponds to the ﬁrst movement carried out by the
teacher (i.e., when the user orients the robot in such
a way that the ball rolls towards the wall adjacent to
the hole). In Figure 8(a), blue and red states intersect
each other in input space, covering the same segments
of trajectories. In this case, the temporal information
is essential to determine what velocity command has
to be provided, which is not clear using a GMM-based
4.2 Pouring Task
In order to show the ﬂexibility of the proposed framework, we use a diﬀerent representation of the task state
for learning the pouring skill. Speciﬁcally, inputs are the
selected subset of variables Ωpreviously obtained in
Section 3 and the current joint positions q at time step
t.5 Outputs are the desired robot state to be achieved
at t + 1. Thus, each training datapoint is deﬁned as
p = {Tx, Fz, qt
1, . . . , qt
, . . . , qt+1
Nq }. Then,
in this case the model is encoding the joint distribution
P(Ω, qt, qt+1).
Figure 9 shows two single HMM encoding diﬀerent
sets of demonstrations of the pouring task. The displayed projection of the models corresponds to the most
relevant input Tx and the robot joint q6 that is rotated
to pour the drinks. Note that there is one state encapsulating the start and end of the skill at the same time
5 It should be noted that qt was not considered in the MIbased analysis because it is known that qt+1 is highly correlated to its values at time step t because the dynamics of the
(a) 3-states HMM encoding the 2nd set of pouring samples
(b) 3-states HMM encoding the 4th set of pouring samples
Fig. 9 Resulting HMMs for two diﬀerent set of demonstrations of the pouring task.
(i.e., the green Gaussian), while the red ellipse is encoding when the ﬂuid comes out from the bottle while
the robot slightly rotates q6. The complete model of
this skill and the reproduction results are shown and
analyzed later on.
5 Task Reproduction
Since the tasks are neither strictly learned as a sequence
of discrete actions nor as simple trajectories, it is necessary to ﬁnd a suitable way to reconstruct the output
commands, given a perception and the resulting trained
HMM. To achieve this goal, a modiﬁed version of GMR
(here named GMRa) is used for computing the robot
actions to be sent to the controller as the desired robot
state to be achieved, as described next.
Recent works proposed to use GMM/GMR
for learning tasks at trajectory level, where the main
idea is to model data from a mixture of Gaussians and
to compute predictions for a given set of queries through
regression by applying the original version of GMR. In
this approach, standard GMR averages the diﬀerent observations, even if they have been observed at diﬀerent
parts of the skill. Formally, for each Gaussian component i, both input x and output y are separated by
expressing the mean and covariance matrix as:
Then, the conditional expectation ˆy given the input
vector x, for a mixture of N Gaussians is:
where βi =
p(i)p(x|i)
j=1 p(j)p(x|j) is a weight exclusively based
on the input variables (mainly force-torque data in our
We aim at predicting the necessary robot commands
as a function of its force-based perceptions in order to
follow the taught strategy for each task as close as possible. We adopt the approach proposed by Calinon et al.
in , where the robot’s actions are computed from a
modiﬁed version of the well-known regression technique
GMR (which we name GMRa). This version computes
the predictions from a mixture of Gaussians (e.g., the
HMM states) taking the encapsulated temporal information by the HMM (i.e., the variable α) into account
along with the given inputs (i.e., the robot perceptions).
In this way, our learning framework is able to handle
perceptual aliases, this means that the robot may be
able to carry out the correct action if more than one
output exist for the same perception pattern, by taking advantage of the sequential information of the task.
This makes the proposed structure more generic and
versatile, thus being useful for a wider set of manipulation skills.
In GMRa, the weights are estimated using the actual values of the inputs, and also implicitly their previous values, through the transition probabilities related
to the forward variable α. Formally, the deﬁnition of
the new GMRa based on temporal information is given
where α(i) is the forward variable for the i-th Gaussian
in the HMM. This variable expresses the probability of
observing the partial sequence, O = {O1, O2, . . . , Ot}
and of being in state Si at time t. Now, for a given forcetorque perception, the predicted command is based on
current and past observations, which makes sense for
those tasks where more than one output exists for a
given input pattern.
Note that Lee and Ott’s work proposes a similar framework that encodes the demonstrations through
A Robot Learning from Demonstration Framework to Perform Force-based Manipulation Tasks
Robot execution
Teacher demonstration
Fig. 10 Top: Inputs pattern for Tx and Ty when the ball
starts at position number 3. Middle: Trajectories of joints
q5 and q6 corresponding to both teacher demonstration and
robot’s execution obtained from the velocity proﬁles ω5 and
ω6 shown at bottom.
an HMM and retrieves the robot actions using a timedriven version of the classical Gaussian Mixture Regression (GMR). In contrast to the forward variable-based
weights, the weighting mechanism used by GMR exclusively depends on time, and neither previous observations nor sequential information are taken into account
in this approach. Such approach might show an unsatisfactory performance when force data present large
time discrepancies, because the explicit use of time at
the reproduction phase.
5.1 Ball-in-box Task
Figure 13 shows the robot joint trajectories and velocities obtained while the teacher demonstrates how to
take the ball out of the box, when starting at position
7. The trajectories and velocity proﬁles of the robot
in the execution phase are also displayed. These predictions have been computed via GMRa for the inputs
displayed in the ﬁrst row of the ﬁgure and using the
HMM displayed in Figure 8(b). It can be observed that
the learning framework is able to compute the correct
velocity commands to follow the teacher’s strategy as
well as to accomplish the task’s goal. In addition, every
joint trajectory is very similar to the desired one, even
for those robot joints that are not playing a relevant
role in the task (e.g., q1 or q3).
The predictions in Figure 10 were obtained from
the HMM shown in Figure 8(a). The most relevant feature of this example is how the learning framework performs successfully even when the input data lie simultaneously on two HMM states. Figure 8(a) shows two
overlapping states, where GMR may likely retrieve a
wrong velocity command if a given input datapoint lies
in this zone. Instead, GMRa performs correctly as it
takes not only the given perception into account, but
also the sequence of states through α.
−1.8 −1.6 −1.4 −1.2
(a) Reproduction of the pouring task using the model trained
with the 2nd set of samples
(b) Reproduction of the pouring task using the model trained
with the 4th set of samples
Fig. 11 Left: Torque pattern around the axis x during the
reproduction. Middle: Trajectory of the robot joint q6 that
rotates the bottle to pour the drinks. Right: Tx vs. q6 plot
showing a reproduction pattern quite similar to the ones observed in the demonstrations set.
5.2 Pouring Task
Figures 11(a) and 11(b) show the obtained reproductions using the models previously displayed in Figures
9(a) and 9(b), respectively. For both executions, the initial force-torque perception was slightly diﬀerent from
the ones sensed during the demonstration phase, for
which the robot performed successfully, as evidenced
from the trajectories followed by q6. Note that such trajectories show that the robot comes back to the starting
conﬁguration after having poured a drink, as expected.
These results provided a good starting point to evaluate the encoding and reproduction capabilities of the
proposed framework in more real force-based tasks. In
Section 6 results of the complete model encoding all the
provided demonstrations of the pouring skill are analyzed. The Matlab source codes of the proposed learning
framework will be made publicly available at the time
of publication.
6 Experimentation with the complete systems
In this section we show how MIFS-based inputs selection inﬂuence the robot performance, and also we
analyze the encoding and reproduction results of the
proposed framework for both manipulation tasks previously described in Section 2.
6.1 Assessing the mutual information criterion
In order to assess the interest of using MIFS within our
learning framework, we evaluate the robot performance
in terms of the root mean squared error (RMSE) of
the joint trajectories. The objective is to observe how
Complete set of inputs
Most relevant input
(a) Ball-in-box task
Complete set of inputs
Most relevant input
(b) Pouring task
Fig. 12 Root mean squared error of robot reproductions for a given set of query vectors. Diﬀerent sets of input variables are
used in order to test the robot performance for three diﬀerent cases: (a) when the original input set is used (blue bar), (b)
applying MIFS (green bar) and (c) using only the most relevant input (red bar).
the robot performance varies for three diﬀerent cases,
namely: (a) when all the input variables are used, (b)
when only the perceptions selected by the modiﬁed
MIFS-U compose the input space (see Section 3), and
(c) when the most relevant input is solely used. To
achieve this, three diﬀerent HMMs were trained using
the aforementioned datasets, and a query vector for every initial ball position was extracted from the demonstrations. The mean RMSE for each robot joint was
computed across all the initial positions.
Ball-in-box task
Figure 12(a) shows the RMSE values (given in degrees)
for the three diﬀerent cases. On the one hand, note that
the RMSE across all the robot joints shows nearly the
same values for cases (a) and (b), which proves that
the MIFS-based dimensionality reduction does not affect the robot performance because the unselected input variables do not inﬂuence the robot behavior (e.g.,
Fy and Tz are weakly correlated to the robot actions).
The RMSE even slightly decreases in case (b) for some
joints, which might mean that the removed perceptions
were introducing noise (or at least no useful information) into the system, making a bit harder to reproduce
the task satisfactorily.
On the other hand, looking at the RMSE of the
robot joints q5 and q6 (those playing the most relevant
role to carry out this task), it is observed that in case
(c), i.e., when the learning framework uses exclusively
the most relevant perception Tx, the robot performance
deteriorates, which might indicate that the robot does
not have enough information to perform successfully.
Here, it should be mentioned that the robot is not able
to carry out the task when perceiving only Tx, because
this variable does not describe entirely the location of
the ball inside the box (see Figure 7).
Pouring task
The same set of experiments carried out to assess robot
performance for the ball-in-box task was also carried
out for this task. Again, three HMMs were trained and
a query vector of every pouring demonstration (four
in this task, as described in Section 2.2) was used to
compute the RMSE of the resulting robot joint trajectories. The three same cases (a), (b) and (c) above were
used to analyze how MIFS-U may inﬂuence the robot
performance in this task. Figure 12(b) shows the mean
RMSE obtained for all the robot joints across the four
reproductions. Again, it is observed that the robot performance is almost the same for cases (a) and (b), thus
MIFS-U does not deteriorate robot execution while it
reduces data dimensionality and saves computational
resources. For case (c), RMSE values are a bit greater
than the ones observed for cases (a) and (b), however,
the robot was also able to carry out the task successfully. This may be explained by the fact that Fz nearly
provides the same information given by Tx. They provided redundant information about the task as shown
in Figure 6, but both of them are relevant in the sense
of their correlation with the robot output commands
(see Section 3.2).
6.2 Encoding and reproduction results
Computational and experimental results of the two manipulation task are explained and analyzed in the next
paragraphs, where the models were trained using the
input dataspace reduced through MIFS.
Ball-in-box Task
To evaluate the performance of the proposed learning
framework in this scenario, the teacher carried out four
demonstrations for ten diﬀerent initial ball positions
A Robot Learning from Demonstration Framework to Perform Force-based Manipulation Tasks
Fig. 13 Top: The ﬁrst row shows the pattern of inputs Tx and Ty when the ball starts at position number 7, and the remaining
rows display the robot joint trajectories and velocity proﬁles when the teacher demonstrated the task (solid blue line) and
when the robot executed its motions based on predictions given by GMRa (dashed red line). Bottom: Left image shows a
snapshot of the beginning of the learned task. The center image displays the moment where the robot has completed the ﬁrst
stage of the strategy and starts to orient the box for taking the ball towards the hole. The right image shows the successful
completion of the task.
placed along the box edges. Every demonstration was
executed by teleoperating the robotic arm through the
6-DoF haptic device (as shown in Figure 2) and following the motion strategy explained in Section 2. The
resulting training dataset consisted of all datapoints
p , which were used to train several HMMs by applying the Baum-Welch method until convergence. To ﬁnd
the “best” model, we resort to the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC), which allows to ﬁnd a trade-oﬀ
between optimizing the model’s ﬁtting and the number
of states . Note that the selected HMM will be a
model that can ﬁt the data well, with no overﬁtting in
BIC sense. Figure 14 displays the diﬀerent BIC values
for the set of models tested, and Figure 15 shows the selected 5-states HMM. The execution and generalization
capabilities were tested for some of these models using
query data extracted from the demonstrations and real
experiments. The 2-states HMM showed the worst performance, this model was not able to carry out the task
starting at any place, even if it did it from a pre-trained
initial position. The HMMs with 4, 8 and 9 states could
achieve the goal from every pre-trained positions but
sometimes failed starting at non-trained initial conﬁgurations, showing poor generalization capabilities. Finally, the models with 5, 6 and 7 states showed very
similar performances with no clear diﬀerences, and all
of them performed the task successfully.
Observing the selected 5-states HMM, it is interesting to highlight how the proposed framework is able
to learn a multiple solution task by taking advantage
Number of states
Fig. 14 BIC values for models with diﬀerent number of
of the HMM properties. The model is shown in Figure
15, where the blue state in the input space covers the
beginning of all demonstrations whose initial positions
are placed on the wall opposite to where the hole is.
At these starting positions, a larger velocity command
is required to draw the ball out of its resting conﬁguration by moving the robot joint q6 (Figure 15, output
space projection). After, the green and light-blue states
represent the movements to force the ball to role to the
hole, through q5 and depending on whether the ball is
up or down with respect to the hole (i.e., positive or
negative velocity commands, respectively). The yellow
Gaussian can be considered as an intermediate state
the system goes through to reach the ﬁnal state (red
ellipse) at which the velocity commands are zero (i.e.,
when the ball is getting out of the box) in input space.
As for the prediction phase, one teacher’s demonstration for each initial position was removed from the
training examples and used as “query data” for evaluating the learning framework performance by comparing its results with the teacher executions. All robot
joint trajectories obtained from velocity commands synthesized by our HMM/GMRa approach are smoother
than the teacher’s demonstrations (as shown for initial positions 3 and 7 in Figures 10 and 13, respectively). By observing the obtained velocity proﬁles for
each robot joint, one sees that they are also smoother
than teacher ones, because human user executions show
several abrupt changes, which are not over-ﬁtted by our
learning framework. This can be attributed to the fact
of using GMRa to retrieve the velocity command, because this type of regression takes the covariance information into account for computing the estimation
of the output, outperforming techniques that only use
the mean of the Gaussians. Thus, we can conclude in
this context that the robot performs better than the
teacher. In addition, all synthesized trajectories follow
the same motion pattern as that of the teacher’s executions, which indicates that the strategy applied by the
human user was learned successfully.
Once computational results were satisfactory, we validated our framework on the experimental setup. First,
the robot had to perform the task with the ball starting at the already trained initial positions (see Figure
2). For all experiments, the robot was able to carry out
the task eﬀectively. After this, a second set of tests was
executed, where the ball was located at random positions inside the container. For these tests, the robot
was also able to achieve the task’s goal, executing the
motions learned for the closest initial position, by identifying the corresponding HMM state. It was observed
that in some executions the ball reached and surpassed
the hole, without falling through it. This behavior may
be justiﬁed by the fact that we are assuming a “quasistatic” case in our task.6 However, the robot was always able to take the ball out of the box after some
more executions, as it correctly identiﬁed the HMM
state corresponding to the current and past input patterns (taking into account the temporal information).
This means that the robot generates its actions as a
function of its current and past perceptions, following the taught motion strategy. If the robot fails to
reach the goal, the ball goes to another position inside the box, providing new perceptions from which the
robot can compute new movements. Videos showing executions of learned trajectories are available online at
 
As the robot was able to accomplish the desired goal
in every test, even when the ball reached and surpassed
the hole, we evaluated the performance of the robot
executions using a time-based criterion . Here, the
idea is to determine how much time the robot takes to
complete the task successfully by executing the commands obtained from the proposed framework compared with the three following cases: (i) the robot executes hand-coded actions according to pre-programmed
if-then rules, (ii) the teacher carries out the task by
teleoperation following the mentioned strategy, (iii) the
robot performs random movements that may take the
ball towards the hole. Figure 16 shows execution times
for the aforementioned cases. As expected, the teacher’s
executions show to the lowest times, except for position
number 2 where the robot was faster than the human.
A relevant aspect to discuss is the fact that the robot
execution times are much larger than the teacher’s ones
for positions 3 to 8. Regarding positions 3 to 5, higher
times are due to the fact that the robot starts the task
by moving the joint q6 as expected, however it also
6 On the one hand, the model variables are force-torque and
joint velocities at the given time step, thus no information
about the past is explicitly provided. On the other hand, the
robot controller only allows position-based control, thus it is
not possible to send the desired velocity commands directly.
A Robot Learning from Demonstration Framework to Perform Force-based Manipulation Tasks
Projection of the 5-states HMM
Representation of the HMM transitions
Fig. 15 Resulting 5-states HMM trained with demonstrations starting at every position inside the box. Top: Input
space composed of the most relevant inputs {Tx
Ty}. Middle: Output space composed of robot joint velocities playing
the most important role for the given task. Bottom: Representation of the resulting transition probabilities matrix. As
expected, the most likely transitions from the blue state take
the robot to the light blue or green ellipses. Moreover, the
transitions from these Gaussians and the yellow one take the
system towards the ﬁnal state.
moves q5 slightly which sometimes causes the ball to
go to the bottom of the box, justifying higher standard
deviations for positions 3 and 4. This is a normal effect because the ﬁrst state of the learned HMM covers
non-zero angular velocities for the variable ω5. Thus, in
these cases, the robot identiﬁes the new state where the
ball is and changes its motion strategy according to the
given input data for reaching the target.
In the case of positions 6 to 8, the robot does also
move the joint q5, however it is because the teacher
demonstrations showed that the human tries to guarantee “a stable motion” by taking the ball towards the
wall adjacent to the hole along the wall at the bottom
of the box. This causes that, when the ball reaches the
wall adjacent to the hole, the robot has to carry out
more movements in order to take the metalic sphere
towards the hole, since the robot must compensate the
initial inclination of the box given by the wrong motion
of q5. Thus, the high robot execution times are mainly
a consequence of two factors: ﬁrst, there is a delay between the sensing and execution phases that increases
the time measures as the ball is farther from the target,
and second, the joint velocity proﬁles of the robot execution show lesser magnitudes than the teacher ones
(as observed in Figures 13 and 10), implying that when
these velocity commands are translated into desired positional conﬁgurations of the robot, the joints rotation
is lower and more velocity commands are needed to orient the box.
Regarding the times shown for the hand-coded actions, several robot learned executions outperformed
the hand-coded ones (e.g., starting at positions 1, 2, 4,
7, 9 and 10). This mainly happened because the handcoded actions also suﬀered the “surpassing” eﬀect, that
is, the ball did not go out through the hole at the ﬁrst
attempt. Moreover, it is important to emphasize that
the if-then rules programming was tedious and timeconsuming, even for this simple task. On the one hand,
it was essential to determine how the input space could
be transformed to discrete regions to set the if conditions. On the other hand, a tuning process was needed
to specify the velocity commands that the robot executed. One may think that the higher the velocity,
the less time the robot might take to accomplish the
task, however the “surpassing” eﬀect may occur more
often, increasing the time execution signiﬁcantly. Thus,
the learning-based approach is preferred because being
similarly eﬃcient, it is friendlier and can be applied by
non-expert users.
Finally, execution times for a “random” strategy
show that trying to accomplish the goal by chance is
possible, nevertheless this implies much higher times
and variances in comparison with when the robot carried out the task by using the taught strategy. These
high values occur because the random strategy does
not impose movement constraints to the robot and,
therefore, a huge set of available motions can be executed, leading to very varied and long trials. This constitutes a reference (lower bound) for comparison purposes, against which the improvement attained by different learning techniques and teaching strategies can
be evaluated.
Pouring Task
In order to teach the robot to pour drinks, three “complete executions” of the task are provided to the robot
by teleoperation as described in Section 2. Such executions consist of starting with the bottle full of ﬂuid
and pouring four 100ml drinks. Note that after each
drink is poured, the initial force-torque value changes
for the next demonstration, which conditions the robot
movements as shown in Figure 17 where the gray lines
Initial position of the ball
Teacher execution
Robot execution
Robot hand−coded execution
Robot random execution
Fig. 16 Mean times for teacher executions, robot learned, hand-coded and random executions starting at each pre-deﬁned
initial position of the ball inside the box.
represent the teacher demonstrations. Observe that the
less quantity of ﬂuid, the more the robot rotates the
The resulting training dataset was used to train a 5states HMM by applying the Baum-Welch method until
convergence. Note that the number of states was chosen
according to the BIC score, similarly to the ball-in-box
task. Figure 17 shows the model encoding the pouring
skill, where the yellow state covers the beginning and
the end of all the demonstrations, whereas the light
blue and green ellipses are encapsulating the phases
corresponding to when the ﬂuid is coming out of the
bottle. The other two Gaussians can be considered as
intermediate states of the task. It is worth highlighting
that the resulting states distribution provides very good
generalization capabilities (discussed below), which are
exploited when the robot has to pour a drink starting
from a force-torque value not previously observed (e.g.,
in between two demonstrated starting values).
In order to test the reproduction performance of
the model, four demonstrations were removed out of
the training data to be used as query datapoints. All
the robot joint trajectories were quite similar to the
ones obtained from the teacher examples as well as the
input-output pattern, as shown in Figure 18(a) (corresponding to the ﬁrst drink). After this, the following
tests were aimed at evaluating the generalization capabilities of the trained HMM. In this case, the bottle contained quantities of ﬂuid diﬀerent from the ones
used at the demonstration phase, but remaining within
the range of force-torque measured in that stage. For
all the tests where the starting force-torque perception
was covered by the initial HMM state (i.e., the yellow
Fig. 17 Resulting 5-states HMM trained with four diﬀerent
sets of demonstrations of the pouring task. Each set of provided samples of the skill shows a diﬀerent initial force-torque
value given by the quantity of “ﬂuid” inside the bottle. According to these initial conditions, the less quantity, the more
the robot rotates the bottle.
ellipse in Figure 17), the robot performed successfully.
The robot joint trajectories and the input-output pattern for one of these tests is shown in Figure 18(b). Nevertheless, as the starting perception signiﬁcantly diﬀers
from the values encapsulated by the initial state, the
robot performance deteriorates. In others words, the actual model shows good interpolation competences but
a poor extrapolation performance. This feature will be
tackled in future work as discussed below. Nonetheless,
the obtained results evidence the generality of the proposed approach as well as its usefulness in more realistic
scenarios. We thus conﬁrm the suitability of our framework to learn manipulation tasks using only force-based
perceptions.
A Robot Learning from Demonstration Framework to Perform Force-based Manipulation Tasks
(a) Reproduction starting from an already trained forcetorque perception
(b) Reproduction starting from an unobserved force-torque
perception
Fig. 18 Reproduction of the pouring task for two diﬀerent
quantities of ﬂuid. The robot joint trajectories during the
execution are shown in the three ﬁrst columns. Last graph
displays the reproduction pattern for q6 as a function of Tx.
7 Conclusions and Future Work
This work presents a suitable end-to-end system for
learning manipulation skills where force-torque data constitute the most relevant input source, specially in the
absence of visual information. In the ﬁrst place, we
addressed the problem of conditioning a good bidirectional communication channel between the teacher and
the robot when using a haptic device as an information
transferring tool. This device provides an useful interaction means between the human and the robot, which
becomes more relevant and necessary when the robot
is located in a remote place, for instance in space applications. In this speciﬁc area, it may be very useful
to reﬁne already learned robot actions while feeling the
robot’s perceptions as a consequence of the teacher’s
reﬁnement commands. In other words, haptic devices
may not be used just in the teaching process, they may
also be used as reﬁnement tools as well, for instance as
an alternative when kinesthetic reﬁnement is not possible for robots working in remote places. Moreover, the
inclusion of a haptic interface improves the teacher’s
demonstrations when the task relies on force-based perception, because the user can feel how his/her actions
aﬀect the robot’s surroundings.
We solved the what to imitate? problem from a new
perspective, by using MI-based inputs selection. Results
showed that this technique is appropriate to ﬁnd which
input variables are the most relevant to learn a task.
This presents several advantages in LfD settings: reduction of input space dimensionality, less computational
cost and probably faster training and execution stages.
This approach can also be applied before ﬁnding the
demonstration segments with low variability that indicate those sections that must be learned. Note that the
variance-based approach is more suitable for trajectory
learning (i.e., low-level encoding), whereas our solution
is more generic and may be applied to a wider set of
The reduction of the input space obtained through
the modiﬁed MIFS-U showed not to deteriorate the
robot performance when this was compared to the results obtained from the case where the learning framework used all the input variables. Moreover, as an additional contribution, the number of components to be retained is now automatically determined by the selection
algorithm according to the proposed conditional mutual
information ratio. This selection criterion took advantage of the conditional MI used in MIFS-U. Nonetheless, the threshold φ is still an open parameter that
depends on how selective the method is desired to be.
Future work will consider techniques to tune this variable using the provided demonstrations.
On the other hand, our framework performs eﬃciently when the teacher’s demonstrations exhibit a multivalued function behavior (e.g., the ball-in-box task),
which means there may be more than one appropriate
action – velocity command – for the same perception
(i.e., force-torque input pattern). This was achieved by
means of a GMRa tool using temporal information encapsulated by an HMM without explicitly considering
time as another input variable and avoiding to deal with
very large time discrepancies. Time, or rather sequential information, is already implicitly present along the
teacher’s demonstrations.
After having carefully designed and tested the several stages of our LfD framework on the well-deﬁned
and easy to analyze task of taking a ball out a container, a more realistic task was designed to evaluate the
generality of the proposed approach by learning to pour
drinks based on force data exclusively. As observed, the
feature selection, encoding and reproduction methods
showed satisfactory results as well.
As future work we would like to apply force-based
skills learning to compliant robots in an active learning environment as a reﬁnement or correction phase,
needed to improve the robot performance. This type
of robots would allow us to extend our approach to
human-robot collaborative tasks by taking advantage of
their compliance features. In this context, force-torque
perceptions about the task and the haptic communication between the partners are a rich source of information to carry out manipulation tasks cooperatively,
where our framework may be used as the core of a learning structure oriented to this kind of scenarios.
Moreover, it was observed that, in some force-based
tasks, certain parameter strongly conditions the subse-
quent robot actions. For instance in the pouring task,
the robot movements were conditioned by the initial
force-torque perception (indicating the amount of ﬂuid
in the bottle), which may be considered as a parameter
of the skill at hand. This feature opens the door to the
use of parametric learning methods to encode such type
of tasks. Speciﬁcally, we plan to enhance the proposed
learning framework by introducing such parameters in
the model through parametric Hidden Markov models